 Story_ID: 86017 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I am the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Sterns. Ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Adjoa, A-D-J-O-A, Aiyetoro, A-I-Y-E-T-O-R-O. Speaker 1: Okay. And, now, is this name, a name that you acquired later in life, or did you--were you born with it? Speaker 2: I acquired it later in life. My real--my full name is Adjoa Artis Aiyetoro. Adjoa is, means female born on Monday. And, the Arabic root means, when the fruit is at its sweetest. Artis is my middle name. That was my given name. It's a--I'm named after my father, Artis, A-R-T-I-S. And, Aiyetoro means, peace on earth, bridge to the peoples. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a maiden name that you had before you--or name, another last name that you have now? Speaker 2: Yeah. Burrow. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Speaker 2: B-U-R-R-O-W. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is your date and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is April 1, 1946. And, my place of birth is St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'll ask you about your name later on too, because I know it's, it signals a transition, people's lives are made when you changed it. And, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a social worker/attorney. I'm an activist really, is my occupation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Activism (laughter). Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is--Oh Lord, you're testing me right? (Laughter). Today is July 23, 2003. Speaker 1: Right. And, where are we at the present time? And don't, you don't have to give your address, but-- Speaker 2: Okay. We're in Washington, D.C. at my home. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 86018 Speaker 1: All right. Before we go into depth, there are five "People Magazine"-ish type questions I am compelled to ask you. And, they only require a short answer. The first one is, Ma'am, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, Lord. I love Thai food. That's a category, I guess that would be one of my favorite kinds of food. My all-time favorite, if it was spread out, and I could only eat one thing, ice cream. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Do you have favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No. I think spring, because I was born in the spring. But, I really like every season. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The beach. Caribbean. The beach, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I can't say it on the--(laughter). Not really, I don't--that's-- Speaker 1: An inspirational phrase (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, I guess my--though--I can't think of a favorite phrase or saying. No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If it pops in my head later on. Speaker 1: Most activists have one, but-- Speaker 2: I mean, I can tell you one, but you wouldn't be able to print. Speaker 1: Alright. Okay. Story_ID: 86019 Speaker 1: Alright, now let me ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I'mma start with your mother. I'mma ask you about your mother and your father's side of the family. But, I'mma start at your mother. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? And, give us her date and place of birth. Speaker 2: Mother's full name was Marie. Well, really, her full name is Carrie Marie Brabham Burrow. Brabham is spelled B-R-A-B-H-A-M. And, Burrow is B-U-R-R-O-W. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, she was born December 14, 1915. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I believe. And, my father-- Speaker 1: Oh, no. Where was she born? Speaker 2: No. Oh, where was she born? She was born in St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I wanna ask you about her side of the family first, then we'll get to your father. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Okay. Speaker 1: But, do--what do you know about her side of the family, and your ancestors going back on that side? Speaker 2: Well, as far back as I know, I know my great--okay, let's start--my mother is the child of Ira Haskell Brabham and William Sherman Brabham-- Speaker 1: Now, (simultaneously). Speaker 2: William Sherman Brabham. And, she has a sister who--my mother's now deceased, but her sister is still living, LufAnn (ph.) Brabham Garren (ph.). They--my father--my grandfather on my mother's side was one of the first graduates, was in the first graduating class of Meharry Medical School [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tenneesee]. And, my grandmother was a teacher-- Speaker 1: What was his name? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: His name was William Sherman Brabham. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, her mother was Ira Haskell Brabham, was a school teacher in St. Louis. My--I know more about my mothers' mother's family than my mothers' father's family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mothers' mother's family, my grandmother, Ira Brab, Ira Haskell Brabham was one of five children. And, she was born to Antonio Haskell and Lucinda Jones Haskell. I believe her middle--her maiden name was Jones, but I won't swear by that one. The interesting thing, well interesting maybe, but kinda facts that have stuck with us in our family history is that: one, my great-grandfather, Antonio was the first black man to cast a ballot in Missouri, in St. Louis, Missouri. His lineage is that he was the product of what I term rape, between an officer in the Navy and his mother, who was Bell Jones. And, she swore that she--the one thing--her parents, Paul, and I forget her mother's name, were owned by this guy in St. Louis, Missouri and that he maintained them as a family unit. She had--he gave her one night to this Navy officer that came to visit and that's--the product was my great-grandfather. My great, great-grandmother had always said that the only thing she would not allow would be to be hit by a white person, struck. And, at one point the so-called master, struck her, she struck him back. She was then sold down to Louisiana. We don't know where or anything. That was in retribution, I guess, punishment. I'm sure she got-- Speaker 1: So, you don't know what happened to her? Speaker 2: We have no idea what happened to her. We just know she--so, we probably have some relatives down in Louisiana that we don't know about. So, those are some in--kinda history. I wrote a chapter in a book that's coming out in October on the 13th, "Amendment and Women." And, I dedicated it to her as an, as an example of the indignities of slavery, the breaking up of the family, and all of that. So, that's my, my, that's on my mother's, my mother's side, my mothers' mother's side of the family. Story_ID: 86020 Speaker 1: We don't know very much at all about my father's--my mothers' father's [William Sherman Brabham] side of the family. What we do know, my aunt did some research and we know that his mother married his father. And, his father already had some children. For some reason, my grandfather received some kind of money that allowed him to go to medical school. He also received some type of government, we think it was some kind of government loan, or somehow or another. Because, he had to do some--he went and did some service on an Indian Reservation. Medical service with the, and we think it was with the Public Health Service, but we're not sure. But, we know he did work on the Indian Reservation. Speaker 2: This would be around what time? Speaker 1: He was in the first med--graduating class of Meharry Medical [College, Nashville, Tennessee], so it must have been probably in the early 1900s, or, so right around in there, you know. I'm not quite sure of that year. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We have an article but--we could look at, but I'm not sure. I don't remember right off the top of my head. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Maybe 1905, or something like that. Speaker 2: Alright. Are there any stories on either side of the family that--on your mother's [Marie Brabhmam Burrow] side that are passed down about slavery other than the one you just told us? Were there any more stories? Speaker 1: My, we know that my grand--my great-grandmother's [Lucinda Haskell] mother was enslaved in Maryland. We're not quite sure how they got to Missouri. We speculate that she was sold, because they were enslaved in Missouri. So, our speculation is that she must have been sold from--but, evidently, the--my grandmother--my great-grandmother and her mother, whose name was Mary, were--remained together and they must have sold them here into Missouri. So, that's about all that we have. That I know of. Story_ID: 86021 Speaker 1: Okay (unclear). Now, let me ask you about your mother [Marie Brabham Burrow] as a personality. What was she like and what did she do? Speaker 2: My mother was a, well she was an educator. She went to, at that time it was called Harris-Stowe Teachers College in St. Louis, Missouri. She was a teacher first, and then she got her Masters in Guidance and Counseling and became a Guidance Counselor. And, her last job with the school system before she retired was as the Director of Career Education. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that was, I mean, that was her career path. Mama was very much of a civic person, civic minded person. She was on the Board of the Local Urban League. She served as a Commissioner of the Human Rights Commission for Missouri. She was a Delta, Delta Sigma Theta Sorority. And, after we got up and grown, she became active again with that sorority. So, she was very much a civic minded person, very much out and about. She was named by a couple of organizations as Woman of the Year, Mother of the Year, that kind of stuff. Story_ID: 86022 Speaker 1: Tell us about your father. Can you give us his full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Daddy is Artis Nathaniel Burrow. Artis is A-R-T-I-S, Nathaniel N-A-T-H-A-N-I-E-L, and Burrow B-U-R-R-O-W. And, daddy was also an educator. He however, he was an educator in Milan, Tennessee. He was, he was born in Memphis, Tennessee, and then his family went to Milan, which is a very small town in Tennessee. And, he was a teacher there. He married my mother [Marie Brabham Burrow] in 1940. And, they went back to Tennessee; only stayed there two years. My sister was born there. And, then came back to St. Louis. Well, in St. Louis the requirement was that if you didn't graduate from Harris-Stowe Teachers College, you had to go back and take so many courses in education before you could teach. Regardless of where you went to college or what your background was, education was. So, daddy had a family to support. So, he got hired at the Postal Service. It's the same story so many black people had--can tell. And, so he worked for thirty years at the Post Office in St. Louis. Retired from that. Was off a year in retirement and then went back to work for the city, as an auditor for the City of St. Louis for ten years. And, they put a time clock in, and dad said he quit the Postal--he retired from the Post Office, swore he'd never punch another time clock. So, he retired again, and so he retired from the city auditing position. He was also civic minded. Daddy, though, as we were growing up, he would work two or three jobs. So, he, you know, wasn't on the different boards or anything like mother. He was working. He--my dad, in the summer would usually work three to four jobs. He worked with the Post Office, worked on the Admiral Boat that took people out to tour. He'd work parties, you know, whatever. And, then sometimes he worked for private families. So, he would easily be working two, three, four jobs. He usually always worked two jobs year round. But, in the summer, he could easily be working more than that. But, when he retired, he began working a lot in politics. He worked and supported Representative Bill [William] Clay [HM]. Mother supported him as well, but daddy worked I think a lot more in his office, and campaign work and that kind of thing. Daddy also was a volunteer at the Washington Hospital Center, things like that after he retired-- Story_ID: 86023 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, in terms of his parents and his ancestors, what do you know about that side? Speaker 2: I don't really know that much. Daddy's [Artis Nathaniel Burrow] mother died when he was two. His--there was some issues in his family around his father, and so he wasn't very close to his father at all. He was raised by Mama Janie, who was his aunt, his mother's sister. His--Mama Janie had--he had, daddy had a brother and a sister. His sister died young. I think she was grown, but she was young. I don't, I didn't know her at all. His brother died--lived in Chicago for a long time and he died maybe ten, fifteen years ago, maybe now. So, we didn't know him. We didn't know him well. They weren't very, very close, but they, you know, talked every once in a while and we saw them every once in a while. And, my sister and I, my sister more so than I, keep up with my, my uncle's wife; his Aunt Willy. Daddy, as I said, was raised in Tennessee. He started working when he was nine. And, because Mama Janie was very, very poor, so he had to work. They were a sharecropping family. So, once he began getting his education as a young boy, he was the main one in the family that was able to look at the books and compare, and give them the figures. And, in many ways--times he had to argue with the owner of the land about what the family owed or didn't owe at the end of the year. So, Daddy pretty--he was the most educated in his family at that point in time. And, so he had a lot of the responsibility. But, he worked his way--he went to Lang College and he worked his way through Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee]. I don't really know his--much about any of his, you know, past, just knowing who his mother was. I have a picture of her. Her name was Fannie. I have a picture of her that you can see. But, I don't know his father at all. And, I don't her--anything about her mother or her father. Speaker 1: Are there any stories passed down through that side of the family about life during slavery or Reconstruction or anything, any of that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, Daddy would say, life for him in Tennessee in the south was very, you know, very, very, racist when he was coming up. Daddy was born in 1914. And, he use to tell us like, things like, you know, if you were walking down the sidewalk and a white person was coming towards you, you had to step off the sidewalk and let 'em pass, so. Things like that, you know. But, he--and he told us about the sharecropping. And, the story I told you about him keeping the books and having to argue about, you know, what the family owed or didn't owe and stuff like that. But, other than that, no. Story_ID: 86024 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a story about how you mother [Marie Brabham Burrow] and father [Artis Nathaniel Burrow] met? Speaker 2: Yeah. There was a friend of my mothers' who introduced them. She, I think met Daddy through a relative. Daddy was up in St. Louis visiting one of his cousins. And, she met Daddy and introduced Daddy and Mother and they hit it off, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. How many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: One. One sister. Speaker 1: Just one sister? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So, you say they, they lived in Milan, Tennessee for a little while? Speaker 2: Yeah, about two years. Speaker 1: Two years than they moved to St. Louis? Speaker 2: They moved back to St. Louis, Right. Speaker 1: St. Louis. Speaker 2: Well, Mother moved back. Daddy had never lived there, but yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 86025 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about growing up. What neighborhood did you grow up in St. Louis [Missouri]? Speaker 2: Well, until I was seven, I lived on Aubert, which is almost Central City. Right now, would be pretty much called Central City. And, so until I was seven, I lived there on Aubert Street, A-U-B-E-R-T. We had, we--my parents rented and they had, it was a, what is it, a two-family. They, we lived upstairs and another family, the Bassfords (ph.) lived downstairs. Speaker 1: They got down below, a duplex system-- Speaker 2: Yeah. It like a, yeah it was like a duplex, yeah. Not the Bassfords (ph.). They lived next door. But, anyway, so we were upstairs and so I stayed--I lived there. And, then we moved to where my--the la--the only other home we had while I was, you know, around it was just on Laclede, and that was in North St. Louis. And, it used to be--the Public School Stadium was like at the end of our block. Where all the high school track meets and football games and all that would be held. And, so we lived there. My parents bought a single-family home and we lived there until my--we, we had--we sold it when my mother [Marie Brabham Burrow] became very ill and we move her into a nursing home. Speaker 1: Okay. I want to reflect back on growing up and give us an idea of some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: Well, the sights of growing up, I guess what I think of most and it's not necessary my favorite time of year, but in the summer riding the bike, you know. We have so much more freedom in the summer ridding the bicycle. And, I had a good girlfriend that we just--one thing--my parents were very, very strict. But, it's something about the bike, they didn't restrict us on the bike. I mean, that, we could just go anywhere. And, we just rode and rode and rode. So, that was like a feeling of freedom in the summer and the bike riding. The sounds are, the big sound is my mother laughing. My mother loved to laugh, and so that was the sound that came, when you asked about sounds. Smells, I guess the, my father [Artis Nathaniel Burrow], and I guess it's the sight and sound. My father cooking breakfast. He was the big cook in the family and you can--the smells of the, you know, breakfast being cooked and the bacon and the, you know, the biscuits. He made biscuits from scratch, you know. I still haven't tasted anybody's biscuits that are good as my father's, you know. So, that, that's pretty much what comes to mind. Story_ID: 86026 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, well what kind of a little girl were you, when you were, when you were small. I mean, what did you like to do? Speaker 2: Ride my bike (laughter). I loved to read. I always, in the summer, I always entered the library's reading club, and you had to read fifteen books in the summer. And, I always finished way ahead of the game and always got my certificate from, you know--I love to read. I like to, I guess, I like hanging out with my friends. I didn't--my--because my parents were real strict, we just couldn't hang out, you know. But, you know, like, I had friends, and I liked doing things with them. I liked sports. I liked the going to sports more so than even playing sports. I liked, you know, like going to the track meets and that kind of thing. Speaker 1: That must have been exciting for you because you had the stadium down the street. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, I guess--would the bands, like marching in the stadium and would you--be a lot of excitement around the stadium? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, and there, you know, during the games, the big, you know, high school games and stuff, you know. They'd be people milling around all the time and you know, going to the game, and all of that. So yeah, that was, that was a lot of fun. That was a lot of fun. And, I guess some, also was a lot of fun is during the holidays, particularly Christmas. The singers in our family would get, you know, together like most families and sing the Christmas carols and stuff. And, that was always kinda nice, you know, kinda nice. And, then trick-or-treat. I liked doing that. You know, I was just a traditional, I mean, I didn't get radical until I was, you know, grown. So, I was a traditional, you know, kid coming up, you know, with all that stuff-- Story_ID: 86027 Speaker 1: So now my family was not radical. They were civic minded. My cousins was very much involved in with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and SNCC [Student Non Violent Coordinating Committee] and we were civic minded but we were-- Speaker 2: That's, that's radical, that's about change, I mean, you talking-- Speaker 1: Yeah, definitely. Speaker 2: You're talking about SNCC and NAACP. There talking about changing-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Conditions and those are organizations that aren't satisfied. Speaker 1: (unclear) Speaker 2: Regardless of the mode of operation, they're not--neither one of 'em was satisfied. Speaker 1: Yeah. I mean, we did--I know my uncle and my aunt were involved in some of the early sit-in movements. I not--it wasn't SNCC, it was CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]. CORE. Which at that time in St. Louis was really radical, CORE. I mean, they did a lot of the sit-ins and stuff. And, so they--we were involved in that way. My uncle and my aunt and then, of course as I said, my mother was always civic minded and my father. But, when I say we weren't radical, it was our pa--my pa--my family's politics were more liberal to conservative, not super conservative, but liberal. They were mainstream Black Americans. They were, you know, Black Americans who, you know, you know, knew what segregation was, knew what racism was and wanted, you know, to be part of the mainstream U.S., wanted to get their piece of the pie. They weren't, you know, about revolution, I guess is what-- Speaker 2: Did they support Richard Milhous Nixon or-- Speaker 1: Oh, no. Speaker 2: Robert Kennedy, I mean or John Kennedy in 1960? Speaker 1: I, I'm almost sure that it was Kennedy. That's my memory, you know. They, so they were liberal, you know, they were Democrats. They were Democrats, you know, they were democrats, very much so. I mean, as I said, they worked and supported very strongly Bill [William] Clay [HM], who was a Democrat. Story_ID: 86028 Speaker 1: Did--was there a, was there a big focus on church when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Daddy [Artis Nathaniel Burrow] was Assistant Superintendent of the Sunday School when we went to--we were C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal]. And, then they changed when I was eighteen to United Church of Christ. And, they became very active in that church as well. In fact, I think one year Mama [Marie Brabham Burrow] was a moderator of the church, which is kind of the civilian minister type person. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you go to church a lot yourself? Speaker 2: Oh, you had to (laughter). You couldn't be raise in their home and not go to church, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you have a lot responsibilities at church? I mean, you know, youth type things. Speaker 2: Yeah. But, I wasn't necessarily a church leader as, as I remember it. I was very active in the church. I mean, I went to Sunday school. I participated in Sunday school, you know. I had debates in Sunday school. That's when I realized I was kind of radical, you know. They went and told my daddy, you know. She doesn't think Jesus is Christ, or God, or something. It's like, oh, my God! You know. Speaker 1: Did you do that in school (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah. I told them, I just didn't think I--way back then, I just didn't believe he was God. I thought he was a prophet, but I didn't think, you know, and of course that was heresy, you know. Speaker 1: Well, what was it? And, how old were you when you did that? Speaker 2: I think I was about ten or eleven, you know. And, I got told on, but I didn't care. I mean, I was just in this discussion. Speaker 1: Now, did you--was your church a typical church in those days? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. C.M.E. Speaker 1: Since we're about the same age, I'm talking about the typical-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: C.M.E. Now, I was raised in C.M.E. Church. Speaker 2: Oh, Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: That picture of a Jesus with the long brown or blond hair, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, blue eyes. Speaker 1: Yeah, blue eyes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, there were very little discussion of race at a C.M.E. church and they would ask people to join the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] from time to time (unclear), and you know, it's in fact that--that mean that you all--tell me about the Services, were--did you have Services where there were a lot of shouting and-- Speaker 2: Some. Not a lot. No, we didn't have a lot of shouting. We did have some. But, not a lot. It was the, as I recall it, it was not quite as volatile and, you know, energetic as, as some of the, you know, other, like A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] or other churches, Baptist, or whatever. But, it had just some. Just you know an edge of that. So, every once and a while, you know, there would be someone shouting. Had, you know, the various choirs, you know. They always had, you know, the Men's Choirs. The, you know, the Gospel Chorus, and then the regular church choirs. I forget now what they called them. And, then the Children's Choir, and then we had two Children's Choirs. So, we had the Children and then we had the Young Adult kinda, you know. Speaker 1: Youth Choir. Speaker 2: Youth Choir, right, you know. So, we had all of that. And, then you had, of course, the Sunday school. And, then you had, the Nursery for kids during service, who you know, were too young to be in the service, so all of that. But, it was very traditional. I didn't, you know, your point, I didn't learn, I don't remember learning anything about race and racism. It was just, you went to church and you, you know, you, you, you know--that's how I can get engaged in a debate about whether Jesus was, you know--I don't think it was--they didn't realize it was a debate until all of a sudden I came of my mouth that, you know, what I thought, but you know. So, it was really focused on reading the Bible, and your Sunday school lessons, and talking about the lesson, and that kind of thing. Story_ID: 85764 Speaker 1: Alright, okay. We were talking about church. We're rolling again. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Talking about church. Now what--was there anything in particular that just, you considered unbelievable about church life, or? Speaker 2: Well, no, not really unbelievable. The point I made earlier is I just--I never, I mean, once I began to have some sense of analysis or to be able to think, you know, myself, I didn't believe a lot of the doctrine, you know. And, in particular, you know, like Jesus was God. I mean, I felt, and I still do feel he was a great prophet. I think he lived. I don't--I'm not one of those who doesn't think he lived or anything. But, yet it just seemed to me, the church doctrine was really created by man for human beings, you know. That they, you know, for men and women, but was created by men, you know. And, I just kind of felt like it was an artificial imposition on how we should live our lives as opposed to some God given, who knows. So, I never really believed in the Bible as such. I mean, I believed, I mean, there are times when, you know, passages from the Bible make a lot of sense to me, even now. But, I didn't believe it was like, the Word of God, and, and that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Now, did you, did you believe that the concept of heaven and hell was a, was fair? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's kind of hard to, to answer that because so much of what I believe now, you know, I'm not sure when I starting believing it. I felt like, the concept of heaven and hell was a way of delaying--in some ways as I became more civic minded and radical, not just civic minded, more radical. I began to believe that the concept of heaven and hell was a concept that was, was created to delay gratification for black folk. They used to say, you know, don't worry, you know, you can be, you know, have your rights denied, you know, be down trodden and all of that. But, you'll go to heaven, you know. That's when you're-- Speaker 1: One day God is gonna raise you up--(simultaneously) Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, God is gonna raise you up, you know. The streets are paved with gold there, you know. So in some sense, I'm not quite sure at what point I began believing that. I know it was way before I became really radical. But, I'm not quite sure whether I was twelve or fifteen or eighteen or--but it was in that, you know, teenage, young adult period that I began to analyze it in that way; the Christian doctrine. Story_ID: 85765 Speaker 1: Okay. So you were an analytical young person. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, what was the upshot of your debate at church? Did you get in trouble? Speaker 2: No. Daddy [Artis Nathaniel Burrows] was very, very religious, and it hurt him that I would say that. But, he also was a very, he's a very analytical guy himself. And, he was more conservative, in fact politically than my mother [Marie Brabham Burrows]. Even though on some things they were more conservative than, well, on all things they're more conservative than I am, but, yeah, I didn't get into trouble. I mean, it was like, you know, it was a contrary to what he believed, you know, he wanted me not to believe that. He always believed Jesus was God, I mean, till the day he died. Yeah, I didn't get into trouble about it, you know. Daddy was the kind of person, I mean, he would make a statement for example, about something and I would--if I got him a book about it on the contrary view, you know, like he would say something like real conservative. Let's say about Cuba, or something about Libya--remember when Libya was all in the news many years ago, you know, ten, fifteen, twenty years ago. And, I would just get him a book, you know, that had the opposite view and he would read it, he'd say, "Oh, I didn't know that." So he was, he was open, you know, he wasn't closed. It was like, yeah I may be conservative, but I'm not a closed conservative on this. And, if you show me another way then, then I'm willing to say, Oh, I didn't know that. Story_ID: 85766 Speaker 1: Okay. Let's talk about school. Now, what grade school did you attend in St. Louis [Missouri]? Speaker 2: I attended three, really. I attended, when we lived on Aubert, I attended, Washington. And, then we moved and I attended, Benton. That was torn down not too long ago. And, then when they integrated the schools in the '50s [1950s], I was going to Benton and when I--they integrated it. I was sent to Gundlach [School, St. Louis, Missouri], which was previously a white school. Speaker 1: Gundlach. Speaker 2: Gundlach. G-U-N-D-L-A-C-H. Speaker 1: Okay. (Unclear). Speaker 2: And, that's, I think, I might have been fourth grade or something like that when I went to Gundlach. And, then I graduated grade school from Gundlach. And, then I went to Beaumont High School [St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Now, tell me about grade school. Now, you started off with--at a black grade school, which was Washington? Speaker 2: Yeah, Washington and Benton were both black. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what are your earliest memories of school? Speaker 2: My earliest memory is, when we were, when we were in school, we had kindergarten, then you had a grade in between kindergarten and first. I forget the name of that grade. It's, it's, it was little, it was a grade you went to between kindergarten and first. And, I remember being in that grade in between kindergarten and first. And, eating Red Hots, and I loved Red Hots. Maybe that's what I should have ask (unclear). I hate, hate Red Hots now. I ate so many Red Hots, I got sick as a dog. I remember that's in-- Speaker 1: Red Hots, you're talking about a candy, or-- Speaker 2: Those little--that candy, you know little, little bitty, they were like maybe, yeah, I mean, they weren't even the size of a dime. They were little bitty things and you could just eat 'em. And, you know how kids are, you know, it's like I gore--I don't if all kids are but I gorged myself on these Red Hots. I have not eaten Red Hots since then. Now, I--that's one memory I have. The other memory I have is walking to school. Because that was another instance of independence, you know, 'cause I walked to school with my sister and her friends and stuff. So, I guess in a way, I was being supervised, but it didn't feel like supervised, like, you know, when your mama's taking you (unclear). Speaker 1: So, you're the youngest? Speaker 2: I'm the youngest, yeah. Speaker 1: How old--how much older is your-- Speaker 2: Four and a half years. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, she was a big girl-- Speaker 1: She's a big sister-- Speaker 2: Compared to, yeah. And, I remember that. I remember playing on the school grounds. I remember the teacher in this grade. I wish I could remember this grade and she really was a good--I didn't realize it then, she was a good friend of my mother [Marie Brabham Burrow]. But, I just loved this teacher. And, I'm blanking on her name right now. I can see her just as good in my eyes. And, I just, I just loved her. She was so good. And, as I got older and as a, as a young adult, I realized that she was also a good friend of my mother. And, and she was, was a very nice, you know, nice friendly person, but she was really kind of progressive too. Which--And, I'm not sure if I was--I don't know what attracted me to her other than I think she was just really a good teacher. And, I just really--she was one of the few teachers, to be honest, if I can say that I just really, really, liked a lot, as a person, you know. Speaker 1: You say she was progressive. In what way? Speaker 2: Well, she was, she was progressive in the sense that she was involved in the Civil Rights Movement, Yeah. That's how I would call it. I think she was probably--in our lingo now, I would probably call her a liberal, you know. Kind of, pro--maybe, I wouldn't use an activist type, but not radical, you know. She was kind of mainstream-- Story_ID: 85767 Speaker 1: I mean, coming up in St. Louis [Missouri], most people as I was coming up were, that I knew of and I guess that's because that's who my parents affiliated with were, you know, mainstreamers, you know, the school teachers, and postal clerks, and doctors, and lawyers, you know. Because back then when I was coming up, it wasn't the division in class, and the black community wasn't quite as, as multilayered, I guess, as it is now. When I was coming up, the middle class was if you were a postal clerk, teacher, minister, doctor, lawyer. All of them were in kind of the middle class with the, you know, and then, you know, just worker--working people such, you know, service people and all that were, you know, and maybe the lower middle class and that kind of thing. So, it wasn't-- Speaker 2: The lower class actually didn't have any jobs. Speaker 1: Right. Lower class, I mean, yeah. They just didn't--they didn't work. Anybody who worked was lower, (laughter) middle class, you know, you had a job, you were, you know. And, so, you know, we--and because of my--I just realized this after I got grown. But, because my, my mother [Marie Brabham Burrow] was very, very much in St. Louis society, I mean, because of her family's history, you know. First of all, her, her great grandfather was born in St. Louis. Her grandfather [Antonio Haskell] was born in St. Louis. His mother [Bell Jones] was born in St. Louis. So, this is her long history of St. Louis folk. Even though they were enslaved, it was still the long history of being in St. Louis. And, then they were kind of the, kind of society, kind of, not society in the sense of they weren't into debutants and all that. But, they were kind of upper class in terms of recognition in the community. Speaker 2: Her father was a doctor, right? Speaker 1: No, her father was a doc--her father [William Sherman Brabham] was a doctor. Her mother [Ira Haskell Brabham] was a teacher, you know. My grand, my--her grandmother was not formally educated that much. But, she made--all of her--she had five children. And, all of them finished school except one. And, he didn't finish 'cause he chose not to. And, he's a musician. He's written gospel music, Antonio Haskell, and stuff. So, he's well known in that sphere, but he didn't finish college. But, she had my, my mothers--of my grandmother and her--and my grand--my great grandmother, my great grandfather, the five children, my, my grandmother was a teacher. Her--One of her--the elder sister was Anita, was a nurse. The eldest son, Roscoe was a doctor. He used to be the head the Homer G. Phillips Hospital, which was one of the hospitals that black physicians could-- Speaker 2: That was a very important hospital for black physicians. Speaker 1: Exactly. Exactly, he was the head of that, superintendent of that for some time. And, then her--the younger, the youngest child, Cornella was a social worker, teacher/social worker. I think she got teaching credentials too, but she worked mainly as a social worker. Speaker 2: So, that is a family that's really entrenched in the St. Louis black society. Speaker 1: Education. Oh, yeah. Yeah, and black society of St. Louis. So, even though we may not have been the, you know, most highfalutin in terms of jobs and titles, in terms of my mother [Marie Brabham Burrow] and father [Artis Nathaniel Burrow]. We were very much entrenched in, in the black society in St. Louis, because of that background, my mother's background. Story_ID: 85768 Speaker 1: So, well, what were you favorite subjects in school? Speaker 2: Social sciences. I wasn't great with math. Even though that was my father's [Artis Nathaniel Burrow] major. But, I--math wasn't my greatest, but the social sciences. I liked English. I did fine in school. I mean, I was a very good student and I did fine in all the subjects. But, I think perhaps my, my most favorite were the social sciences, and English, and you know. I wasn't even a history buff until I, I'm not a history buff now. I really didn't like history that much until I read, I used to always think history was boring until I read [W.E.B.] Du Bois' book, "History in Africa." I forget the exact-- Speaker 1: The "World in Africa"? Speaker 2: The "World in Africa". I couldn't put that book down. Then I realized that history doesn't have to be boring. And, I think the other issue with me with history, is they didn't tell our history when I was gro--when I was coming up. I didn't go to an alternative school that, you know, was Afro centric. I went to regular old public schools that, with regular old public school books, that, you know, when we got the Civil War and American History--when I was in high school, I think we stayed on it all of one session, if that long, you know, that kind of thing, so. Speaker 1: So, in grade school you didn't have any black history? There was no celebration of Black History month or any of that in St. Louis? Speaker 2: Aww no. Black History, no. Back then, I think Black History Month, just been celebrated that last, what, twenty years, thirty years? Speaker 1: No. It started in 1920 something. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Twenty-six ['26, 1926], I think, yeah. Speaker 2: No. Not in St. Louis then. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah. Story_ID: 85769 Speaker 1: The public school would pick it up so they kinda slowly picked it up around the country. So, you find it's spotty, you know, in some places black teachers will do it. In some cases, they didn't do it. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. No, we didn't do it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think I would remember that. Speaker 1: So, you didn't have any Black History in school at all? Speaker 2: Not, not very much at all. Speaker 1: Okay. And,-- Speaker 2: In fact, no Black History in the sense of really concentrated in Black History and I didn't really--no. Speaker 1: And, in church there was no discussion of it, huh? Speaker 2: Um-um. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 85770 Speaker 1: So. All right. So, did your parents ever discuss some of the discrepancies in race relations, in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Because they were, as I said, they were civic minded and, you know, they would talk about the discrimination in various places. Sometimes you'd hear them talk about, like dad [Artlis Nathaniel Burrow] was at the Post Office and, you know, he would talk about what appeared to be discrimination. Probably was, but, you know, in terms of promotions and, you know, that kinds of thing. Yeah, so there was discussion in our family as related-- Speaker 1: Did he serve in World War II? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. He didn't go to the Service. Speaker 1: That's often a catalyst for a line of discussion of racial issues-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) the War being so dramatically segregated. Speaker 2: No. He didn't go to the War. But, what did happen, he did discuss this is that during World War II, he went to apply for a job at a chemical plant. And, daddy had graduated from Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee] with a major in Math and a minor in Chemistry, or vice versa, I never can get those two right. But, it was Chemistry and Math, and he went to apply for this job and they gave it to a White high school graduate, you know. So, he talked about that as an example of racism that he personally had to face. But, he really shared it more (unclear) what Black people had to face. I mean, even though it was part of his personal history. That here he had, you know, the qualifications to do the job, was far more qualified than this white male high school graduate, but yet they gave the job to him. Story_ID: 85771 Speaker 1: Okay. So, are there any other teachers that took an interest in you in grade school that you can remember? Speaker 2: I--Many of them took an interest in me, because, you know, one, my mother [Marie Brabham Burrow] was a teacher and her mother was a teach--I mean, you know, as I said, and given the status of my family in the community most particular my mother's family. And, I was a good student. I was one of those students that, you know,--the biggest thing that I got on my report card that was bad was conduct, because I talked all the time. So, I would end up in--I was in grade school you got U's and S's, Unsatisfactory or Satisfactory for conduct. And, many times I would get an "S" minus. A couple times I got U's, because, "she just talks all the time," you know. "She finishes her work and then she starts talking," you know. Or, "she's trying to help someone else," you know. So, I was a good student. So, you know, pretty much the teachers for the most part, liked me. I'm sure there was some that probably didn't, I don't know. But, I never felt like--I think there was just one teacher in grade school that I felt like, I didn't like and didn't like me. And, if she was the first teacher I had when I went to Gundlach [School, St. Louis, Missouri], the integrated school. Story_ID: 85772 Speaker 1: And, I think there was--I can't remember all the facts, but there was some racism going on there. And-- Speaker 2: Were you happy about going to Gundlach [School, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 1: Not particularly because all my friends were at Benton. I don't remember it being like a major crisis for me. But, I do remember feeling very sad and somewhat--I mean, there were others in my block, 'cause they divided it by blocks. So, it wasn't as if I was the only one going. But, there was a feeling of being isolated. Not, not really, you know, being out of my, kind of, area of comfort. I guess is the only way I can say it. I hadn't thought that much about it. But, it wasn't--I'm sure there was some trauma, but it wasn't like major trauma like down south where people were throwing roc--I mean, you know, it was--the transition was not violent. There was not a violent transition that I can, you know, then say well, you know, they threw rocks at us or anything. There were incidents when I was coming--like I remember this teacher, and I think she said something that was kind of off color. And, I--my memory is and you know, remembering back when fourth grade, I mean, you know, I can't say that my memory is that vivid. Maybe somebody else's is. But, in my memory is that there was an incident where the parents had to come and address the issue with this teacher about how she was treating the black children. I don't remember exactly. I think it was something she said to us, or to one of us, or to me or something. But, and I was one that if you said it, I was gonna tell, so, you know. It probably was something that was said that I heard or was said to me. But, I do remember the black parents having to address that issue. I also remember that I would--became very good friends with the little white girl. I mean, I think we were in fourth or fifth grade and became very good friends. We used to walk half way home together. And, then she'd go her way and I'd walk the rest of the way with the rest of my friends, you know. And, then she had invited me to come and play with her. And, I hadn't asked my parents yet, because my parents were, as I told you, they were very strict, so. They, you know, we didn't do too much going and staying over at other people's homes. It wasn't race, it was just that we just didn't, you know. People could come to our home and if my mother and father knew them, you know, we could go, but it wasn't a lot of that. And, so I hadn't asked yet. But, she came back the next day and said her father said, you know, he wouldn't let niggers come play, you know. And, that was like--and she, and the way she told me, I could tell she was, she was repeating what he said and she wasn't comfortable with it. I mean, she wasn't like reporting it as like she was happy about it. She was very sad. But, that ended our relationship, so-to-speak. I don't remember being friends with her anymore. And, I'm not quite sure if that was just something in my mind because I'm a little--I'm not like a harsh task master kind of person, even now. You know, I'm not like, okay bam, we're not friends anymore. But, I just kinda think, it was like, how can you be friends with someone that, you know, is--it just didn't feel right, you know. So, I mean, I remember stuff like that, but it wasn't a whole--it wasn't like a major trauma. Even though that was probably more traumatic then, than I am remembering it to be, it wasn't. Story_ID: 85773 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about high school. Now, where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: I went to Beaumont High School [St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Beaumont, Okay. Is that a, was that an integrated school, too? Speaker 2: That was, yeah. It was pri--it was initially white and then it--they integrated it. And, so my sister, when they integrated the schools, my sister went to Beaumont. She was, you know, ahead of me, and so, then I went. Speaker 1: Now when--what year was it when you started Beaumont? Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963]? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. No, no, wait a minute. Sixty [1960]. 'Cause I graduated in '63 [1963]. Lord help me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, '60' [1960]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I graduated in '63' [1963]. 'Cause I graduate college in '67' [1967]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, that'd be '60 [1960]. No-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I think I started-- Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962], I guess you had started. Right? No. Speaker 2: No. I graduated-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Speaker 2: I went to college in '63' [1963], so, I went--I think I started in January of '60' [1960]. I think I was--I started in January. Speaker 1: Sixty [1960], okay. January of '60' [1960]. Speaker 2: I'm not, yeah. But, it was '60' [1960]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Alright. So, when you were in school--well, tell us about Beaumont. What was it like? Speaker 2: It was, it was okay, I mean, you know, it was an integrated school, you know. I was very, I was good academically. I didn't participate in sports, but like I said earlier, I like going to the sports 'cause I was right, you know, it was right there by my house. I'm not quite, I mean, it wasn't, you know, I can't--there was nothing like spectacular about it. Speaker 1: Did you get involved in like the normal high school stuff like, were you in the band-- Speaker 2: No, I wasn't in band. Speaker 1: Any of those kind of-- Speaker 2: No. I was in band. Speaker 1: Wasn't a cheerleader or nothing? Speaker 2: Oh, naw. I wasn't in any of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was just a regular student. Speaker 1: Were there any black cheerleaders or-- Speaker 2: One. My, my--one of the--it took her a while to become it, but I had--it was a group of four of us and one of our--one of--Evelyn Raye (ph.). She wanted to be a cheerleader and she went out and she finally made it, yeah. So, that was like a big event. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was it--were the black students a real minority on campus? Speaker 2: Yes. Initially, we were a minority. I believe by the time I graduated, it was more even. But, we were a minority initially when I first went. But, I believe that by the time I graduated, it was more even. And, we were, we became active. And, like I have--a very good friend of mine became the president of the student council, you know. So, we began to get into--because see the school had actually been integrated like four or five years before I went there. So, it was gradually, you know, by the time I went, you know, blacks were gradually getting more involved in the, you know, the student council and that kind of thing, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, now so, did you work on school newspaper or any of that kinda of thing, like that? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. Okay. Speaker 2: No. I did--it was, I was just a regular student that did well in school. I don't, I--was I in choir? I don't think I was. I think was--I worked on the radio station for a while. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. What were your favorite subjects in high school? Speaker 2: Again, social sciences, sociology, those kinda of subjects. Those were the main ones, I always liked social sciences. Story_ID: 85774 Speaker 1: As the Civil Rights Movement kind of unfolded on a national scene, on television, in the news, did you start--did you--what did you think about that, would you have liked, open up the world more? Speaker 2: Yeah. It did. And, we looked at, what was it, the March on Washington was in, what was it, what was that? Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963]. Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963]. That was when I graduated high school. I remember looking at it with my daddy [Artis Nathaniel Burrow]. And, my father had tears rolling down his face when he was listening to Martin Luther King [Jr.]. So, I remember that. And, really that's the one thing, I mean, we know now historically that the role television played in the Civil Rights Movement. But, back then we felt it, 'cause we could see, you know, what was happening, you look at the news and, you know, and that kind of thing. So, that played a significant role in me really understanding more than just within the confines of St. Louis, what was happening to black people and the discrimination and segregation that was going on. Story_ID: 85775 Speaker 1: So, well when it was--so you were a good student, you had good grades, and on the verge of graduation, did you know where you were going to college? Speaker 2: Um-hum. I went to Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts. My mother--my sister had gone to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. And, I was very much a--I was a child that was very much controlled by my mother [Marie Brabham Burrow], I'll put it that way. I was-- Speaker 1: Controlled! Actually? Speaker 2: Yeah. My mother was very strong willed, domineering kind of person, and I did what she asked me to do. Not all the time. But, on big things. And, she wanted me, she wanted me to go to, like the east, to go to school. And, I don't know how she chose Clark University. And, I just have to be honest, she chose it. I mean, I didn't choose it. Speaker 1: That's like Worcester, Massachusetts? Speaker 2: Un-hum. It's in Worcester, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: People often get it mixed up with Clark Atlanta [University, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Clark Atlanta, right. Right. Right. 'Cause I tell people I went to Clark. And they say, Oh you did, blah, blah, blah, blah blah. And, then I say, "Yeah, well I didn't go there, I went to Worcester." Yeah. But, it was a very, very good school. I mean, they gave me--what it did for me was it gave me a strong academic background. It was an excellent school, academically. It was--it gave me a taste of the east coast, which I love, you know. I really do like it in the east coast. And, in a way, on hindsight, it gave me a way of developing my consciousness about, about race. Because, rather than going the route that so many of my friends went, or, not many of my friends, but a number of my friends, which been going to a predominately black school, going to an overwhelmingly white school. This wasn't even a predominately white school when I went. I was the only black child out--in that class other than two Africans. It gave me a way of beginning to see myself as a black person. And, contrast to as opposed to--as a part of a black culture. And, so on hind sight, I think that it was important in that, the development of my racial consciousness. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, it could have, now, I'm sure that some thought it might, though I, you know, I mean there are different ways of looking at things. But, some might have thought it would have made you a part of--you may have felt more part of the mainstream having gone to this all white school. You know, that was the thinking-- Speaker 2: I'm not. Speaker 1: In those days. Speaker 2: Yeah. Maybe--and that why, be why Mother sent me. I mean, I think that's part of the thinking there in that community, and I'm sure it was not just that black community, was, you know, that, you know, it--there is an advantage to, you know, you know, we're in, you know, we wanna integrate, you know, I mean, you know, you know, we wanna be a part of the mainstream U.S. not just mainstream, black community. So, you know, it's great for our kids to go and go to, you know, these schools in the east and all of that, because they begin the get the "credentials" of the white society as opposed to just the credentials of the black. I mean, I'm sure that that was part of what was in my mother's mind, you know. And, because I was such a good student, mother knew that she, you know, that I could get into certain schools that perhaps, you know, I could not have, you know, other kids could not have gotten into because of the credentialing issues. So, I know that was part of it. But for me, it was--it's like I can move in any so--any group. I know that. I mean, I'm comfortable with any group of people. I don't know if that is a part of having gone to a predominately or overwhelmingly white environment. Story_ID: 85776 Speaker 1: I missed out on some things that I think others of my friends got, in going to a predominately black environment to school. Speaker 2: Well what are those things? Speaker 1: I think just, I mean, you know when I walk to--like my sister went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], you know. My really good friend Ramona went to Fisk, and you when they talk about, you know--and the times I went down to Fisk to visit my sister, you know, it's just the, just being with black folk all the time, and the culture. And, you know, and they had networks among themselves now, you know, that, you know, I don't have, you know. You know, I can ride on my sister's coattail or my aunt's coattail, who also went to Fisk, you know, my mother's sister. It's the, I mean, the way in which, you know, like homecoming in the black school, it's not, you just, it's not like anywhere else. And, no other school has homecoming like a black school has homecoming, and those kinds of things. I just didn't have that experience, and that, you know, social experience. Academically, I think I had a good experience. But, you know, many of the black schools, they had a good academic experience as well, that were, you know, they were, you know, like, you know, not good schools. So, I missed out on that part. And in part, I think for me at least, I think it also was a period in school in which I was caught in between who am I, you know. Which I don't think, when you go to all black school, you necessarily have that culturally. I know that all of us, as human beings have that question. I'm no trying to demean that, but I mean, it's like, particularly back then it's--you have to res--it, it, it--you find, at least I found, that I had to resist embracing a white culture. Story_ID: 85777 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you're at Clark, this Clark College is kinda isolated, you know-- Speaker 2: Clark University, where-- Speaker 1: Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: You say in a lot of your classes, you're the only black student. Speaker 2: Well, I was the, I was the only U.S. black in my class. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were two Africans in my class. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, then they-- Speaker 1: Did you form relationships with them? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Where were they from? Speaker 2: One was from Ghana. And, one was from Kenya, I wanna say. Yeah. Speaker 1: Male and female? Speaker 2: Both were males. Speaker 1: Both were males? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Alright. So, but in the school, were there other American born blacks in the school? Speaker 2: There was one in the senior class, D'Army Bailey [HM]. He's now a judge down in Memphis. And, then there was one, a woman in the sophomore class and we weren't very friendly. You know, I mean, we weren't close. We were friendly but, wasn't close. Speaker 1: None of the other black students were friendly? I mean,-- Speaker 2: Well, D'Army and I was around some. But, he was a--his senior. And, the woman that was in the class ahead of me, we knew each other, but we weren't, you know, we didn't like, bond as, as black women. And, I'm even blanking on her name. And, then the Africans and I were very close. Speaker 1: But, it sound kinda isolated there and really (simultaneously). Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, you know. Speaker 1: Any other black students in the area? Around there that-- Speaker 2: There--I hung out a couple--with some blacks students out of Holy Cross. That's where Clarence Thomas was, but I didn't know him (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, D'Army Bailey now, he had quite a career, you know, he got--still got quite a career. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 85778 Speaker 1: So, well, you know, how is your social life in that kind of a situation? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: The academics was good you say, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, academics were good. Social life, it, it was kinda--I was around a lot of the African students a lot. I mean, we did a lot of things together. In fact, one of them I went with for a while. Well, you know, as boyfriend/girlfriend. So, we had, you know, a network. And, then we had, we had projects in the town. So, I worked in the black community some, working in some of the community centers and stuff, as a volunteer. And then, you know, the social life became, you know--I had a lot of white friends. And, then I had a very good friend that went to Williams College, from St. Louis. In fact, he and I are still friends. Our parents were friends. So, I would go visit him some, you know, not a whole lot, but I think I went a couple of times. Then, you know, it was, you know, like I said, part of that, for me at least, I don't know about other black students that--'cause I know they're others who have done what I did. But, for me at least, that was that tension of who am I, you know. And, in some ways I could see how black people who go to over, you know, predominantly white institutions could lose their sense of identity as black. Because it's very tempting, because in some ways, at Clark at least, and I'm not sure if this is the way it would be at other schools. But, I can't image it being that much different. In some ways that there is always an opportunity because you're dealing with many of the--many of the students are liberal, you know, are--you know, back then, you know. I'm not sure if they were trying to show that they were liberal when embracing black folks or if they were sincere. But, there is this tension of, you can forget who you are and just become part of who they are and become part of their culture. And, that would have been very easy to have done. Story_ID: 85779 Speaker 1: I don't know if that--I'm making sense, but-- Speaker 2: Well, historically, the time period produced a good number of white students, 1963, '64 [1964], especially if they all sort of reached their height of volunteerism and went into the south with SNCC [Student Non Violent Coordinating Committee]. I mean, there's never been a wave like that in the history of the country. Of white, young white student who felt compelled to volunteer to make things better for black people as it relates. It's never been that kind of a wave before. That's when the time that Peace Corps opened up, and I think they started VISTA [Volunteers In Service To America] in '64' [1964]. The year after that, it was just a lot--very--the time when, if there's any time when they were trying to demonstrate, you know, some fidelity to the Corps or to black people, that would have been the time, you know. There's never been a time that dramatic anywhere, at any rate. So, there's some sense in when, a lot of sense in what you're saying. Speaker 1: Right. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But, as a, a young black woman, and I guess this is something that I had to struggle with is, I developed who I am. Because it's been a conscious development of who I am, is that there have been points in my life where I had to choose who I was. There was, it was not this unconsciousness of choice. And there, there is that tension in being in that environment in that, that, you know, you know, to be honest, it's like that environment looks good. I mean, it's like, it's not like a denial of who I was because my family sent me into that environment. Yet, out of that, I think, came and perhaps years of introspection out of that experience, came a sense of who I am as an African woman. And that's not, and that's not in antagonism in some way towards white people. It is in, you know, reflection of who I am, if that makes sense. I'm not sure if that's making sense, but that, that experience allowed me to do that. I know that my friends who went to black schools did it in another way. Some of 'em did it in the same way because some of 'em had experiences either in, you know, proprietary school or grad school or something similar to mine. But, we all, I think, all of us, for myself, all of us who were at the age that I am, who have developed a sense of who they are as a person. Whether or not they've embraced being an African woman or whatever their decision of how they describe themselves. We've had these experiences against which we had to choose, you know. Story_ID: 85780 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what about your professors on campus. Were there teachers that you really looked up to and admired at Clark [University, Worcester, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Um-hum, my advisor, Dr. Weiner. I really, I admired him because he treated me, at least my experience of him, is he treated me as a student, not as a black student. He respected me as a student. I didn't do very well at all after my first semester 'cause I was gone every night. I told you my parents were strict. At Clark they had very liberal hours coming in and, you know. Because there weren't many black women there at all, all the African men, you know that first semester, I was, you know, I was the thing. Until they realize that I wasn't, you know what, I won't say that on the tape. But, you know, I had a date almost every night, you know. You know, that first semester until they found out who I was, you know. And, so I just had me a ball. And, of course, studies went down the drain. And, I respected Dr. Weiner, 'cause he just confronted me on it. I mean, he wasn't liberal about it, you know. He challenged me, you know. What are you here for, you know. Are you stupid? Or, are you dumb? What's going on? I mean, you know, you can do this, you know, that kind of thing. But, it was, you know, it's hard hitting, you know. But, I didn't find it racially hard hitting. I found that he--I felt he was dealing with me like he would have a white student that he wanted to shock into, you know, you either gonna have to get on the track or you're not gonna be here. Speaker 1: What was his full name; the doctor? Speaker 2: I don't remember his-- Speaker 1: His first name? Okay. Speaker 2: I did good to remember his last name. I couldn't remember this in between grade school and--I mean, kindergarten and the other teacher. Speaker 1: I was wondering if he was related to Leo Weiner. (Simultaneously) Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. He was a--I don't know. He's a psychologist, I know that. He may be deceased by now. I don't know that. But, that was one that I really respected. 'Cause I felt like--and I don't think that he ever taught me, he was just my advisor. I really respected him 'cause I felt like he just dealt with me straight up. I didn't feel like he was--I had, I've had situations and I--that you know, either you getting dismissed by the white teacher or either--and they just give you a grade just 'cause they think, you know, okay, and let me just get rid of this person. But, you're not treated with respect and with, you know, you know, integrity, you know. And, I felt he dealt with me with integrity. And, there was a, I'm awful at names. I don't know why I remembered Dr. Weiner's name. But, there was a black woman graduate student there who got her PhD the same year I graduated. And, I can't remember, I can just see her just as good in my, in my eyes, eye, eye view, and we, we kinda bonded. I really, you know, enjoyed being around her, and for a couple of years after, we kinda kept track of each other. But, I haven't been in touch with her--I mean, that's--this is 30 years ago, you know, more than thirty years ago now. But, for the most part, and I guess in some ways I was thinking about, for the most part, my school experiences had been fine. I was always a good student. I mean, I did very well in school for the most part. I mean, but, I haven't--they--it's not like a, it's not a stand out for me, I guess is what I wanna say. I don't--it's not like it, this was some--it was, it's a period in my life I did well at it, school was fine. More for me were experiences, interactions of becoming who I am more in terms of the social interactions and the contradictions that existed in, in both, particularly college and grad school, but even in high school. Story_ID: 85781 Speaker 1: Okay, now. In '64 [1964] is when they had that-SNCC [Student Non Violent Coordinating Committee] organized all the voters in Mississippi. Speaker 2: Hum-hum. Speaker 1: Did you know any of the people-- Speaker 2: I went, yeah. In fact, you were talking about and I'm seeing this guy too. It's a white, real big, tall white guy. Big guy, went down there from our school. We did--there were--we did a lot. In fact, D'Army [Bailey, HM] organized a lot of this his last year. We were doing a lot of demonstrations at, in town in front of the City Hall and other places against discrimination and public services and jobs, and stuff like that. We supported the black community in a lot of things. I didn't go down south, but we did a lot of that there and I was involved with that. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So. Well, when you, you graduated in 1967? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 85782 Speaker 1: And, what did you plan to do after you graduated? Speaker 2: I went to-- Speaker 1: Did you plan to go graduate school? Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah. I chose social work school. I wasn't quite sure whether I wanted to be a psychologist or social worker. And, I chose social work school. It was a two year program. Speaker 1: Was your major psychology? Speaker 2: My major was psychology. My minor was sociology. And, so I chose school social work; got accepted at George Warren Brown School of Social Work in St. Louis, Washington University, St. Louis. And, so I went back home to St. Louis, and did that two year program. And-- Speaker 1: Were you glad to get back home? Speaker 2: In some ways, yeah; and, in some ways, no. I enjoyed the northeast and I enjoyed the school. It wasn't a tra--it wasn't an awful experience, you know. In fact, I had applied and my mother kind of bribed me. I had applied to go to Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts] to their Social Work School. But, my mother [Marie Brabham Burrow] wanted me to come back home. So, I went back. It's a mama's girl. So, I went back there. So, I was glad to be back. You know, my sister was there then and I have, had a lot of friends there, which I still do have quite a few friends in St. Louis. So, it was good. It was a good experience. And GWB, George Warren Brown School of Social Work was one of best social work schools, at least at that point, in the country. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers or acquaintance down there that stand out that you wanna tell us about? Speaker 2: Well, some of the teachers, Dorothy, Dorothy, I'll think of her last--Dorothy Harrison was a black social work, social worker who my last year, I think, did some work there at the school. My question when I met her--but she stands out being part of that school experience. And, that--and from Dorothy and Bill, her husband, William Harrison, is where I really began to learn activism, you know. I was dibbling and babbling a little bit in college, you know. Being part of the demonstrations, going to meeting that D'Army [Bailey, HM] would organize. And, then after D'Army others would organize and being involved in the community in some of the community programs. But, I really wasn't an activist then. I was just an ordinary, you know, did well in school, smart, you know, kinda young lady, but I really wasn't an activist, you know. My activist kinda stuff didn't began to bud in college, but then in social work school, it really started to bud. And, being in the association with Dorothy Harrison and Bill Harrison, Jack Kirkland, Fred Smith, these are, you know, these were really activist social workers in St. Louis that were really in--considered radical in many ways. So, beginning to be around them, began to develop my activism, began to see, you know, to see that it's, it's not, it, it, you know, it is something about the need for some major structural changes in our society. Not simply, you know, let's just integrate this system, you know. And, and even began to understand what even the whole move around integration was, you know, more from a practical activist perspective. And, that's even though, you know, my uncle and my aunt were very involved in the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], CORE [Congress on Racial Equality], my mother [Marie Brabham Burrow] was civic minded, and all of that. It was still--didn't hit home until the activist bug, as such, didn't hit me until I was in social work school and shortly after social work school. And, I think that's when the, you know, the character that I've had all my life, the standing up for what I believe in, you know, the debating whether Jesus was God, or all of that, that became focused in an activist way, you know. Those kinda character traits of independent thinking, you know, not going along to get along all the time, you know. You know, standing up for what you believe in became really focused as an activism, you know, in grad school. Story_ID: 85783 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what were the causes you were active in? I mean, what were-- Speaker 2: In, well some of the ones that stand out is the newspaper article that I was showing you earlier were things like when--right after, shortly after I graduated from social work school [George Warren Brown School of Social Work, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri]. Well, maybe no, that was about nine years later. One of the things was, that we found out, that Barnes Hospital was re-segregating. When I was born on the segregated floor at Washington Hospital Center, which is real--not Washington Hospital Center, Barnes Hospital Center, which was the Washington University's Hospital, so-to-speak. And, they were re-segregating. They were doing it by Medicaid now, as opposed to race. But, that ended up being race. So, under the--my leadership, we organized major demonstrations against that. I was very, so, I was very much active in that. Up until then, I mean, it was things like, we would be working around public housing. Right after grad school, when I was talking about the role that Dorothy Harrison and Bill Harrison played, I remember working around a lot of public housing issues. You know, where people in public housing weren't getting what they were supposed to be getting. Discrimination in services to the blacks in public housing. I did a lot of work around--in mental health because that was my area of expertise coming out of grad school. I remember in St. Louis, it was some major issue around lead poisoning of our children and it was predominately black children. And, so we had a lot of work around in that area, the lead poisoning issues. Issues pertaining to just general services to the black community, or lack of services to the poor black community. Story_ID: 85784 Speaker 1: Did you have community organizing training at all? Or, did you--were you involved in that (simultaneously)-- Speaker 2: Not really. I took--when I did social work, I did it mainly as a individual therapy. I did the track of mental health and that kind of thing. So, I didn't have the community organizing training in social work school. I got it on the ground, you know, when we began to work. I mean, when I began working in the community. I worked as a community mental health worker. I was the head of the social work aspect of the Community Mental Health Program out of the Model Cities Program. And the--I was working then at Malcolm Bliss Hospital and they asked me if I wanted to go into the community and I said, yeah. And, I went in and I worked one community for a while and they promoted me to be in charge of all of the communities. So that, I didn't take courses in it, but I, you know, had to learn it on the ground. That's when I was talking to Jack Kirkland, early on in my career. And, he was saying, you know, he challenged me to whether or not I wanted to be a conformist or whether I wanted to, you know, to just get mental health services for people. Or, if I wanted to challenge the basics upon which people needed these kinda of mental health services. The social and political realities that black people live in, most particular black people in poverty. And, that if I was really gonna be a mental health social worker, I had to raise those issues too. So, that began to, I mean, that challenge began to really focus me as a, as a radical and as an activist. To begin to see that there, that yes, I was raised in middle class black America and for so many years, you know. The goal of so many of us and probably still is, many middle class black Americans is just to merge into society to get the benefits that are right for you. And to, you know, even if you raised up discrimination, you were raising it up just to kinda change it for that situation. But, not any real fundamental challenge to a society that would create these kinds of schisms in society. And, that would create a society that, and maintain a society that was so, because you were whatever, black or, you know, whatever the ism is at that point. That to really raise those fundamental issued and so under the tutelage of like a Jack Kirkland, and a Fred Smith, and a Dorothy and Bill Harrison. I began to learn those kinds of ways of looking at this society, even more so than when I was in college, even though we, you know, did the little demonstrations and stuffs like that. And, I say it like that, not to demean those demonstrations, but I really didn't embrace a view of the societal ill of racism; the real ill of it. As a real way of looking at it and then analyzing it, and looking at what my role would be in this world as it related to that, until I was in social work. In fact, right after social work school. Speaker 1: Okay-- Story_ID: 85785 Speaker 1: Now, when you were in school, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Do you remember what you were doing then? And, what impact did it-- Speaker 2: That was '68' [1968], right? Speaker 1: "Sixty-eight [1968]," yeah, April of '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Um-hum. I was--'67' [1967]--I was in social work school [George Warren Brown School of Social Work, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri]. Yeah. I was in social work school. Speaker 1: Did it make a big impact-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: On the school and the school district? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. I don't remember it like a big impact on the whole school. I remember it had a significant impact on many of us in the school. And, and because I was living at home, so-to-speak, I mean, I wasn't--it had an impact in our community, very, very strong impact. I mean, even, well, you know, most people didn't march with King, even though many people say they did now, that didn't. But, but most of, most of our community was very upset even though they may not have marched with him. But, you know, if he'd come through town, or, I have relatives in Chicago that had seen him in Chicago, and all of that. And, people--he had a lot of people respected him and was very, very, painful. And, there was a demonstration, in fact, some people, there was a big delegation from St. Louis, some of my--who went down to the funeral. And, then I remember those of us who couldn't go or didn't go to the funeral, you know, staying, you know, riveted at the TV and stuff (unclear). So, it had major impact. Speaker 1: Okay. I just wondered if the school did something special (unclear). Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: Ceremony or something? Speaker 2: I don't remember. That doesn't mean it didn't happen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't remember that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember going to memorials around that time, but I don't remember it at the school. But, that doesn't mean it didn't happen. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 85786 Speaker 1: Let's see. So, you were with, you were with the Community Mental Health Department after-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: After graduate school-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: A long time, looks like about seven years. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Alright. And, what were some of your experiences with the Community Mental Health Department? Speaker 2: I guess, when I first started at Malcolm Bliss, I was working on the children's unit. In fact, I worked on the children's unit and the juvenile, the adolescent unit. And, I began, I mean, that experience was more of a clinical experience not simply in terms of what I was doing but even in terms of analysis of what I was doing. I began to see how much of mental illnesses actual tied to social conditions. I began to see how--I did a lot, as a social worker, I did a lot of the social histories. And I did, you know, I did, you know, I sat in on groups with psychiatrist and psychologist. And, so I began to understand that mental illness isn't just, you know, some brain kinda gone--pulled like electricity kinda goes out. But that it is, it can be created or at least exacerbated by social conditions. And so, that was kind of my initial experience in the clinical level. When I went out into the communities when I began--and, I learned some real important lessons in the community. 'Cause I was working in a black community trying it as a social worker which was, it was primarily responsible for developing that service. I mean, the psychiatrist came in to give direct service, you know. To see the patient or patients, you know, once every however often. But, I was the one that had to do the, the, you know, supervising. At that point, they had paraprofessionals, and trained them, and help get delivered services and develop group programming and I began to work with the schools. And, again, those kinds of experiences tied with the relating to other black social workers who were far, who were really radical, you know, who were training me to be radical, you know. We just began, it began this, this way of viewing the conditions in our society is more than just these are the conditions. But, to begin to see well, why are they like that, and what can we do to change it? And, in order to change it, it required an activism. They just, you know, you couldn't just change it by saying, oh okay now, you just go out and get a better job, you know. Because we had not only issues of mental illness to deal with, but issues of race to deal with, issues of class to deal with, and so in, you know, in dealing with teachers, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Some of the mental health issues of black people are, I mean, it's been said by some, I think J.A. Rogers said a long time ago. The historian said that "To be an expert on race in America, the first qualification is to be crazy." And, like somebody else said, "That to be paranoid, for blacks to be paranoid is not to be crazy, is to be normal." Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Then we have like, the phenomenal, every--I think one of the local, one of the contemporary comedian's now, talks about how every black family got somebody upstairs, some uncle upstairs in a room locked up (laughter). And, everybody laughed 'cause they know it's some--there's a lot of truth to this. 'Cause relative usually in every black family, you know, in the extended family that's got some, he seemed to be shell shock in the war, or something's wrong. And, he comes down every now and then, and he's got some secret or something hidden there and, you know, I think in that movie "Soul Food" there was a lump in the-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, these are some of the challenges, you know, are and then there's always the analysis that it comes all the way down from slavery, that you're crazy if you challenge what the status quo. Like this is a good nigger or bad nigger, whatever (simultaneously) challenging the status quo are crazy Negro, you know, challenging what's already here. He's not considered a, he's not considered a hero, but crazy. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Yeah. Story_ID: 85787 Speaker 1: And, I guess it, the--I think the challenge for mental health professions is to, well, I think there's several challenges. One is, at what point has someone crossed the line to being clinically mentally ill and therefore, need, in need of treatment? And, to what point--what kind of treatment is the best? And, I think that's for everyone, regardless of race. I think that the point that you're making is one that I saw a lot when Jack [Kirkland] challenged me to look beyond just the traditional way of looking at people, is that rage within the black community has in fact, I mean, rage has, has created several kinds of illnesses. Rage has created depression. 'Cause rage is depression, is anger turned inward. I mean, depression is anger turned inward. It's created depression. It's created--there's a paranoia that is healthy for black people to have. But, there are those who have crossed the line, and did they cross the line--would they had crossed the line if they had not been black in America, you know. And, that becomes the interwoven issue. That's--the issue that's interwoven and all of the issue around mental illness for black people. At what point did--are they really mental ill, number one. And, at what point, if they are mental ill, did they become mental ill? And, what is the relationship between how society treated them. And, not just treated them, individually. See part of it seems to me is I've looked at this issue, is that I may not have gotten the brunt of a lot of racism, but to the extent that I saw, you know. Looking at TV, we were talking about, in the '60's [1960s] seeing what was happening in the south with the, with that, you know, what was that sheriff, you know, that was beating people in the head, you know, all of that? Speaker 2: Bull Connor. Speaker 1: Bull Connor, and all of that. Speaker 2: Jim Clark. Speaker 1: Look, you know, looking at all of that. To what extent, you know--I might not had been the direct victim, but I am the indirect victim of it, because I'm black, you know. Because I can experience that, you know, what was happening to them. It would have been me, if I'd been down there, you know, or could have been me. So, that's the interesting thing around the mental health for me. Again is, it is a struggle to figure out how to heal our people. Story_ID: 85326 Speaker 1: I was--let me just--yeah, I was going to ask you about Pruitt-Igoe that was destroyed during the early '70s [1970s], and some of the thinking about that? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, I just remember it was an awful place. Speaker 1: Was it a big housing (simultaneously)? Speaker 2: Really tall high-rise. I don't know how many stories, but it was big. And, the elevator didn't stop on every floor. So, and I don't know if that was the way my memory is or if that's the way it was built. But, if it wasn't the way it was built, it was the way it was operationally. So, it meant, if you lived on, let's say on the fifth floor, you either had to go to the fourth floor or the sixth floor. So, I mean, built in security issues of having to go down or up steps depending on where--I--many of us always felt, and that was one of the projects that we had. I mean, projects, projects, one of the things that we did in the Black Social Workers Group that I participated in, in St. Louis. I was member of, is to provide, I mean, they had major issues. One time in the community in--at Pruitt Igoe, and we took blankets down, I think the heat went out one cold, cold winter and that kind of thing. So, there were a lot of social issues. But, I think the real issue was the creation of a, of a type of housing that was in it, it itself, inhuman. That really treated poor people and predominantly black people, but poor black people, predominantly, in a way that was just inhuman. There was not sufficient facilities for security, for programming, for that community. I mean, in just these huge tall buildings that, you know, weren't maintained well at all. That created all kinds of--I mean, there was, it was a, you know, you hate to keep focusing on the danger, but the building and the construction in itself created the danger for people. And, units themselves weren't well maintained and that kind of thing. So, it was a nightmare. We weren't very sad when they blew them up. I mean, the issue in housing, and I'm not a housing expert, is not getting rid of a Pruitt-Igoe, but what do you put in its place for housing. Housing is a critical issue for poor people. So, that's really the issue. The issue is, how do you create housing for poor people in a society that is, you know, capital society that, you know, places a major dollar price on, on anything that's livable? And so, it's really the creation of housing for poor people that's the issue. And, that we in the Black Social Workers focused on in St. Louis. But, not any love for Pruitt-Igoe by any means, you know. Speaker 1: Did that Black Social Workers campaign for the destruction of Pruitt-Igoe? Or, did-- Speaker 2: I don't remember us campaigning for that. I don't remember that, but I remember that it wasn't a item of which we opposed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's my memory. Speaker 1: That's something the government decided to do, or the city decided to do? Speaker 2: The city decided to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Story_ID: 85327 Speaker 1: Now, after your tenure with the Community Mental Health Department, you rose pretty high in that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In the Mental Health Department? Right? Speaker 2: Right. I became the head of the Community Mental Health Program for the social work side. Dr. Calvin, Lincoln Calvin was actually the head of the program as a psychiatrist. But, I actually, actually, I actually ran the program in terms of development of services and that, and he was wonderful to work with. So, it wasn't like a lot of--any tension between he and I on that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, at a certain point, you decided to go to law school. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Did you--what made you decide to go to law school? Speaker 2: I felt like, every--and I sat down and talk to Dr. [Lincoln] Calvin about it, he's the one that suggested law school. I felt like I wanted to do more. I felt like my social work skill was fine. I mean, I felt like, you know, particularly in the areas that I was trained in terms of mental health and, and giving direct service. And, I had really learned a lot in terms of community services, and community organizing some, you know. I wasn't an expert in it, but you know, beginning to work with the communities and working with the very structures within the communities. But, I felt like, that, that I wanted more of a skill. Something else. I felt like every time I would work with the community, either individually or collectively with a group, I was referring them to someone else, you know. Lawyers, because I felt many times that their legal rights, you know, that, that they had legal rights that they need to talk with someone about. Or, you know, we were dealing with doctors a lot, psychiatrist or whatever. And, I just kind of felt like I wanted more. I wanted to be able to have more, to offer more. And, Dr. Calvin said, "Well, why don't you look into law school. I think you, you know, that would be great." And, his son was in law school at that time. And, so I look into it and I took the LSAT [Law School Admission Test] and go into St. Louis University Law School. Well, I actually got in, I was on the waiting list at Wash U [Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri] and then I got into to Wash U, Washington University Law School as well. But, I had already started in the summer program with St. Louis University so I stayed there. Figured it was a known factor (laughter), so. But that's what happened. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 85328 Speaker 1: Alright. Well, how was law school [St. Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri]? I mean, how did you--was it--could you--was it, was it tougher than you thought it was or easier, or? Speaker 2: No. It wasn't easier but it wasn't tougher. I, I think I had an advantage because I was one of the few students that had been out of school for a while. So, when I decided to do it, it was a choice. It wasn't like I'm going from--in some ways, going to social work school was probably what some of the other students were like, you know, it's like okay, I'm going to grad school. Where do I go? What do I do? Well, I guess I'll be a social worker. And, I think for some of the students, is well, I'll guess I'll go to law school. And, where as I had really thought it through. So, I was very serious. I was a really a very serious student. I graduated cum laude, you know. I was in the leadership of the BLSA, Black Law Students Association there at the school, you know. I was very active in that. And, so it was, I did, I did well, I did well both, you know, in terms of the academics but also in terms of being involved in the school itself and in the system of black law students themselves. Law school was, it was difficult in a sense that, you know, it was different than any of my other education, so it was an adjustment to the style of learning. It was a lot of work (laughter). It was a lot of, lot of work. But, I, I did okay in it. Speaker 1: Now, when were you in law school? From when, you know-- Speaker 2: From, see you're testing me now, '75 [1975] to '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Alright. You passed (laughter). Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 85329 Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975] to '78 [1978], okay. Now when did you, when did you acquire your African name? When did that take place? Speaker 2: Seventy--wait a minute. I think it was right, I think it was like '74 [1974], '73 [1973]. It was a guy that--I had been thinking of changing my name in the early '70's [1970s]. I wanted a name that reflected more who I was. Because, I had begun particularly after college, in grad school and then right after grad school, I had begun feeling like I wanted--I began to feel my African-ness as well as, you know. You know, I couldn't get away from the fact that I'm a Black American, you know, which is different. I mean, some people are not--don't want to make it different, but it is different, you know. And, so I wanted a name that reflect more of who I thought I was. I no longer was that name that I had. And, it was a guy, I don't--I didn't even know him that well. That was Dr. Gle--Calvin introduced me to him. He was an attendant at the hospital. He was form Ghana. And, I talked to him and told him and he gave me--he said, "Well, when were you born?" And, I told him, I was born on a Monday. So, he said, "Adjoa." And, he said, "And, I think you have the characteristics of Asantewaa." So he, his middle name for me was Asantewaa, which is Nana [Yaa] Asantewaa. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So Aiyetoro is-- Speaker 2: Is my--I, I was attempting to be gentle, you know. I've told you about my parents, you know. I was trying to be gentle 'cause I knew they were gonna have a major fit when I change my name, which they did. But, I decided I was gonna keep Burrow, right. And, I was gonna change--and keep Artis. I was gonna keep Artis and keep Burrow. So, my name was Adjoa Artis Asan--is Adjoa Artis Asantewaa, and it was Borrow at that time. And, I thought Borrow--keeping Artis and Borrow would like, you know, let 'em see that I'm maintaining the tie to them, but I'm also adding this African. Well, they hit the roof anyways. But, I keep, I did the Artis and Borrow. And, then I married some years later. A guy who had changed, changed his name Sentwali Aiyetoro. And, I married him and I used that as an opportunity to change my last name. I had always wanted to change it, but I used that as an opportunity. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Alright, so your first part of your name is Akan, you know, I guess (simultaneously) Ghana, right? Speaker 2: Well, my first, yeah--first name Adjoa and Asantewaa is Ghana, right. And, then Aiyetoro is Nigerian. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 85330 Speaker 1: Were you part of an organization or anything in those days? Speaker 2: I was part of the National Association of Black Social Workers. And, then I was part of the Black Law Students Association. Speaker 1: Okay, but there wasn't any local group that (simultaneously) was the name-- Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Speaker 2: No. No. Any nationalist group like that. No. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So, as a young black lawyer, you got involved with a national-- Speaker 2: Conference of Black Lawyers. Speaker 1: Conference of Black Lawyers. Speaker 2: Um-hum. I got involved with them when I was in law school. They came to our school. In fact, my ex-husband was one of them that came to our school to talk about NCBL [National Conference of Black Lawyers]. And basically, you know, educating us about the group and recruiting us to be active and part of it. And, I was just very taken with the radical nature of it. It was all created as the legal arm of the Black Liberation Movement and was created as an activist legal organization. It wasn't about just, you know, supporting the, you know, entry into the profession and the, you know, going up, up, up in terms of the profession, in terms of that. It was really about the community and about activism and radicalism. And, so I--it attracted me very much, because as I said earlier, you know, I have begun to hone my, you know, radical, activist kind of interest and skills most particularly in grad school and shortly thereafter. Story_ID: 85331 Speaker 1: Oh I was gonna ask you about the term radical. I mean, is it, is it really, is it really radical activity we're talking about--in terms of--well, it might be, but how do you define-- Speaker 2: Well, when I say radical, it really, for me, I mean an organization or actions that really strike at changing the way in which society works. Not simply getting it to work in, well, in this sense, radical to me is if you wanna change something from being totally focused on capitalism and, you know, one that really change the substance of it. It's not where you wanna say okay, radical is not, to me, saying lets demonstrate to get more black people to be CEO's. Radical is saying that the fundamental structure of this society, creates a society where there's gonna be poor and rich. And, where there's got to be a built-in discrimination against somebody, whether it's black or somebody else in order to maintain this society. So, let's, let's go to those underpinnings. Let's not only--we looking at it from a race perspective, but we actually want fundamental structural change in this society. So that's radical to me. Most-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. That's different from, you know, striving for, you know, big achievement--individual achievement-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: in other words. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You're talking about fundamentally changing the relationships between-- Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: People. Speaker 2: Well, it's not, I mean, for--in probably in some ways at one point seeking integration could have been viewed as radical. Because, it was a change, a fundamental change in a racist segregated society that had been so for three hundred years or more. You know, through slavery, and through Jim Crow and all of that. So, at some point that was a radical concept. Now, it's not a radical concept. At the point in which I joined NCBL [National Conference of Black Lawyers], you know, they were talking about being the legal arm of the Black Liberation Movement. And, that Liberation Movement was talking about liberating black folk not simply from, you know, I can't get that job as a clerk in that grocery store. But, actually saying, I mean, it was really the precursor for me of the Reparations Movement that I'm very much involved in now. Because, it's saying, you owe me more than just giving me that job at the grocery store. Story_ID: 85332 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now you were also involved with the National Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: This organization was formed, to form--to give support to Angela Davis [HM] when she was-- Speaker 2: Was formed out of that. Right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, out of that, yeah. Right. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. It really was and it's--the organization did a lot of work around political prisoners, did a lot of work around political prisoners. We were very much in the forefront of the fight for Ben Chavis [HM] and The Wilmington Ten, Johnny Imani Harris was a political prisoner down in Alabama. I know Leonard Peltier. Speaker 1: (unclear) Speaker 2: Just a number of political prisoners. We did a lot of work around that. We did a lot of Anti-Apartheid work. We worked very closely with the National Conference of Black Lawyers. So, they were kinda like it was an easy flow between those two organizations because one of the leaders of the National Alliance was also the second Director of the National Conference of Black Lawyers, Lennox Hinds. And, so we had a lot of interactions in that way. Story_ID: 85333 Speaker 1: And you worked on the case of Geronimo Pratt, too? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Um-hum. Right. I did, I did a--my primary work around Geronimo was I represented him in two appearances before the parole board. There was a decision made by his defense committee that they really wanted to begin making the parole issue a real issue. And, really presenting him as a, you know, in a way that makes it such that denying him parole raises the real contradiction in the criminal punishment system, around black, around political prisoners, black political prisoners, but also around blacks in general. It was a difficult position for Geronimo because Geronimo always felt, which he shows that he was correct, that he needed to get out of prison not through parole but through some form of exoneration. And, he felt at some point that actually attempting to get parole would be selling out him and his family. Because, it would be in some way, even if he never said it, it would be in some way a way of conceding that perhaps he was in fact a traditional prisoner that had done something wrong, whether or not he ever admitted it or not. So, that what we had to do in representing him on parole was to make sure that we didn't crossing that line. That not cross that line to say--for example, one of the things we did very strongly in both parole appearances, both in the papers that we submitted as well as in our presentation in defense of him, or in support of him, was that it was fundamentally unfair for them to require him to show remorse for crime that he had consistently said, he did not do. That he is sorry that the crime happened. He has no remorse because remorse means that he must have done it. So, that we had to do that kind of thin line because we did not want--in keeping with not only--first of all because he is as our client had a strong view that he did not want ever to have anything out there that, that would even appear as if that he was saying that he did this awful crime, which he didn't do. But, second of all, it was important from the perspective of his supporters that we, we did not want to--you know some times in activism and in radicalism, as I would call it, when you're dealing with fundamental changes, sometimes you make compromises that basically comprise your principal. You don't mean to. Sometimes you do, but many times you don't. But, you don't understand, many times we don't understand that by making this statement, you know, we may have been, we may be buying into an argument that we really are fundamentally opposed to. And, that's something we had to work very hard on in presenting the case for Geronimo and parole. We had to work very hard, because we did not at all--I mean, I read every record, I mean, I prepared myself to represent him. I read every page of his record. And, when I finished that, even though on--before I did that I had believed in his innocence. I was involved with the group, the Alliance as well as the NCBL that always supported him. Yet, it was not until I read every page of his record that I was conv--I was convinced in the bottom of my soul that this man could not have done this crime. It wasn't that he didn't do it, he didn't do it. But, he could not have done it, which was to me a different way of looking at it. Not only didn't he do it, but he could not have done it. You could not have a man that cared as much for human beings, that saved people's lives in Vietnam, that had been--had won all these medals for valor in Vietnam, that had the kind of compassion that he had for human beings. Not just black human being, but for human beings, and he could not have committed that crime. And, so in presenting him and representing him, I had to also convey that. That he couldn't admit to it because not only didn't he do it, he could not have done it, you know. So, that was, you know, fortunately for Geronimo, he did not get out on parole. He got out through, almost an exoneration. I mean, they, they had enough evidence to show that he had not gotten a fair trial. Johnnie Cochran came in on the case. He had represented him some, from very early on. He came in on the case and was able to get the--get him out and the government didn't have enough evidence to retry him. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 85334 Speaker 1: Yeah, it's in the details, isn't it? I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah. It really is. I think so many times in our, in our, whatever the aspect of our movement we're involved in. I mean, I've gone the gamut from criminal punishment, you know, issues of just general social stuff, you know, social issues, and now reparations, which I think encompasses all of it, all of it. It kind of, has kinda rapped up all of my history into one bag. But, it really is in the detail. Because so many times, we embrace a position and we, we embrace it because it sounds right. But, we can't defend it, because we haven't done the detail. And, when I say we, I don't mean just black people. I mean anybody who does. I mean, I think that that's one of the errors of, you know, many of the advocates of the death penalty. I oppose the death penalty. But, many--I've debated with many advocates of the, of the death penalty. And, their augments are all emotional. They have no basic factual support for their position. And, it is in the detail. It is in understanding why is it that this society is doing what it's doing to black people, you know. And, in--what has it done? I mean, even some of us don't even know, black, white, I'm not again talking about race. What has it actually done? Speaker 1: This--that's a good point, very good point. Most people have no idea that, I mean, for instance stats, you know, it's as late as five years ago, the last time I looked, United States was the leading executer of people in the world. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Um-hum. Speaker 1: And, more people in prison than any other country in the world, by far. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Um-hum Speaker 1: And, most of them are black or, and Hispanic. Well, most of them are black. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Um-hum. Speaker 1: Overwhelmingly. Speaker 2: Yeah. At one point when South Africa, Apartheid was still existing in South Africa, I don't know what the date is now. The United States and South Africa imprisoned, the United States imprisoned as, as--the percentage of imprisoning black people was as high as the percentage in South Africa. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously). Speaker 2: Their percentage of incarcerating white people was similar to Europe. And, the way in which they incarcerated black people, they incarcerated as many percentage wise as many black people as they did in South Africa, Apartheid South African. Speaker 1: And, their proportion is much different in South African, but-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: South Africa's stay was done by white minorities. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And, in this country blacks are the minority. And yet the same number are being (simultaneously). Speaker 2: I mean, we--you know, the data is still basically fifty percent; about fifty percent of those incarcerated are black. I mean, it may be forty-eight, it may be forty-nine, it may be fifty-one, but nationally around 50 percent of those incarcerated are black. When we make up, you know, the latest Census was, what are we making up fourteen percent now, according to the Census, I mean, you know-- Speaker 1: Eleven, twelve percent. Speaker 2: Eleven, twelve, you know, around in there. So, I mean, let's say they're kinda shaving it a little bit and we make fourteen to fifteen percent. That still is significantly higher than our percentage in the population. The data also show in some states we, you know--for example, years ago when I was really steep in the data on criminal punishment, Maryland, the state of Maryland convicted fifty percent of their felons were black. Fifty percent were white, convicted. Now, you know, we--that probably still is also an issue of race. But, if we look at that data, we also look at the fact that they incarcerated, seventy five percent of those they incarcerated were black. So, what happened to that other percentage of whites that were convicted as felons? Why didn't they go to prison? You know, they went through the alternatives to prison. So, all of these things, we need to know this data to really understand. Because what happens is, in this society that it deals with lingoism so-to-speak, people will say well blacks is just more violent. Well, let's look at that, you know. Let's not just embrace it, let's look at that, you know. And, then we have to look at what do we mean by violent. Was it violent when that chicken factory back, you know, what was ten years or fifteen years ago, chained those doors and the people who were--in North Carolina--and the people who were working in there who were predominately black, many of 'em died? That person didn't get charged with a crime. The owner was white. He killed, consciously killed. He had to know if, if a fire broke out, people were gonna die. He changed the door--chained the door shut, you know. So, we, you know, that's why I appreciate your point, that it's in the detail. Story_ID: 85335 Speaker 1: Now, you worked for a while for the U.S. Department of Justice, the Civil Rights Division, too? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about some of your experiences. Speaker 2: That was--I worked there in the section, Special Litigation Section of the Civil Rights Division. We deal--dealt with the rights of those being institutionalized. And, that's when I really began to get involved in the understanding and knowledge around the criminal punishment system. Because, we worked on the rights of the institutionalized. The primary institutions we worked around were criminal punishment. And, the--we also did nursing homes, and we also did--let's see, nursing homes, mental institutions, mental retardation institutions. So, I did a lot of prison cases. I did a lot of cases on, you know, like the rights of those who were incarcerated. I also did a couple of mental institutions for Pennhurst Case out of Pennsylvania, stuff like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you also worked with ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union]-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: For a while. Was john powell [HM] at ACLU when you were working? Speaker 2: He came after I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, I was there when he came. He--when he was legal director, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Speaker 2: Yeah. I worked at the ACLU, I was--I worked at the National Prison Project here in [Washington] D.C. and I eventually became the Associate Director for Administration there. I did litigation, but in addition had administrative tasks. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 85336 Speaker 1: Now, I hope that some of this stuff is out of order and stuff as I've got written down here, but I just--a lot of the--you represented Tupac Shakur-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: On a prison, on prison, about prison conditions when he was incarcerated, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. He--when he was incarcerated in New York, upper state New York there was some issues that came to my attention through his attorney Charles Ogletree [HM], as well as a couple of other people who worked--Chokwe Lumumba who had been representing him on other cases. And, around prison conditions, they were wondering if I would, one, investigate and determine if there were any cases that we could bring around how he was being treated. There was a possible question of physical abuse and other things. And, so I met with him on a couple of occasions. We talked and determined based on the information that I had that it was--that not that he was being treated well, by any means, but that it was one of those that, you know, it would've been harder to win then to, to address in another more political way. Story_ID: 85337 Speaker 1: Okay. So, there's a Judge Lajune-- Speaker 2: Lange. Speaker 1: Lange in Hennepin County, Minnesota. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Now, what was that case about? Speaker 2: It was a lot of--well, I'll start from--Lajune Lange contacted us, NCBL [National Conference of Black Lawyers] in Minnesota first and then they contacted me, I was the Director of NCBL at that time. And, she had been experiencing threats to her career as a Judge. What happened was that she was experiencing what she felt was a lot of racism. Questioning things about her work that other judges had--did not receive questions about. That there was other acts that she felt were discriminatory against her. At one point, they were threating to take her judgeship or to move her from one district to another and to not assign her as she had been assigned traditionally. And, she made a public statement that basically said there was a cancer in the court and its racism. And, she pointed to the Supreme Court Justice of the, Justice of the Minnesota Supreme Court as well as to the judge that was in charge of her unit. And, they started proceedings against her from the--it's the judicial review board. Speaker 1: To recall her? Speaker 2: To recall her from that position and to punish her. Story_ID: 85338 Speaker 1: Anyway. Well, as we're--so we were talking about Judge Lajune Lange. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Yeah, so-- Speaker 1: They were trying to pull her down. Speaker 2: Yeah. They were trying to--well, first of all I think, one, we think what they were definitely trying to do was to ruin her reputation. They were trying to paint her as crazy and, you know, unfit to be a judge. The second thing they were attempting to do, of course, was to get her off the bench. And, to get her off the bench such that she would not only lose her job but lose, you know, her credentialing, her skills, her reputation, as I said earlier. And so, she called me and called us in and CBL [National Conference of Black Lawyers] and we took the case. It was very difficult to find a lawyer there in Minnesota as local council. Because, here you, you know, really were going up against the chief of the Hennepin County Judge--Bench and then also the Supreme Court Justice. But, we did. I'm blanking on the guy's name, but we found somebody that was willing to be local counsel. Of course, I did like the deposition of the judges and I cross examined them. I mean, but, but he was, you know, he was a good local counsel and very supportive, and we won. We had a panel of three judges and we convinced two of them that she had not violated the ethical rules. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 85339 Speaker 1: Now, what is the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom? I mean, the name sounds like it's self-evident with what it is, but-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: What is it? Speaker 2: It's an organization of women that was founded, Jane Addams, I think that's her name, back in the early 1900s. And, it was really founded against war. To be for peace. And, it now, it has embraced, not now, has had a fairly long history of looking at racism as well. I was invited to speak there in--at their conference on '95' [1995]. And, they asked me to speak on Affirmative Action and I told 'em I didn't talk on Affirmative Action, I talked on Reparations. So, they said, "Well, come on anyway." And, I spoke and they were very interested, moved, by the discussion of reparations and they formed the Truth and Reconciliation Committee. Asked me to be a part of that, which I agreed to. And, then they formed the, the organization went to developing, I think, three, embracing three campaigns and they voted. We had--they had to vote on which campaign and we put one of the campaigns was the Truth and Reconciliation. And, they embraced that, and they voted to have that as one of their three main campaigns. And, so they've been focused on the issue of racial justice. Now, the campaign is called, UFORJE (United for Racial Justice: Truth, Reparations, Restoration and Reconciliation), that's what their campaign is called. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 85340 Speaker 1: Now you worked for a while, also for the Congressional Black Caucus Admini--as Administrative Director. Speaker 2: Um-hum. I was--it was with the foundation, the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation. And, I was the Director of Administration under Ramona Edelin [HM], who was the Executive Director. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Now, let's see, where do I go. Well, let's talk about reparations. Now, this seems to be the big thing that you're--the thing that takes the most time, I guess, that you are working on now. It's, you're currently, you're a professor, visiting professor at the University of California, Santa Barbara [Santa Barbara, California]? Speaker 2: Um-hum. I was. I ended on July, on July 30th was my last day there. I'm still working on one project, which is the development of an anthology. But, my basic tenure there was up then. And, I'll be going to the, West Virginia University College of Law [Morgantown, West Virginia], in fact, in a few weeks. I'm visiting professor there and I'll be teaching Civic Procedure and Race, Racism, and the Law. I guess, in terms of reparations, I mean, I also am an adjunct professor, I'm not a teacher this year, at Washington College of Law at American University [Washington, D.C.]. And, I taught a course that in fact I designed with another law professor, Professor Adrian Davis, who is now at the University of North Carolina [Chapel Hill, North Carolina]. It was called Litigating Reparations for African Americans. And, been doing that since '97 [1997]. A couple of years we didn't do it. But, and I won't do it this year, but basically since '97 [1997]. Story_ID: 85341 Speaker 1: How old is the struggle for reparations? Speaker 2: Whoa (laughter). Speaker 1: (Unclear). I wonder, did it start right after the Civil War? Speaker 2: Well, if you really wanna count, David Walker's Appeal in 1929, 19--18, oh God, 1829, 1830, it started. I mean, he made the call for reparations in his appeal. I mean, he said that, you know, white folks needed to declare to the world that, you know, the inhumanities and brutalities in which they had treated black people, which is the acknowledgement aspect of reparations. And, that they had a responsibility to lift us up as he said, out of our brute state, which is the form of reparations. If you lift us up, it meant (unclear) and all of that to do that, I mean. So, if you, if you, if you look at that as the, a demand for reparations and I'm sure there were others in his community of like-minded people that believed the same. I would say, that the demand for reparations predated the end of slavery. We also know that after slavery in the 1890s, an organization was formed that called for a pension for black people who were an--ex--ex-enslaved black people, or African people or their descendants and that was the Ex-slave Mutual Bounty Pension Associ--and Pension Association. Its leaders were Callie House and Isaiah Dickerson, is two national leaders. And, they lobbied and got around 600 thousand or so people to sign on and support legislation. It was a senate bill for seven one eight that had been introduced--I'm blanking on the senator's name that introduced it--for a pension. And, they went the way of, they were pre-Marcus Garvey as I say. They were accused of mail fraud. There was a ten-year investigation. Nothing they could come--the government could come up with except looking at this poster where they solicited twenty five cents for people to support their work. And, they decided to use that as a charge for mail fraud, itself for fraudulent charge. Callie House spent about two years or so in prison. When she got out of prison, she didn't stop her demand for reparation. She raised money to fund a lawsuit that was filed here in Washington, D.C. seeking reparations. Speaker 1: This was in 1800? Speaker 2: This was--no, this was in the early 1900 by now, you know. 'Cause the organization was formed in like the first documents I saw were like 1896. So, let's say it might have been formed a couple of years earlier. But, the first documents I saw were dated 1896. So, that's kind of the precursor. So, the demand is as long as, as at least, I would say, from the 1830s. That began the demand with David Walker for some form of reparation. Story_ID: 85342 Speaker 1: Let me just set this up in one way to say this, after the Civil War there was an expectation about a lot of black people based on some things they were told-- Speaker 2: Forty acres? Speaker 1: That they would receive maybe land and some-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Maybe, and some equipment at least of--as compensation for slavery. And, they was a Freedman's Bank setup and the ex-slaves contributed, I mean, put their money in Freedman's Bank. And, this was supposed to be overseen by the Federal Government to provide them with, you know, a way to save their money and so, the Freedman's Bank even went bust with--and all their money went (simultaneously) and these are ex-slaves. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: There was a big scandal around that and it's suspected that Jay Gould in New York and some other people took their money. But, this is a lot of fraud and the Johnson Administration and Grant Administration. And, people didn't get any land or any money, at least not from the Federal Government, nothing. And, lands that are occupied by black folks after the Civil War, that they occupied they were owned by their former masters, who actually confiscated and giving back to those former masters. And, they were again landless (simultaneously) you know, I think for the most part. Unless, some master for some reason decided to give someone a piece of something, there was nothing coming for the black people. So, at any rate, that's the, you know, so there's nothing after, basically nothing is--happens after the Civil War to compensate, so, the ex-slaves Speaker 2: Not really. The interesting history, and you gave some of it, when you ask about the movement for reparations, I don't think that the Freedmen's Bureau was a movement for reparations. I think that that was legislation that was, I know that that was legislation that was passed by Congress to address the issue of, all of a sudden here we have, you know, we've got millions of black folks that we've been enslaving and now all of a sudden we say they're free. What we gonna do with these, destitute black folk, many of them coming out of slavery, have nothing to their name and all of that. What happened was General [William] Sherman in a Field Order, General Sherman issued a Field Order that set aside land in South Carolina down through the Florida border. That was, that was he said was that this land will be set aside for freed men and refugees. Which would, you know, just black folks that had escaped and were coming back I guess is what he meant by refugees. But, they--that would be set aside and what they did was they said, for upstanding Negroes, you know, so you know, there was some qualification there. I don't know how they were gonna judge that. And, it was for family people. And, they said that they would give up to three families. But, plots together that could be divided in smaller plots of up to forty acres per family. Up to forty acres per family. Now, this land was, much of this was confiscated land, as you pointed out. From South Carolina planters, plantation owners, and--that had fought on, you know, in the Civil War, had not supported the union, but has supported the confederacy. So, what they did was, they gave this land to many black families. I don't even have the figures as to how many actually got land. I'm sure there's somewhere we could do that research, but I don't know that off hand. Well, what happened was that in, in, in this, when he entered this Field Order, it was supported by President [Abraham] Lincoln, so-to-speak. But, then President Lincoln introduced an executive order that then said that the land, that this land, I'm not sure if it was exactly the same land or some contiguous to it, that it would be rented or purchased for a certain price, okay. Then the Freedmen's Bureau came into action. And this, the history is very important because it's again, it pretty much goes back to your statement that the cases and the detail. Because, see we have this forty--I want my forty acres and a mule. And, you hear black folks talking about, I want my forty--they promised me forty acres and a mule. Well, they never really promised us forty acres and a mule, outside of General Sherman's order. Because what Congress began doing in the Freedmen's Bureau Legislation and what Lincoln did in an executive order prior to that, was too began to put a price tag on this forty acres. In the first Freedmen's Bureau Act it was forty acres. I didn't never see a mule mentioned in any of the documents. But, I've seen the forty acres. In the first Freedmen's Bureau Act it was forty acres that you could rent with right to purchase. And, again, this upstanding black folk could rent with right to purchase up to forty acres. In the second Freedmen's Bureau Act, the first one-- Speaker 1: So, forty acres was a cap on the-- Speaker 2: Up to, up to. Speaker 1: Up to. You couldn't get any more even if you could afford it. Speaker 2: Exactly. Even if you could afford it, it was up to. And, it was never given in the Freedmen's Bureau Act. See, this is where--the only place that I have found that was, land was given was in General Sherman's Field Order as a, as an act of war kind of thing. Story_ID: 85343 Speaker 1: Well, what happened is in those period, in that period of time, here you have the first Freedmen Bureau Act. Then they tried to get the, a second Freedmen Bureau Act, which President [Andrew] Johnson then vetoed and that had again, up to forty acres. But, again it was not, give, it was rent (telephone ringing) or purchase, you know, for a certain price, the market value, blahdy blah. (Telephone ringing) So, then what happened, is in the second Freedmen Bureau Act, they reduced it (telephone ringing) to up to twenty acres. By then some of the South Carolina planters had come back (telephone ringing) and they had given them back their land. So, here you gave me this forty acres, but then, you know, the owner (telephone ringing) of the previous owner of the land comes back. So, you give--they take my land, you give them back my land. So, what they did in the second Freedmen's Bureau Act is they said, Okay, first of all, you can rent or to--with right of purchase of up to twenty acres of land. They decreased it. They said then persons who had a valid claim under General [William] Sherman could--and showed that claim could not get free, but could also then get twenty acres of land, up to twenty acres of land. And, those who had been displaced because the owner came back and reclaimed his land, could then get, rent or purchase up to twenty. So, that they decreased the number in the second Freedmen's Bureau and they maintained the fact of pay. So that they never, Congress and the President never really promised reparations in the form of land. We never got--that was--even if you had gotten, if your family or somebody's family had gotten it, other than if they didn't get displaced. If you got it through General Ferman--Sherman and you did not somehow get displaced, by a previous owner or Congress coming in and saying you had to give it up, those are the only people who got that free. Everybody else had to pay under the Freedmen's Bureau Act. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, well the result of all of this is that, for the most part, we have a population that's been enslaved for a couple hundred years, ends up with nothing, basically. Speaker 1: Yeah. Two hundred fifty years. Speaker 2: No compensation. Speaker 1: Right. Close to 250, right. Speaker 2: And, there's also the discussion now that slavery didn't really end with, at 1865. Speaker 1: Right. Right. There's some evidence of people having been enslaved in Florida. And, I believe there was a guy that just came forth saying his family had been enslaved in, I wanna say Indiana but that might be wrong, up until the 1960s. Story_ID: 85344 Speaker 1: And, beyond that, there's even the, well, there's the, and it's, now, I mean, its common knowledge that black people in the south and in the north, and especially in the south, did not have the rights of full citizens for another, and some say don't have it yet, you know, I mean, up through the Civil Rights Movement. Many people couldn't vote, couldn't participate in the court system on an equal basis. Or, property ownership or very many other things, black people could not participate in up and through the Civil Right Movement. And, have argued the Civil Rights Movement is still going on today. So, it's not even over with. Which would mean that, you know, in the case of, let's say if you, if you just opposed that were the case, what happened to the Japanese. (Unclear) World War II. And, they did receive reparations. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I mean, how--well, I mean, talk about that and just kinda-- Speaker 2: The historical contents. Right. Speaker 1: Show where these cases stand. Speaker 2: Right, right. Well, I mean, first of all, to talk about it, you're absolutely correct as to look at the fact that here, we were enslaved. Which basically means, to be graphic about it, is that we were forced to work for nothing, basically. I mean, there was some, there's evidence that there were some people who, after their normal duties on the plantations, some slave owners allowed them to hire themselves out. And, that's how some people were able to buy their freedom. Because they were able to hire themselves out. They had skills and they could hire themselves out and they could save their money and buy their freedom. But, for the most part, the system of slavery meant, you work for nothing or, and you, you know, basically had no control over your life. If you--as an example, I gave of my great, great-grandmother [Bell Jones], you know, you know, if you cross the master, or he or she just decides, it's mainly he's, that you know, they wanna make some money. So, they can put up, you know, their best stock because they're ready to make some cash. And, as some scholars indicate that the most valuable property in the south was land first, and enslaved Africans second. I mean, that was the property, the property of the most value in that part of the country. So, here you've freed all, you know, you know, all of a sudden we have the Emancipation Proclamation that freed those who were fighting the north. It didn't freed all, it didn't free all slaves, that's another, all enslaved African, that's another myth, that Lincoln freed the slaves. No he didn't. What he did was an act of war. And, he said, Okay fine you're at war against us. I'm gonna issue an Emancipation Proclamation that frees all those Africans enslaved in the states that are in rebellion against the United States. But, then we have the 13th Amendment that did in fact, end slavery for all African in, you know, supposedly ended. But, you ended up with nothing. I mean, so the country never has determined that they owed us anything for those 250 years of forced labor that included all kinds of dehumanizing treatment. Story_ID: 85345 Speaker 1: Now, some would argue, they have said, well, you know, the descendants of those who owned us shouldn't have to pay, 'cause they weren't there. And, those who owned us are already dead, so, who owes us any money? Speaker 2: Well, it's the government that does. Because the system could not have operated as long as it did and to the extent that it did without government, not only support, but encouragement. The United States Government and its precursor, the colonies of the, of the, of this country, the thirteen colonies or so, allowed it. They had, they, they maintained it, they taxed us. This government taxed the importation of Africans. So, this government has a benefit that it has derived. The data that has come out to show that the enslaved Africans who built the capital of this United States. Many of the buildings that you go to in the south were built by enslaved Africans. The, the fancy ironwork was done by enslaved Africans. And, this was all done legally so that you, the-- Speaker 1: So the United States policy was that of slavery support--(simultaneously). Speaker 2: The United States policy was out of slavery and therefore, the debt is owed by the government. Now, I would argue that the debt is owed by more than the government, but it most, most fundamentally it's owed by government. So, and it was never paid. I mean, they--we go and we see how they destabilized. I talked to you a little bit about the Ex-salve Mutual ben--Mutual Bounty and Pension Association. That was destabilized by this government. That, not, you know, they didn't even want to pay a pension. You know, they weren't asking for full reparations. They was saying, give us a pension and if, if the ex-slave is dead, give it to his descendant, you know, her descendant, you know. He didn't wanna do that. So, that if we look, if we go up through and the point, again, that you made, that some show, I mean, Ron Walters had done some research that shows that, in fact, in the 1950s, there were people who were in Florida that were living in enslaved conditions. So, that it was--didn't just end in with the passage of the 13th amendment. I mean, we all know we celebrate Juneteenth where they learned of, of the end of slavery some months, you know, was it later, you know, way after it had--the amendment had passed. And, so we know that it, it was a continuation. But, most importantly, as importantly is that, in fact more importantly, for the masses of black people, the conditions of slavery didn't change fundamentally. Other than the fact that you couldn't force me in many ways, to work on your land for nothing. But, if we look at the sharecropper system that occurred after that where black people would work the land, you know. And, you'd work it and at the end you go and settle up. And, nine times out of ten, they said you owed them money, you know, after working their land. Because you would shop at the planation store and do all of that and run up your bill. And, many times they were cheating the families. Again, the history of my family. My father [Artis Nathaniel Burrow] was able because he had gone and gotten an education and stuff. As a young boy, was able to catch some of that cheating that was going on. But, the cheating that was going on and even those who caught it, you had no power to change it, you know. Who you gonna tell? The sheriff (laughter). You know, he gonna arrest the big land owner over the word of the word of a-- Speaker 1: The government is supportive of a system-- Speaker 2: The government is in support of it, exactly. Speaker 1: Of exploitation. Speaker 2: Exactly. Story_ID: 85346 Speaker 1: And, you look at all of--what we look at in N'COBRA [National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America] and the thing that we have, are developing, had been developing since we were founded in '87 [1987] is we look at the vestiges of slavery. That's one of the things that led me into this. I know, you know, in talking about, well, you know, my career so-to-speak, I got involved with reparations because I saw as a Civil Rights lawyer, that we were continuing to put Band-Aids on. We weren't dealing with the fundamental issue. The fundamental issue when we're look at Civil Rights of housing, education, criminal punishment systems that discriminate against us. Is that--and we wanna end that discrimination, we have to go to, where did it start? And, we're not doing that, we you know, to me reparations is more than a check for black people most particularly. Because these systems of discrimination in all those arenas started in slavery, you know. It started in slavery. When you look at the death penalty now and look at what the death penalty was back in slavery, you know. When black people were--could be--I mean, Higginbotham wrote a matter, "In the Matter of Color," A. Leon Higginbotham. And, he talks about how the laws were created, that were created to punish black people and Native Americans. That, that white people could do the same thing and it not be a crime. Or, that white people would get much less of a penalty. If it was a crime for them, it was much less of a penalty. When we look at the use of the death penalty, the lynching is a form of the death penalty that was used against us. Some say it's lawless, but we know many times people who were among the gang who lynched us was the police, the sheriffs, the law enforcement agents. So, we see that the punishment system is consistently disproportionately imposed harsh punishments on black people. Either totally without any system of law, or now with some so called show of law, but it continues to be the same. And, the studies show that, you know. The studies show that the prosecutor is more likely to charge with a capital offense, a black person, most particularly a black person who has killed a white person. So, we continue to see that. We see it in education, you know. It's no, it should be no shock that many of our children in the, particularly in the inner cities and in the rural areas, forget the rural areas, are going to school in totally inadequate facilities. Totally inadequate. From the actual structure of the school to the books that they have. They don't have all these computer stations. But, yet the courts say, it's not a, you know, that the, the violation, it's not a violation of the Constitution that there are more tax dollars going to white schools than the black schools, you know. Because it's based on class and not on race. But, that's another argument that gets us around the issue of race, you know. And, we can't--I'm not saying that we don't have a class issue, but if we don't focus on race and class, we miss the vestige of slavery. So, that for me, the demand for reparations is a demand a full accounting of what was done to African people in this country. Both from the first importation of African that became a slave in the 1600s. The formal system of slavery didn't really start until like 1660. But, there's history since 1619 of enslavement. First indentured servants and then enslavement, you know, up until today when we continue these systems. And, most particularly when we continue 'em because of this view of white supremacy and black inferiority that Higginbotham says in "Shades of Color." It's the under, underpinning of slavery. It's the creation of this myth of white supremacy and this myth of black inferiority. And, even though we have dismantled many of the structures from slavery, we have not dismantled those myths and those myths continues the vestiges of slavery. Story_ID: 86029 Speaker 1: What is the strategy of, of N'COBRA [National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America] and the other organizations that are--now there are a lot of friends of reparations and just to point out, I mean, just an addendum to whatever you might say, but a lot of people that are, black people who somewhat be surprised at, or probably, are in favor of preparations, so. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Dorothy Height [HM] is one. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Randall Robinson are one of the people that are (simultaneously) Charles Ogletree [HM]. There're Harvard lawyers and there's a, there are, not just the Detroit lawyers that are N'COBRA, you know, not to diminish them, but-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) guess you just did that (laughter). Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) all the lawyers with the African names. Not all the lawyers that are--that fight the causes like you all. The Standish Willises [HM] and other people to be in favor of something like this. But, to, you know, there are a lot of other people in favor of this too and they're not just talking about a check or anything (unclear). Speaker 2: Right. Right. Story_ID: 86030 Speaker 1: Well it's, it's more than a check. And it, and that's why it's important to look at, it seems to me, what have been the injuries not simply the stolen labor, that's a major injury (laughter). I'm not saying it's not, but there's so many other injuries. Speaker 2: Well that one, for instance. Labor creates land and wealth. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: In our case, labor created-- Speaker 1: Land and wealth, for somebody else (laughter). Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) so, then that means that you don't have an inheritance really. I mean, to build on, 'cause you don't get the wealth or the land. And, if you, if you happened to overcome tremendous odds to get any of this, you know, it's that, you know, I mean, it's, it's an admiration almost rather than the rule, you know. And, it's not--most people not gonna take nothing and make something out of nothing, you know. You know, it's continued to be snatched from you even if you try to make something. Speaker 1: Well, you know the interesting thing about the history of African people here in this United States is the history that shows the continuing repression against African people even becoming equal and overcoming the status of slavery. And, it's interesting because, the point that you were just making, if you--one of my students did a paper on land. And, his research was very, very telling because if you look at the period right after slavery, we had basically nothing. I mean, there were some who had, you know, white plantation owners who were, you know, you know, benevolent or whatever and gave 'em a little plot of land. But, for the most part, you know, I would say, a lar--the overwhelming la--majority of black folk, had nothing. And, from nothing, we eeked out a living and we saved our money, our resources, we created ways of making money. So that by the turn of the century, we owned millions of acres of land. But, then the government came in and the peop, you know, they began the effort to stealing our land again. And, then you see a period when our land was actually taken. And, you see the history of the Black Farmers Movement where it shows how in the, you know--and this didn't just start in the '50's and '60's. But, they were going back, maybe not all the way back, to the 1900s. But, where land we needed to start getting loans from the Department of Agriculture. We were discriminated against, you know. These whole processes where if you owned land, let's say your family owned land in Tennessee, you know. And, then they left to come north and left somebody to tend the land and you didn't even know that there were taxes weren't being paid. I mean, you know, there were all kinds of ways that we lost land. Either because of our lack of knowledge, or because of fraud, people, you know, sign, you signed it over to get some, you know, like sharecropping, you know. You say okay, I need to get some more equipment so you do a deal and you didn't read the small print, you know. And, so your land was taken just for something minor infraction of the loan. Or, you didn't get the monies to work the land, or you didn't know all of that. So, that what happened is, if we look at the history of African people that I know of, and I'm not even a his--I'm not a historian. I painting myself as an historian. But, the little history I know that, that we as a people were able at every turn that was a bad turn, to make something good out of it. To create, to overcome. But, then the repression of the government comes in and say, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, you're not gonna do this. Look at reconstruction, you know. Look at reconstruction and the little histories that I know about, some of those men who were elected to national office. It's, I mean, it's just some stars (unclear), I mean these are men right out of slavery that were eloquent and thoughtful and analytical, and then all, reconstruction, sorry south, you know. South, we--we've cut a deal with the south. So, now we gotta go back to not quite slavery, but just about, you know. Story_ID: 86031 Speaker 1: And, if we look at that, all the peaks, I mean, if we look at that--I did a little research for a legislative work I was doing at one point with--while I was with the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union]. If you look at the period of the Johnson--what was that era called? Speaker 2: The Great Society? Speaker 1: The Great Society. And, if you look at that whole model cities area program and stuff, I told you I worked in. Well, if you look at the data under Johnson, the gaps were beginning to close. But, then what did they do? They got rid of the programs. You see, so that there have been in this, to me, the continuing vestige of slavery goes back again to part of what Higginbotham was saying. This badge of inferiority and this badge--and this myth of white supremacy. But, it's the myth, the myths that people know are false so that they develop structural impediments to keep the myths alive. So, that we can continue to have the data that we have. But, that data is created through structure impediments to our development, you know. If you allow--even if, I would argue that even though I believe they owed our ancestors reparations, that it was a crime to free enslaved Africans and give them nothing. To require nothing be given. Some got a little bit. Most got nothing, you know. But, the rags on their back. That was a crime. We are owed reparations. But it--the crime was compounded by the continuing impediments that were placed on us. If you had just let us be, and allowed us to become, I would still argue you owed for that period. But, now they owe for all these periods because they did not just allow us to be. They continued to keep us back. And, then the argument then becomes, you're there because of your own fault. You blamed the victim, you know. We gave you supports. We gave you affirmative action for "x" number of years. Well, hell you all had Affirmative Action since the founding of this country. What is it but Affirmative Action for white males? But this country, that has said that black people, Native American, no people of color, and women. White women even could not compete in this society. It was, it was open season for white males. That's Affirmative Action, you know. So, that it's some people say, the minister, the young minister, he does the rap all the time. He's from--was in Chicago a lot, now he's in New York. I'll think of his name. But, he talked about, he was on a program, and he said, "Give us Affirmative Action for as long as you had us enslaved." That's fair, you know. So, that for me, reparations is about, righting the wrong and the wrong goes way back, but it also starts right now too. And, that's why it's more than a check. You cannot pay me enough to repair me. But, you can give me a symbolic check. Which is all they did with the Japanese American. I mean, you know, I, I--you know I understand the argument that, you know, maybe our--what happened to us, not maybe, was a lot worse, a long standing than what happened to them. But, happened to them was a crime too. It was wrong. And, they got $20,000, which is just a pittance. I mean $20,000 in--to, you know, in even, not event today's dollars, in 1990 dollars. 'Cause they got it in 1988 on, you know, was really nothing. That's not even a college education at a, at a school other than a state school. And, some state schools might be more than that, I don't know. But, the point being, that for us it is, a check is symbolic, but there has to be systemic changes. Story_ID: 86032 Speaker 1: There have to be changes in each of those systems that we've talked about. We have to look at the healthcare system that has not targeted studies around healthcare around black folks. They have--are looking at the HIV Aids drug, but they're doing the study--it just came out, what, three or four years ago. They were studying that drug using it on white people. They're getting the benefits, many of them, you know, in many of these studies. They're, they are the group that you're, you're, evaluating and looking at the development of cancer, and all of this. And, even though some would argue there are no difference between white and black. There are differences. There are studies that show that medicine that I use on my body as a black woman, and a white woman using the same medicine, it's gonna affect us differently. So, you have to validate healthcare initiatives on black people as well as white people. Or, we will not get the benefit of it. And, in fact, we get the detriment. Because it could kill us. All while it's helping somebody else. So, all of these area are, to me, reparations. Looking at health, looking at development of scholarship funds that allow black people to go as far as their interest and their ability take them, you know. Looking at community development monies so that we can get rid of the boarded up buildings in our community. So, that we can have the recreational and educational support systems in our community that many other communities have. So, that we can have more Serena and Venuses. But, we should also have more of these Olympic swimmers because our children can go down the street and learn to swim and do laps and have all of that kind of stuff, you know. We can look the whole issue of computers in our school. Many, many of our children don't have access in their homes to a computer. And, you go to some of our inner city schools and they don't have sufficient, they may have some computers now. But, they don't have sufficient supplies for the children to really get acclimated. This is a computer age. How can our children compete if they aren't exposed to that? Whereas, upper-middle class children and white children, you know, are, you know, they can go, they can get up in the morning, go into their computers, you know. And, so these, to me, are forms of reparations in addition to a symbolic check, you know. And, I say symbolic because you could never pay me, even if it was a million dollars that would be symbolic. 'Cause you cannot pay me for all that you have done to me as a person and as a people. But, I think there needs to be something, symbolism. One guy--Reverend Long, Dr. Long who was past Director of the University of California, Sana Barbara Center for Black Studies said--he was a rapporteur for colloquium we had there in 2001. And, he said that it is important that it be a check and more, because people don't respect it if a check is not involved. That we have to make it clear that this was wrong. And, if all you do is change the structure and say that's reparations. Or, say a scholarship fund, and that's reparations, but there is no payment to some aspect of some form of our community on an individual basis, then it will not be taken seriously. Story_ID: 86033 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about house bill-- Speaker 2: H.R. 40. Speaker 1: H.R. 40, right, with John Conyers (simultaneously). Speaker 2: Right. The H.R. [House Resolution] 40 was introduced by John Conyers [HM] in '89' [1989]. It has been reintroduced by him every congressional session since then. It is based on the Japanese American Bill. Almost the same bill. And, what it does, it creates a commission to study slavery and current day society and whether or not there are any continuing consequences of slavery today. And if so, what forms of reparation should take. So, it's, it's fairly benign. H.R. 40 is fairly benign because it doesn't give reparations it just orders the formation of a commission that would look at whether or not reparations are owed. Speaker 1: To validate their claim in other words (simultaneously). Speaker 2: Exactly. Exactly. Exactly. And, it is very similar as I said, to the Japanese Bill. When John Conyers first was approached, he was approached by some members of N'COBRA [National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America]. In fact, one of our lead members "Reparations Ray", Ray Jenkins. And, he was approached by him to introduce some bill for reparations and, and so he agreed to do so. I'm sure after much persuasion, he agreed to do so. And, I say that, because I'm sure the first time, it was raised it was like, are you crazy? What are you talking about? What are you doing? But, you know, he was persuaded to do so. And, Conyers is probably one of the most progressive members of Congress, Black members of Congress that we have. And, what he did was though, which I thought was very to his credit, was he did a draft bill and then he sent to N'COBRA, and I'm sure he sent it to other places, too. But, he did send it to N'COBRA for us to look at, talk about, discuss, and send him suggested changes. And, he took one or two of our suggestions, not many, but one or two of our suggestions and added it to the bill. And, the good thing about that is it had made--it wasn't just him, you know, as the congressman introducing a bill. It was, he responded to a demand from the community, and then he respected that demand by sending it back to that community saying, "This is what I plan to do, give me your feedback." What that did was very important, and I'm, I don't know, he probably, he may have had this in his mind or not or he might not have been. So, many of times we get consequences that we don't expect. But, what it did was it allowed our movement that was just beginning of revitalization of the, of the reparations movement in '88 [1988], '89 [1989]. It allowed us to debate and discuss what the role of legislation was. And, it allowed for that tension between, well they already know that they owe us reparations, we don't need a commission. I mean, there was this kind of debate. Why do we have to have a commission? They know they owe us reparations. We just need to have them, a bill that says, this is what you owe us. And, it allowed many of us to participate in a debate and a discussion on strategy. So, that you begin to see at least some of us, began to see in this debate and discussion, whether we agreed or didn't agree with the bill itself. That there was an issue of strategy that also had to be addressed. The strategy of, which Conyers said is, you know, I can introduce, sure, I can introduce another bill that is far more strident that lays out, boom, this is what you owe. But, in my view, that's gonna go less far than if we introduced the bill that is modeled on the bill that was already passed. The strategy then of saying, okay they did that for the Japanese Americans. Let's just kinda, get on that coattail and say if you can do that for them, you can surely do the same thing for us, you know. So, it began to, it began to develop the kind of looking at, what is our strategy that, you know, we can bang on that door, but what is our strategy when we bang on the door? And, what is the strategy when they open the door? 'Cause they are gonna open the door. Story_ID: 86034 Speaker 1: So, H.R. 40 was very important, not simply because of, you know, the fact that it is a bill in Congress that has been introduced and they we continue, N'COBRA [National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America] and other groups, lobby around and we increased the number of co-sponsors. We haven't really gotten the kind of support from Congress that we need in order to get it out on the floor. But, we have, we have gotten more and more co-sponsors, black and white. And, what we have done is that, it's a tool in our community to educate our community about what reparations is. Because you see, its legislation like this in Congress is similar to litigation. People, it legitimizes the issue for people. When you can go and talk to a group of people, black folk in the community who aren't necessarily, you know, involved in civic matters, you know, they just ordinary work-a-day folks, you know. They, they get up in the morning. They go to work. They come home. They talk care of their family. They eat dinner. They turn on the TV. They go to bed. They wake up the next morning. They go to work, you know. That kinda thing, I'm--you know, they're not, you know, they go to church maybe. They're involved in church, you know, they may be involved in a sorority or fraternity, but they're not really engaged in politics or in activism or anything. When you're talking to them about an issue, you get responses like, well you know man, I'm just trying to make it. Why should I be worried about something that happened x-number of years ago. Or, how does that impact reparations when I'm dealing with the fact that I just got fired. Or, I just got laid off, or I just got a salary cut, or whatever. I'm not getting a raise or whatever. Or, I'm trying to save to send my kid to college. And, you began to talk to them about it. It's important that we can have these discussions and arguments and--or debates with around vestiges of slavery. But, what sways people is not simply those arguments. But, those arguments hook to the fact, well Congressman Conyers, there's a bill that was introduced and we've got now, 30, 40, 50 Congresspersons, who have signed on to that bill. Or, there was a lawsuit filed, you know, last week, or last month. That begins to legitimize that issue and people began to say, "Oh, well maybe it's not just these crazy, wild, you know, that Standish Willis [HM] that you, you know, and that Adjoa Aiyetoro," but you know, you start--it's pretty much what you was saying a few minutes ago. You start lifting up people that had gotten their respect through traditional credentialing, you know. You lift up the Harvard Law professor, you know. There--First of all, having Harvard in front of their names, I don't care, you know, most black folks, I mean, you know, it's like when you talk about DuBois graduated from Harvard. I mean, that's a major thing for many black people, for many people not just black people. So, you lift up, Charles Ogletree, the Harvard Law Professor. Or, Randall Robinson, who they heard about through TransAfrica. And, was--in one--in the leadership of an Anti, Anti-Apartheid Movement. Or, you began to lift up a Johnnie Cochran who they, you know, became, you know, interested in and learned about through the O.J. Simpson Trail. And, you know, you lift up these names of people. The Dorothy Height [HM], you know, that they have respect for from, you know, all of the work she's done around women and all of that, in the black community beyond that. But, her focus being the National Council of Negro Women, you know. And, you began to lift those names up for them, along with the John Conyers, you know. Story_ID: 86035 Speaker 1: And there's an international aspect of this lifting up too. Tell us about the Durban 400 and what that was about. Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't, I was, I went to Durban, in fact, I was--I participated through WILPF. WILPF asked me, Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, through the campaign, the UFORJE [United for Racial Justice: Truth, Reparations, Restoration and Reconciliation], asked me to participate in The World Conference Against Racism, and the, and the preparatory meetings as well as going to Durban. And so, I-- Speaker 1: This was in August of 2001. Speaker 2: This was--well, Durban was in August of 2001. The preparatory meetings started in May of 2000. And, they were in Geneva [Switzerland], then they had a regional meeting in Chile [South America] for the Americans. So, and most of them were in, other than that, were in Geneva. And, so I participated in there when I--we went to May, in May of 2000. Roger Wareham, who was with the D12 Movement [December 12th Movement International Secretariat], organized African and African Descendants Caucus in May of 2000. And, we build that Caucus over that year and a half or so going to preparatory meetings, lobbying governments, lobbying the other caucuses to get them to support our agenda. And, our two primary points on our agenda were that, slavery and the slave trade are crimes against humanity and that preparations are owed to its des--the descendant of, of, of the, of those who were enslaved. And, then we had, we had a ten-point action point for those who were the top, ten action points for those who were the top two. So, we did all that work. We did a lot of work organizing. We built it. We expanded it. We had a lot of work actually having the African--at one point, there was an African and Geo Caucus and then the African, African Descendent. And, the last six months of the preparatory process, they clasped the African Caucus into just the African and African Descendent Caucus, which is a major feat. A major accomplishment. We got over a lot of suspicions, a lot of, you know, what are those, you know, U.S. Negro doing, kinda thing, you know. We got over a lot of the languages barriers, you know. Many of us in the United States believe that English is spoken everywhere you go and if you don't speak English, you know, what are you? You know, we had to deal with real issues that we had in people who spoke Spanish and no English and very little English, Portuguese, French. And, we had to address that and to, and address it in a way that was respectful of each other. Where we weren't going in as U.S. people, saying, you know, arrogant saying, well okay, I guess we'll have a translator and vice versa. We weren't, you know, others weren't going in being in the same way, arrogant about their language group. Even though we realized, and I just have to say it, that westerners, you know, U.S. people, are much more arrogant about English than people were about French or Spanish or Portuguese. But, we had to grapple with that so that by the time we got to Durbin, we brought with us translators who we did simultaneous translation, we got to that point. Story_ID: 86036 Speaker 1: Durbin was an event that was a culmination of a year and a half of preparatory process. When we got there, we were so organized as the African and African Descendants Caucus, and we were able to have an impact there in Durbin because we had organized. And, we had a structure in which other African and African Descendants could come and work within if they wanted. The Durbin 400, and the reason I didn't start there is, I wasn't a part of the Durbin 400. That was a group that was organized for people who just wanted to come to Durbin to have an impact in Durbin. And, they didn't come to the NGO Forum. They got there at the end of the NGO Forum. But, their main purpose, and it was organized primarily through Conrad Worrill [HM] and the D12 Movement [December 12th Movement International Secretariat], Roger Wareham. And, they came a day or two before the government meeting started. And, so their main focus was to have an impact in the government meeting. I'm not quite sure how many people they have. They didn't have 400, but I'm, I'm, you know, I'm sure they had at least a couple of hundred. I'm not--those, those numbers Conrad could give you more accurately. But, they did not have 400. Yet, they were, they were a mass group of Black folks coming from the United States to be, and to participate and lobby. They in many ways, acted parallel to the African and African Descendants Caucus. Even though Roger was the initiator of the Caucus. At that point, they were acting parallel to it. They were not in--Roger did not come in and assume his co-leadership of the Caucus. He maintained the role with the, the Durbin 400, and so parallel. We came together towards the end of the government conference because we saw that we needed to come together. Because, there was some real struggles around getting the language into the document that we wanted in. And, we recognized towards the end, that this parallel working together, was not necessarily inefficient. But, it was not as efficient as if we came together to talk about a joint strategy for doing a major lobbying effort in the government to get the language we wanted in. And, so we did that. We met on the lawn right behind the building. It was very historic and we sat there and we developed joint strategy. And, Roger and I then worked together on some language and, and got that, you know, lobbied. And, we go it to various people, our Caucus got it to various people, government delegates. And, we had a major impact. Story_ID: 86037 Speaker 1: We had a major impact. Speaker 2: Okay. Which has sort of been obscured by the events of 9/11 that occurred immediately after. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: So, I mean, that kinda took some of the thunder away from the events at the Durbin Conference. Speaker 1: Right. I think so. It took away from it in terms of mass media. But, I don't think we would have gotten the coverage in the United States anyway. Because, part of what the United States was doing, which I think is another act of criminality, is that it really--it withdrew from the conference officially. And, it withdrew from the conference officially because it said, that it was in disagreement with language that had been proposed by an Arabic, some Arab-- Speaker 2: (unclear) Palestinian (simultaneously) Speaker 1: A group. That--Zionism is racism type language and that it was opposed to the, the stature and the possibility that reparations would be in the document. And, it was really a crim--act of criminality to me for several reasons. One, all throughout the preparatory process, which is another reason I started there. Because so many people started the conference not realizing that there were, there was a year and a half of work that went into the conference, and probably even more than that. I mean, Roger [Wareham] and Silis Muhammad, and others had been going to the Human Rights Commission for years, you know. And so, they had been lobbying around and demanding, demands made for our conference on racism for a long time. So, even those of us, like myself, when we came in and became, you know, active in the preparatory process were probably just still coming into something that had already been working and developing over a period of time. But, what's interesting, it seems to me and it's important, is that from the very beginning in May, the Unite--2000, the United States took a very strong position against issues around reparations. And, when we cornered the ambassador at that time, that was representing them, a black woman, I'm blanking her name too. I'm awful at names. Who was a Canadian citizen and then became a naturalized U.S. Citizen. She said, she admitted that the reason why the United States was opposed to em--to supporting the issues of reparations was that they--that the debt was so large to African Americans in the United States. And, I mean, she admitted that when cornered. And, but we had this battle with them. I mean, they lobbied against it. It was a major battle against this government. And, the government played, you know, games it's owned--the government, leaders of the Government Delegation and the staff that they hired, pretty much began attacking us. Saying--and we had one meeting with them and, I mean we had some of the Civil Rights mainstay, you know, in that meeting. And, Henderson, Wade Henderson, and Barbara Arnwine, who's very much in the leadership with me and others of the African and African Descendant Caucus. And, I mean, they basically said that the demand for preparation was racist. That's like, are you crazy? I mean, they were undermining the demand. They told lies to the other delegations, other governments, saying that it was illegal for them to apologize for slavery. Well, it's not illegal for them to apologize for slavery. The issue is that they would then admit liability. But, it's not illegal, you know. So, it was a major fight. So, that by the time we got to Durbin, the United States had already made it clear, and it was losing. See, I think the United States, many of us thought not just me, the United States thought if they stood on their hand and whistled for a while, the governments would back off. And, they didn't back off. Story_ID: 85356 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Well, I guess, my--because of the work I'm doing now, I think the, my, one of my biggest hopes is that--or really anticipations and plan--I think hope, I think is more concrete than even hope. It's that we will learn about our history. Learn to respect our history. And, demand what is rightfully ours. That we--then, and I realize it's not gonna be everybody in the community. It's not something that everybody is gonna do. But, that we as a community by enlarge, we have, as a friend of my calls it, the critical mass of us, that understand that we can't, you know, it's sorta like some of the historian say, you can't--if you don't know your history, you're destine to repeat it. And, you also know that, for me, that we will continue to be marginalized until we really know, not only our history but how we got where we are. And, accept it and embrace it. And, that's part of that demand for reparations. I mean, the demand for reparations is a demand to for acknowledgment, but also for a discussion of how do we repair it. And, so that's, that's my major anticipation. And, that's my major passion right now, is to show the inner connections. For us to understand the connection between what Johnny is doing today in school and what happened to our ancestors. And, the connections between that as Charles has said, Charles Ogletree [HM], we can look at many of our systems and it's virtually an unbroken chain. And, so it's partly having to own that. It's owning that history. And, and in doing that, it's not simply being done for the black community, which of course I am an activist and advocate for the black community, the African centric community in this country. However, it's also done for the whole community. Because, I feel very strongly that unless this whole society, unless white people, you know, Asian people, whoever comes into this county understands the history of this country. And, the history of how this country got to where it is. Then, they won't be able to understand why there continues to be frictions between the races, most particularly black and white. Why is it that black children continues to do less well on certain tests than white children? Why is it that, you know, we have the disproportionality we have in healthcare? You know, it's not just that black people, you know, eat more pork, you know. That we have lifestyle issues. Yes, we do have lifestyle issues and some of those lifestyle issues are connected to our history as enslaved Africans. But, we also know that they're issues of ongoing discrimination in healthcare. We know that there's issues of ongoing discrimination not only in terms of when we go to see a physician, you know. How they look at us and treat us as compared to how they look and treat a white person. But, we also know, that there's ongoing issues of, as we talked earlier in terms of validation of treatment, modalities of white versus black and all of that. So, my big picture, you know, is what how I would want to see not the black community, but the society as a whole. As one that owns its past and is willing to look at its present to correct the ills that were born of the past in order for us to move forward. So, that we can start untangling what we talked about earlier, like with mental health and others. Untangling what is, you know, the rage that has become depression, because of the societal structural violations of human life versus someone who just, you know, wasn't just quite able to handle the ordinary vicissitudes of life. Story_ID: 85357 Speaker 1: Okay. When you look back at the things that you've done, and you're still young by a lot of standards in what you're doing. Are you, are you--what do you see as your legacy at this point? Speaker 2: You know, it's kind of hard, for me at least, I don't know if it's hard for everyone to really see my legacy. What I've tried to do since I became a conscious activist, and I dare say, as I look at examples of things that I did when I was younger. The time when, which, when I was in high school [Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri], and we had a social club and they were trying to keep out one of my friends because she wasn't from the right family. And, I fought for her and basically stood up for her. Another precursor of, you know, the character issues that we talked about, you know, that I might not have been an activist, so-to-speak, then in terms of social systems. But I, you know, had a way of looking at the world that is the same way now. That it's not fair to discriminate based on race, or class, or any ism. I guess that's part of my legacy, is that I think that I've been a person of integrity. That's part of my legacy. Even when I did things wrong, you know, all of us did. And, I'm glad in these interviews you don't ask, well what did you do wrong, you know. What are the bad things that you did, you know. But, that I, I have, you know, that I've always looked to how can I be better, both as a human being and as a contributor to this society. That's part of my legacy. Helping people. But, not helping people in the terms of, I'm helping you, but you know, trying to become a part of a community effort. I think my legacy is also that I always had believed that the collective is bigger and more important than the individual. And, that, that what happens to me as an individual. And, it would have been very easily with my upbringing, you know, black middle class, you know, America upbringing, you know, went to a very good college, and all of that to had just gotten caught up in, I, me, mine, mine, you know. Let me develop my career. Let me do about me, you know. And, I think my legacy is that, you know, you can achieve. And, to young people, that you can be a lawyer. You can be well-known. You don't have to be, you know, broke down and po (ph.), you know. But, you can contribute to the community. And, you can contribute and know that what happens in the community is more important really than what happens to you as an individual. Story_ID: 85358 Speaker 1: I think my legacy is that I was able to see as a leftist, 'cause I was a leftist and I still am a leftist, you know. We stopped using those languages. Now we use progressive, you know. It's no longer left or, you know, whatever. We're progressive, so okay, I'll buy it. But, that I could see that the issue of reparations was an issue that was really an issue for all of us and not just--it shouldn't just be lodged in the nationalist community. So, that I could become a part of that founding of, of N'COBRA [National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America] as the head of a left legal organization and National Conference of Black Lawyers. And, that I have, I think, part of my legacy is that I can utilize my middle class upbringing to kinda be in two worlds. That I could--can be with the, you know, middle class black folks, but I can be with the ordinary working day black folks too. And, that I can relate to both. But, I can also relate to white people. I think that that's part of what perhaps, I don't know if that's what my mother meant by requiring me to go to Clark University, or urging me, you know, to go. But, that I can work in more than one world. And, that I can take this message of the importance of healing our community and our society. And, by healing, it means doing what many people don't wanna do. Which means, it's really opening up the wound first. It's really seeing what is the wound and why did that wound get there. And, what has--how does the wound exhibit itself now and therefore, what do we need to do to heal it from the inside, out. And, I think that's part of my legacy. And, it's again, that integrity comes in because I do it in a fairly uncompromising way. Some people would say, very uncompromising. It's because I believe in speaking the truth, you know. And, I believe in, you know, as my spiritual director says, "calling a spade and damn shovel," you know. And, that's part of my legacy is that we are not going to obtain the healing that we need as a people. And, that we need as a society. Unless we can speak the truth and are willing to sit and hear it, and willing to do the hard work of resolving it? Because, as you pointed out, September 11th was a convenient way. You didn't say it this way. I'm saying it this way. It was a convenient excuse for the United States to continue to ignore a critical conference in the result of that conference, The World Conference Against Racism. And, it was a convenient way for the United States to avoid the accusations that we made of it, and against it at the World Conference. That how can you uphold yourself up as being the example of democracy and refuse to discuss reparations. That is in fact a hypocritical stance. So, I think that my legacy is that, we can work collectively on these issues. That we can succeed, 'cause we have little victories along the way. But, that we have to do so with integrity and we have to, to really be--act in integrity and work together collectively. Story_ID: 85359 Speaker 1: How do you see oral history as, I mean, as in this--in the process of understand who we are? If it sounds self-serving, it is, but (laughter) how do you see-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, one of the things and I don't--I'll just say this well, for, I mean, it will probably be cut out. But, it seems to me that part of the difficulty for me of the interview, which is an oral history, is to ask me to speak about my history. It's like, well, you know, it wasn't no big deal. I mean, you know, you know, and it sort of--but what it does is as you get going and you talk about your history, you begin to see that there were things that are important perhaps to share that people won't know about because they aren't written down in a book. Or, you have it--everyone hasn't written their, the story of their life. And, even in people such as myself, you know, when I was called even by your organization, it's like, "why you wanna talk to me," you know. My life isn't that, you know. And, it's, it is a way of communicating to people who--about things that are happening, the lives of people in this instance, but also other events that aren't written a book. And, probably never get written in a book. And, then the other thing about it is, there are many people who, you know, in terms of, will listen to something and won't read about it, you know. And, because that's just how they learn, how they wanna learn. I mean, they'll listen to something, you know. There're people who'll see things on the TV and that same thing can be in book form but they'll never read the book. But, they'll look at the whole video on TV, and, are, you know, so, on the VCR or whatever. Story_ID: 85360 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently with your life? I mean, if you could do it again. Speaker 2: If I could, yeah, if I could do it again. And, I hope I don't, but. I'm not sure I would do things differently because of my--I feel that our lives are the way they are in so many ways and things that happen to use are happening and there're for a purpose in some ways. I guess for me, if I could change anything, I think I would change my knowledge of, of history. And, my knowledge of--not just black history but most particularly black and African history. If I could do it over again, I think that I would--and if I could influence my community, see part of doing it over again would be to influence my community. I mean, I'm raised in black, middle class, St. Louis. I'm a member of Jack and Jill. I mean, you know, how do you get them in, you know--I was born in '46' [1946]. How do I get them in '47' [1947], in '57' [1957] to, you know, instead of taking me to charm school and to cooking classes and to this and that. To take me to hear a, you know, take me and my group and have us have to spend the summer learning about black history and that kind of thing. So, I guess if I could change anything, it would be something like that, in terms of my life, my particular life. I would change my community more so than me. I would change what I was exposed to, to broaden it. Because, what I was exposed to and I, I'm not one of those black middle class people who wanna disdained being black middle class. I had a lot of--I'm very fortunate. I was very fortunate in the sense of, you know, I never really wanted for anything, even though I learned as I--after I was grown--we used to have eggs and bacon at, you know, sometimes when I'd come home from school. And, not--and we were a family that loved breakfast so that was a treat for us. And, it just dawned on me, not even more than twenty years ago. So, I was way grown when it dawned on me. That we were having eggs and bacon 'cause my family didn't have money that, you know, we had run out, they had run out of the regular dinner food. But that's, you know, was camouflaged in some ways. And, I told my mother [Marie Brabham Burrow], she said, "You just now figured that out," you know. I just, I think I would change the--that community sense of, you know, I think I would do more what a lot of parents are doing that have young children now. Where they're sending--I wouldn't necessarily wanna go to an alternative school. I don't know, maybe I would've wanted to go to an alternative school. But, a school where I was really learning about me. I think a lot of, many of our children who are going to these alternative schools are really developing a sense of confidence in themselves that I know I didn't have, you know. That I've had to struggle to get, you know. Where as many of these children, I mean, they're learning the value, the beauty of being black. Of being who they are as opposed to when we were coming up, I don't know about you, but when I was coming up in the '50's [1950s] and the '60's [1960s], in that middle class black America, it was really about forgetting who you were. Or, you know, it wasn't honoring blackness. Even though there was a respect for you in the black community, I'm not trying to say that. But, it was really about integration. It was really about embracing the, what the majority society, so called majority society was about. So, I think if I could change anything, I think I would change that which then would change me, you know. In that sense, I think I would've been more confident a lot earlier, you know. I don't know if I'd been more of an activist a lot earlier. But, I think I would've been a lot more confident about me. Story_ID: 85361 Speaker 1: Okay. And, the last question is similar to the legacy, but different. How would like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to be remembered--this is gonna sound silly that's why I am hesitating. I would really like to be remembered as somebody who cared. And, that, and that did more than speak it, but acted it. And, did the very, very, best I could to help not just individuals, but to help oppressed people and to end depression. And, that I focused over in home first, which is black people for me. But, that I, I didn't do it by eliminating concern for other people who were oppressed. And, that I tried to really make this world a place where people could live and have what they needed to live, you know. That's where I'd like to be remembered. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Thank you. Story_ID: 85362 Speaker 1: Okay. This photograph is of me, and Congressman [John] Conyers [HM], Ron Daniels and two other people that were attending a forum that Ron Daniels held. And, we--the night was on reparations and was around the Center for Constitutional Rights, '98' [1998], '99' [1999]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 1: That was me presenting at the Anniversary Conference of the National Alliance Against Racism and Political Repression back in the mid-'80's [1980s]. And, to my--well facing--to my left as on the podium is Lennox Hinds. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next one. Speaker 1: Okay. And, I'm sitting--this is in India, Tiruvannamalai, India, which is in southwest India. It's in the Tamil Nadu area of India. And, I'm there with the spiritual group on a spiritual pilgrimage. And, the group is AHAM, Association of Happiness for All Mankind. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Great. Next photo. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) it scans better. Speaker 2: Oh, Okay. And that's me sitting on a black Santa Clause lap. And, I don't even think I'm a year old yet. Maybe I am, just a year in St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): You're giving him a look. Speaker 2: Um-hum. (Laughter) Speaker 1: That's my family. We're at my parents. My sister and I gave my parents a 50th wedding anniversary celebration. And, in the front row, is me, my mother [Marie Brabham Burrow], my father [Artis Nathaniel Burrow], and my sister. And, in the back rows is her other family members. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, Next. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: And, that's me. We gave my father a surprise 75th birthday celebration. And, I came all the way from D.C. And, I was so excited, I didn't even let him get in the door good. I just opened the door and greeted him. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Did we get a year for that? Speaker 1: That was 75 daddy was-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Seventy-five [1975]. Speaker 1: No, no. Not--that wasn't 1975, I'm trying to figure out-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): He's 75. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) 'cause he was born in 1914. Speaker 1: He was 75. He was born in 1914. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. He's got a (unclear). Speaker 2: That's me with a team. We represented the Statehood Party, the Statehood Defendants. They did civil disobedience around Statehood and we were able to get them acquitted of charges of trans--of trespassing. That was in early 1980s, I wanna say. I don't know the exact year. And, the gentlemen to my, to the left of me, George LaRoche and the gentlemen to the right, Yeager. We were the attorneys for the case. And, the others were the plaintiffs. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Defendants. They were being charged criminally. Defendants, sorry. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Then, that's me. The small one is me and that's my sister. And, I was maybe not quite a year. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Alright. Next. Speaker 2: (Laughter) what a noble expression there-- Speaker 1: I know. I look at picture of me when I was little and I'm always looking so serious and-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) yes, I'm telling you. Speaker 1: That was me in 1997. In June of '97' [1997] The National Conference of Black Lawyers chapter here gave me, honored me at a dinner and a tribute to me down at B. Smith's in Washington, D.C. To the right is William Joseph who served with me at one point as co-chair of the organization and another point served as director. And, to--you can see barely to the left of me, to the left in the picture is Ramona Edelin [HM] was a very good friend. We've been associates and friends since I was twelve. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 1: Since we were twelve. Speaker 2: That's me in 1994, December in Europe Gui. I was part of a delegation that's a part of, National Conference of Black Lawyers, my duties there as National Conference of Black Lawyers. I was part of a delegation to a conference there on the racism in the Americus, and for African Descendants and Racism Against African Citizens in the Americus. And, I was on a panel with the people there from Brazil and Europe Gui. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 2: That's me. I'm a-- I was, in one point, I was the leader of the St. Louis Chapter of National Association of Black Social Workers. I came to D.C. as--with my job with the Department of Justice, but went back to the Conference in '79' [1979], I think the Conference was. And, we had a major demonstration in front of Barnes Hospital that had begun discriminating again in the past few years. And, the Chapter there had had a demonstration every week and when the national came, we had thousands of Black Social Workers ringing the--around the complex. And, the interesting thing about this paper is if you flip the page. Father William Sherman Brabham and that picture showed up in the same paper, on the same page as the picture of me. Unbeknownst to me, they covered the first graduates of Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: And, he was in there. So, I, I always thought that was symbolic. That he was saying, yeah, you go on, Miss Activist. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Just spell his name real quick. Speaker 1: His name is William Sherman Brabham, B-R-A-B-H-A-M. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Great. Next. Speaker 1: That's it. (Unclear). ( OFF-CAMERA VOICE): This is a good one. Speaker 2: Yeah. That's a portrait of me and it's really special because, one it depicts me--I had gotten my green belt. But, I had been burned in '83' [1983]. And, my karate school as a present to me, had someone take the picture and make a portrait of me as a gift to lift my spirits and whatever. And, I was a green belt then. I went on to take my blue belt test and that's what that is. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I'm gonna need you to tilt that forward more. So, it's more upright. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Whoa. Got it? Hold on one second. I may have to focus there..