 Story_ID: 2404 Speaker 1: Spell it for us. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I want today's date--your birth date, today's date, and I'll go on from there. Speaker 2: All right. You ready? Okay. I am Ethel Skyles Alexander. E-T-H-E-L S-K-Y-L-E-S Alexander. A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R and I was born January 16, 1925. Speaker 1: And your birth place? Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is April 2nd, 2001. Am I right? Good. Edit this stuff. Speaker 1: And make sure you address me. There are a lot of people in the room, but make sure you address me only-- Speaker 2: --to address you Speaker 1: And want to have--well, I'd like to have your profession. Well, I'd like to have the years that you served in the Illinois General Assembly. Speaker 2: I served with the Illinois General Assembly starting in February 1978. I completed eight years as a State Representative. At the demise of the former Senator Charles Chew [Jr.], I succeeded him in the Senate. I completed my tenure there in 1993. I chose at that time to retire, and come home, and be a housewife. Speaker 1: Now we have 1979 to 1986, is that incorrect? Speaker 2: That is correct. Yes, '79 [1979] to--that is right. You're correct--thinking about the election and stuff. Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted to be accurate. And (pauses) okay, and we're here in Chicago, Illinois. Story_ID: 2405 Speaker 1: What I'd like to know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: I like food. I like food, period! I really don't have a favorite. I'm not a big meat eater, vegetables, yes, pies, cakes. So long as it's good, cooked, clean food, I like food. Speaker 1: No laughing--you cannot make a noise--sound. Okay. Now when I laugh, I laugh silently, but there can be no--no sound. Your favorite color? Speaker 2: I would say blue. Speaker 1: We have a blue background so you look lovely today. Okay, your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring time. Speaker 1: We're coming on it. A favorite vacation place or destination? Speaker 2: I like warm places. I like cruises. I like Hot Springs, pretty much. I'm more freer there. I don't feel closed in. I can just hang, and do what I want to do at the times I want to do it. Speaker 1: So that's Hot Springs--? Speaker 2: It's Hot Springs, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Arkansas, okay, great, okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. It's religious. I can do all things through Christ Jesus who strengthens me. Yes, yes. Story_ID: 2406 Speaker 1: You were born here in Chicago [Illinois], and I wanted you to tell me what you know about your father, and his side of the family, and where he was from. If you would give his name first? Speaker 2: My father was Charles Miles Skyles, Sr., and he was born in Little Rock, Arkansas. He was a very outgoing individual. He was a minister, an ordained Methodist minister. He was one of the--not founding fathers, but one of the pillars of Grant Memorial Church here in Chicago on Jackson Boulevard. He liked people. He was known to go into a room where there was a group assembled, and the room would become electrified. He was known as an orator. As a minister, whatever reason he chose to go into politics, I do not know, but I can remember the change that took place when he decided to go into politics. He was a good legislator, and in that era when black legislators went into the Springfield [Illinois] area, they could not stay in hotels, motels, eat in restaurants, have anything to do as we do now. We can go in, sit, get rooms, and anything like that, and they lived in cat houses or Christian homes. They bunched up or slept in the car overnight until time to go into session. I understand and heard them say that they didn't even have a secretary, but one person to serve all of the black legislators. That was in the Springfield scene, at that time, and they were very adamant about trying to make the civil right change or to bring about a change in the discrimination that existed in Springfield at that time. They would bunch up in cars and go down--the Corneal Davis, and the Fred Smith, the senators and whatnot at that time, and (unclear). To get there, and to try to do what they felt was good for the people back here in Chicago in the State of Illinois. I don't know if they were highly respected or not. I think they were accepted in part because they had been elected from the black populace, at that time, which we were just beginning to get our feet into the political stream, and it was a thing that they almost had to accept us in parts. He stayed in Springfield until he had a massive coronary attack, and I understand that they kept him there in the Springfield scene for like a month and a half until they were able to bring him back from Springfield to Chicago. He never returned to the Springfield scene. At that time, the Honorable Cecil A. Partee came upon the scene, and he succeeded the seat that was being held by my father. He got back into politics a little while later, and I sometime questioned whether it was a ruse or not. He ran against the Honorable Congressman William P. Dawson, and I think it was a ruse in order to keep the black vote from splitting and going someplace else. Many people loved Dawson, and many hated him. Many loved my father and hated him, but by splitting the black vote at that time, I think my father was sent out to siphon off the vote. Because, as I think, to keep it from going someplace else. I don't think he believed he could win. It was just something he was doing, I believe, to save the party or the imagery of the party at that time. He originated out of the old Third Ward under Mike Sneed or Edward Mike Sneed who became Commissioner here in the City of Chicago, and who later succeeded by his wife Josephine Sneed, who served until her death. And it was a very strong organization, growing organization. It was second to the--none other than the Second Ward; they were the two main black wards in that era in time, and many lovely, grand fighters came out of those wards in that era. And I'm proud to have known many of them or been affiliated with them. My father was a precinct captain. He not only was a state representative but a precinct captain, and you must remember we were coming out through the era of the Depression, and the [Franklin D.] Roosevelt era was just coming into being, and we didn't have anything. No one had anything. We shared and shared alike. Doors were not locked in that time. We went in and out of each other's houses over the street. Everybody was trying to help someone else at that era. And my father, being the precinct captain, and the Democratic Party at that time trying to match the vote of the black populace at that time, around the Christmas era, to give out big Christmas baskets full of socks, gloves, panties for the little girls, pants for the little boys, vouchers for shoes. And I remember we were as poor as anybody could ever be, as poor would be, and we never got a box, and I used to look at my father. He'd bring these boxes home to distribute out into the precinct area to the children of the precinct, and I used to say to myself, I wonder why he doesn't give us a pair of socks, or give us a pair of gloves to wear backwards and forwards to school, but that was not to be. We had to be the precinct captain's, the state representative's children, and we were assumed that we had what we needed, but we were struggling like everybody else in that era in time. Story_ID: 2407 Speaker 1: Are there any other stories you remember that you can share with us about your father [Charles Miles Skyles, Sr.], or maybe you heard, about the time that he served in the legislature? Speaker 2: My father was known as a fighter. He belonged to what was one time here in the Chicago [Illinois] area--I believe it was called Red Square. You may have heard of it from Professor Timothy Black--Timuel Black. Red Square was located around Garfield [Boulevard] and King Drive, or old South Park as it was known then. Blacks would come there to listen to persons like my father, or other speakers of that era, the Sam Parks of that era, to espouse what we should be doing, and where we should be going, and how do we get it to go, and all that other stuff that was assumed to be the right way for blacks to pull themselves up and get into the mainstream. And I can remember a story that still relates to my father, that when they laid the old streetcar tracks--maybe you don't know what a streetcar was. We used to call them the big reds. Up and down 51st Street, the workmen at them time were all of another expression, and my father took a group of men with picks and shovels, and they walked to 51st Street, and laid down across the tracks and said if they were not allowed to work in their own neighborhood or get jobs laying the tracks and things, then the tracks would not be laid. And they laid there until the person came out and made some arrangements with him to hire some of the black persons who were laid out there across the street to stop the traffic. And there was another era in the Springfield [Illinois] scene where, I understand, all the black legislators went into one of the restaurants down there and refused to leave the restaurant until they were served. In fact, they stood on the tables. It's history down there, just kind of sit-in. This was before the era of the Civil Rights Movement and from that some of the establishments in that area began to open up and allow blacks to come in behind that scene there that took place in Springfield. Speaker 1: Do you know what year that took place? Speaker 2: That was done during the '40s [1940s]. I cannot give you an exact date of it, and, of course, some of the participants in it are now long gone. Speaker 1: Do you know who they were? Speaker 2: Corneal Davis, Fred Smith, Jimmy White Carter, I don't believe the Honorable Kenneth E. Wilson was--a judge, now--was a part. He came on later after that era but it was the older legislators who was in that scenery. There was no Charlie [Charles] Chew down there during that era. That was before their time. No Cecil Partee down there at that time. It was another whole group. If I could see the list of names I could perhaps identify them to you from the time that they served in that scene, down there. Story_ID: 2408 Speaker 1: Could you start again about Corneal Davis? Speaker 2: Yes. Corneal Davis was very articulate. He would throw a rock and hide his hand, as if he never throwed it. He would have meetings with not only my father's [Charles Miles Skyles, Sr.] era, and even when I served, I served with Corneal, for one term. And by him being light skinned, he could pass for white and he would tell us his strategy. Now, I'm going to go out there you fellows--he would say, or girls, or whatever--and I'm going to stand up and talk about you all won't act right, and not trying to get on the program. But, in the meanwhile, don't you all cast a vote until we get what we want. He was that kind of a person, very forceful in voice, but very loving in nature. And we were able to know, although he would speak against us, in part, or the blacks that were in the [Illinois] General Assembly at that time, he knew what he was doing. He was playing the devil's advocate in order to try to get the point over and ask his compadres--stay still. Don't move, you know, I'm going out and fight this battle now, and you ought to stay still. And he would go out there, and they would listen to him, because he has this big, roaring, booming voice. He was an assistant pastor down at the Quinn AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church until the day of his death. He was lovely. I loved him. Speaker 1: What about Fred Smith? Speaker 2: Fred Smith was called the civil tone voice of the General Assembly. Very smooth, never hardly talked over a whisper, but you could hear him--very audible, very elegant. Stands straight, and look up at the sky, and just talk and talk, and in those days there was a thing called filibuster allowed. Since then they've somewhat modified, watered down filibustering in the General Assembly. And he would stand there and try to make a point on something that he felt that was needed for our people, and they would listen to him and sometimes even vote with him, but it's a hard thing there in the Springfield scene. Many people do not understand that a lot of time black legislators or minority legislators have to siphon off, or split off their vote in order to accomplish something that we feel that we need back home. We have at times said--okay can you vote with Johnny Jones over here. It's a bad piece of legislation, but we need Johnny Jones over there. And it's something that we need to have done. And, we would wrestle with that problem--well, my people won't say nothing back home. I can go with it--and many of the legislators could not vote because of the area that they come out of. They would have been crucified, and then they wouldn't have a chance to be re-elected. So, it was somewhat of a meeting of the minds. I can vote; can you vote on it? Story_ID: 2409 Speaker 1: And then my term in the [Illinois] General Assembly, I always kept a big red handkerchief or napkin, and if an issue came up, I would stand up and swing the red napkin over my head. And all the black legislators would get up, leave their seats; we'd meet in the back, underneath the balcony, discuss the problem or discuss the piece of legislation, decide who will, who will not, who cannot, or we won't go, because I was the leader of the bunch at that time. Don't lead as much now as I should, but if they wanted statistics I could find the legislation. Always kept my desk loaded with bills, and what was there for them to know. If they needed an amendment, I could pick it up real quick, because I kept somewhat of a file system on my--just like a big file cabinet on my desk. So, I was always able to--whatever piece of legislation, if it was Republican, Democratic, it was bipartisan. I could always identify it immediately, because I had kept a running record of what was there for us to vote on or not to vote on. Story_ID: 2410 Speaker 1: Do you remember during--I'm going back to your father's [Charles Miles Skyles, Sr.] time--anything else, you know, that he developed, because we're talking about 1945 to 1957 and this is--it's after, he served after 'Brown vs. Board of Education', but there was a whole period of time that--weren't things a lot dictated out of Chicago [Illinois]--the politics of the situation? Speaker 2: The politics were dictated; there was no question about it. And it was hopeful that out of being a part of--under that dictatorship that, as we call it, some of the pie, or piece of the pie would be given to those who supported the dictatorship. There was no question that you received, in very small proportions, things that you had given up your life serving trying to do. There was no promise of anything. Those who were given patronage jobs were given the lowest grades in those jobs. And that was at that time, you must remember, we're coming out of the big migration out of the South, and the Chicago area, people coming looking for jobs, many of them couldn't read and could not write. And we're talking about the crisis now with our children, I had went into homes as a precinct captain, went into basements with no concrete on the floor, no toiletry in there, to try to ask those persons who lived in this basement area to please come out and vote because, at first, it was their right. They needed to help to change their conditions so that their children's conditions and things could be changed. And it was really a trying time at that time to have lived through. If I had a cup of sugar, mom [Mildred Skyles] had a cup a sugar; the neighbor had a cup of sugar or part of that sugar. It was really something else, but we loved each other at that time. There was very little crime, if you looked at the blotters, or the police blotters, existing in the black neighborhoods at that time. I don't know what has happened now that has brought about this big change. I do know, but I'm not as deep into it maybe as I should be. Speaker 1: Now, the area that you and your father represented, describe that area. Speaker 2: My father's area that he was a part of was an area that was mostly black with a fringe of white in it. He came out of the old Fifth, and I'm trying to remember some of the boundary lines of the old Fifth [Ward]. It embraced a very small portion of the Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] area and the Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois]. They're very, very, very little, like a couple of blocks or so. The area--the region that I was legislator over, was almost over into Hyde Park. I had past the University of Chicago, but I was south of it. I really never had an area in the University of Chicago; I abutted it. Senator Carol Moseley, not Senator, but Ambassador Carol Moseley Braun had the area next to mine, and our dividing line touched almost at every point during our time that we served together. My area was--I would consider it to have been middle, low-income area. My father's was what we would call low. Not low, low, but low as we speak of it in terms of the median of income. The education was very, very, very low. In fact, I doubt very seriously if you had--we didn't have policemen at that time. We didn't have firemen. We didn't have-well, you all don't have it now, but at that time there was delivery of milk by milkmen, bread men, bread trucks. We didn't have those kind of occupations. So the money flow was very shallow; very, very, very shallow. As for my district when I came into office, we had been told--we're looking at a 20-year span difference almost; just about give or take over the time that I served. There was the thought you must go to school. You must get an education. It was drilled into you. You must have a high school education. Well, that's long gone now. That was described when I was coming through. I had to have a high school education and there's no question about it. I don't know if my dad's era demanded the high school education or not, having lived in the Chicago area I don't know and I can't tell you but in my era well, there were people who read, there were people who came into the area or the region to stir up to keep the people excited for their own personal gains and what not and it was always a struggle to say now wait a minute that's not good for us. It's sounds good now but it's not good in the main for the majority of us. There was always that kind of a struggle. It's different now though. Speaker 1: Now your father--how did he come from Hot Springs [Arkansas] to here? Speaker 2: I really don't know. I know his mother, his father; I think there's eight brothers and sisters that came with them. I come from that side of the family a very large family. We have had contact with the St. Louis branch--there's a branch of them in St. Louis, Missouri. Then there's a branch in Little Rock [Arkansas] and, of course, there's scatterings all over the United States but I cannot tell you how they came. I know Grandpa on my father's side was a orphan. He never knew any of his parents. Sometimes I wonder if perhaps he came out of the slave bag or not and that's why he knew nobody, brothers or sisters, uncles or aunties. The grandmother on my father's side came from a big family. It looks like to me there's a hundred or thousand of them in her family and they married and migrated to Chicago. My father, I understand was about fifteen or sixteen years old when he did come to Chicago. My mother was about fifteen or sixteen when she came to Chicago via out of Tennessee and they married. Story_ID: 2411 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit, just a little bit about your mother's, you know, her name--, Speaker 2: My mother's name was Mildred [Skyles] and her father was the product of a slavemaster and he had to leave Tennessee and never return because of some conflict that had taken place there in the old master's house. He never went back and he brought his daughter and her brother with them to Chicago [Illinois] and they were about I think fifteen or sixteen years old. He was so very fair that when he would stand on the corner they would take him to be a big Irish policeman or as you would say in those times a cop. He loved people. Somewhat of a gambler though bless him and for years; maybe you may have heard maybe before your era of the old Riverview Amusement Park [Chicago, Illinois]. He was the person who was in charge of all of the concessions out there because of his stature and of his complexion and he hired at that time many of our young blacks were going to college and they would come out and work there during the summer months to make their monies to go back to school and it was nothing for Papa to come home at nights with bags of money. It wasn't bills, it was silver; just bags of silver would come into the house every night because people would go into the restrooms and the concessions and the parking lot and they'd leave a tip and tip you, okay fine but he would only take a small percentage of your tip. You didn't pay him for the job he just wanted to enforce it and he expected you to be honest with him. What your tip take for that night was and he would take a portion of that from you every night and out of Riverview Park. When he died the owners of Riverview Park asked the family would we continue to run the concessions; Dad [Charles Miles Skyles, Sr.] was in Springfield [Illinois], didn't have time; I'm the oldest of the family the girl; Mama was a housewife, she had no time. So as a result we did not continue the concession proprietorship with the Riverview Park but he had been out there something like thirty-five or forty years. And it was nothing for us to go out there they'd say, "Here comes Slim's grandchildren," and we just had the run of the whole park and all the rides and the candies and whatever was taking place because we were Slim's children and it was a lovely area that I can remember. It was always a pleasure when we were going to the Riverview Park for the day. That's how we enjoyed ourselves. We'd take kids with us and we would get out of here and that was the end of it. But he'd bring these bags of money home at night and I enjoyed in the morning getting up and he had it out on the kitchen table and we'd count it and roll it and take it to the bank and the park was only open like three and a half months if I remembering correctly but the amount of money that he received from those summer months or from those concession days was enough to sustain him during the entire rest of the year and he'd look like a big rich (laughs)--from the dimes and nickels and pennies that he got off the concessions. Story_ID: 2412 Speaker 1: Tell me your siblings and where you fit and give me their order of birth. Speaker 2: There was a daughter older than I was who only lived six months. That was the first child of my mother [Mildred Skyles] and father [Charles Miles Skyles, Sr.]. I was the second. I have a sister Delores [Skyles] Harper. I have--had rather another sister Ruby but she's deceased and my brother Charles Miles Skyles, Jr. is deceased. So there's only two of us left out of the original family of mom and dad. Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about growing up and your youth because you know what you were really the oldest. Speaker 2: I really was the oldest of the whole family. There was nothing that--whenever Mom had a chance to go out on the streets, which she did not go because she was a homebody, and I sincerely believe that although they had a very cordial relationship my dad was an outgoing person. He was a what you would call a street man. Nothing he loved any better than being in the street around people and mom didn't play that as they say today. Mama liked to stay home and keep the house clean, comb the children's hair. We had chores, there being four of us in the family my week was the kitchen week. I was responsible for making the kitchen stayed clean. The next week my job was to make all the beds; the next week was to scrub the floors. Every week we had to scrub the house down, the floors on our hands and knees, the woodwork the bases. The next week my week would be to go and do the shopping. I was the runner to the store and we rotated around like that in order for every one of us to stay busy. We had to get our homework at night. We had to bring home good grades. One of my chores being the oldest and a girl was to keep the fires going in dad's absence, the furnaces in the basement. So it was nothing for me to go down at night and bank the furnace, pull the clinkers because we had old fashioned coal stove and I can recall having lived by the railroad tracks, behind the railroad tracks at that time and they had the old Rock Island [Railroad] trains come down and the coal hikers would be pushing the coal into the furnaces to keep the engines going and some of it would fall on the tracks. So it was nothing that every once in a while we would get a sack and walk the tracks and pick up the coal so we would have coal back at the house to keep the hot water heater going or the kitchen stove going. We had one of them old-fashioned kitchen stoves that you had to put coal in. So that was my job being the oldest. Chopping wood, yes, I know how to chop wood because we had to keep the stoves going. Mom was taking care of the younger bunch of children and trying to run the house and dad was running the street, politics night and day so that was a common life we came up in. We went to church every Sunday. It was nothing new not to go to church. I can recall two incidences in my father's life when we were living in Canada, he was sent to one of the parishes up there and he was in the pulpit preaching one morning, in fact, I wrote a paper on it in school. Story_ID: 2413 Speaker 1: Give me the names of the schools you went to in order--where you went to elementary school--when you--'cause you said you spent time in Canada, but I'd like you to just--. Speaker 2: Can I talk--I don't remember the name of the school that I started in. It was in Iowa; Davenport, Iowa I can remember that and always the parish house was next to the church and we lived like down in a little valley like a lowland and the town was kind of up on the hills but were we lived at we could look across the, I think the Mississippi [River] or the river and look right into the penitentiary and we could see the prisoners as they would come out for their recreational times and we would sit like on the slope and look down at them and I went to school, I started in Davenport, Iowa but I don't remember the name of the school. The only thing that stands out in my memory is that the escape--if a fire would break out they had tubes that they would put us in and we would slide down in big tubes to the first floor and come out. That's the only thing I can remember about the school. And I can remember Dad [Charles Miles Skyles, Sr.] coming home--I can remember being in a tree, a mulberry tree, shaking the tree with a white towel, a sheet in the road to shake down the mulberries so we could have food to eat at night because it was a poor area at that time. The area was mixed. We'd be the only black family in the neighborhood. It was nothing for the neighbors across the street to come over and bring something they had left over from Sunday's dinner or vica versa and very vaguely, foggy because I must have been about five or six and I can remember those incidents. We came to Chicago [Illinois]--we came to Chicago and lived around 43rd [Street] and Calumet [Avenue] in a tenant house and I can remember we had one large room--two large rooms and a kitchen and we all piled in that and slept. This is prior to the days of him going into the political arena. I can recall my starting to school at [Jesse] Sherwood Elementary School here in Chicago over on I think it's 57th [Street] and Stewart [Avenue] or someplace in that area. I graduated from that school. That time they were just completing the DuSable High School and they had redrawn the lines and if you can recall historically Englewood High School was a school for white children and out of my class and we were a graduating class at the elementary level of black students, two of us was not permitted to go to DuSable because the line had been drawn at the street we lived on and we had to go to Englewood and I can remember crying because I could not follow my students that I had gone to school with down to the new school, to the DuSable High School and I was sent out to Englewood High School where I completed the curriculum there and graduated. As I look back now I don't really feel too bad but I've never gone to an all-black school in my life and at one time I felt that I had really missed something by not being in that grouping, you know. I left then and went into the college scene. I stayed two years in college and I left, got married, had a child, went to work, decided to go back and went to the [Chicago] Loop Junior College [now Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois] and got--in Liberal Arts and that has been the completion of my formal education. Story_ID: 2414 Speaker 1: During the tenure of my years as a Clerk in the [Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois] Criminal Division when they decided to modernize that system and bring up on line, as they said, I had to go to school, the IBM [International Business Machines, Inc.] Training School--Analysis School and I never will forget that incident. We had one week to train and students had come and personnel had come from all over the United States to be trained in this new computerized age because I was to go back and train the entire Criminal Court Division up on line at a given time because Federal funds had been given to us to bring up the Criminal Justice System and my having been there the length of time that I was there and I knew a lot about the system from the time you're at the door until the time you went to the jail and went to appeal all the way to the United States Supreme Court and back and I knew how it was handled. I trained many an attorney, bless them, that are now sitting on the bench, as judges, in procedures as how to handle and what they needed in every file they would need. I enjoyed that very much. I stayed there roughly about thirty, thirty-four years give or take but my term in the [Illinois] General Assembly and I was speaking with one of the judges no later than last week I ran into him in the co-op and he looked at me and said, "Ethel, is that you?" I said, "But of course, judge, how are you?" His father was a major black attorney during the era I was there and he, of course, was a young budding attorney but now he's sitting on the bench as a judge. He said, "Your name still comes up girl. You look good." I said, "Thank you for remembering me," but it was an experience that I don't think I can ever forget that experience there working. One of the things that I--going back to the school here, the intensity of that course--we started at seven in the morning and we had four teachers in a room and they stood on each side of the room and one teacher would begin to talk and before they could finish talking the teacher maybe to the left would start talking; then the one in the back. So you were really sitting like in a pool surrounded by these experts trying to fill these heads what they had to learn within the week time and we could come and stay as long as we wanted or we could stay whenever you wanted to leave but in order to get a certificate we had to actually program business or factory or something we had to get together in teams and actually set up a working computerized system in order to get your certificate. And I remember becoming so confused and when I say confused, my head was just vomiting, just like to bust wide open. Standing on the corner of 35th [Street] and King Drive [Chicago, Illinois] and did not know which direction to go; I was just that heavy headed; just loaded with what they had been teaching us and I remember asking a lady, I said, "Which way should I go, which bus should I take in order to go back to 59th Street?" She looked at me kind of funny, being in the hood, at the hood, 35th and King one of the hubs of the black community. I guess she wondered where did this child come from in order to ask me which way to go? She told me and I felt so embarrassed that I had just blanked out directionally, so I went home and I thought about it and I said well I've only got two more days and I'll be finished but the next night when I got ready to come home I thought I would take the el [elevated train] so I wouldn't get caught out there at 35th and King Drive. Didn't I get on the wrong el and go north instead of coming south; just that befuddled with the teaching that they had given to us. But however, settling that down and going on to the next stage we were able to computerize that system. By what I had learned I came back to teach this certain person to help augment it and bring it up on par. Until now I understand it's one of the most recognized computerized systems in the world in obtaining records. I've been there when there have been death sentences to be carried out at executions. Someone always had to remain in that office until the execution was completed. And in preparing the records on appeal on a death case, it's very, very sobering. It's like a glue comes into the office when you start to prepare it and get the documents and everything ready to send out. You say to yourself, this person is going to die, right or wrong the court said they're going to die and you prepare the record and you send it out and when it comes back and say the judgment is upheld and the execution date is set, it was always my duty to remain on the premises until after the sentences of the court of that execution had taken place and I'd sit there in that office alone, that big office there at 26th Street, and when they would--at the time, the electric chair at that time was back in the old County Jail. At the time, they would throw the switch the lights would go out in the entire block in you'd be plunged into darkness just that split second. It was the most eerie feeling; you know someone is dying here, right close to you, right across the street in the next building. And people would be outside chanting with placards, you know, "Don't kill", you know, and a few minutes later the phone would ring in the office and they would say the sentence of the court has been carried out at such and such a time. The documents are coming over to the office to be timed and logged in for the record. Story_ID: 2415 Speaker 1: You worked at the court system [Circuit Court of Cook County]. How did you come about--had you worked for your father's [Charles Miles Skyles, Sr.] campaign? Speaker 2: Never. Speaker 1: Never. So how does this come about? You went into politics--you're sort of short-shrifting that and I just want to know where you are working for the court system but how do you transfer and this is a whole new career in many ways. Speaker 2: Right. My father, you know, was an adult probation officer at the time he had been in that system some thirty-odd years and was one of the supervisors and at the completion of the election in 1950, the then Democratic clerk, who was elected and my father were friends and my father said, "I have a daughter and I'd like for you to give her a job." And he said, "Send her out and I'll hire her." My father came home and said, "I got you a job, kid. It's time for you to go to work." I said, "Okay, when am I supposed to go?" He said, "You report out there on Monday." I said, "Okay." I didn't want to go to work out there. The transportation was difficult, no cars, streetcars; out there by the criminals, you know. I had kind of a shaky feeling going out there by myself, black and in that neighborhood. So Monday came and I got up and got dressed; I'm going out to be interviewed for the job. I didn't go. I went to the show downtown. Tuesday came, I went out in the park and walked around all day long. The clerk then called my father and said, "Where is she? She hasn't showed up yet." So Dad came in and said, "Haven't you been on the job yet and reported yet?" I said "No, I really hadn't, Dad," and he said, "You go tomorrow young lady, or else." So the next morning I got up, put my clothes on. I showed up in the court building and I announced myself. I was royally received and they took me in and interviewed me. It was not a problem with me getting the job. I was the first black in the office, in fact and the only black for a long time before any others came in behind me. And I got the job, but sometimes I look back on my life and said, how may days I refused go take the job and then ended up staying and had made up in my mind that I was only going to work one week just to satisfy my father and get him off my back and then say, I don't want to work here no more but I ended up staying thirty, almost thirty-four years. Story_ID: 2416 Speaker 1: Now the transfer to politics, how does that help? Speaker 2: I'm sitting in the [Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois] Clerk's Office and I received a call from the political establishment downtown. Ethel, come hurriedly down to the slate making. There's a little side story here; that I looked at Honorable John Stroger, that job was supposed to have been mine, okay, and I was on the ballot for twenty-four hours. John, at that time, Stroger, Honorable Stroger at that time was a committeeman a new committeeman building up a fresh ward, new territory, new ground and he went in and said that he felt that the job should have come to him rather than to me and I was then serving as a committeewoman at that point in time under Kenneth Campbell and Cecil Partee. So I went down for the interview and it's the most eerie set-up you wanted to go into. In those days you went into a big room, no lights, one spotlight on a platform with a chair and didn't you know I had runs, at that time, in every leg. I was just full of runs all up and down my stockings; here I'm going into this setting; had to be there on an emergency call; I went in and went into the ante room to wait my turn to go in to be interviewed, I sat beside the Honorable Judge Earl E. Strayhorn, who was not a judge at that time but who was coming on to be one of the trustees for the University of Chicago and he was sitting there to be interviewed too and I went in before he did and I remember they led me into this darkened room, up three little flights of steps; set me in this chair with a big spotlight on me and begin to toss questions at me. What's my name? What is my background? How did I get there? Who was sponsoring me at that time for the Commissionership job, the County Commissioner's job? What would happen if the party decided to slate me, would I be loyal to the party? You don't know who's asking these questions. These here questions coming at you from all the rooms. You hear shuffling of chairs. You smell the cigar smoke and the cigarette smoke and you're afraid. I was so afraid I didn't know what to do. I'm sitting there just trembling. I've never been in a setting like that before. You can't see anybody. You just stay in that room surrounded by this beam of light from the spotlight. And if I was chosen would I be able to raise my own money and how would I raise it and I heard in the back my committeeman, Kenneth E. Campbell say, "We will help her raise the money that she would need to be on the ticket." They thanked me and I thanked them and someone came up on the platform and took me by the arm, led me down the three steps and out the door because at that time I was ready to collapse. I learned later that I had, indeed, been slated for that seat but within that twenty-four hour period the Honorable John H. Stroger put in his bid for it being the male and got the position and he is now our illustrious President of Cook County. Story_ID: 2417 Speaker 1: Remember at that time, women were not the accepted equality--or commodity at that time for anything. We had been given the right to vote. We said we had equalities but we were far, far, far away from equality at that time and my entry into the political arena in the [Illinois] General Assembly same scene almost, sitting in the office [of the Circuit Court of Cook County Criminal Division] received a call was asked would I please come down to a slate meeting. I was being considered to run as a State Representative. That was a three-man race at that time. They had the accumulative vote. At that time Jim Taylor, the Honorable Jim Taylor, Pouncey Taylor and there was another individual by the name of Peggy Smith Martin, a young lady who was in the seat at that time and I was to go after the seat being held by Peggy Martin. I didn't know the lady. She didn't know me, we just knew each other by name. It was agreed that with the Honorable Committeeman James C. Taylor and my committeeman that we belong as a team being under the accumulative vote system I would go for one and a half votes and he would go for one and a half votes--that would assure us a victory, one and a half. That morning--Sunday morning before the election, I had all my literature printed up, all of my friends from 26th Street [Cook County Criminal Court], the judges and the lawyers at that time had given me some nice contributions; so I had the funds to run on. The morning before the election period, that Sunday morning we were all sitting at a party, breakfast party, and running over the last final detail of how to win the election on Tuesday. It was at that time that the Honorable James C. Taylor said to me, "I'm going for the bullet." The bullet being he would take the three and that would leave me nothing. I'm giving him on all of my literature one and half votes of mine and I would pick the one and a half vote. He was going for the whole three vote. I went into that election that Tuesday morning, in fact I went home that afternoon that Sunday and at that time there was some policy still going on in our neighborhood and some of the members of the organizations knew where a printing press was in our neighborhood and they went and printed me up flyers asking the voters of our area to give me the bullet. Forget the one and a half; forget Jim Taylor because he was going for the jugular vein, the whole hog, as they say. That was on a Sunday. Now we have to call back in all of the workers, the captains and everybody and bring them back in to tell them hey, catch your people before they go into the poll and give them the new information sheet on Ethel so that she can win. Short story long, long story short, I lost by 500 votes, that election, the first time I ran because of what I consider the bullet. I got shot down by James C. Taylor and I just made up my mind well I'll just give it up. I won't even try to follow into politics and my dad [Charles Miles Skyles, Sr.] was quite enthused about the fact that I could be succeeding him in that arena but two years later it almost became a mandate that I go back out and run again and beat Jim Taylor this time instead of him beating me; which we did. We beat him by something like over 8,000 votes the next time. We went out for the whole hog. I mean we flooded everything and everybody. We went into basements. We went into churches. We went into places and I had a good crew that followed me around: my husband, my campaign manager and my brother was still alive and we went all over the area telling our story of what we felt we good for us if I went to Springfield [Illinois] to represent them and as a result of that I won that election and won every election after that. Never had any problems trying to win. Was asked not to retire when I did decide to retire. Never had any fundraisers because I don't know but for the grace of God, there was always money there for me to run. I don't know where it came from, how it got there. I didn't have to give big affairs to raise money to run on and I was always able to have money to run on at the time it became necessary for me to run. When I was asked to move up to the [Illinois State] Senate at the demise of Charlie [Charles] Chew, there was a little friction going on between the then our former Mayor [Eugene] Sawyer and the power structure, the committeemen Structure, they had a little in fight going down. It was quite a hassle too. It was quite a hassle doing down. And as a result of that there was a little breach between the different wards. That was really the beginning of the breakdown of the coalitions--the black wards--because they began to not be really as solid with each other as they had been down through the years. I, at the caucus that day, got the nomination or was a selected appointment to succeed Charlie Chew in the General Assembly. Charlie died in July but I had to run that November gander--money to run that November because they said by a certain number of days left over the incoming had to run to secure the seat. So I was appointed for about five months ran and won the seat. Thereafter, maintained the seat until the time I decided to retire. I enjoyed my tenure there. I go down about three times a year still. I was just down there last month keeping doors open; touching the flesh; making them remembering me; me remembering them, 'cause you never know when you might have to go back through that arena, through somebody and you always kind of leave with a good taste in your mouth with them. Story_ID: 2418 Speaker 1: When you first went down there, [Illinois General Assembly, Springfield, Illinois] can you give me your impressions, I mean there weren't--how many women were serving with you? Speaker 2: I'd have to see the list to tell you exactly but I can tell you this about the minority or the Black Caucus. We went down there with some fractions out and it was a shame. We had so many heavy persons involved. We had the big new [State] House [of Representatives]. We had Harold Washington. Now Washington was my [State] senator when I was down and he had a good relationship with me. His father and my father [Charles Miles Skyles, Sr.]; Harold Washington's father and my father were running buddies back in the '40s [1940s] and as you know the story of the Mayor at that time, he was a young precinct captain out of the Third Ward and he knew all the basic hat moves of the Democratic Party having come through it like myself. So it was assumed that our relationship would be one of a very close kindred relationship. Harold would have lost his re-election as a senator had it not been for the 20th Ward. He won by 236 votes on re-election. I can remember that time it was such a close election that Harold and myself and my campaign manager, we went into some of the high rises in the area to try to get his name into those buildings and we'd start on the 17th floor. And I remember that one night we decided to work a building there, a high-rise building, we had to contact the building person who would permit you to get in. So her name was Miss Brownlow She's still alive, bless her and I love her and I say, "Miss Brownlow, we'll be over there tonight and we'll have the Senator with us." He was still a Senator then, he had not gone to Congress and we want to work the building. She said, "Okay, you come at seven o'clock." Now I put a gun in my pocket. I'm not going to tell you I didn't. I put a gun in my pocket; going into my precinct, pitch black. She met us in front of the building and she said, "Come on you all, we'll work the 17th and we'll walk down." So we went up to the 17th floor and we started knocking on doors up and down the corridor and it was bad, a bad scenery. I'd knock on the door and I'd holler out, "This is Senator Washington, open this door." "What you want?" "I've got the Senator with me. I've got Harold Washington with me. Open this door and meet the Senator." And that's how I forced the introduction of him on a personal vein with the person in that building. We would work one floor and come down; we didn't take the elevator we had to take the stairwell and that was a meeting place and the congregate--place for whatever you're going to do, not going to do, should do, smoking your pot if they were--and my campaign manager was a very nervous man and I remember coming down one set of steps from one floor to another floor and he started panicking. The darkness frightened him and he started hollering and turning me around and around and saying, "Give me the gun, give me the gun." I said, "What is wrong with you?" "I want the gun. Give me the gun." So I ended up handing him my gun and he walked down the steps with the gun in his hand. "I'm coming through, coming through and I've got a gun in my hand." But Miss Brownlow had to prepare the tenants and the residents of that building that we were in the building and don't start no stuff as she called it. We were able to get in and out of there and I was able to take him through that building and introduce him on a very personal vein to those persons in that building. He won by 236 votes and from that day his relationship and mine was somewhat strange. I never have understood it because I loved him. In fact, he lived across the street from me for several years when I lived here on Rhodes Avenue and the 61st [Street] block on Rhodes Avenue. One day I confronted him when I went to Springfield I said, "Oh I have a friend in Springfield, the Honorable Harold Washington, he's my senator"--and our relationship prior to and during the election time and I noticed that he was avoiding me. I could never understand why. And one day I just cornered him in the middle of a rotunda down there in Springfield and I said, "What is wrong? What has happened? What have I done? Have I offended you in any way?" He said "No," he said, "Your philosophy is a little different than mine and he said we just don't see eye-to-eye." I said, "Well I've been trying to follow in your footsteps and take your lead on many things." And he said, "I know, we'll talk about it when we get back to Chicago. I'm going to be in Chicago this weekend, I'm not going to stay here in Springfield so I'll come to your office and meet with you and we'll discuss it." He did. He came and brought one of his workers with him and I had my campaign manager with me. We went into my office and we sat down and he told me I was too much of a realist--idealist. I did not believe in confrontaiton and that he had the spirit of confrontation about him and therefore, even if we didn't see eye-to-eye, we were speaking friends. He mode of operations, of course, would be foreign from mine. I never will forget I cried about it but we never had words, as people would say, falling out words in that fashion because when the opportunity came for him to go to Congress he held out as long as he could for me to succeed him in his seat in Springfield. But you go to the Jane Byrne era and we have a James C. Taylor, State Representative, who became Deputy Mayor [of Chicago, Illinois] under Mayor Jane Byrne and I assumed and thought that I would be the Senator following Mayor Washington's rise to Congress. Went to sleep that night, I woke up the next morning and the newspaper big black letters, "Taylor Appointed to Senate." The Honorable Jane Byrne had appointed Jim Taylor to succeed Harold in the Senate as Senator Taylor and, of course, I still remained in the House of Representatives and tried to do the best I could as long as I could. Story_ID: 2419 Speaker 1: Tell us about Charlie [Charles] Chew, what's your impression of him? Speaker 2: There is no word to describe my buddy, Charlie Chew. Charlie Chew didn't care, who, what, when, where, however, he was as real as real could be. He would say things and know that they were going to upset you but he would tell you in the beginning that "You're not going to like what I'm going to say but I'm going to say it anyhow. I'm not going to tell you no lie." And he would lay down the bare facts, he wouldn't color it--just as hard as it could be, he would say it. He was very colorful. In fact, there was a story that regularly floats around Springfield [Illinois] that his living style there--had a house. We took the apartment Charlie Chew had when we first came down, Ambassador [Carol Moseley] Braun and myself 'cause we were roommates for over ten years together just she and I. And he moved out and bought a house or townhouse or something and the lady he moved in with. And he was cutting the lawn, the story goes, one day and a lady drove by and said, "Oh, how much are you charged to keep up the lawns and the shrubbery, do the landscaping." She said, "How much do you charge?" He said, "I get the chance to sleep with the lady of the house." And that was his response at that time. And he didn't care what he said and how he said it. And when you went behind what he said and analyzed it, he was just telling it like it is. He would go into a meeting place and upset it, just almost--really shake it up, real bad and the time came when we went into a caucus meeting at one of the election periods coming up, when he was bucking Jim [James C.] Taylor and Charlie Chew, and you talk about a room full of guns. Story_ID: 2420 Speaker 1: My recall of Harrison--Harris B. Gaines is that he was the father of the late Charles Gaines, [Illinois] State Representative from the Republican Party. The next name that I have a recognition of is James Y. Carter, who served in the era of '37 [1937] to '73 [1973]. He returned to the Chicago [Illinois] scene and became what was then called the Commissioner of Vehicles at that time which was a very high job in the Democratic Party. At that time they had the old jitneys running up and down the street and you'd see the commissioners or the deputies standing out on the corners of King Drive [Chicago, Illinois] or the crosspoints of the black community and pulling a cab over--a jitney over to make sure they had the right license or they had paid their dues or whatever it was. Ernest A. Green and Richard A. Harwood--, Speaker 2: Okay, look at me now. Speaker 1: Okay. I know both of them. Green was a lawyer at that time worked on 47th at 417 East 47th Street at a law firm there and he also he was elected to serve in the [Illinois] General Assembly. Richard A. Harwood, I knew of him only by name. Nothing in a very close relationship whatsoever. Christopher C. Wimbush was a former committeeman of the Third Ward and he was very forceful, very rushed. What he said you had to do it. He was that kind of a person and everybody seemed to have loved him very much. Of course, we know about Corneal A. Davis, my father, Charles M. [Miles] Skyles [Sr.]. We've talked about them. Now let me see who we've got over here. Fred J. Smith we've talked about. Kenneth E. Wilson. Speaker 2: Can I ask you--your father; was there anything that he was known for, anything, you know, because we don't have any articles. Was there--? Speaker 1: Not to my knowledge. I don't know whether Senator [Emil] Jones had told you that in the archives at the [Illinois] State Building, any legislation that has been introduced of passed by an of these legislators, they can give you a printout on it whether it became law or how it moved. Speaker 2: Was he known as a champion for anything? Speaker 1: Yeah. The civil rights cause. Yes, positively. Was known to fight too even though he was a preacher, was know to fight, fist fight. One time as the story goes, in the City Hall he hit Alderman Claude Holman. They had a fight in the middle of City Hall and he knocked him down and he made the newspaper headlines. It seemed like Dad had gotten angry with something that Claude Holman was doing because Claude Holman was then serving as Deputy Mayor under the Mayor's father, the elder Daley [Richard J. Daley] and they became angry with each other because of something they were voting that was not good for the people. And Dad hit him and knocked him down, that made the papers. That's the only thing I know that came out of that relationship. I can remember that issue, as you speak--comes back--Charles F. Armstrong, young man, had a very promising career in front of him but died at an early age. He had affected some changes in the school system if you look up his legislation. That was very meaningful for the desegregation of the schools. William H. Robertson, I'm backing up a little bit. He was a Republican. He served buy nobody had any contact. We didn't really have too much contact with people if they were Republican. You were like no touch, don't talk to, strange fellows, had nothing to do with them. I was saying something about Kenneth E. Wilson, I can remember when he first started practicing out at 26th [Street] and California [Avenue, Circuit Court of Cook County, Criminal Division, Chicago, Illinois] as an attorney. Went on and became State Representative, came back to sit back on the bench. A very lovely, soft-spoken man. He could tiptoe in a room and you'd never know he was in the room. He was just that quiet and movements and actions and what not. Horace J. Gardner, Republican out of the old 20th Ward. Had a very good, close working relationship with then Colonel Kenneth E. Campbell, who was the Committeeman, Democratic Committeeman of the 20th Ward. Part of the old what they called the Silent Six that sit down at City Hall. There was six persons that carried that title for years. They'd just sit there, did nothing. Whatever the old man Daley would say, the Mayor's father, they would go along with it and that they were really not on the program for the African American community. They were called the Silent Six. Speaker 2: Who were the Silent Six? Speaker 1: I'll have to start thinking now. It was Kenneth Campbell, Ralph Metcalf, Second Ward, Second Ward, not Barnett--. Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: No no no, he died, the man died--give me a minute and I'll bring them back to my remembrance. Claude Holman was one of them, I've got three now. There were six of them. Oh, I can remember when he died. I can remember when his wife died. His daughter became a part of our organization, William, not Barnett, Barnett was just a worker in the organization. Okay, we're looking at Cecil A. Partee, who you've got a lot of history on all ready written on. Story_ID: 2421 Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit, I mean--do you--anything you would consider his importance or he as a person or what he did as a politician? Speaker 2: Cecil Partee came into our organization, the 20th Ward, under Kenneth E. Campbell. There were two young men that came in together. One is Earl E. Neal [sic, Earl L. Neal], who now is with the Land Clearance [Committee] or whatever law--they were both very well liked in the organization. Now there was no love lost between the wives at all. I don't know why there was--I don't want to become too close to this one or close to that one. I can recall that some of the affairs that we had--we had lavish affairs at that time. Masquerade parties, you know, glamorizing things; that is was my duty as the committeewoman under the committeemen to keep the various fractions separated. So when the Campbells came in I had deputies sit them over there but don't sit them close to this one and don't sit them close to that one. We had to keep them somewhat kind of separate because of all of them were moving and vying for power and recognition and of course Cecil went down, he succeeded my father [Charles Miles Skyles, Sr.], took the seat my father did not go back for and he became somewhat like the fair headed boy of the [Democratic] Party. I can recall Cecil when we worked at 26th [Street] and California [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois Circuit Court of Cook County Criminal Division] with his partner as a state's attorney, they had eighteen or nineteen back-to-back convictions and I think they were the only team to date that have had eighteen or nineteen straight convictions in that court system. Of course, I've not been in it for a while but they carried that titlement as being--they went to court and you went into their courtroom you were going to be convicted. That was one of these hard steps that was given to him as being an able and capable lawyer. Cecil was married in my family. He married my sister, not my sister, my aunt's mother--sister rather and I used to tease him all the time, "Oh, you're my kinfolk" and he would laugh and we would laugh. He was a very outgoing person but a very, very closed person. If he could do something for you he would make a try to try to help you out. It was very articulate. He loved to play golf. Speaker. Didn't talk on the average level that you would expect a person to speak. He spoke a grade up or a step up. In other words he made you think up. He never stayed at the same level with you when he talked to you but you understood what he was saying. He loved his family. Loved his parents. Adored his stepfather and I met his mother and he had a good relationship there in the [Illinois] General Assembly because when he used to come back down there they'd almost stop everything when he walked in the door, having been the President of that Senate body down there. Floy Clements, let me tell you about Floy Clements. She was the first black woman to go into the General Assembly. She came out of the Fourth Ward, a committeewoman, sent there by Claude Holman. Now the hard times that the men were having, you know the time she was having been the only black woman in that body down there. The pressures were so strong and so anti, and that Floy couldn't even complete her first term down there; it became just that stressful and she returned back to Chicago and whether it's bad or good, we've had a thing in the Springfield [Illinois] scene among us, by the minorities, that if you were doing something that was a little out of sort, we'd say okay, you're a candidate for the Floy Clements award. It became just that--it was kind of like hey, shape up; you're not acting right, you know. It was kind of like a little joke but it was not a joke because of the stress that she ended up being under and the called it the Floy Clements award. We can do that sometimes to each other, man and woman. Kenneth Hall, I know he went to sleep before you had a chance to interview him. Very, very strong legislator, [State] Senator. In fact I can recall them bringing him, not during my tenure, but prior to me going to this thing, when he was very sick in the hospital bringing him there in a gurney to pass the vote in order to save a bill that the party needed at that time. They brought him up so he could pass the vote. Well, I've been there too. They flew me in one year to pass the vote. I had just had a heart attack and at that time they had a very serious bill coming up and I could remember they sent a helicopter to bring me in. I said, "No, somebody's going to have to drive me; I'm not getting up in a helicopter, my heart's too bad. You all trying to kill me." And they sent a car up with a police escort and put me in the back seat. One of these big, long limousines and drove me into Springfield. Everyone knew that I had been home recuperating from the heart attack so when the bill came up on the floor, it was Burris, who is running for office now, Roland Burris had a piece of legislation that he needed every vote in order to accomplish what he wanted to do and I had the winning vote if I was there. So they brought me in, brought me in the back door of the Capital and took me into the Speaker's office and let me lay on a couch and a nurse to kind of watch over me. The bill came up for the vote in the Senate and they pushed my button saying that I was there present, yes. Well the Republicans hit the floor screaming. Not her, she's not there. Knock her out. You can't vote her. And at that time they ushered me, literally carried me into the chambers. When I walked into the door of that Senate I received such an acclamation I could never forget. Both sides just went up screaming. "Oh, Ethel, you're back." So they had to put my vote back up and that is how he won that piece of legislation. He talks about it today; had it not been for me coming and then they put me back in the car; drove me back home and I went back and stayed home almost until the session ended that year during that little, short recuperation period that I had to go through. So he laughs at it. We laugh at it now a lot. Ike Sam was on the west side and I don't know too much about Ike Sam. I just knew that he was my father's friend. I knew they were buddies and I assume he was some of the persons that rode down with him to Springfield because they used to meet up and go together all the time. You have here Collins. I believe this is the Collins who was Earlene Collins's husband. Yes, I never really met him but I used to hear of him. James A. McClendon, lovely person. Have you interviewed him? No, he's dead, isn't he? James McClendon was a character in his own right. It was nothing for James to get up, leave the Senate, a very important vote is going down; come over to the House of Representatives, whoever was sitting in the seat that he used to sit in when he was a State Representative asked them up. Get up! You're sitting in my seat. Just whatever was going on; everybody would come to a dead halt. Get up! You're in my seat! And in the meanwhile back over in the Senate they're running around. They've got the guards looking for him to try to get him to come out or trick him out of the House of Representatives to get back in his own House to pass this vote and he was stretched out like a dead man. Just sitting. Wouldn't move. I'm not going back over there. I'm not going back over there. And whoever was in his seat, I don't care who you were, you didn't want to get into a fight with him so you'd get up. This is your seat now but he came back to claim it and they'd just get him and let him sit there until he kind of simmered and cooled off and then they would send some of the Charlie [Charles] Chews over and Kenneth Halls and say, "Come on, Jim, we need your vote." They would beg him and pet him and try to pull him over and trick him over to get back over to let him vote. Sometimes it wouldn't quite make it and that was just his way but he was a character right, he really was. I understand that he ended up in jail down there on a charge of having had too much to drink one night and he was driving and they put him in jail overnight but he had a lovely wife and came from a very good family but quiet not where he usually was, he was a dream to know, really he was. Very cordial, very southern like gentlemen, hi, how are you today? That kind of an individual. Now Owen D. Pelt was a former pastor of a church in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]. I'm trying to remember the name of the church. He didn't serve but a few terms. I think one term he served and did not give up his church but he died around the time he was going back for his second election but he was a reverend--he was a pastor in a big church in Englewood, Racine Avenue in about 65th [Street]. The church is still there but he was a very young man and his death, of course, was a very much of a shock to those persons. I know you see--I see you've got Raymond Ewell. That's my buddy. Bless him. You know about Harold [Washington]. Louis H. Caldwell, Louis H. Caldwell was a very super duper individual for books and the intelligence. I read a book that he wrote about the history of policies if you ever want to read it, how it came about and he was a father really of the [Illinois] Lottery now that's in the State of Illinois. He was trying to get policy recognized and somewhat legalized during his tenure there. But I've always contented and this is an Ethel contentment that they took what he had put down in black and white of the history of policy and how it worked; modified it; changed it; and today's lottery is because of that action that he had had. But he was never able to pass the legislation. He was a writer, he was a publisher. I think he published one of the little local newspapers here in Chicago. Yes. His son-in-law was my best friend's son, the Caldwells and his daughter, she was a Caldwell and married a Caldwell. So she never changed her name but they were a lovely family to be a part of. [Taylor] Pouncey did nothing. Taylor did nothing that Jim [James] Taylor did not tell him to do. He came out of the same organization and Pouncey--Taylor took Jim Taylor, who was his committeeman and his boss to be the Lord, God almighty reincarnated here on earth. In fact, when Jim Taylor lost the election and was being put down, I never will forget it and Pouncey won his election, Taylor came in to the Springfield scene. Pouncey retired, terminated before that session started to give his seat up and back to James Taylor and the core went down to the limits of the Black Caucus and the minority group, Jim Taylor's back, Jim Taylor's back. And he put a call in, Jim Taylor did to all of us to come and see him and to let us know that he had indeed taken the seat that Pouncey had won in the election and that he'd been sworn in and that he was now back in the scene. No one saw Pouncey leave from down there. It was just like he never existed. I don't know if it was planned that way or what when they went into Springfield that week that Pouncey would come in, terminate his seat, have his stuff all packed and gone out the front door or the back door but he never came back into the political scenery again and Jim Taylor, of course, stayed there at that seat. It was a little hard feeling there for a while among many of us of the black minority because we felt that he should not have asserted that kind of power over Pouncey at that time and I sat beside Pouncey for about four years and if you ever wanted anything to eat you went to Pouncey Taylor's desk. In the draw you could find anything of all kind of food in that drawn. It was just like going to a deli because Pouncey loved to eat. Story_ID: 2422 Speaker 1: And there was a section in the [Illinois] General Assembly called 'Catfish Row'. You've heard about it haven't you? Who told you about Catfish Row. Speaker 2: Actually a lot of people. Speaker 1: I sat on Catfish Row. It was a row that you never could imagine even existed. You had one legislator, he would come in sign in, go out, come back, prop his feet up on the desk. At that time the seating arrangement extended all the way back underneath the balcony. So anybody sitting up front could not see you back underneath the balcony. And one of them would go out early in the morning and come back, hey, how you doing? Fine. Prop his feet up on the desk and his Colombian Gold would take over and he would stretch out and like somebody dead--go to talking about cutting off hands and stuff. It was a trip, Catfish Row was. Then we had the Bill Henry sit beside me and Bill and I knew each other from 26th Street [Circuit Court of Cook County, Criminal Division, Chicago, Illinois]. Had known each other for years and years, of course, and he came down to take [James] McClendon's place. It was a shock because I just never saw him or really deal with Bill being in the scenery because Bill was a big joker but he had other ulterior motives at all times and I can remember one time when a piece of legislation was coming up and he said, "I'm going to vote for this, are you going to vote?" And I said, "You can't vote for that." "But I'm going to vote for it." "Oh, no you're not. I'll tell you what I'm going to do, if you put your hand on this switch to vote, I'm going to wrap my leg around your leg and holler rape and I'm going to start screaming that you've got your hand under my dress." "Ethel, you wouldn't do that would you?" I said, "Watch me." And that the only way I kept him from letting that piece of legislature bomb out. I raised my leg up. "Don't do that Ethel, don't do that." "I'm going to do it. You cannot vote on that legislation." And he'd tell me, "You're crazy, you're crazy." And I said, "Well I'm just going to be crazy today but you're not voting on that piece of legislation." And then there was a time when a big piece of legislation came down the pipe called the Tort Liability Insurance [Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act] and lawyers and doctors from around the world, I think, was up in there. They jetted them in there and set the down all over and brought them in these limousines and we were supposed to vote and the gallery was packed and the whole--just a big piece of legislation. I mean, major. No one had spoken to the Black Caucus members. Now we had made up our minds with my red flag, that we were not bidding on it. And I can remember that it was a very silent moment and my name being Alexander, I was the first one to vote always. I really was to set the tone. So when they called my name, I passed. Present, hit the present button. To a man as they went down the roll call all the blacks voted present. Way in the north corner in the galley was a group sitting. I never will know if they were lawyers or if they were doctors or who they were, lobbyists or what but they were not from the Springfield [Illinois] scene. One of them unbeknownst that he spoken out loud started hollering "The blacks have jumped the ship. The black have jumped the ship." Well all of us started looking at each other saying what ship is he talking about? Carol [Moseley Braun] looked at me, we turned around and looked at each other. Then it dawned on us, we were supposed to have been on that ship but we related to that slavery mentality and we hit the floor running to the man in the back. By this time the man who had hollered they sat him down and quieted him down, he'd come out of the balcony and was running down the back to the back of the chambers and we we're running to the back of the chambers to trying to find out what they were talking about and at that time the man who we felt was responsible supposedly we never did find out, for selling us or promising our vote. I remember grabbing him in his chest and hanging on his tie and he turned red and I just kept swinging by that tie. Pouncey [Taylor] grabbed me. Both of them grabbed me. I was going to try to kill him. I was just that angry that someone in that chamber would be that vocal about the blacks have jumped the ship. I remember we to a man went into the conference room and called home to Harold Washington, Mayor Washington. He was the Mayor [of Chicago, Illinois] at this time, and to the man we told him how we felt about what had taken place down there and that we did not like it that when the governmental persons who were working there under him had apparently or perhaps had sold our vote and we knew nothing about it and he did, bless him, really upbraid the person who was responsible and they changed the governmental leadership down there following that incident, what had happened. There's been some bitter scenes down there. We've been in fights. Story_ID: 2423 Speaker 1: A lot of people here in Chicago [Illinois] don't appreciate the Illinois General Assembly's work down there and I want you to address this issue of why that body is so important for the black coomunity? Speaker 2: The General Assembly is important to all people and especially to the black community or persons who have a need to upbraid--upgrade themselves around laws that will help them to move into the mainstream. No information really comes out of the Springfield [Illinois] scene back into our districts other than that that we bring back via newsletters maybe once or twice a year. You can't tell it all what had happened. We are a minority even in a majority party. Let us say that the Democrat like in the [Illinois] House of Representatives, they are in the minority but we are--they are in the majority and we are in the minority there because we do not have enough of us there to actually pass legislation that is meaningful to our communities. I'm looking at a piece of legislation now that Mary E. Flowers has out there on the gender situation. When I first saw it in the paper the other day I was just elated because what she is saying is that if the HMO's [health maintenance organizations] and the health companies will pay for Viagra and we've heard it, for our male counterparts they likewise should pay for birth control pills for the females. I'm hoping that it does pass and get out so that it can be fully aired. But had it not been for such a controversial subject, her efforts or whatever she was trying to do not only for women period or for her community would never reach back into her community. Many beautiful pieces of legislation have gone down the tubes like legislation saying you may come into my community. You may establish yourself into my community but you must do a two mile or two block perimeter in my community to the constituency there to tell them what you're about. You must also accept a community representative into your fold to bring back into our community what you're doing because a lot of the places end up being dope dens or things that are really detrimental to our community. We couldn't get that kind of legislation passed for nothing. Then there's other pieces of legislation that they don't get credit for which they should. When we deal with the disbursement of budgetarial money. The money is budgeted out to fix this or to fix that. Now when it hits the City of Chicago it is now passed through the City Council and the final phaseology of it is by the City Council. So the alderperson, the alderwoman takes credit for having done an issue. Got the street paved. Fixed that, fixed that when it initially came out of the General Assembly via the fight there to get the budgetarial money back to the city so the city could use it or whatever not. Senator Brookins had a hard time getting some money for the DuSable Museum [of African American History]. The money lay dormant. We approved it. Got it out and it just kept laying and every time he'd make an inquiry about it; oh, we're going to move it, we're going to move it prior to them building the new auditorium [Illinois Black Legislator's Auditorium] that's now over there. The people don't realize that the money initially came out of Springfield. It did not come out of the City Council where it sit for a little while and a little while and a little while and then was appropriated for the construction of the new, I think it's a 500 seat auditorium at the DuSable Museum. So it's important that our constituency learn or attempt to learn what that body is about. We would have more strength is that is so. I resented the fact that on high dates or high pieces of legislation group--pressure groups with a load of people out of my communities and the other person's communities on the minorities, bringing damn buses and give them a jelly sandwich on route, all day long they'd walk around. No place to sit. No place to really eat. Calling themselves lobbyist and I would always ask them, "What are you down here for?" "I don't know. They just told us to come on down here." They did not explain to the persons they had brought down why they were there and how to effectively lobby and I'd say to them, many of them I'd get them in a group and I'd said, "Don't lobby me on this subject matter. You go over and lobby my counterpart, my legislators on the other expression who are going to vote against this. You don't have to come to me. I'm already on your boat. I'm all ready eating the pie you just baked. I'm with you. Here." And I'd give them a list of names of legislators to go and see. Story_ID: 2424 Speaker 1: Give the history of blacks who served in the Illinois General Assembly. Speaker 2: Pioneers in struggle? Speaker 1: Pioneers in the struggle. Speaker 2: It means that the pioneer person that had been designated or assumed that title will do anything and everything that they possibly can do for the survival of what the struggle may be. It may be the struggle for health care. It may be a struggle for children for children to get proper care. It may be the struggle for proper schooling. That person who assumes that title of being the forging pioneer will go to the depth to try to get it done and any shape, form or fashion. You know, I was in a train wreck going down to get some school money during the [Chicago, Mayor] Jane Byrne year and the train turned over just outside of well, I guess we were half way to Springfield [Illinois]. They had ordered us, all the committeewomen, to get on this train and go to Springfield to lobby for funds. Story_ID: 2425 Speaker 1: I want to know what you think the importance of the Black Caucus is? Speaker 2: The Illinois Black Caucus purpose was to come together in solidarity to review, to write, to review, to write, to seek the passage of legislation that was meaningful to our constituents at home and to other persons within the State of Illinois. We didn't just try to pass what we thought of as black legislation. Legislation for people, period--that was good. Maybe it might have had a big price tag on it but if it was good we wanted to see it passed and in order for us to get legislation passed sometimes we had to give up or appear to have deserted other causes in order to get the vote on the things we felt we must have in order for our people to survive, but sometimes we've been called, you didn't vote on this, you didn't vote on like the threats we were given. Don't come home without it and that kind of situation. But once you can get into a meeting or setting with some of the main leaders of those movements, don't come home without a movement and explain your position to them and hear their reason for wanting it. Sometimes you can come to a compromisable state and you can work through it. But sometimes you really--you're at a deadlock. You don't know whether to go or not to go or what to do or not to do. It's really serious. Story_ID: 2426 Speaker 1: And what do you think when you look over the history as you know it of blacks who served the Illinois General Assembly and what do you think of that legacy and what are your hopes for the future? Speaker 2: Well I'll say this, to my best remembrance there perhaps everyone who came down came down with the hope of doing something better for people. There were some who served there that never tempted to pass a piece of legislation whether out of fear or did not know how. They just didn't. Then there were those who would listen to anyone coming to them just to have a whole lot of matters behind their name at the end of a session which had no meaningful meaning to anybody other than oh, let's use myself as an example. Oh, she introduced fifty pieces of legislation but out of that fifty how many was I able to negotiate through the stream of legislation and get it passed? But I have a big long list at the end of the year which will make it appear like I'm doing a lot of work when really in reality I'm just putting my name out there. Maybe I'll get one out of fifty, knowing all the time that I can't pass it. Then there are persons who come to you especially the lobbyists and you say right away, I don't want to have any parts of that. Well will you speak against it? I'll have to think about it. Or I'm going to speak against it or I'm going to speak for it. Like I had the opportunity to speak against destroying the registry of women that have taken the drugs Stilbestrol which caused deformity and cancer in women and I had taken the drug many, many, many years ago and I don't know whatever reason I had kept the last vial of the bottle in my drawer and so when the legislation came up to get rid of the registry because there had been several suits brought against the drug company, large amounts of money. One woman won in California and New York and they were afraid that if women became aware of the danger of this drug there would be besieged with suits, so they were trying to destroy the registry at that time and I remember going home and rambling through my junk. I'm a pack rat and pulling out this vial that I had taken the drugs and bringing to me and the next time the lobbyists came in to address the subject matter to me, I handed them my vial. I said, "I cannot speak in favor of your legislation because it will affect a generation of women, white and black could be medically hurt by the destroying of this registrations of this drug. And I said I'm not trying to hurt you; I'm just trying to prepare for a future date if something should go wrong." Several cancers, but it did not affect the person who took the medicine; it affected the offsprings, the children of the person who took the medicines. Story_ID: 2427 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: My legacy I would want it to be that I have tried to be a part of the struggle. I have tried to be a friend to those who wanted me to be a friend. There some persons you cannot be friends with. You may respect them but you cannot be friends with them because they're going down a different path. I would want to be remembered for whatever I have spoken that it could be taken to be 100 percent, 99 percent truth. That I will not color what has been said. I may say it harshly but it's not coming out of a harsh spirit it's just coming out and maybe I should learn how to temper the presentation of some of the things that I say. I would like to see the awareness both of all people that there is better things ahead if we would only come together and perform it and do it together and that don't look at the color of my skin, look at what I'm able to do for you or you're able to do for me or what we're able to do for others as we go through our life stream and I think that's about all I can say and to love everybody if they let me. (laughs).