 Story_ID: 83001 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am could state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Carol, C-A-R-O-L, L middle initial, Adams, A-D-A-M-S. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born May 11, 1944, in Louisville, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Alright. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a human services administrator and an applied sociologist. Speaker 1: Scott Stearns: Okay. I'm sorry, Ma'am, one more adjustment. If you could again move your chair a little more to the left. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Scott Stearns: Even a little bit... let me move this a little bit more. Speaker 2: Okay, because I don't have-- Speaker 1: Scott Stearns: Yeah, that's perfect, okay. Thank you. We have a narrow background range to work with. Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. And what is today's date? Speaker 1: You should tell me that; I have no idea. I imagine April 7th, is it? Today is April 7, 2003. Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: At The HistoryMakers studio in Chicago, Illinois. Story_ID: 83002 Speaker 1: Alright. Now, before we get into depth, there are five People Magazine-ish type questions I'm compelled to ask you. They just require a brief answer. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: The first one is, Ma'am, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: I don't even have a favorite food. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a short answer. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Alright. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes. The favorite time of the year for me is the fall. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is Brazil. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "Let's cut to the chase." Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 83003 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about your family history. How far can you trace your family back? How far can you go? Speaker 2: Really grandparents, great-grandparents. I can't trace back very far. I know on my father's side the story about the Adams's who migrated from Louisiana to Kentucky so that they could homestead. And there were four Adams men who came up from Louisiana. They came to Kentucky, and they met four Williams sisters. And the four brothers married the four sisters. Speaker 1: That's incredible. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Yes. And in the country, in Louisville, there's still the old site. Some of the Williams's descendants have built some homes on the old land there. There's a cemetery, and things like that. I can trace some of them, because then some of their sons went to the War. So history of them exists in terms of the War, you know, World War II and what have you. And I had a great-uncle, Clarence, who was with Teddy Roosevelt and the Rough Riders, and the San Juan Hill, and all of that. On my mother's side of the family, the Knoxes, I know much less, only to her grandfather, although I have pictures of great and great-great-grandmothers. They were apparently people who worked for wealthy people. They seemed to have been, you know, various kinds of chauffeurs and things like that back in the old days, in the post-slavery era. My grandfather, in fact, Milton--that I did remember in Kentucky--still lived in the coach house behind some people that he had worked for until his death, even though he had not worked for years. My father... [William Clarence Adams] I'm getting back to the Adams's, because I know more about them. He and my uncle went to Tuskegee Institute [now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama]. And that was sort of a groundbreaking thing, in that they were, you know, just a couple of generations out of slavery and they went to college. They were there when George Washington Carver was there. They went because there was no black college in Kentucky, which meant that they applied to go the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky]. And the state of Kentucky said that they would pay their way to go to a Negro college rather than to let them go to the University of Kentucky. And so, they paid their way to go to Tuskegee. My father only stayed there for a year, because he said you could not make any money there. And he had been an entrepreneur since he was a boy. And he had started selling newspapers and getting bigger and more territory, until all of black Louisville was under his control, in terms of newspapers. So, he made a lot of money. He bought his first house at fifteen years old. So, to go away to college and not have any money... he said to his brother, "Both of us can't stay here." They were the only children, and their parents were dead by then. He said, "Both of us can't stay here. One of us has got to go and make money to send to the other. Because you can't be here... we can't be here without any money." So, my father returned to Louisville to back up his territory and pay... and send money to his brother who subsequently did graduate from Tuskegee. They were both mechanical engineering and mechanical drawing majors. And they went on to buy and develop property, and do other things like that. They were both major athletes in the city. My father was known for his athletic ability, and they both coached. My uncle became the coach at the, what was then called the colored high school in Louisville, Central High School. And my father did that as his volunteer work in the community at the Hope Presbyterian Center, which was a settlement house... kind of community place... where every day after his work and his enterprises, he coached. And that was his real love, to work with boys and work to develop. And we stayed in the community where my father and his brother had come up. That was a major point with him--that you didn't... as you prospered, you didn't leave your community. You stayed in your community, so that you could help it prosper as well--so you could devote your time, your volunteering and all those things to your community. It was a major lesson that I learned from him. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was your father's name, and can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: William Clarence Adams. Speaker 1: And when was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in 1905. Speaker 1: Okay. And was he born in Louisville? Speaker 2: Yes, he was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But see, his father was one of the ones that came... so he was born in Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 83004 Speaker 1: My mother was [born in Kentucky], as well. But she was born in a place called Henderson, Kentucky. Speaker 2: What was her full name, and when was she born? Speaker 1: Her name was Laura Elizabeth Knox. She was born five years later, 1910, November 23rd, in Henderson, Kentucky. She was the oldest of seven children. She went probably to the seventh or eighth grade. She and my father met in grammar school, okay. And they married when he came back from college. She had to quit school, because she was the oldest of seven. And when her mom died, there was no one else. You know, the father of the younger children had died as well. Her mama had been divorced once, and he was somewhere else. So, she had to quit to be the head of the household, which is what people did in those days, and went to... You know, everybody else went to school. She was a brilliant, absolutely brilliant woman, and had the kind of education... because she'd had a classical education that even when we were in college, she could help us with our work. Perfect grammar, great writer, great thinker, you know. And the younger of the seven children, she was able to send them, with my father's help, to college. But she was one of those brilliant homemakers that could do absolutely everything--you know, make your clothes... do this, do that. She could do it all. Story_ID: 83005 Speaker 1: Okay. I want to backtrack a little bit to the ancestors. Are there any stories that come down from slavery times, or--? Speaker 2: No. We have absolutely no stories about that, no memories of that. The only story I know about my paternal grandfather was the circumstance of his death, which is a story that we hear often in the black community. But he worked on the roads, and would build these actual streets and thoroughfares in Louisville [Kentucky]. And he was one of the laborers on that job. And something fell on him, and he got hurt. And they were outside of a hospital, but it was a white hospital. So, by the time that they got him to a hospital that would take him, he had lost so much blood that he died. And I think that that was a very pivotal point for my father [William Clarence Adams], for his uncle, in terms of their views and what they saw as significant--how they felt as African-Americans. Story_ID: 83006 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell me about your childhood. Give me, kind of reflect back and give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of-- Speaker 2: Oh, wow. I had a wonderful childhood. I was the last of the children of a particular era. There's ten years between me and my next sister. And my father's brother, their kids were older. So, no one expected a baby that much later, which meant I came along after the really rough times were over, when my father [William Clarence Adams] was fairly prosperous and doing well. My oldest sisters had been to college. He and his brother were just so close that they reared us almost together. The brother had the sons, and my dad had the daughters. And they were even older, the sons. And they had also gone to Tuskegee [University in Tuskegee, Alabama]. They believed that the men should go to Tuskegee, because it taught you how to build your own home and to do for yourself. And that was a very important thing to them. They thought that we should have a more gentile kind of experience. And my father was very proud of the fact that we could have piano lessons, and violin, and this and that, and so forth. And my oldest sister had majored in music in college, so they expected that I would major in music, too. I mean, my father didn't really, I think, ever stop to realize that I was not a piano prodigy--you know, that I really wasn't... that wasn't the thing. I was never going to... I could play the piano, but that was just it, right? But he, if he came home from work and he asked me to play something for him, he would act like [Sergei] Rachmaninoff himself was playing; you got that much praise from him about what you were doing. We lived in a close community, in a section I considered was in the rich or even the middle class section of Louisville [Kentucky]. It was the section called Smoketown, and that's where my folks were from. And that's where we stayed, in Smoketown. That's where we went to church, that's where we did everything. An awful lot of my spare time revolved around things that happened at our church. It was part of a series of Presbyterian community centers. The Presbyterians had been, had set up lots of missionary places in Africa, and then they determined to set up some similar places in depressed southern communities. And my father and his brother had been part of that, coming up. So, he credited it with having had a lot to do with the person that he became. So, he always did volunteer work there up until his death. And in fact, when my father had his first stroke at about eighty or so, he was coaching the baseball game out in the hot sun in the playground at the Grace Hope Presbyterian Center. It was very important to him. So, we had a great life--full of all kinds of activities... and sports activities, and music, and various things like that. Story_ID: 83007 Speaker 1: We went to, you know, we went to Booker T. Washington Elementary School [in Louisville, Kentucky] and Jackson Junior High School, which is now named Meyzeek, after a famous black educator [Albert Ernest Meyzeek]. And when it was time for high school, I went to the same high school that my parents [William Clarence Adams and Laura Elizabeth Knox] went to, and that was a very significant thing. In elementary school I had actually had... there were actually still a couple of teachers who had taught my parents. They lived in the neighborhood--across the street, down the street, all around. It just made all the difference in the world, you know, in the sense of community that we had. Speaker 2: Now you went to, was it Central High School? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Right. And by that time, schools were integrating in Louisville. And it really was not the closest high school to me. And my friends were going to all different schools. But I had all of my life wanted to go to the famous Central High School. And I said nothing was going to keep me from doing it. And all my life I had gone to their games, because my uncle had been the coach. I'd gone to everything. My older sisters... everyone had been to that school. And so I went, even though I rode the bus and went past a couple of schools. And I had a great experience there. Speaker 2: Okay. Let me go back to grade school. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington Elementary School. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, how did you like school? Speaker 1: I loved it. I always loved it. Again, as the youngest, I always watched the oldest do their work--get ready, do things and so forth. So, I couldn't wait to get a chance to go to school. And my oldest sister used to teach me various things. So, the day that I was to go to school for the first day... the junior high was right next door to the elementary school. My mother didn't take me to school that first day; my sister took me. And because she had been teaching me things at home, she decided that I shouldn't go to the kindergarten. And so, she put my age up and put me in the first grade. And I started school at five years old in the first grade. By the time they found out that that really wasn't my birthday, and were tempted to put me into kindergarten, my teacher said that I was the head of the class, so there was no need to put me back into kindergarten. But all that really happened was my oldest sister, I think, sort of playing teacher... and practicing and practicing things with me. And I always wanted to be with them. I thought I was really cheated by the fact that they were a year apart, and that all these years later I came along. So, as was much of what they did that I could mimic, I would do, which is also why I started the piano lessons at five. Because every time the teacher would come to give her her lesson, I would just be right there. And so, then she started giving me a little mini lesson after. And then I started being a full-blown student, as well as my sister. Story_ID: 83008 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you come from... from what you say, you come from a very proactive, independent family. Speaker 2: Very much so, very active. My father [William Clarence Adams] was what they used to call a race man. And a number of relatives in my family were known for their activism, for their oratory, for their involvement in causes. He was an investor in the first black bank in Kentucky. Things like that were very important. Again, that whole philosophy of self-sufficiency was important to him. And he always was entrepreneurial, always had a business of some kind, because he felt that you needed to be in your own economic control. And in fact, when he got his first real white collar job, it came about because the Louisville Times and [Louisville] Courier-Journal [Louisville, Kentucky] were owned by what was considered a liberal family, the Binghams. [George] Barry Bingham [Sr.], in fact, was an Ambassador at one point to England. And they determined that they needed to integrate the staff there. Well, my father had been their circulation manager. By then he's all the way up to that--from the newsboy to the territory, to this, to that, to being the circulation manager. But he was the circulation manager in the office located in the black community--just a little house--like not in the big corporate offices. So, they decided that they wanted to integrate, and make him the sort of assistant circulation manager for the paper in general at the, in the corporate office. I always felt that they probably said as they did in the South--you know, they tend to look for their own. They don't tend to look outside or recruit from here or there. So, I think they said, "Well, you know, Clarence went to college. He should come on. You know, let's give him the opportunity." There was a lot of discussion about it in my household, because my mother [Laura Elizabeth Knox] thought it was wonderful. She was very proud. She wanted him to have that great office, and be the first black man in some kind of capacity like that for a major newspaper. My father was appalled. He didn't want the job, because it was a salaried position. And he liked to be able to make a commission, to make the money based on how much work you did. And it really was going to constitute less money for him. And that was more important to him than to have the job where now you made a certain amount a week, no matter what. You know, you weren't paid by the volume, the production. But she was able to convince him, and of course, it was a great thing. It led to a lot of other things. And since he still kept buying property, and building in real estate, and opening up one business or another, then I don't think he suffered anything from it economically. But you know, he was a bit of a chauvinist when it came to that. So, there wasn't a lot of discussion around the house about a business when he was getting ready to go into a business. Those discussions were between he and his brother, because they always did these things together. And there was a running joke around our house--that the only way you could know if Daddy had a new business was by somebody calling up on the phone saying, "Is this Mr. Adams that owns the cleaners at 18th and so and so." And then we'd say, "Daddy, we got a cleaners." (Laughter). He just felt, "Look, this is my business. As long as I take care of all of you all, it's alright." I think if he had had sons, it would have been different. But he thought he could take care of his wife and his daughters... he could send everybody to school. He could send the extended family members as well. It was a source of great pride to him, that he could do this. Story_ID: 83009 Speaker 1: Now, did you have any, any other role models in the classroom? Did any of your teachers stand out as people that helped develop you? Speaker 2: Not particularly, in terms of like a female role model for what I wanted to be. I had one teacher, Lyman T. [Tefft] Johnson, who was very, very famous in Kentucky, who was my role model in terms of activism. He was always out there promoting and demonstrating and working on legislation, and doing various things that had to do with the rights of black people. And I had Civics from him. And when you had Civics from Lyman T. Johnson, you learned everything that had to do with black people, which was absolutely uncommon in that day. He taught you everything else, but you would know every single decision that had ever been named in the Supreme Court or elsewhere that had to do with black people. You know, we knew Plessy v. Ferguson, Sweatt v. Painter... all these things. In the state of Kentucky he was often the person involved in those suits, because he was always going for public accommodations, going to get in the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky], and all of those kinds of things--and he would sue. So, I think that he was very much an influence for me, in terms of looking at who we were and what we ought to do, what we ought to do about it, those kinds of things. I think the other thing in high school [Central High School in Louisville, Kentucky] is my peers were significant role models for me. And when I went to high school, it was the first time I ran into a considerable number of other young people who really liked to study and who really liked to work, and were really smart and bright, and did things. Because I was competitive, it brought me up to another standard. I mean, I can remember so well that I was a voracious reader, but I never read the newspaper. I went to high school and I found out that the kids in my class, they read the paper every day before they came to school. I said, "I thought just grown-ups read the paper. I don't read..." You know, just little things like that I can remember. And I remember that I was all the sudden in a class with some really, really smart kids. And we competed with each other, because we had all been the smart kids from whatever school we came from. And so then here we all were here together, and we were very competitive, and at the same time very supportive of each other. And it was an excellent place in which to prepare me for college. I also had an English teacher--I must remember her, Mrs. Lauderdale, who has absolutely influenced everything about my work from that day to this. Because she insisted on me being an excellent writer. And she would have us, once or twice a week extemporaneously write five hundred word essays, so that you got to the point where writing was second nature to you. And I had her for two years. And I used to wonder why at the spring breaks in the summer when kids were coming home from college, kids would always come and visit her, always come to thank her. I didn't really realize why until I went to college and got in my first, my freshman English course. And the professor said she wanted to gauge people's writing ability, and would everyone just write her five hundred words. I couldn't believe it. I said, "What fortune. Did she talk to Mrs. Lauderdale? How did she know I could whip out five hundred words? I know what they look like. I don't have to count them, I don't have to do anything." The kids in the class were petrified. They were like, "Five hundred words?" It sounded like a lot to them. You know, they didn't know about making the little outline first, and going straight on through and be through writing. So, they just studied trying to write. And they started trying to count the words as they wrote, and go back and count, and all those kinds of things. It was a very tough professor. And when my "homies," as they used to call people from the hometown that went to the same college--when they found out I had her, they said, "Well, why didn't you ask somebody?" Her name was Miss Savage, and they said that's exactly what she was when it came to grading your work. They said, "You should have talked to us, because nobody takes her if they can help it." And sure enough, the next day when she came in, the next time the class met to discuss those papers, she savagely attacked the class about how ill-prepared they were for college, how poor their work was because they couldn't write five hundred words, and that there was only one person in the class that even vaguely knew how to do it, and how to approach it. And I'm just sitting there about to die, because I'm saying, "Oh, my God." You know, "I didn't do it. I didn't do this... I didn't do that." And because every time I reached another level, I always was wondering, "Am I still going to be able to do the work at the level that I think?" And so, I had no confidence yet about college work. And I was the one student that had made the A. And I went back to see Miss Lauderdale at the break, too, because she was the reason why. Story_ID: 83010 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you were in high school, what, what... what did you do in terms of activities, you know? Speaker 2: Everything. Louisville [Kentucky] Central High School was the only so-called "black school." And since it had been built to accommodate all the black students, it had various tracks. You could be in the college prep; you could be in the trade, like tailoring and this; you could be in automotive; you could be in a lot of different things. It was a new school. The old Central that my parents and everything went to... my oldest sister graduated from there. My next sister was in the first class to graduate from the new building, and I was in that building. And they had everything, because they intended for you not to have to go anywhere else. And I was active in everything in school--in the Student Council, in the National Honor Society. And whatever they had, I was in it. You know, I sang in the choir in the women's chorus called the Denalls [ph.]. And my sister had done that before me. I sort of knew what I wanted to do when I went there, based on the things that my sisters had done when they were there. I knew all about Central. And so, I didn't have any of the shyness that you may often have when you first come into high school. I just, I had been trying to be there all of my life. Speaker 1: Okay, so you got right in the mix? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And see, I went to all the games all my life, and everything. It's the kind of place where the black ballgames... the whole town went to. When I was coming up, the so-called colored schools were part of a national Negro League. And they would go... I can remember when Central won the nationals. You know, and they would play all around. I have programs from football when we'd have our Thanksgiving Football Classic. We played Wendell Phillips [High School] from Chicago [Illinois]. We played Pearl High School from Nashville [Tennessee]. We played somewhere else, from Memphis [Tennessee] and so forth. The black high schools had a circuit that would remind you of colleges. Because they were often the only school in the town, and they couldn't play anyone else. Story_ID: 83129 Speaker 1: So, when you were on the verge of graduating from high school [Central High School in Louisville, Kentucky], did you know exactly where you wanted to go? Speaker 2: Well, let me say something about being on the verge of graduating from high school. By this time I had gotten involved in the Civil Rights Movement, and we were doing a lot of demonstrating. And the response had not been good. And so, we decided that we were going to boycott downtown... that we were not going to do any shopping. This started before Easter which was a big shopping time. And-- Speaker 1: Now, this is 1962, I guess? Speaker 2: I graduated from high school in '61' [1961]. Speaker 1: Sixty-One? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, so that's when this was happening. So, we boycotted the stores, and it lasted through Easter until it was time to graduate. It was time to get all your things for graduation. We were still boycotting. My mother [Laura Elizabeth Knox] put me on a Greyhound bus, and we went to Indianapolis [Indiana]. And we bought the things I would need to graduate in Indianapolis, so as not to shop and break the boycott in Louisville [Kentucky]. I wanted to choose my own college. So, even though my folks would have wanted me to go to Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee], and my father [William Clarence Adams] wanted me to go to Fisk and be a music major like my sister had been, I felt like I needed to choose someplace different. My mother always made a big thing out of the fact that we could choose what we wanted. So, all of us went to different churches. And one sister went to Fisk, the other went to Hampton [University in Hampton, Virginia]. So, I said "Okay, I'm going somewhere different," and I decided to go to Lincoln University in Jefferson City, Missouri. Cause I wanted to be a lawyer, and they had a pre-law curriculum, and it sounded like a place that I would enjoy. And so, I went there my freshman year. I was the only female from Louisville there. There was about thirteen guys, all of whom had been sent there by my father or my uncle. Because the coach there was from Kentucky, and they had been coaches together, and they would send him athletes. So, I was very protected and well-looked after, but I didn't like the school at all. And I didn't like their stance. I didn't understand at that point the difference between a state school and a private school, and it was a state school. And when the demonstrations and things started happening there, he put the kids out, okay. And there were riots and things that happened at school, because the students were disappointed that this first group of students... and I wasn't in that group yet. Because my mother had said, "Please go to school, and don't get locked up all the time like you did in high school." So, I hadn't gotten involved yet, but I was outraged by the fact that he put the students out of school. And-- Speaker 1: This is the president? Speaker 2: The president of Lincoln University. And then they locked us in the room and tried to get us to tell--when the riot happened in the dormitory--who did it. They said they weren't going to let us out until we told who it was, and all that kind of stuff. So, I called my mother that night, and I said, "I'm just unhappy. I have to come home, I can't stay here." And school was almost out. And she said, "If you just please stay," she said, "You need to finish. Don't let all of this work be for nothing that you have already done. It's just a few weeks, so stick it out, and then next year you can go wherever you want to go." And sticking it out was really very difficult, because they hired people from the town to be monitors in the hallway. And when you got in the room, you're not supposed to come out of your room after twelve o'clock and all that. It was like a major lockdown, you know. And this was one of those old Negro presidents that would give money back to the state at the end of the year, rather than invest it in the college. So-- Story_ID: 83130 Speaker 1: I left there [Lincoln University in Jefferson City, Missouri], and the next year [fall of 1962] I went to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], and that was the best thing I ever did. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: It was a wonderful place with wonderful people. Arna Bontemps was one of my teachers, you know. Robert Hayden, Aaron Douglas... it was magical to be around people like that, to be able to have them for your professors. I stayed in the dorm where [W.E.B.] DuBois stayed, you know, and that kind of thing. And when we got involved in the demonstrations--as we did--and got arrested as we did--the school came and helped you and supported you, and brought you work... did this, did that. You know, they supported us in our activism, rather than put us out or punish us for it. It had so much history, so many magical things--the Jubilee Singers, everything. I just loved it, and I'm a devoted Fisk alumni. It was a marvelous experience. And there were people of African descent from other places in the world, you know, from the Caribbean and from Africa, and an International Student Center. So you were able to find out... I was able to learn some things that I'd never known before about Africa and about the changes, the political changes, that were happening as countries were moving toward their liberation. I could meet students who could tell us what that was really like, because we had absolutely no idea of anything about Africa. I had learned about the history of African-Americans from being a student of Lyman T. Johnson. But I didn't learn anything about Africa until I went to Fisk. Speaker 2: And that was at the time when a lot of the countries were gaining independence. Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 2: Yeah, that... so you took advantage of those international-- Speaker 1: Yes, I did. Speaker 2: --opportunities. Speaker 1: Yes, I did. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I would go--and a lot of students didn't. My roommate and I were consistently at the International Student Center. They showed films and everything on the weekends, and they were what they called foreign films, with the sub-titles and all that. And we would go and get a chance to meet and talk... and talk with the students, you know, about such things as The Battle of Algiers [directed by Gillo Pontecorvo], and what have you. Story_ID: 83131 Speaker 1: Now, were any of the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] activists still at Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee] when you were there--like [HM] James Bevel or Diane Nash, or any-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Any of them? Speaker 2: No, no, they were gone. We were with the wave that came after them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and there again, I really had pretty much decided in my head that I wasn't doing that anymore. I had already gotten to the point where I was not interested in integration. And it was a thing that my father [William Clarence Adams] and I used to always have a little back and forth about. Because he would say that he wouldn't demonstrate to go in somebody's place that didn't want them, and why would I demonstrate to go and spend my money with someone who did not want me in their place? Why didn't I just have my own place? So, I was moving more toward that when I was in college. And I had not planned to get actively involved in the demonstrations in Nashville. But one day I was on the campus, and they were getting ready to go to demonstrate. And it was only high school kids, and they were going to demonstrate during school time. So, they were having a meeting. [HM Reverend Dr.] C.T. Vivian was the one who was organizing, and he was having a meeting with them that afternoon. And it was going to be on the Fisk campus because the campus is in the heart of the African-American community, and people could always use it for meetings. And so, I decided just out of curiosity, just for old time's sake, to go to the meeting. I should have known better. I should have known once you go, you get caught up in it, right? I go to the meeting, it's all these high school kids. I stand up, and I say to C.T. Vivian, "I don't really think this is how this is supposed to go. I was in this when I was in high school, but we didn't go until after school. You can't miss school. The parents, the teachers there, and the other people won't support it. The students can't sustain a movement that involves them not going to school." He said, "Well, Miss Adams, the only reason the high school kids are going is because you college kids won't." And so, that was it for me, right? It was on. I couldn't stand up and have something to say and not be willing to go. And so I said, "Well, you know, I think that we will." I said, "I think that we just have to organize, and organize on the campus, and the college students will go." And so, I got involved in doing that organizing. And we took over going out, and then the high school students would come after school. And I rather promptly got arrested demonstrating out in front of the Morrison's Cafeteria in Nashville, Tennessee. And I had recruited all of my friends, many of whom were from the North--from Boston [Massachusetts] and from Detroit [Michigan], and all those places. And I had assured them all that we wouldn't get arrested--that we were just going to go and demonstrate, and it would all be cool, and we'd be back--which they reminded me of when they were loading us in those paddy wagons taking us to jail. So, we went to jail, and of course they let us out. You know, they didn't keep us; there wasn't any room for all of us. It was just to take you and scare you, or whatever. And we were... it didn't scare us at all, so we kept going. And we went to court right... the Friday before Mother's Day. Speaker 1: Now, this is-- Speaker 2: Nashville, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Is this '63' [1963]? Speaker 2: This is about '63' [1963] or '64' [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I graduated in '65' [1965]; it wasn't in my senior year. It was '63' [1963]... it was '63' [1963]. So, we go to court that day. And I remember when it was, because we stopped to get Mother's Day cards and things we wanted to send to our mothers. And I said... we took all our little bags and stuff with us to court, because we knew they were going to dismiss this. Because I had been arrested before in Louisville [Kentucky], and they always dismissed it. Story_ID: 83132 Speaker 1: And they had this prominent attorney, older black man named [Z. Alexander] Looby, who was representing us. We get to court, and they have already done the paperwork for us to go to jail, and the trial hadn't even started yet. So, Attorney Looby objected, and he said to the judge that it appeared as though they had already made up their mind, because all the paperwork was done for us to go jail, and we hadn't even had trial yet. And so, the judge said, "Are you trying to tell me how to run my court?" So, he said, "Oh, no, your Honor, I'm not trying to tell you how to run your court. But I find it unfair to these young people..." He said, "Listen, you know, you don't tell me what to do. We're a little short of help, and we figured it would save time if we just had all these things filled out ahead of time, because they're going to jail." So, he raised an objection again. And the judge said, "I find you in contempt of court. Ten dollars for each additional word you say." He opened his mouth to say something else, and the judge put down the gavel and sent him to jail along with us, okay. That was the probably the worst thing he could have done. Because the fence sitters--the more middle class people in the city--were shocked that they would send the venerable Attorney Looby to jail. They went berserk. They got him out that night, of course. But it got them all engaged and involved in this thing that had to do with us and the students. And because there were some places in Nashville that were integrated, I think some people had taken the position, "Well, just don't go here. Go to the one that you can go to." There wasn't a big uproar until that situation happened with Looby. Speaker 2: Right. So, what you're describing is a more protracted struggle than, I think, people who had been living there believed it was. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: Because [HM Reverend James] Bevel, and [Diane] Nash, and James Lawson, they started doing this in '60' [1960]... I guess '60' [1960], yeah. Speaker 1: Right, [HM] John Lewis. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, John Lewis. Speaker 1: The others... that's right. This stuff wasn't over with when they left. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They just did the hardest part, the part when it was more difficult, you know, when people were more stringently against you for demonstrating. I can say that we did not in the course of the demonstrations suffer some of the things that they did, nor some of the things that people did in Mississippi and places like that, where they'd put the dogs on you, or they'd put the water on you, like in Alabama. We didn't have that. A little jeering, you know, and then jail. And jail was segregated, and they really didn't have enough room. And part of the tactic was, of course, to refuse bond and stay in and crowd up the jail. So, we were in jail for about a week. It was really non-eventful on the women's side. But on the guy's side, it got kind of interesting, because they had some kind of interactions with the white prisoners. We did not. We were a small... they only had seven black women in jail until we got in there. And, you know, it was an experience to us. So, we didn't suffer greatly, you know. They were able... we were able to have visitors. The school... our teachers sent us our assignments. At first we couldn't have books, then they let us have books. And you know, we sort of were feeling like we were part of history. And so, we enjoyed it. Story_ID: 83133 Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, what else about Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee] you want to tell us about? Speaker 2: Um, the music. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The music. John [Wesley] Work [III]... his wife. [HM] Matthew Kennedy, who is still living today in 2003. The Jubilee Singers were just here. And he was here, and he did a guest... directing of us singing "The Gold and Blue," the Fisk song. I loved the music, because they took our traditional Negro Spirituals. John Work was the first person to transcribe many of them, and really to put pen to paper for that music. And they sang them in the old way as they still do, totally a capella, and they were beautiful. Going to chapel... all those old time rules that they had when I went to school that they would do well to have again. Because it provided you with so much safety, so much security. You were part of the family, they knew who you were. You know, they took "in loco parentis" very seriously. So, somebody looked out for you. You didn't just go to college and you're away from home for the first time and be able to stay out all night and go wherever you wanted to, and all of that. It didn't happen like that. They had certain expectations of you, and they helped you with it in case you weren't able to help yourself. Because you knew... it's a weeknight, and you needed to be in that dormitory by nine o'clock. You know, it was... those things were really very good. They helped us a lot in the long run. Also, I liked the fact that everybody knew you. People would know you. They knew who your mom was... who this, who that, all of those kind of things. You know, when I, when I graduated--well, yeah, that's the first time it happened to me. When I graduated, I was inducted into Phi Beta Kappa. You could bring one person with you, I think. And I decided to bring my oldest sister, because she had gone to Fisk. We went to the ceremony. The man who was responsible for the Chapter there--and my sister, mind you, had graduated ten years before. He looks around and says, "Muriel, what are you doing here?" She says, "My sister, Carol is being inducted." He said, "That's your sister?" So he called me, and right on the spot said, "How dare you. You didn't tell me you were Muriel's sister," blah, blah. Because they wanted to know; they keep up with everybody. They'd ask you, "How's this one?" "How's that one," and so forth, you know, in a sense of family. He said, "Why didn't you tell me?" I said, "It never occurred to me." And it really didn't. You know, it never occurred to me. But after I graduated, well, my sister's daughter was there, sister lives in Los Angeles [California], and that was too far for her to come to pin her daughter. So, she asked me if I would go, and I said yes. So, I go to her pinning ceremony. And those same two ladies, Mrs. Work and another lady who were the advisors when I was there--they were there. And they said, "Carol, what are you doing here?" And I said, "My niece Colette is on this line." And they called Colette and they said, "What do you mean, not telling us that Muriel is your mother and Carol is your aunt?" They put it all together. They remembered everybody. You know, you could go back to the reunion twenty-five years later, and they would call you by name. That's the magic of Fisk to me. Speaker 1: And that's certainly different from what, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --some of the experiences are in the big state schools. Speaker 2: Right, we would just be lost. We would just... they didn't intend for you not to do well... not at all. Story_ID: 83134 Speaker 1: Okay. So after graduating from Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee in 1965], you went to Boston? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went to Boston University [in Massachusetts]. At that time a certain relationship had begun to start between Fisk and Vanderbilt [University in Nashville, Tennessee]. The chairman of the sociology department at Fisk was a man named Masi Oka [ph.]. He was a Japanese man, who had been in the internment camps and all of that. And he had come to Nashville and became a professor there. And he engaged with an English professor named John Moogy [ph.] at Vanderbilt. And we did some things together... some research, some projects, some exchanges. Moogy [ph.] goes on to become the chairman of the sociology department at Boston University. He gets to Boston and he says, he calls back Masi Oka and says, "There are no black students in this department. Send me some of your best students." So, Masi Oka recommended me to him, and sent my information--my transcripts... my... everything. And the next thing I know, I'm selected to go to Boston University. I knew I wanted to go to graduate school, but I hadn't selected one yet. And that was a fine school, and the idea of being in Boston appealed to me. And so, I did that. And in the meantime, I got selected to be part of a summer program at Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut]. So, I was able to do both of those things. And while I was there at Yale I was able to find my apartment, those kind of things, and get situated for when I would start at BU in the fall. Twelve of us went, maybe thirteen, from that area--from Fisk to that area. Ten guys went to Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts], one woman went to Brandeis [University in Waltham, Massachusetts]; two of us went to BU. I should have been one of those ten that went to Harvard, in terms of my standing in my class. But Professor [Theodore S.] Currier said that only the guys should go, because the girls were just going to get married. So, (Laughter) they would... as I said, some of it was a little on the paternalistic side. And frankly, I did not think at that time that that was such a strange thing. You know, so I didn't protest or anything--I just went to BU. Speaker 1: Well, how did you like BU? Speaker 2: BU was okay. Boston, I hated it. It was not all that I expected. Out of all of that... all those places... all the universities and everything, I thought it was going to idyllic. Again, I liked the school. I had good professors at BU. But Boston itself was absolutely the most racist environment I had ever encountered. And I wasn't prepared for it. Because like people who had spent all of their lives in the South, we were expecting by the time we get in a place like that... some other kind of freedom that you never experienced, you know. Speaker 1: Boston is the home of the Kennedys. Speaker 2: Yeah, you think... all of those things, okay. And you don't think that you're going to end up with "Nigger, go home" signs pasted all over your door, and pictures of guns and rifles, and your neighbors telling you to go back where you came from, and all those things that happened to me when I was there. And because I was there virtually by myself, it was very frightening to me. Speaker 1: What neighborhood did you live in? Speaker 2: I lived in the Fenway area. I lived on a street called Hemingway across the street from Northeastern Illinois University. Because there was-- Speaker 1: In Massachusetts? Speaker 2: In Massachusetts. Did I say Northeastern Illinois? Speaker 1: You said Northeastern Illinois. Speaker 2: Northeastern University. Speaker 1: In Massachusetts? Speaker 2: In Mass... in Boston. It wasn't the BU neighborhood, but it was close enough. I could walk if I felt like a long walk, or I could take the streetcar and it wasn't very far. It was something that I could afford that was, I thought, near my school. No one told me that I was the first black person to live in the building. Because I had no trouble at all renting it, I didn't expect any problems. I looked at the place and I said, "This is fine." I filled out the application, gave them the money, they rented it to me. No warnings. So, it was a big shock to me to have that experience. There were other experiences that I had when I was there. And so it meant-- Speaker 1: What are some of the things that happened? Do you want to talk about them? Speaker 2: I was followed... lots of things. I had... my sister in Detroit [Michigan] had to send me mace, because it was against the law to have it in Boston. But I felt like I needed something, because I was always afraid. You know, you know when you're a student and you're late in the library, and you're coming home late and all of that--it was scary. And the people in my building harassed me quite a bit. So, it was... I was in a hurry to get out. And I took a lot of extra stuff and went through the summer. And I was on my way out of there at the end of the summer of 1966, with a master's degree. I wouldn't stay for the doctoral program, because I didn't like it. I hated it that much. Story_ID: 83135 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So September 1st, 1966, I came to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, why did you choose [the University of] Chicago? Speaker 2: Well, I had never been to Chicago before. And I had read a lot about Chicago, as a sociologist. But it was really... Chicago is seen as the school of American sociology. Speaker 1: Robert Park, and all of that. Speaker 2: Park... and the people at Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee] were students of Park, okay. The building that I had all of my social science and sociology studies in--Park Johnson [Hall]--was named after Robert Park, and Charles Johnson, one of the presidents of Fisk that had been his student. Charles Johnson, Horace [R.] Cayton [Jr.], [William Boyd] Allison Davis, and many, many other early... Charles Minor, Oliver [Cromwell] Cox, those African-American sociologists went to the University of Chicago. Speaker 1: St. Clair Drake. Speaker 2: Right. So, I had in my head... you go back to school... you go to the University of Chicago. Also, I began looking for jobs. And in the back of the American Sociological Association Journal, and one of the other sociological journals, there were several positions in Chicago advertised. And I started applying for jobs here. And finally, the icing on the cake was that I read somewhere that there were a million black people in Chicago. And I said, "Okay, I'm on my way." Because I was trying to decide... I had narrowed my choices down, which was Chicago and Atlanta [Georgia]. And Atlanta seemed to me to be the same size as Louisville [Kentucky], where I was from. And I figured eventually you'd know everybody. I said, "Chicago got a million black people. I'll never know all of them. I'm going." And I came here on that day and stayed at the YWCA at Dearborn and Oak. And within a month I had an apartment and a job--a job by virtue of that old Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee] network of people who found out you were looking, and started helping you. So, the two or three things that were narrowed down for me all came through that connection. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how did you like the University of Chicago? Speaker 2: I didn't go there right away. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't go there until later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I worked first. Speaker 1: Well, who did you work for? Speaker 2: I worked for the Welfare Council of Metropolitan Chicago. And it was, it represented the private social service agencies. It was sort of a trade association almost, that worked for them--did research, kept their service statistics, represented really all of these organizations. So, it was a great place for me to get to know what was going on in all the social agencies in Chicago. And it is the single thing that had to with what I became later on in Chicago. Because there was a black man from Gary, Indiana named Charles Ross that worked there. And he invited me to a meeting that black social workers were having about how they could best work for their community. And this meeting was being called by [HM] Warner Saunders, [Albert] Al Raby, and [HM Abena] Joan Phillips Brown. And it was held at Joan Brown's house. And that was the real beginning of Chicago for me--was meeting them, getting involved in that organization, and becoming a part of something that we established in 1968 called "The Catalyst." And I met some really brilliant social activists, and really learned how to use your profession in a way that would be of service to your people. Everybody I met was in that group. All the people that we know now started out as members of the Catalyst. [HM] Useni Eugene Perkins, Don Linder, [HM] Haki [Madhubuti], [HM] Harold Pates, [Dr. Anderson] Andy Thompson--I met all of them through that organization. And that informed all of the rest of Chicago for me. Story_ID: 84086 Speaker 1: Tell me some more about Catalyst. Speaker 2: Well, Catalyst was so exciting and so pivotal in terms of taking my political world-view to the next stage, because we were engaged in such serious discussions about who were and what we believed. We would meet on Saturdays at the Parkway House Community Center [Jane Addams Hull House Parkway Community Center in Chicago, Illinois]. And people would come there to not only discuss issues, but to talk about whatever was happening to them on their job, or whatever project they were trying to do that they were having difficulty with. We would do everything--from the most mundane thing like somebody getting fired because they tried to wear African garb to work. And we would send the delegation to their job. Things like going to see the head of WTTW about putting a black soap opera, "Bird of the Iron Feather" on television. We formed... I wish we'd been in the era of the more MIS, you know, information technology work, because we did all this by hand. We formed committees; we had a resource bank that said everything someone could do. So, if you needed someone to do that particular thing, you could just look up who did this. That led, that also opened up another world for me. Because I was a research sociologist, and I was probably the only one, I think, in the resource bank that said I do research. So when a man named Jake Jennings who worked for the Illinois Board of Higher Ed [Education], and the University of Illinois--I think at that time the University of Illinois needed somebody to do some research--and he was in the Catalyst, and he went to the resource bank. And he saw my name, and he contacted me. And I met with them and gave them a methodology, and talked about doing particular work. And I got a chance to do it, and it was the first thing that let me know that I could really do my sociological research, and that I could get paid to do it--that I could do studies and do other things. And I did subsequent work for them, and for other people. And we all utilized this bank. We all studied and did things together. And we had a conference every year called "Black Folk Us." And we'd bring people in... and speakers and have workshops, and meet and think through what we were going to do. We took over certain of the old standard meetings in Chicago, like the United Way, and what have you. And so, we weren't going to give anymore contributions to the United Way, because they did not support any African-American agencies, nor did they come to the fore the way we thought they should when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated, because they said it was a "natural disaster." So, we started taking over those meetings and going to things. We issued something called our list of demands to all of our bosses. We had a big meeting where we sent them telegrams, and suggested that they come to the Afro Arts Theater and learn what was really going on in the African-American community. And then when they got those telegrams, anybody that... if you worked in that particular agency, you were to go and call on your boss to let them know that you were a member of that group, so it didn't seem like some anonymous note--because the telegrams were signed, "The Catalyst," and that we strongly suggested that they come to the meeting. And when they did, they were given this list of demands, and it was like a black bag. Because Vince Cullers of Vince Cullers Advertising fame was also in the Catalyst, and he had designed this marvelous presentation for us. And therein was our covenant... that we decided that we no longer really worked for the agencies, we worked for our people, and what we were going to do in terms of representing them--what we felt about building institutions and working to build our own institutions. And all of those things came out of that whole process we went through to craft and present the list of demands. "This is Our Bag" was the name of it, and it was presented like a bag. I still have it to this day. And it was a motif we were to use for years after. It was almost like a logo of the Catalyst, yeah. Speaker 1: This is powerful stuff. Story_ID: 84087 Speaker 1: And it [The Catalyst] evolved, too. That organization evolved to become increasingly Afrocentric. And as we spread out and formed various institutions of our own, the most notable, I think would be eta Creative Arts Foundation. When Joan [HM Abena Joan P. Brown] made that move to leave the WYCA and to devote full time to that mission of eta, various other people who started things-[HM] Haki [Madhubuti]'s work in terms of all the institution building that he has done--others of us in other contexts, you know, beginning to do that. But Abena was teaching a course at Mundelein College [in Chicago, Illinois, now part of Loyola University Chicago]. And that was instructive for me. Because in terms of role models you asked me about in high school--my role models really came later in terms of the people I saw who were really moving and working in a way that I admired, and would want to pattern myself after. And certainly Abena is a major role model for me. She was at Mundelein, and the kids said they wanted to go Africa; they thought they'd never go to Africa. And she said, "Let's go," and she started Africa Express that exists to this day, going to Africa every year. And she raised money with those students, and they went to Africa. And some years later when I taught at Loyola, and we were talking about [Marcus] Garvey and the Garvey movement in Jamaica, and my students said they wanted to go, I said, "Let's go." And it was really because I had seen what she did. And I told them about it, and we raised money in the same way. And in fact, we all ended up, both Africa Express and my students, in Jamaica for the Marcus Garvey Centenary [1987], you know. And so, there was the connectedness. And they could say, "Well, this is the person that let me know you could do this, because she did this with her students many years ago. I know you all can do it now." And we went, you know. The idea of doing what you want to do... being self-determined, raising your money, doing whatever it took, and going ahead to do your own thing. And going ahead to really invest in your own community and then own... your own institution building, which really harked all the way back to early discussions with my father [William Clarence Adams] about how important it is to have your own. Speaker 2: Okay. This is, you know... well, I mean this is so important. I have to say that for anybody listening to this, so they don't skip past this part. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: It's one of the most important parts of this interview... Catalyst. Story_ID: 84088 Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, let's see. Now, you're involvement with Catalyst informed a lot of other activities you were engaged in, too. Now, you went on to the University of Chicago [Illinois] after you worked for the agency. What was it called? I forgot. Speaker 2: After I worked for the Welfare Council [of Metropolitan Chicago]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They began, the University of Chicago started to look for African-American students in the sociology department, because they had none. And all of those prominent African-American sociologists had graduated from there. And here we are at a time of great urgency in this whole African-American civil rights dynamic, and here's the seat of America's sociology with no African-American students. One woman who worked on the job with me who had been to Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee], in my sister's class, was the one who had told me about the job. She was involved going back, because she had gotten her master's from the University of Chicago. And so, she was involved in the PhD program. And when they said they wanted some other African-American students, she told them about me. And I applied, and I was accepted, okay, and I started going there. And also, who started going at the same time with me, was [HM] Dr. Gloria Jackson Bacon. She was Gloria Jackson then. She already was an MD, and decided she was going to get a PhD in sociology. So, we were in classes together, that's how we met and became friends. And I started going for a while, but they didn't want you to work at all. You had a little fellowship, you weren't supposed to do anything. If I hadn't done that straight out of the master's degree, I could have done it. But by this time I had started working, you know. And that meant I had an apartment, I had a car, I had all the baggage that I didn't have when I was a student before. And in the meantime, in the other part of my life, I'm involved in all this life-changing activism, as well as constantly in fights at the University of Chicago with my professors over issues. I went to Malcolm X [College, City Colleges of Chicago]. It was Crane [Junior] College then. When I first started teaching there, I said I was going to cheat on this fellowship thing; I needed some money, but I'd just teach one class. And so I taught an anthropology class there, and it was their first African-American Studies class. There I had students like Henry English and Calvin Cooke and Rufus, now known as Chaka Khan. They were all in my class. And I had to sort of keep up with them, you know. We were contemporaries; some of them were older than I was. They were reading... they had come out of the service, and they had come out of a period of activism in the service. So, they were, you know, voracious readers... they had a lot of information. And I had to make sure that I was on top of my game so I could handle that very interesting group of students... the first class I ever had. And so, I did that for a while. And I'm getting less interested in the University of Chicago almost by the week. You know, I'm doing other things. I've now met, you know, Andy [Dr. Anderson Thompson] and [HM Harold] Pates, and this one and that one, and we're doing this history study group. And the [HM Jacob H. Carruthers] Center for Inner City Studies [at Northeastern Illinois University] is starting. I'm going there, and I'm going to the Communiversity, and all kinds of things are happening. I was going to quit, because I wasn't enjoying it. And I went to see Janowitz, Morris Janowitz, he was my advisor, to tell him that I wasn't really enjoying the University of Chicago, and I was going to quit. And he said, "Have you met Horace Cayton?" I said, "Have I met Horace Cayton?" I said, "Where is he?" He said, "He's here." He said, "And he's looking for somebody to work with him, and I think you might enjoy that." I said, "Are you kidding?" Because of course, I had read Black Metropolis. And you mean, I'm going to get a chance to work with Horace Cayton? He said, "He's got an announcement out on the bulletin board. Go get it, and call him up." So, I go out on the bulletin board, and I see the announcement. And I think this announcement has been up here for over a month. I know he's got somebody, you know. But I call anyway. And he tells me to come over and see him. He's staying on Harper right off of 53rd Street at that place called the Hyde Park Arms Hotel. I go in to see Mr. Cayton, and he looks at me and he says, "Well, thank God. You know, it's about time." He knew he hadn't seen any African-American students, and he really wanted to work with an African-American student to pass on all of this information that he had. And he hired me on the spot and I became his research assistant, the last one that he was to have in America. It was all so amazing, because I got to learn Chicago through the eyes of Horace Cayton, who wrote Black Metropolis [with St. Clair Drake]. Story_ID: 84089 Speaker 1: He [Horace Cayton] took me to the [George Cleveland] Hall Branch Library [in Chicago, Illinois]; I never knew about the Hall Branch Library. We went in the basement and saw all of that work that he and others had done during the WPA [Works Progress Administration] era, writing about the history of black Chicago. And there it was, in boxes. It wasn't cataloged, it wasn't climate controlled; it wasn't anything; all of this work by he and Richard Wright and other people. He was working on three books about Richard Wright. He was going to do an autobiography, excuse me, a biography. He was going to do a children's book, and some other piece that was analytical. And so, we went and met. And I was with him during the taping and all those things, of all the people who had been their contemporaries. I met Sidney Williams that way, and learned all his magnificent stories. And he and Cayton used to reminiscence about the times when they were the renegades at the Urban League and the Parkway Community Center [Jane Addams Hull House Parkway Community Center in Chicago, Illinois], and what happened with the establishment community and them. I got to see the South Side Community Art Center in a new way, to know everything that had happened there, and all the people who had been there--Gwendolyn Brooks and everybody. I met all of these people through Horace Cayton. And that meant some very special introductions, indeed, and really a chance to see what that whole community of arts and letters was like in Chicago back in the day. Because I had gone to school at Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee] and learned of the Harlem Renaissance. I had not learned much about that period in Chicago and all the magnificent work that came out of that period. And I would drive him around. I had a little two-seater sports car, a Sunbeam Alpine. And Mr. Cayton was a man of age, you know, sort of portly with a little cosmopolitan air--the beret, the whole thing. And he would get in that little car and we would go all over town. And there again, a different kind of exposure. He gave me the works of Zora Neale Hurston, I had read her before, Jean Toomer, various people. And it was excellent to be able to read them and then discuss them with someone who knew them, who had worked with them--you know, to learn about his life. Because he was a descendent of Hiram [Rhodes] Revels, the first black Senator, you know, right after the Reconstruction--to learn all of that family history and be engaged and involved--to take him to all of the radical things that we were doing at that time and hear his opinion about that. And it was just a very exciting time for me. And I got involved in interviewing, because-- and then we made a shift in what my dissertation was to be about. Because often establishment schools would want the African-American students to do research in the community on matters and subjects that they would find it a difficult time to ask questions about. My friend was supposed to write about illegitimacy in the black community. And they wanted me to write about the Blackstone Rangers. And I said I didn't want to write about the Blackstone Rangers, and I didn't want to do research about the Blackstone Rangers. So, when Cayton came along, we switched it to me doing the research about the early black sociologists. And I went in to interview Oliver Cox and Bertrand Doyle and some other people... Charles Parrish in Louisville, and other folks to get started with this work. And Mr. Cayton went on to Paris [France] to do that part of his research. And he did not have enough money for me to go Paris. And so I said, "Well, I can earn some money and then I will join you. Because I want to continue to be your research assistant on the part in Paris." And he died in Paris [January 1970]. So, we did not have a chance to finish. And I never went back to the University of Chicago. Story_ID: 84090 Speaker 1: So, what did you do next? Now, you were teaching and doing other things. Speaker 2: I was at the [HM Jacob H. Carruthers] Center for Inner City Studies [at Northeastern Illinois University] by then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that had as much to do with me not going back [to the University of Chicago, Illinois] as me just being so disappointed in not being able to continue to work for Mr. [Horace] Cayton. It was probably more of the former than the latter. Because again, I'm constantly engaged in a lot of back and forth with my professors, including my African-American professors, who were just of a different political persuasion, and really thought that the things that were happening from the Center were horrendous. And so you know, I just said, "This is not where I want to be." Speaker 1: I know the two, you know, the two institutions were probably were in close geographical proximity. Speaker 2: And that's about it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's about it. And this was really the heyday period at the Center. We had so many things going on. The Communiversity was happening; Sonja [Hayes] Stone was there, you know. Dr. [Nancy] Arnez was there; [Elcon] Sitole; [HM Jacob H.] Carruthers; you know, [HM] Conrad [Walter Worrill], bout all of us at the same time, not to mention the people who taught there part-time like [Dr.] Bobby Wright and others. And we were so excited about what we did, that when the Center closed up we would go to a restaurant and stay there until it closed, talking about whatever we were reading--which for several months of "Crisis of the Negro Intellectual" [by Harold Cruse]. You know, we'd get on something and dissect every bit of it, and argue about it and interpret it. And we were very excited about our work. And we would do it at least six days a week. And those six days were days and nights. So, this other stuff was just not making sense to me, not making sense to me at all. Speaker 1: Now, you can explain to us what Communiversity was. Speaker 2: Well, the Communiversity was I think one of the most brilliant things that ever happened, where we opened up the Center on Saturdays. And at the very beginning you could pay a dollar to register, and you could take anything that we offered. And we would teach different classes. I think pretty soon thereafter we even forgot about the dollar, you know, because we were so engaged in doing it. And really, I was a student as well as I was a teacher there. Because it had really just been a couple of years since I got out of graduate school. And some of these things, I had never known about. So I would go to the classes as well. We had that kind of respect for each other, and for each other's work. And I was around such brilliant scholars that I loved to go to their classes and listen to them as well. And we got engaged with the community also, because of Dr. Arnez and things that she did in terms of working with schools, because her background was education. And she wanted to change the way the children were being taught. So, she and [HM] Barbara [A.] Sizemore and folks like that--through the Woodlawn Experimental Schools Project and all those things--we started looking at how do we change the way our children are taught? How do we create ways that respect their culture? And there, they came up with the cultural linguistic approach, and really institutionalized that through the start of the Follow-Through Program, which Don Linder subsequently became the director of. And today people are still referring to those things, or trying to re-invent them, because they don't know they've already been done. Story_ID: 84091 Speaker 1: Yeah, this is an exciting time to be in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: It was wonderful. Speaker 1: The Black Freedom movement was running-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --was going on. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: People were meeting at the home of Gwendolyn Brooks, and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --[HM] Val [Gray] Ward and-- Speaker 2: Right. And [HM Reverend Jesse Jackson's Operation] Breadbasket was happening and changing... and people would come to Breadbasket first and they'd come to the Catalyst. You know, [HM] Lu Palmer was a part of that group... George English... they were doing all of their work. You know, and then it turned into the movement for some political movements, some political independence. Because Charlie Ross in Gary [Indiana] had us all involved in the campaign for [HM] Richard Hatcher to become the mayor of Gary. And then subsequently, we got involved in a lot of campaigns. We were so optimistic, so ahead of the... finally the election of a black mayor of Chicago [Illinois], that we had little buttons. I still have mine to this day that says, "Black Mayor, '71'. We figured it could happen by 1971, you know. So, we were more than ready for it to happen-- Speaker 1: Did you have an idea-- Speaker 2: --when Harold Washington came along [1983], and we had supported Harold Washington in his previous campaigns. If you look back to some of those old black focus programs, you will see that he'd generally do a workshop about politics for the Catalyst. And we had supported him when he ran for state office and what have you. He was somebody that we knew, you know, and we felt we could work for. And you would see certain Catalysts, like [HM] Conrad [Walter Worrill], for example, very prominently involved in that campaign. Speaker 1: Alright. There always seemed to be... I know as I've observed with Chicago that it seemed like somebody at Catalyst was involved in everything that sort of (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I know. It's a great thing. And sometimes people don't even know people who started there who got involved in other things, you know. But you could always... but they all remembered that they were. And you could always go back to them. You could always go to them for support, and they would support what you were trying to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so you're at the [HM Jacob H. Carruthers] Center for Inner City Studies [at Northeastern Illinois University]. Speaker 2: From 1968 to 1978, I stayed at the Center. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, were you working on your PhD at this time, too? Speaker 2: I went back during that period, and I got it while I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I didn't go to the University of Chicago. I went to the Union Graduate School. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I could put together my own committee, which was headed by Dr. Albert Carruthers. Speaker 1: Yeah, now that's a unique... now was Union Graduate School [now Union Institute and University]-- Speaker 2: At that point, Union was just starting. It was a part of the Union of Experimenting Colleges and Graduate Schools, and it was associated with Antioch University [sic, Antioch College]. Speaker 1: In Yellow Springs? Speaker 2: In Yellow Springs, Ohio. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Story_ID: 84092 Speaker 1: Yeah, it's interesting they way they do that. Speaker 2: Well, I had started the program at the Cook County Jail as part of my work with the [HM Jacob H. Carruthers] Center for Inner City Studies [at Northeastern Illinois University]. I had come across... and part of my work from Jake Jennings at the Illinois Board of Higher Ed [Education], they needed some work to be done. Senator Richard Newhouse wanted to do some studies about the state of African-American higher education in Illinois. And so, I was the research director on that study. And we found that the most neglected population in the state, from the standpoint of education, was the female imprisoned population... that they had programs in the men's institutions, but they had nothing for the women. And so, I wrote a proposal to do a program in the Cook County Jail for women. As luck would have it, they were building a new division, Division 3. Because before, there had been so few women that they had a couple of floors on one section in the men's facility. So, they were building Division 3 for the women. And who'd be the director of that facility but a woman named Claudia McCormick, whom I had taught at the Center for Inner City Studies when she worked on her master's degree. So, when I approached her about the Center, and us coming and doing classes, she was absolutely thrilled. And so the day they opened... when they went in, we went in, and we had classes. We had everything from GED through college credit courses. Various people taught the college credit course. It would be a different one every semester. But most often, it would be [Anderson] Andy Thompson. And he would teach the same course in there that he was teaching on the outside. So, if you got let out of jail in the middle of the class, you could come to the Center and finish the class. And we did all kinds of work, both in and out. And we formed an organization called Still Doing Time, for women who got out of jail or the penitentiary if they went to Dwight [Correctional Center]. And we would work with them throughout. So by the time they were out, we'd be helping them with their employment, with their housing, with their family re-unification issues, and all of those things. And we did that for about three or four years. Speaker 1: Okay. You know, now, what else did you all do there? Speaker 2: Oh, I mentioned that because I ended up writing my dissertation about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, just to bring to full circle the story about how I initially started with the sociologists. When I went back--and because Union [Union Graduate School, now Union Institute and University] would allow you to do an actual project, okay, I did that. But because I knew that I probably wanted a traditional movement in terms of myself as a professor, I did the project, but I also did a dissertation. And I did a film about the project. Speaker 1: Okay. A film too, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So, did you produce that yourself? Speaker 2: Yes, along with the help of Kofi... (unclear) Saunders... Kofi Karega Moyo [sic, Karega Kofi Moyo] and-- Speaker 1: He's now the head of Real Men Cook. Speaker 2: Right. But you see, he had always been a photographer, and was associated also with a film company. And so, they helped me-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --to do the piece. It's a documentary piece about the work in the jail. Story_ID: 83025 Speaker 1: Alright. So, now you were at Northeastern until-- the [HM Jacob H. Carruthers] Center for Inner City Studies [at Northeastern Illinois University in Chicago, Illinois] until '78' [1978]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And then you worked for the Neighborhood Institute? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, tell us about that. Speaker 2: Well, that was another real exciting time. The South Shore Bank was located, of course, in the South Shore community [of Chicago, Illinois] that had rapidly changed to a predominantly black community. And at that time, state law required that a bank couldn't just decide to re-locate. They had to apply, and the banking authorities had to approve their request. During that time, there was a man named Ron Gryswinski who was studying at the University of Chicago. He was an Adlai Stevenson fellow, and he was doing the work about the relationship between a bank remaining in the community or leaving, and that community's stability. And he said that the leaving of a financial institution had a great deal to do with the subsequent instability of the community. He was working at that time at the Hyde Park Bank with James Fletcher and [HM] Milton Davis and a woman named Mary Houghton. They decided they gonna strike out and get them a bank. And when the South Shore Bank is trying to leave, they organized... the community organized really through... the South Shore community and others organized and asked the state to not grant them this permission, and they were denied. So it said Gryswinski, Davis, et al, this would be a pretty good time to approach them about buying that bank, because they had definitely motivated sellers. So, they did approach them about buying the bank, and they got the South Shore Bank [later named ShoreBank]. But they knew that the bank alone wasn't enough; they needed to do some work in the community. And they determined that they wanted to form these non-banking subsidiaries--the Neighborhood Institute, the Neighborhood Fund--which was a minority business investment vehicle--and then the South Shore Housing Center, to work on the housing stock and to help to get owner-occupied properties, and help develop the big non-occupied properties that were creating problems. And I became a part of the staff at the Neighborhood Institute, and was the first director of Research and Planning. And that was really very exciting, because South Shore was the first neighborhood development bank in the country. And because I lived in that neighborhood... and so I got a chance to actually live and work and plan in my own neighborhood, and to come up with some concepts and to do proposals around things we were interested in doing, like on Artists Row and other stuff. Speaker 1: Right. That's part of the... now, you developed something called the South Shore Cultural District Plan. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Which sort of was the model, I think, that the Mayor, Mayor [Harold] Washington used to develop a cultural plan for the city [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so, too. We knew we wanted to make plans, and we looked at what was going on in that community. It was full of so much talent--a lot of artists with the kind of community that could sustain a thriving cultural presence. And we thought we would organize around it. So, I held a conference, organized a conference when I was I was at the Neighborhood Institute called "The Role of the Artist in Neighborhood Revitalization." And we all got together and started to talk and plan, and decided we would develop a cultural district plan for Chicago. And it included ideas for individual artists as well as arts organizations, as well as a section about the arts as an economic engine. And we looked to develop working and living spaces, affordable spaces, for artists as well as to support the creation of institutions and the teaching of the arts. And there were two versions. The plan was done once, and then a couple years later updated. Story_ID: 83026 Speaker 1: Alright. Now, you went on to Loyola [University in Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: After that. Speaker 2: Yes. I went on from there to Loyola University to be the head of the African-American Studies program there, which was great. I mean, it was a return to the classroom, which I've always loved. That was the only thing I had missed during my period at the Neighborhood Institute. When I was at the Center [HM Jacob H. Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies at Northeastern Illinois University in Chicago] I was the research director, but I also taught, and I taught the methodology and the evaluation, the research writing--those kind of classes. I missed having students, so at Loyola I had undergraduate students. See, the whole ten years I taught at the Center, the Center was strictly a graduate program. So, my students were very experienced people who had been working--usually had thriving careers--who were coming back for a second degree. At Loyola I had freshmen, sophomores, kids right out of high school, and I loved it. And they were very bright, very naive. Most of them had not learned much at all about race and ethnic relations, and the politics of them in a city like Chicago. So, it was an exciting time to be there, also because that was during the [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington era. And our students got involved. We had him on the campus, and what have you. I had almost everybody the students had ever heard of, and never thought they would meet, to come to that campus-[HM] Nikki Giovanni, Kwame Ture [formerly known as Stokely Carmichael], [HM] Maulana Karenga, everybody, you know, to come. And them have a chance to meet and interact with, to talk with... to ask questions. I had [HM Minister Louis] Farrakhan and Prince Asiel [Ben Israel] and folks from the Moorish Science Temple, in terms of all the religious identity movements that African-Americans had engaged in in this country. And they'd get a chance to talk to them. Now, I do have those tapes of those kinds of things that we did at Loyola. I did the Black Film Festival. I had "The Spook Who Sat by the Door" [directed by Ivan Dixon] was the first movie I did for the Film Festival. Because the people who were involved in it were right here in Chicago. And we had almost like a premier, and invited [HM Samuel] Sam Greenlee and invited the people who were in the movie. And for some of them, their children, it was the first time they'd ever seen it. Because at that time it was not easy to get a copy. And Sam had left his copy on the subway in New York [New York City, New York]. So, he didn't even have a copy. And I managed to get one and do the film, and it was the beginning of our series. And we had all of the people in it and all their children, David [Lemieux] and everybody, his kids, they all came out to see their folks in that groundbreaking movie. So, we had a lot of fun. We had Gil Scott Heron and folks like that come and perform on the campus. We... I worked very closely with the students; we planned all of our events together. They were co-sponsored by the department and by the Black Student Council and the Black Cultural Center, those kind of things, with LUASA [Loyola University Afro-American Studies Association] was Loyola's African Student Association. And we did a lot of work together. Story_ID: 83027 Speaker 1: And those students are some of my best work. They're the ones that right now today are doing so many wonderful things. And I get invited to their things when they get made, one thing or another. And it's the best reward any teacher could have, to see their students do well and to have a good sense of who they are and whose they are, and have the power... political head, you know. So, I point with pride to my students like Attorney Andre Grant, and [HM] Melody Spann [Spann-Cooper] at WVON, and Wynona Redmond at Dominick's, and I could go and on. I had wonderful students from Loyola. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'd say it's good to be able to see that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: To see them, you know-- Speaker 1: Well, one of my mentors was Dr. Arnita Boswell. And I remember her making a speech one time about how you knew you had arrived when your students were hiring you. And I now know exactly what she means. Because from time to time, one of my students would call and ask me to come and speak here, or do a piece of work there, or do one thing or another. And they'd... you were always so proud, you know. You'd do it for them, no matter what. But they actually want to retain you. It's like a combination of shock and humility, you know. They just say, "Wow, you're going to pay me to do something?" You know, I mean, because you're seeing them in their new role, but you still see them when you had them in your class at 17 or 18 years old, you know. So, I enjoy that a lot. Story_ID: 83028 Speaker 1: Now by this time, I mean you had already traveled to Africa, I think, a few times by-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I had. I made my first trip to Ghana in 1972. So, I had been. And then I went to Kenya. I went to Kenya as part of my graduate work experience at Union [Graduate School, now Union Institute and University]. I had made those two trips by that time. Speaker 1: That was with Kip (unclear), right, I think? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: And then I went, of course, on that famous trip to Kemet, that I wouldn't have missed for all the world. Speaker 1: That's in 1987. Speaker 2: Eighty-Seven [1987]. Speaker 1: The ASCAC Fourth Annual-- Speaker 2: The Fourth Annual for the Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations. And we got a chance to go. And I said, if ever in the world I'm going to go to Kemet... Egypt, to the regular folks... I will go on a trip where you could go with [HM] Asa Hilliard [III], [HM Jacob H.] Jake Carruthers, [HM] Maulana Karenga, John Henrik Clarke. What can be better than that? Not to mention all the other people who went on the trip. And Dr. Ben [HM Yosef ben-Jochannon] as well, okay. But a thousand people from all over the United States descending on Kemet. And there again, every day was a lesson of some type. That was one of the most exciting trips ever, no doubt about it. Kemet '87' [1987], will go down in history. I don't think that's ever been attempted since. Speaker 1: No, I don't think it has. It's been-- Speaker 2: And certainly not before. Other trips were smaller numbers. Speaker 1: Yeah, about a thousand black people went on that trip. Speaker 2: Well, it was a thousand officially. Then there were the people who couldn't come on the trip. Because they kept saying there's no more room for the people who came on their own, just because they wanted to be there with that group. Just the logistics of moving us around, all of that was monumental. Story_ID: 83029 Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Now, you were also, I think that same year [1987] you helped the African-American Arts Alliance pull together a Midwest Conference of Artists. You seemed to be always doing the arts stuff. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I forget who we did it for. We, we were partners. We did it for someone else. Speaker 1: The National Endowment for the Arts. Speaker 2: Right, right, we partnered to do that. That was some good work, I think, because it brought together an interesting group of ethnic arts people. It wasn't just African-Americans. And we did the big concert where [HM Philip] Phil Cohran and an Asian artist, and a Hispanic artist found the common thread in our mythology. And they did a piece around that. Do you remember? It had to do with a monkey or something like that. And it was magical, with the drummers from all of the cultures coming together to do that play. But you're right, I've been involved in the arts a lot, probably starting from my early work with eta [Creative Arts Foundation]. And then being able to bring artists in route to things, and subsequently getting involved with the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians]. And artists used to come to me a lot between that and the Afro Arts Theater to work proposals, or help them put certain kinds of projects together. And in this instance, as in many others, one thing just leads to the other. And before you know it, people see you as somebody who's known for the arts, even though you really never set out for that to happen. It's just a series of experiences that I was fortunate enough to have. And each thing got me more and more interested in it. So, whenever I wasn't doing my sociology thing, I was doing something that had to do with the arts, both the visual and the performing and the literary. Story_ID: 83030 Speaker 1: I think it... just another I guess commercial for South Shore [Chicago, Illinois]. South Shore was filled, and still is filled with a lot of progressive jazz musicians. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Dancers, writers, they're all over the place. Speaker 2: Exactly. And I was involved in that movement, the Coalition to Save the South Shore Country Club. So, when that was done, I formed something with Robert Page, a visual artist, called Everyday Art. And we actually did the first jazz concerts at the South Shore Cultural Center. Speaker 1: I know they have something now they do annually-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --at South Shore, Jazz United. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But we were, we pre-dated that. When they still had the "members only" sign out front, we were having concerts in the back as well as having exhibits. Speaker 1: Now, those were the days when they had the African Information Center, too, on 71st Street [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Well, that was the Catalyst. Speaker 1: The Catalyst, right. Speaker 2: The Catalyst had the African Information Center on 71st. After we had had it before on 75th, we moved to 71st Street. And it was an important meeting place. The Nigerian Students Association and the Ghanaian Students Association, they all found a home there. And we all found a home together. Speaker 1: Right, right. South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] is the home of the Illinois Black United Fund [Black United Fund of Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: There's so much going on. Speaker 2: Another one of my famous students, Henry English. Speaker 1: Henry English, right. Story_ID: 83031 Speaker 1: And you became known as the premier proposal writer for arts groups. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. We did a lot of proposal writing, writing work for arts groups. And we did the role of the artists. We started doing workshops for artists in how to get grant money, and what have you. We started a whole series, and that was when the city [Chicago, Illinois] was just cutting out those individual arts grants. And so we gave seminars, and I agreed that I would review and touch up anybody's stuff that needed to. And that year South Shore got more of those grants than any other community in the center--much of what I'm trying to do now in Bronzeville with the Bronzeville Arts Trust, and attract dollars to the artists in that burgeoning community that will be its second cultural Renaissance. Plus, it's always been the home of our culture in Chicago. Speaker 1: Now this is something that's important for anybody watching this. It's that you are known as the person who knows how to assess a proposal and find out exactly what the agency wants, and deal with it in an effective way. I mean, you have all the people in Catalyst even. You know, you seem to be able to make that assessment faster and more effectively than anybody. You know, how do you do that? I mean, how do you de-code all this? Speaker 2: I think some of it, some of it comes from being on both sides of the fence. So, once I got started and I did this role of the arts stuff, I came into contact with [HM] Madeline [Murphy] Rabb, okay. All this stuff relates. Madeline was the head of the Arts Council for [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington. So, she then invited me to be on some of the committees that reviewed proposal. So, when you sit on that other end and you hear the questions that people raise who are also reviewing, then you start getting a sense of it. And you hear the people from the agencies talk about what they're looking for. And so, I became a proposal reader for a number of other federal entities, non-arts entities. And I was able to bring back that information to myself as a proposal writer, in knowing how to break down an actual RfP [Request for Proposal] to what the essential things are that people are looking for, and then to be able to follow directions when it comes to the proposal itself. Because most people get out of whack because they just won't follow directions. If you do it exactly as they ask you in the order in which they ask you, then you up your chances fifty percent. Because inevitably somebody wants to put Part B first and Part A third, and all those other things that they may think are creative, but that the funding source does not want you to do. It makes it more difficult for them to get through and understand what you're getting at. And I found that the easier you made for them to digest, the better off you were, too, instead of obscuring your ideas in a lot of flowery language. Speaker 1: As a lot of people want to do. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah, they're writing for history instead of what they want. Speaker 2: Exactly, instead of for the money. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Certain way you write for the money. And you had to be able to show what you're going to do with it, instead of writing a lot of flowery stuff and at the end say, "And it's going to cost us about $250,000." Story_ID: 83032 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for the HistoryMakers archive. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Carol Lawrence Adams. C-A-R-O-L, L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E, A-D-A-M-S. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Five Eleven Nineteen Forty-Four, [5/11/1944], Louisville, Kentucky. Speaker 1: And Ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a sociologist. Speaker 1: Okay. And you've done many things. And currently as we interview you, you're the-- Speaker 2: Currently, I am the President and CEO of the DuSable Museum of African-American History. Speaker 1: Right here in Chicago. Speaker 2: In Chicago, Illinois in Washington Park. Speaker 1: Alright. Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: I believe today is August 24th, 2010. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in the Ames Auditorium of the DuSable Museum. Speaker 1: And we're completing an interview that we started back in 2002 [sic, 2003], I believe. Story_ID: 83033 Speaker 1: So, well, we were talking about your tenure at Loyola University [Chicago, Illinois]. And let's just kind of recap. What did you do at Loyola? Speaker 2: I was the director of African-American Studies at Loyola University. And I also had an appointment in the sociology department. Speaker 1: Okay. What would you, how would you summarize your activities at Loyola in terms of accomplishments and what you have done? Speaker 2: Well, I really enjoyed my time there. I had some very outstanding students. And the proof of it is in what they are doing now. So, I think that the work that I did with my students--to expose the students, who knew very little about African-American history at that point--to learn more about themselves. In fact, they knew so little about it, I had to almost knock them down at first to get them to come in my class. I remember the very first registration there. You had to work registration back in those days, it wasn't on-line. So, people from the various departments would be at tables, and students would have to come up and get in your classes. And I'm sitting there waiting for some people to come up to me to get in my classes. And they're not, including the black students; they're sort of looking the other way when they pass by me. So, I couldn't believe it, you know. I've got a few people in classes, but not that many. So, by the time the registration rolled around the next time, I was ready for them. I had a marketing campaign that I had prepared. And I'd asked for the first position in registration. So, you couldn't get into the registration area without passing by me. And I made some flyers, and the flyers had a picture of some students protesting in front of the administration building for Black Studies. And at the head of the flyer it said, "This is what they had to do get African-American Studies." And at the bottom it said, "All you have to do is register." And on the back it listed all of the classes that were offered, and what they would satisfy. Because the students had the misconception that this must be extra, that it didn't really count--that you couldn't count it towards the core courses and what have you that you needed as a student. So, I had all that information listed on the back. And I just literally stopped them and started talking to them about it, and explaining it. And then we get a full complement of people in all of our classes. After that, we never had to really do that anymore, although I worked registration myself until they no longer did that. Because once students started coming, they were hungry for it, and they wanted all the classes. And I had some phenomenon of students trying to get in my classes, whether they were registered for them or not, and just asking could they come in anyway, because they wanted this information. I also worked a great deal with the student organizations. There were two black student organizations--LUASA, The Loyola University African-American Studies Association and the BCC, The Black Cultural Council. And usually these things had worked as separate entities. I brought us all together, and we put our money together, our budgets together so we could bring very outstanding people to the campus once we began to work like that. So, we had a lot of cultural performers like Gil Scott Heron. We had [HM Maulana] Karanga, we had Kwame Ture [formerly known as Stokely Carmichael], we had [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan; we had every cultural identity group that blacks had ever wanted to be a part of. We just did... we had [Amiri] Baraka, all of that we were able to bring to that campus. I was also there when [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington ran for mayor. And he also came to the campus, which was a really high point on the campus for the students. Speaker 1: Now you started in '81', 1981, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 83034 Speaker 1: And what you described at your first registration, it seems like the health of the [African-American Studies] department had kind of fallen on hard times or something, in terms of the students' mis-understanding of what was going on. Speaker 2: Well, I don't think that anyone had marketed it. You know, it's often we're under the consensus that all we have to do is be. We don't have to do anything to tell people who we are, what we are, why it's important. And for a lot of the students at Loyola [University in Chicago, Illinois], who had in general been to predominantly white Catholic institutions before they came to Loyola, nobody had been socializing them to this. And in fact, some of them had been socialized away from it. You know, "Just get to school and go to your major. Don't worry about that stuff. Don't worry about that black stuff." And so, somehow it was a distraction rather than an asset. But one thing I knew very well, there were only about ten black professors at Loyola out of over a thousand. At one point or another, you were going to come to me. Whether you came to me for your class, or whether you came to me to try to help you understand what was happening to you in your other classes, you were going to get there. And other students would tell students who ran into some difficulties, "You should go see Dr. Adams," or "You should go see this person or that person." I was able to bring other people there--Betty Parker-Smith who taught my English courses, you know. I brought other people there if they didn't have someone who could teach the courses in the various areas. And I think we did a really great job. And now I have the pleasure of my students sometimes actually hiring me, because they're in great places, you know. [HM] Melody Spann-Cooper who owns WVON was one of my students, and I got to know her. I taught sometimes on the Water Tower campus, that's where the business students were. And in the evening I'd have dinner with them in the student cafeteria rather than go to the faculty cafeteria, because I wanted to know them. I wanted them to know me, I wanted to know what their issues were. So, I came in contact with them in that way. Wynona Redmond, who's with Dominick's in a very prominent marketing position was one of those students as well. Andre Grant, an attorney who still has that picture in his office of that flyer from that day, "This is all you have to do is register," he keeps it in his office. He was one of my students as well. So, I'm very proud of the work that they do. Mary Morton was one of those students. They, they represent. Story_ID: 83035 Speaker 1: Now this is, as you say, this was the era of the [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington campaign. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And in fact, this whole mayoralty took place when you were at Loyola [University in Chicago, Illinois], I guess, right? You were still there when he passed away [in 1987], weren't you? Speaker 2: I don't... frankly I don't remember. Speaker 1: I think, well, yeah... Well, I don't know exactly if you were. But I know you left Loyola in '87' [1987]. I don't know if he was still alive then or not. But that's... but did, were the students involved in the campaign? Speaker 2: Yes. And it was interesting, because at first they mirrored the comments you'd hear in the general community, "Oh, he doesn't have a chance," or, "I don't think he's going to make it." So, they'd always says the things they're hearing at home. And a lot of the students at Loyola were commuter students who lived at home, and they didn't think much of the chances at first. That's the buzz they were getting. And I said, "Well, it seems to me that that's for us to decide. If we really think we can do this, we can do this, you know. We have to think so in our own hearts and minds." And so, we began to discuss it and to debate about it, and then they got involved in it. And when we decided to invite him they did the inviting, you know, wrote the letters, did this, did that. I did the follow-up, of course. Because by this time the campaign is gaining momentum, and everybody's trying to get him. So, Velma Wilson, who I knew was one of the schedulers... and I almost worried her to death, I think, constantly making sure that Harold Washington was going to come to Loyola. And it was a huge event; I mean the place was packed. And the black students were very proud that they had organized this. They had successfully brought him to the campus, and many of them were volunteers in the campaign. Speaker 1: Now, this is at the height of the race? Speaker 2: Yes, the first one, yes. Story_ID: 83036 Speaker 1: Was there... how was the state of, I guess, black studies city-wide [Chicago, Illinois] in those days? And did... were you involved in any city-wide effort to unite the-(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, I belonged to the Illinois Council of Black Studies. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: ICBS, and we were very, very active. We did a lot of work cooperatively, not just in the state, but frankly in the region. You know, we did things to be able to afford to bring the programs and the people that we wanted to our campuses. And I did a lot of proposal writing, to be able to get money to bring other things. Loyola [University in Chicago, Illinois] had some money from the [Andrew W.] Mellon Foundation, and I wrote proposals for the Loyola Mellon Fund to do things like the Black Film Festival, and activities like that. The Haitian Refugee issue was also one of the issues during that time, and we took that one on as well. The students got involved and they--you know, students of that era, once they got engaged, sort of romanticized what had happened in the sixties. And so, they looked for opportunities to express their own activism. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Story_ID: 83037 Speaker 1: Do you remember what you were doing at all when you got the word that [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington passed away [on November 25, 1987]? Speaker 2: I do not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just remember being in denial at first, just saying that this can't be true. I remember then just saying he's got to make it, you know. I remember all the things I felt when I heard about his death, and seeing people just crying in the street and all that. But where exactly I was when I heard it, I do not remember. Story_ID: 83038 Speaker 1: You've been involved in so much in the city, culturally and politically. What is... did you have an assessment... or what's your reflection of Harold Washington's term as mayor [of Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, I guess one of my best memories is traveling during that time. Because you know, we all had Harold Washington buttons. One of our exhibits here at the museum shows the hundreds of different kinds of buttons. Because everybody wanted their own. The artists had a button; the teachers, the social workers, everybody. But that famous blue and white button, the official button, was the one that everyone wanted. I got to the point where whenever I traveled, I'd just have a bunch of them in my bag. Because if I had it on--and we wore them everywhere--at the airport, wherever I was, people would ask for them. Folks got engaged in this all over the world, you know. And I never saw that kind of fervor return until [HM President] Barack Obama. Wherever you went, if you had a button, people wanted that. When I went to Africa, I was popular. All the things people were trying to trade, I brought Barack Obama buttons, and that's what people wanted. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You're involved, and you've seen like at least three major movements, you know, take place. The Civil Rights Movement, you were involved with [HM Reverend Dr.] C.T. Vivian at Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee], and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then you know, the Harold Washington campaign and then Barack Obama later on. Speaker 2: And actually, my first involvement in politics in Chicago was around the [HM Richard] Hatcher campaign in Gary [Indiana], okay. Speaker 1: In the seventies. Speaker 2: That's when I first came here-- Speaker 1: Sixty-Eight [1968]- Speaker 2: --and started working, it was in the sixties. And that was my very first job, at a place called the Welfare Council of Metropolitan Chicago. And I met a guy named Charles Ross from Gary. And he was actively involved with Richard Hatcher, and he got all of us involved in the Hatcher campaign. And the second was for the Fred Hubbard campaign. Speaker 1: Right here in Chicago? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 83039 Speaker 1: Why- how did you come to leave Loyola [University in Chicago, Illinois]? And-- Speaker 2: Well, a very good friend of mine, [HM] Harold Pates, became the president of Kennedy-King College [City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois]. That was huge to us in the Afrocentric community and the scholar activist community, because it meant one of our own was the president of an institution of higher education. And he contacted me and asked me if I would come to join him. And I didn't really hesitate about that, even though some of my colleagues could not understand why someone would leave Loyola University and go to Kennedy-King. And I said, "Well, easy. This whole institution is a bunch of African-American students that I'll have a chance to interact with. They're relatively few of them here at Loyola. I think I'm needed there." And I knew what Harold was trying to do, and I knew he needed people he really trusted around him to try to help do it. So, I left Loyola and became his Dean of Adult and Continuing Ed [Education]. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, so what were your, what were your tasks like when you-- Speaker 2: Well, again, you're working with continuing students. You're working with trying to get people to come back, you're working with adults. You're working with the off-site classes, the GED, and the alternative school. There was the Benjamin Mays School [Benjamin E. Mays Academy]; [Judith] Judy Starks was the director. That also came under me. Speaker 1: Okay, right. Speaker 2: So, those kind of programs. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, and I worked on bringing special offerings that would attract people to come to the school who didn't necessarily want to get a degree, but they just wanted to take some classes. And very often, once they had that experience, they'd be interested in getting in a long-term program. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. At Kennedy-King during Dr. Pates term as president, was very open to the community and-- Speaker 2: Yes, we did lots of things, very open to the community. And I was able to do some interesting things there. I brought in two resident companies during my time there that remained there for many years. The Muntu Dance Theater [of Chicago] and the Chocolate Chips Theatre [Company], I brought to Kennedy-King as resident companies. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And I know that was the scene for several national conferences of the African Heritage Studies Association. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I think ASCAC [Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations], too. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The National Black United Fund [NBUF]? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 83040 Speaker 1: You were there until 19... [1989] you were just there a year. Speaker 2: I was just there a very short time. And that was a real difficult decision. As easy as it was to go from Loyola [University in Chicago, Illinois] to Kennedy-King [College in Chicago, Illinois, one of the City Colleges of Chicago], it was hard to leave Kennedy-King, because I felt I had made a commitment to [HM Harold] Pates. But the opportunity that came to me thereafter was so huge for an applied sociologist that I couldn't turn it down. And it all happened because I went to get some Harold's Fried Chicken one night. Speaker 1: Well, tell us the story. Speaker 2: Well, I live in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois]. And I went to... one night my daughter and I were coming home, I from work and she from school. And we stopped there, and [HM Vincent] Vince Lane was in there. And Vince Lane had just become the head of the Chicago Housing Authority [CHA]. And he was someone that I knew from working in the community, both in Woodlawn and in South Shore. So, I started joking with him about the job. I first said how wonderful it was for him to take it, because he was a private businessman. And entrepreneurs, they rarely took those kind of positions, the working part. They generally were chairs of boards or what have you. But then I started teasing him. I told my daughter to look at him just as he was, and to try to remember him. Because a year from now when we saw him, he'd probably be gray or bald, and this and that, because the job was going to take a lot out of him. And I think this was on a Friday evening. The next morning at about seven o'clock that Saturday morning, I got a phone call and it was Vince Lane. He said, "I'm so glad I ran into you at Harold's, because it put you on my mind, you know. I'm trying to build my team, and I really, really need you." I said, "Well, I can't do that. You know, I'm at Kennedy-King and I haven't been there this long. I'm trying to help, you know, Pates with the direction of Kennedy-King." He said, "You need to come and see me, and let's at least have breakfast." So, Vince is a businessman if nothing else. And he knew how to have a discussion in a business-like manner. I'm about to send my daughter to Howard University [in Washington, D.C.]. Things are tight, it's difficult. He tells me I can do what I need to do. He not only makes me an excellent offer, but in terms of how this department is going to be organized. And it was Resident Services and Programs. He says, "You can design it, you know, you can develop it. I need somebody that I know can dot the i's and cross the t's, but can also relate very well with the residents, and who has a strong community orientation. I really need you to come. This is huge, it really impacts our people a great deal." And a long story short, at the end of the day I decided to do it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was Dr. Pates reluctant to--? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was so hard-- Speaker 1: And he knew you, didn't he? Speaker 2: --to do. And yes, he was. But at the same time he understood why it would have great appeal to me. Because this meant you were moving from theory to action. You were moving from talking about the sociological issues to trying to actually impact them. Story_ID: 83041 Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were there [Chicago Housing Authority] for ten years? Speaker 2: I think, well, like about eight, but through lots of different administrations. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, how many? How fast did it turn over? Speaker 2: Okay. At least five, with HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] ultimately taking over for a time. Speaker 1: Now, that's a-- Speaker 2: And then after they did, Joe Shuldiner became the director after the HUD takeover [in 1995], and I was there then as well. So I think [HM Vincent] Vince Lane, Bob Woodfield, Graham Grady, Joe Shuldiner, and one guy whose name I can't remember, because he only lasted about a week. Speaker 1: Okay. You might be... well, let's see. The dates on here may or may not be right, I don't know. I'm looking at the vitae, and it has you leaving Kennedy-King in '88' [1988] and then starting with CHA in '89' [1989]. Is that... that could be... still could be right. You started in January... did you start in January of '89' [1989], you think? Speaker 2: Larry, if you think I remember that. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Okay. Just for the sake of history I'm asking these questions. But, okay. Speaker 2: I have to go back and look at my hiring letters. Story_ID: 83042 Speaker 1: Okay, well that's alright. So, well, Chicago Housing Authority [CHA] is a... has been a sore spot in the city [Chicago, Illinois] for a long time in terms of, you know, the city's- Speaker 2: Well, we had the largest concentration of just... sort of some concrete reservations, as they used to be known in Chicago in terms of the public housing. Speaker 1: Well, describe for people that don't have any idea of what-- Speaker 2: In the city of Chicago, on the South Side, you're talking about thirty-three continuous blocks of high rise, for the most part, public housing, from 22nd Street to just about 55th Street along State and Dearborn, around there. Nothing but straight public housing as part of a containment strategy for black people in the city of Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay, just so we understand-- Speaker 2: And they said, we want to keep you in this one ward. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: we don't want your political influence to spread. There's not any room to go out, so we're going to go up. And so, you had these poorly constructed high rise developments. Speaker 1: In the sixties-- Speaker 2: And then on the West Side you also had some public housing. You had a little Near West in the Bridgeport area. But the big concentration... And you had a little on the North Side with [Julia C.] Lathrop Homes, probably the most integrated of the public housing developments in Chicago. And you had some far South Side stuff. Speaker 1: Altgeld, you know-- Speaker 2: Trumbull [Park Homes], Altgeld [Gardens], Princeton Park [Homes], some of that stuff that was along there. But, and you had some scattered sites. But when people think of when they see and when they visualize public housing is generally the high rise, you know, starting at 22nd Street. Speaker 1: Yeah, and it's ironic. Outside of Chicago, people know the name of Cabrini-Green [Homes] as being the major one. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The one they know of. Speaker 2: And that was the major one on the North Side, and really it happened in three stages. So, they had the earliest part, the row houses, which is altogether different, back in the day of public housing. And then they had the reds and the whites. And those were the high rises. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Coming up in different eras, you know. All of them, I might add, what later became some pretty valuable land in the city of Chicago. Because you had Lakefront Public Housing as well, part of the Washington Park development right along the lakefront. Speaker 1: As we speak today in 2010, those thirty-three blocks have basically... those buildings are not-- Speaker 2: As we speak today, what they euphemistically referred to as "the transformation," has indeed taken place. Story_ID: 83043 Speaker 1: Part of a move ironically started by [HM Vincent] Vince Lane, Hope VI, with an altogether different intent, became the vehicle through which public housing was demolished all over the country. He really had gone to lobby for some real money to go into public housing to re-develop and transform it. And the idea at that point was a hundred percent unit for unit replacement, but just more resident-friendly housing, with residents at the center of the planning process. Because this was also during the period when resident management was a big movement that was going on in public housing. So, that was the idea. Over time it got watered down, watered down, watered down, until it became not unit-for-unit anymore, but occupied units for unit. And that meant if you did not put people in as people moved out, you could decrease the number of units that actually had to be done. And then it went from that to the notion of fifty percent public housing occupied, and fifty percent otherwise. And then it went down from there to a third/a third/a third, which you generally hear people talk about--you know, a third public housing, a third moderate income, a third market rate. But it all boils down to much fewer units than people ever had before--as well as folks who took Section-8 certificates and other things in between--being scattered throughout the city, some of whom will never be allowed to return to public housing because they came up with some different requirements which really said you had to have been sort of a model tenant, you know, in terms of your rent; that you know, now there are federal laws that say if you have a felony conviction you can't live in public housing. Which means that if somebody in your family has that, and they're incarcerated and they want to come back, then you have to move. And so, it's a different kind of thing. And it may have created a level of stability in those old communities, but it's definitely de-stabilized other communities, most notably in Chicago Chatham and South Shore. Story_ID: 83044 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, one of the surprising stories I heard in Chicago [Illinois] when I got here in '77' [1977] was that the projects at one time were functional. They had like recreation-- Speaker 2: Does that surprised you? Speaker 1: --and well we... you know, when you think of the projects as being like the worst place black folks could-- Speaker 2: Well, that just depends on how old you are. See, if you remember early on, you can remember a certain level of stability around public housing. And if you talk to people, even older ones... I talk to my family members about when it first started, folks longed for it, because it took the place of some very horrendous slum housing. And so folks looked forward to moving into this housing. And the rules at that time were pretty stringent. Some of the public housing also had been developed around returning veterans and so forth. There were requirements around jobs and family and upkeep, and all that. And over time, those things just seemed to go by the wayside. And so, you had an interesting mix. You know, you had lots of strong residents who really had successfully reared their families--that were upwardly mobile folks who saw this as temporary housing. And you had some folks who were third generation in the housing. Then you also had, as you moved up into the high rise things, some real serious construction kind of problems. Because this housing wasn't well-designed for families, you know. And I remember when I was at the [HM Jacob H. Carruthers] Center for Inner City Studies [at Northeastern Illinois University in Chicago] a faculty member named Joe Pentecost, and he did studies about the psychological impact of high rise living on children and on families, and the anxieties of mothers. Because in the low rise and the row houses and the townhouses, you could look out the window and see your child. You could hear them if they called you. And the situation in the high rise was entirely different, you know. And over time, even little playgrounds and some of those things got concreted over, and there wasn't much green space. And all of that... and a lot of those things contributed to this whole concrete reservation notion, even the gallery style of some of the buildings, because it looked like a prison. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I think wiring or caging was put up. Speaker 2: And then when the caging came out, they really had that look. And it had that psychological impact that says, "Hey, we've got to just sort of cage you out in here." So, it was also an interesting time for a lot of the activism on the part of public housing for more self-determination for resident management--for trying to change the way that... to try to use their power differently. Because one thing about it, there was a lot of power there for a time, because there were a lot of votes there, you know. And people would court the heads of the local advisory councils for their support, and for them to try to encourage their residents to support them in a particular way. Story_ID: 83045 Speaker 1: What was the state of resident organization when you started at CHA? Speaker 2: Well, the resident management movement had really just started. And so, we were very much involved in that, in training and trying to get residents engaged in that. We spent a lot of time doing it. Also, Cabrini-Green [Homes] was probably one of the first developments to go for the Hope VI money. And it's ironic, because now it's one of the developments that's the standout. At least one... there's a small group of residents that have managed to hold on there, who have sued CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] and everything over what has happened in terms of public housing. But really they were situated to be the first recipients of Hope VI money. And again, at that time the expectation was that they were going to have a much greater part, and a much larger rate of return. Again, that was some of the most valuable... sort of adjacent to the Gold Coast and now a part of the Gold Coast land. And you can go by there and see the almost complete gentrification in those areas. Story_ID: 81599 Speaker 1: Okay. So, the residents were organized on some level when you started [at the Chicago Housing Authority in 1989], I think? Speaker 2: Organized on a lot of levels, okay. There were... I mean all the way to blocks, to floor captains, to development, and then to a Central Advisory Council. They had a lot of influence, you know. And the president of the Central Advisory Council at that time was Artensa Randolph. She had been there for a long time, and she was a very powerful woman. I mean, she could call the mayor. She could do this, she could do that, because people wanted that influence. Story_ID: 81600 Speaker 1: What were the biggest issues? I know over the years, there's been a lot of issues with public housing in terms of... the residents have even had... I had... there was a woman who was the VISTA volunteer [AmeriCorps Volunteers in Service to America] once, who talked about how she was locked out of her building when the Bulls won the NBA championship. The cops wouldn't let... Speaker 2: Oh, she was living in the Henry Horner Homes, because they were right by the Bulls Stadium [United Center]. But there were a lot of issues, Larry. And a lot of things were a result of long term poor public policy, in terms of who and how things happened in public housing. Again, there were issues of maintenance, and keeping up the property, and enforcing the rules and regulations, and what was going on--and the wholesale warehousing of poor people all together, when you know... Part of what [HM Vincent Lane] Vince's thinking was, was "We've got to have some income integration, because back in the day when we all lived in the same communities, and there was this spread, then maybe if you didn't have a job, somebody else did, and they told you when they were hiring at your place. But when you warehouse everybody with pretty much the same circumstance, and it became a very welfare oriented environment, then there wasn't as much upward mobility. So, part of this was to create opportunity. And some of that did happen through starting programs for resident-owned businesses, training people in business, changing the rules to have Section 3--I think that's the section that meant the residents could bid on contracts; they could form companies; they could get mentoring companies to work with them and establish businesses, some of which are very successful businesses to this day. Lester Coleman is a construction... Les Coleman Development. He started as a resident who started in ROBO, that's Resident-Owned Business Opportunities; that was the name of the program. And he found a mentoring company, another construction company... worked with them, learned the business, got contracts from HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] and from CHA [Chicago Housing Authority], and now is a major builder... and a number of other businesses that started at that point. The resident management thing looked very promising for a time. But I think it's pretty much gone by the wayside. Story_ID: 81601 Speaker 1: We did some exciting and effective social programming. You know, we did the Midnight Basketball League, and it was very big here. You know, we took it to an altogether different level with the program. And it really changed the way that young people functioned in the developments where we had it. Crime went down dramatically. It was self-imposed discipline, if you will. Because we said, "Listen, we'll come, we'll bring the program; we'll bring all the bells and whistles along with it. But if we have any incidents, we've got to go. And we can't stop the incidents; you've got to stop the incidents." Speaker 2: Now, was that the initiative of Gil Walker? Or how did Midnight Basketball come about? Speaker 1: Well, [HM Vincent] Vince Lane heard about it; it already existed. A man had formed it in Glenarden, Maryland. And he told me that he wanted to have this program at CHA [Chicago Housing Authority]. He had heard about it. So, he sent us to take a look at it. And Gil will tell you that when we first started talking about the program, he said--you know, he's a master at running youth basketball programs. He said, "Oh, yeah, we can run this. We'll start at so and so, and we'll be through by six or seven o'clock. I said, "Oh, no, that's where you're wrong." I said, "Midnight." He said, "You've got to be joking." I said, "No." I said, "The whole point about this is that there's a certain period of time when a lots of crime takes place on the part of young men that don't have anything to do. And we've got to hit that critical point. And so, we've got to be going to midnight." So, he came to this kicking and screaming, but he came soon to be the exponent of it in the country. They organized; he and Hank Clark were very good at this thing, and they organized midnight basketball. And I'm sort of good at the administrative side of things. So, I started looking at how to institutionalize it, because people then wanted it all over. And with the blessings of its founder, Mr. [G. Van] Standifer, we started a training program. We started the Midnight Basketball League Institute. We also were the people that brought Nike to the table, and they became the principal sponsors. So, when a young man became involved in midnight basketball, he was going to get everything. We had jackets, we had shoes, we ended up... we did a draft. Folks tried out, it was exciting. And in some developments like Altgeld [Gardens] that was located, you know, on the outskirts of the city [Chicago, Illinois], not a lot to do, it became the thing to do at night. You know, and folks would get very involved with their teams. And we participated in various tournaments and championships they ended up around the country. You know, we had banquets, and they got rings and jackets, and all of that. And it was really pretty exciting. Because the motto was "No workshop, no jump shot." So every night there were workshops about different issues. And you couldn't play if you didn't participate. And some very significant folk in the community, men in particular, got engaged with this, who liked sports. And they bought teams. That's what enabled us to keep going. So, it was just like, "Hey, if you can't own an NBA team, you can own a MBL, you know." And so businesses sponsored teams. Lots of guys came out and coached, and volunteer coached. We hired professional officials from the Officials Association, because Gil rightfully understood that the refing was going to be one of the most significant things about it. And the other thing was... by them coming up with this draft thing, you couldn't come in with your own team, like the "Maniac Gangsters so and so's" or something. You couldn't... you had to agree to abide by their rules, and they were old school coach rules. You know, hat off, no profanity, so and so. "I'm the coach, I run the gym." They did it like that, and they brought a number of old guys who were basketball legends in the different communities to help coach. And that meant a lot in terms of the neighborhood folklore around these guys, you know. Like Andre Wakefield, who had gone to the NBA, and he was over the West Side in Rockwell, and places like that organizing the program, you know. So, this was our big... Frank Burks, who was also key to this program--and Woodrow and different people who were known as ballers, you know, in the positive sense of the word, in Chicago became involved in midnight basketball. So, it was the thing to do. But whatever else you were involved in, you had to put it down to come there. Story_ID: 81602 Speaker 1: And they [Chicago Housing Authority's Midnight Basketball League] had a boot camp. So, the guys had to work out... they had some folks... you know, they dropped out of the boot camp part. And then after that, they did the draft. And the whole community would come out to see who was going to get drafted. And each team was named after a team in the NBA. So again, you couldn't have any names associated with anything else in the street organizations, or anything like that. And they did the draft in a way where you got the hat for your team. You had first and second and third round picks. And it was an excellent program. And for a lot of guys it led them to work, it led them to school. We had one of the biggest developers in the city of Chicago [Illinois] buy a team. And he took an interest in everybody on his team. So before you knew it, they had construction jobs, because he had jobs to offer. He'd have them to his home for events, and this and that. And so, they had a lot of exposure. And I thought it was an excellent program. You know, then when it got to spread and people wanted to do it all over the country, we had a little Republican backlash when they started voting on it in Congress, with people saying, "Y'all want to take the taxpayers' money and spend it on basketball." Well, really, basketball was the hook. It was the thing that was going to bring them into our sphere. And then once we had them there, we could talk about a lot of other things, like being good fathers. Because we did workshops about all those things. Speaker 2: Now, were you... were you there when the baseball, little league baseball program started? I know there's one, there's a movie about-- Speaker 1: No, that program had started before I ever got there. It was there when I was there, but it had already started. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Alright. It didn't last as long, either, I don't think. Speaker 1: No, it actually did last a long time. Speaker 2: Did it? Okay. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: It lasted a long time. And it wasn't quite the way it was depicted in the movie, but-- Speaker 2: No. I've known some people that were involved in it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And they-- Story_ID: 81603 Speaker 1: Yeah. The other program we had that I really was very proud of was called "Mama Said." And it was a program for young women who were mothers, and who were mentored by moms who had successfully reared their kids in public housing. And I thought of that program--the name of it--not the idea; it was a woman named Helen Fenner who was the president of the Local Advisory Council at Ida B. Wells [Homes]. And she said, "Carol, we really need to do something about these young moms. They don't know how to raise children. They're making a lot of mistakes with their kids, you know." She sort of would sit on her... outside her dwelling and see some of this. And she was very disturbed by it. So, after talking with her a little bit, it occurred to me that maybe moms like her could mentor the girls who needed to know how to be mothers. But at first, I think I thought about it in a sort of retro way. I started recruiting all of these so-called successful women to be the mentors in the Mama Said program. It was an abysmal failure. Then it dawned on me, that the distance between this was too great. But the girls thought that so and so who didn't live anywhere near their community--who had an altogether different life--who went to college who ran this and this thing or whatever--wasn't anything like them. And they thought, "Well what you're talking about is something you can do in your neighborhood, but not something that I can do here." And that's when I realized sort of the mistake in my own reasoning, that I had overlooked the successful mom right next door. So, we totally did the program over, and started looking at the moms right there. And I started realizing... because by then I had moved my office from downtown at State and Madison to Ida B. Wells. I moved all my staff there. Because I said, "If you're really actually into development, you're going to get a much better feel for what things we ought to be doing. Our ears are going to be to the ground. We're going to be talking to the residents and dealing with them in a different way." So, we went back to the drawing board. And working with Mrs. Fenner and some of the other... I call "old school moms," then we reorganized Mama Said. And it was wildly successful, because we were able to get funding and hire women who lived in the developments to have some roles, as well as the women who volunteered. And if the girls were involved in workshops and different kinds of things--if the mom lived next door or across the street--your mentoring mom--she'd get to see what you were doing. She'd get to see what was happening. She could say, "Come and sit on my porch and let's talk for a minute." You know, it was just in a different kind of environment. And that was very successful. And I see my Mama Said moms all the time; they want to have a reunion. They became mentoring moms themselves, and so forth. And in the subsequent years when other girls would come, they sort of were self-directed, self-governing. They would tell the other girls, "Don't do that. You're going to have to... you know, you shouldn't spank her." Or, "You shouldn't do this or you shouldn't that." They learned a lot of things that they passed on to other people, you know. Story_ID: 81604 Speaker 1: So Midnight Basketball, Mama Said... and CADRE was the third program, of which I'm most proud. And CADRE was an acronym for Combatting Alcohol and Drugs through Rehabilitation and Education. That's where we started on-site substance abuse programs right in the developments. Had lots of successes. They still have reunions. Had people who came up through the ranks who are now successful counselors, and run programs all over the city who came through this. And they was able to be just right there on the ground and make a big difference in what was going on in the community. So, there'd be places you could go. And we bought as we... Later on, we--we'd incubate these programs. And this is what I loved about [HM Vincent] Vince Lane, because he let me try all of what some other people would have considered some wild things. And then he'd go to Washington [D.C.] and fight for us, and fight for funding and what have you. So, we got some funding from HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] for the public housing drug elimination program. We were able to grow these things. And we could buy beds, you know. In other words, there's always waiting lists if you want to go into rehab. And the waiting list often is so long that a person who's motivated one day, loses their motivation for rehabilitation, because they have waited so long, and because of all the distractions in their communities. So, by us having the means to buy beds, we could put people in treatment right then and there, or within a day--put them into detox and then put them right into treatment. So, CADRE was also a very successful groundbreaking and award winning public housing program. Story_ID: 81605 Speaker 1: Okay. What were some of the frustrations of working with CHA [Chicago Housing Authority]? Speaker 2: Whew! Speaker 1: You know, it was a huge job. I mean just thinking of Resident Services in CHA in Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Well, the fact that some things, no matter what, were very difficult... that sometimes the environment was very dangerous. Probably the worst day of my entire professional life was [October 13, 1994] the day that one young man [sic, two young men] threw another young man [Eric Morse] off the top of one of those high-rise buildings... a kid. And it was the building where we were. And we had to do a lot of work. It led us to working with the Association of Black Psychologists. Speaker 1: Was it in Ida B. Wells [Homes]? Speaker 2: It was in Wells. Speaker 1: I kind of remember. Speaker 2: It led to work with the Association of Black Psychologists. Maisha Bennett was the head of it then, and I contacted her and I said, "Our whole community needs counseling." Because the expectation is that somehow these kids are supposed to shake it off and go to school the next day. Speaker 1: Is that the famous case that made the national news? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --little boy being dropped from a high window-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and another kid-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, who were playing... they were... they saw the movie or something, you know. Okay. Speaker 2: So, we worked the community very hard during that time, and they organized. And the black psychologists came out and they worked... they went floor to floor, building to building, working with families and all of that. And at the end of it, I said, "Now y'all got to work with us." Because we all felt we had failed because something like this could still happen. Speaker 1: Now, that was in the building right behind the [HM Jacob H. Carruthers] Center for Inner City Studies [at Northeastern Illinois University in Chicago]. [Clarence] Darrow Homes, right? Speaker 2: 3833 South Langley. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Story_ID: 81606 Speaker 1: But we [Chicago Housing Authority] had some other good things, too. We got the [Carruthers] Center [for Inner City Studies at Northeastern Illinois University in Chicago] involved. We started a school called the Wells Prep [Ida B. Wells Preparatory Elementary Academy]. We started it at the Center, and then it spun out to a development at... to some buildings at Wells [Ida B. Wells Homes], and then ultimately to a school within the school, in one of the elementary schools. And they're still graduating kids from Wells Prep, you know. That was also one of the successful programs. Story_ID: 81607 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, did you... now you were there for, you say eight years. Did you, how did you come to leave? And what are some of your reflections on CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] today, after-- Speaker 2: Well, how I came to leave was very interesting, and it grew out of those sports programs. Because in addition to the midnight basketball... when we're doing the Midnight Basketball [League], it comes to the attention of Arnold Schwarzenegger. And he has a program that he started in California called the Inner-City Games. So, they've taken Inner-City Games from Los Angeles [California] to Atlanta [Georgia], and then they want to bring it to Chicago. So, Gil Walker goes to Atlanta to see what it's all about. And he comes back and says, "Hey, this Inner-City Games thing is something we ought to do." And so, we started working to do the Inner-City Games. And this is having kids from all developments get involved in all sports and then, you know, again, do tournaments. It's like Midnight Basketball on steroids, because it involves everything, including soccer. We get the American Youth Soccer Association organization involved. We started training kids in CHA in all those sports. We even had something called The Chase Cup, the CHA Soccer Experience. And we worked with that when the World Cup comes [1994]. In other words, it gets big, big, big. So, we're one of the leading Inner-City Games cities. So, enter the House of Blues. They're getting ready to open up in Chicago [Illinois in 1996]. And Isaac Tigrett, who was the founder of the House of Blues, had a philosophy that was very philanthropic. And he wanted people in Chicago to know that his business model was that the business was to do good... that the profits of the business were to do good. And he was looking for something to benefit in Chicago. So, one of the investors in Chicago was part of the board of the Inner-City Games. And he suggested that the Inner-City Games be the first recipient of that House of Blues philanthropy. So, what they decided to do... this was right at the time they were going to be doing the grand opening... was to have a golf outing and to raise money through the golf outing to give to the Inner-City Games. They were going to do these foursomes and have well-known celebrities golf with businesspeople from Chicago. And it was for some huge amount, like ten thousand dollars for a foursome. So, when they described the event to me, I said, "This is not anything we can do. You know, we can't sell ten thousand dollar golf outing tickets." So, they laughed and said, "Oh, you don't have to, we'll do that. All you have to do is, you know, come and bring some of the guys, if you know people who can play who want to be a part of it." So, we brought like Bernie Mac, and Otis Wilson, and people we knew; we got them in the mix to be part of some of the celebrity foursomes and have you. And they raised a significant amount of money for us that day. So, they were trying to sort of find out what was going on culturally in Chicago in the different communities, and what was going on in the schools and so forth. And this is something that I knew very well. And I was so appreciative, because I never had anybody raise money for me without me having to do much but show up. So, I prepared an extensive package for them of everything that was going on in Chicago--who the programs were, who should get this, who did that--all of the stuff in the various communities. And I sent it to them just to say "Hey, thank you. I hear you want to know this. Here's what's happening here, you know." And they contacted me back and said, "We need someone to be head of the House of Blues Foundation in Chicago, you know. Are you interested?" I said, "No. I work for CHA. I love what I'm doing. It's much more significant than this, and I'm not interested." So then Isaac Tigrett himself came, and we had a discussion. And he repeated the offer, and I said, "No, I'm not interested." He said, "Well, frankly, I would like for you to be the head of the International House of Blues Foundation, and direct this everywhere there is a House of Blues. Right now, we're national but we're going international. We're going to Japan, we're going here... we're going there. Would you like to do that?" And I said, "Now, you're talking. I'd like to do that." So, I left CHA and went to the International House of Blues Foundation. Story_ID: 81608 Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you get a chance to do all those things? Speaker 2: I got a chance to do a few things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not nearly all the things I wanted to do. Because after about a year and a half or two years, the whole configuration of the House of Blues changed, you know. Isaac [Tigrett] was very pro certain kinds of things--you know, giving money to civil rights, civil rights museums; having scholarships in every city where there was a House of Blues, doing things--we started doing documentaries of the early blues musicians and folk artists. I loved all of that, because you know I was in video. So, I liked doing those things. But as he began to expand, and expand very rapidly, more people's money got involved in this then he and Dan Akroyd's. okay. And as more people got involved, they wanted seats on the board. And at a certain point, he lost controlling interest of the board. And when that happened, the new board said, "The House of Blues is making a lot of money, but we're not getting much in the way of dividends." They really didn't like the business model of giving away every... so much money. And so, first they voted out his role, and brought in someone else to run the House of Blues. But they knew he was the figure, and so they still needed him. And he tried to continue, but he was so upset at the direction it was going in, that he refused to do that anymore. And then they ended up bringing in somebody else, and then they changed everything. They changed our offices, they changed the way things were going to be done, and they didn't want to do all these other programs that we were doing; they didn't want us to have any staff. They wanted to minimize this thing to where they gave something like two two-thousand dollar scholarships everywhere there was a House of Blues. And so of course we had a parting of the ways. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were there about a year and a half? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Let me ask you another question. Now-- Speaker 2: And they since have been sold like several times. Now, they're part of something called Live Nation. It bears no resemblance to what the model was at the beginning. Story_ID: 81609 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I want to go back to ask you a question that may seem like it's off the wall. But when you said you moved your office from downtown at CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] to-- Speaker 2: Right, Ida B. Wells. Speaker 1: Ida B. Wells Homes. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: When you left, did it move back downtown? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It stayed there? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. It was pretty shocking when it happened. Nobody could believe it. I had an office that was about as big as this room. It's right at State and Madison. I've got most of my administrative staff there. But the so-called field staff is out in the developments. It was sort of a house and field kind of thing, right. And my staff is going to Carson's and shopping during the lunchtime, going here, going there, and so forth and so on. You got a different feel for what's going on if you're there, than when you're in the development. So, I'm taking a look at this. And I'm like, "Um, I think we need to get out." Because, you know, it's one thing to tell somebody you'll get around to addressing their problems soon if you're in luxury where you are. And it's another thing if you're in that same place. So, it was very controversial. Some of the staff was very upset about moving. You know, even the people who were already in the field thought I should stay downtown. Because after all, if I'm downtown pushing paper, I don't know what's going on out in the field. I said, "I said, no, you have been misled. I'm not that kind of person. So, I'm about to come out there with you." So, we moved. We took some units at 3833, and we moved there. And really all these programs I've described to you were all located in different developments housed there, because we went out, you know. And it meant a lot. It made us much more impactful at what we did, and made us much more accessible to residents who could just come over and see us. And it meant we got a chance to really, really do the work, you know. And I remember so clearly that first day after we moved in there. All of a sudden, some of my staff who dressed up every day to come to work when we were working downtown, showed up to work in some warm-up suits and things like that. I said, "Ooh, are you on vacation? Did you just stop by? What's with you?" "Well, no, you know, we out here at the development. I'm not wearing my clothes." I said, "Oh, but you are, you know. So, yes, you are. You're going to show the highest degree of professionalism. Everybody deserves it. They're the people who pay you. You work for them, that's who you work for, you know. So, you're going to show your best, you're going to give your best. It's not time for play clothes. It's time for you to just, you know, give your best work to your people." Speaker 1: Okay. I thought I'd ask that question. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I wondered if-- Speaker 2: Well, no, after that-- Speaker 1: --how things had changed. Speaker 2: --you know, and I was there for a considerable amount of time. The stage was set; it was like that. You know, it was going to be in the development. Everybody was accustomed to it. I think if they had tried to move back downtown, it would have been-- Speaker 1: Now, and one other thing- Speaker 2: --disastrous. Speaker 1: One other thing. I remember- Story_ID: 81610 Speaker 1: Was it Project Peace? Was that the program that-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I forgot about that one. Speaker 1: --Olomenji was working with? Speaker 2: Well, [R.] Olomenji [O'Connor] already worked at Chicago Housing Authority [CHA] when I got there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was a situation where there was a lot of fighting going on between kids that lived in Ida B. Wells [Homes] and kids that lived in Stateway Gardens that went to Wendell Phillips High School. And it was causing a lot of problems in school and after school--a lot of violence and everything. And so, we started talking about it, and we said, "Well..." We started going to the school talking to the kids and what have you. And we noticed that one of the main issues was a lack of enough positive, strong, black men as role models. And so, we came up with the idea of asking a hundred black men to come to Phillips and to talk to the students and to be there, and be men that said, "Hey, I came up from here, you know. Things can be different, and I can be, you know, I can help you," that kind of thing. We just did it first as an assembly that morning. And we started recruiting, and before we knew it we got all kinds of people that... Olomenji worked for Rights of Passage programs. And I said he would be perfect for this, because he had already been doing rites of passage programs and all kinds of programs like this. He'd come up under the Bobby Wright, you know. And I said, he's going to be great for this. And he really took it to heart, and really worked very hard on it. So, it, too, emerged and developed into a regular program called Project Peace. When we had thought we were going to do that assembly... maybe it was a one-time thing, or maybe it was going to establish a little miniature... But we didn't really know where it was going to go. There again, we had that opportunity. A lot of times you may work for someone who doesn't allow you to try anything out, you know. And our real concern about this, in this day of what they call "evidence based practice"--where if somebody hasn't already proved that something worked, you don't get to try it... you don't get to do it. And I'm wondering, "Well, where do the creative programs come from? And if I've only got to do this... What about practice based evidence? What about getting out there and doing... and seeing what's happening, and letting things evolve? And that's what we were able to do. And so, Olomenji sort of took that, and he became the head of Project Peace. That meant we established Rites of Passage programs, and all those kind of things in the developments for young people. Story_ID: 81611 Speaker 1: I was asking you off-camera about Olomenji [O'Connor], who is head of Project Peace, being on public television paired with Mr. Rogers [Fred Rogers] to discuss conflict mediation with the children. Speaker 2: Well, Olomenji grew this idea to include conflict mediation--training in the schools that involved kids being able to address, you know, their own issues and what have you. I was not at CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] any longer when the particular interview you're talking about happened. But it definitely was a program over which he assumed a great deal of ownership. And it grew and expanded into some very significant areas. And his experiences from before at the Bobby Wright Center, the experiences that he had in terms of the development of rites of passage programs, influenced a lot of what occurred at CHA, even in the CADRE [Combatting Alcohol and Drugs through Rehabilitation and Education] program where we started a "Just Say No" club for the kids. Except our 'no' was 'k-n-o-w' okay, about knowledge and what have you. He started the rites of passage programs for those kids as well. Speaker 1: Okay, Olomenji O'Connor. I thought it was curious the way Mr. Rogers pronounced his name, "Ohlo-mingee." (Laughter). Speaker 2: I can imagine. I'll give anything to see that tape. Speaker 1: It exists. It's probably on the internet somewhere. Speaker 2: We need to look for it. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. I couldn't believe it. Story_ID: 81612 Speaker 1: But alright, so when you left the [International] House of Blues Foundation because of the many, many changes it was going through, and morphing into beyond what you thought it was going to be, you went to the, you ended up at the [HM Jacob H. Carruthers] Center for Inner City Studies [at Northeastern Illinois University in Chicago]. How did that happen? Speaker 2: Well, I came back home. And I really never left my residence in Chicago, but I was mainly on the road. I spent maybe about a week... a month here... I spent a week in California, and then I went to the various Houses of Blues. And Isaac Tigrett was the one that I got me into using the internet and all of that, because that's the way they kept up with everybody. They were early into the technology, and his thing... And when I first got hired, I said I didn't really do that. He said, "Oh, you're going to have to do that to work here, because that's the only way we communicate with people." And it was over the internet, so I got involved in that. And he said, "You don't really have to move to California as long as you're out here a week a month, for the things we do when we're thinking about things together. Because you're going to be going to a lot of places, and it's really cheaper for you to go those places from Chicago than it is from L.A. [Los Angeles]" So after that, when I came back I was looking around for something to do. And I heard about the establishment of a new program. They were looking for somebody to be the founding director of something called Museums and Public Schools, and I applied and got that position. I had done a lot of work with museums in the past, generally as a volunteer--curated some shows, co-curated some things, and participated in some things with the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois] mostly, and a few things with the Field [Museum of Natural History in Chicago, Illinois] and the Adler [Planetarium in Chicago, Illinois]. So, Museums and Public Schools was perfect for me. And I had also started something when I was at CHA called The Museum Consortium, where the museums had all adopted different public housing developments, and did programs both in the development as well as had kids come to their museums. So, I was pretty well acquainted with most of the museum directors. So, I became the Director of Museums and Public Schools and founding director. Story_ID: 81613 Speaker 1: I was back in Chicago [Illinois] full time, and then I became... I was approached by my former colleagues at the [HM Jacob H. Carruthers] Center for Inner Center Studies [at Northeastern Illinois University in Chicago] and asked to return there as the director. I had been at the Center many years before, for ten years. I'd always kept in association; was there back in the real heydays with Communiversity and everything, and I always had a love for the Center and what it had accomplished in Chicago. So, I was very gratified by this and by the invitation that came from the faculty members and the director to come back there, and I did. So, I went back to the Center for Inner City Studies. I was able to do some good things while I was there, in terms of increasing enrollment and getting re-engaged with some things that I wanted to see us do. I brought the Type 75 [Certification], the principal's program, to the Center. Because early on, our whole thing was to prepare people who wanted to teach and work in inner-city communities. And I felt we needed to return to that. Some of the most impactful principals in Chicago had come from the Center for Inner City Studies, both black and brown. They had moved up the ranks in education, and I felt we needed to get back to that. And so, we successfully got the program, it's still there now. And we became a competitor in terms of, again, graduate level education. Because as you recall, when the Center first started it was strictly a graduate program. Over the years it had expanded to also have undergraduate programs. And so, I went for recruiting people who had started college and maybe not finished, and said, "You need to come back." And we started going for those kinds of students, and we increased enrollment a great deal. I also started going for more grants. I think that was part of my appeal when they came to ask me. It was not only that they knew me and I knew them, but I was always known for being able to bring money to an institution, because I was a pretty skilled grants person. So, I started writing proposals and attracting and getting money, and also getting us engaged with public housing, since that had been part of my background. So, we got a $4 million grant from the U.S. Department of Education for something called PT-4, "Preparing Teachers in the New Technologies." By then I was sort of off and running with the technology. And we were in a situation where the kids knew more about technology than their teachers did. And the teachers were reluctant users, and we wanted to work on that as well as to reform the way teachers were trained, so that they came out of these programs knowing about technology and being able to integrate that into their work. So, that was one of the things we got going at the Center. Also, we got the Center re-engaged with the public housing community. By this time, this "transformation" was underway and they're looking for things that were going to happen with residents around the new communities and all of that. We didn't quite know how it was going to turn out, but we knew we needed to be involved and be engaged with them. So, we started something called The Right Move, about good neighbors and what that was all about, and we worked with that. And subsequently, the Center worked with the residents to help them with their elections. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, I remember the enrollment increased dramatically. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And the whole, you know, profile of the Center-- Speaker 1: Well, I wanted to bring back-- Speaker 2: --improved. Speaker 1: --that feeling, you know. And I said we need to get re-engaged. We need to bring our alumni back, you know, bring some exciting people. We still had a core of very excellent teachers and faculty members. The Center always had brilliant folk. And I convinced Jake [HM Jacob H. Carruthers] to still teach, even though he technically had retired. I said, "Please still teach, the students need you." And the same thing with Don Bailey. They were both, you know, still able and willing, and they still taught, you know. And we were also able to bring in some younger people like Lance Williams and Zada Johnson and what have you, so we could get some of that spark but still keep that wisdom and that core of people who had been engaged with the Center for a long time. Because you know, folks don't leave. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Alright. Story_ID: 81614 Speaker 1: Well, I think you started something that's really still, you know... it's still... whatever you started, it's still giving, you know. Some of the programs are still... the enrollment seems to still be better than it was. For many years, it seemed to be down, I mean-- Speaker 2: Well, it gets back to something I said to you earlier: Everything needs to be marketed. Just because something's good doesn't mean people are going to do it. You have to remind people that it's good. You have to keep on saying, "Come here, and here's why. And here's our product, and this is what it is. And this is why it's convenient, and this is why it's a good choice." And this is what we started doing--much more marketing. Speaker 1: Well, once again, it's just opinion, but I think a lot of people could observe the same thing--that prior to your arrival, there seemed to have been a reluctance on the part of the staff of the Center to engage in your campus for resources. And there's, as you said, it's a brilliant, you know, faculty and staff there at the Center. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: And then we did some things-- Speaker 1: But the resources were always lacking. Speaker 2: Exactly. And we did some things to make some important statements to the community. We did the mural outside, the Black History mural that's there. We did activities outside, you know. When I came there and they talked about having some big program welcoming me to the Center, I said, "Don't do it yet. Do it a year from now, when we've got something to brag about. And when we do it, let's do in association with an enrollment fair. And let's get people to come. And tell them about the school, and why they should come to this school." And so, we had a big opening that I wish I would have had the presence of mind to tape. Because our president was there, and all of our elected officials and people from the community. And by us having it outside, people could just walk up and say, "What is this really about?" And we could say, "It's about coming to school and getting a degree, and so forth and so on. Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I remember everybody that was a friend of the Center dropped whatever they were doing. And some people left their jobs to come down and support the Center. Speaker 2: Right, people came back. And we also had things to re-engage our elected officials, you know. We had breakfast, and invited all the elected officials and asked them to help us; to get involved; to help the Center--to help with funding, to help with other things, you know. And people, you know, notably among them like Donne Trotter and others, some of the folks who were our alumni who were elected officials, also got engaged in helping us to things. And out of that came your Trans-Atlantic Slave Commission and other things that were funded opportunities for the Center. Story_ID: 81615 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you were there [Jacob H. Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies at Northeastern Illinois University] until, what was it? I'm looking at my outline here... when you moved to-- Speaker 2: Two Thousand and Three [2003]. Speaker 1: Two Thousand and Three [2003], okay. That's when you became-- Speaker 2: Secretary of Human Services for the State of Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about that. How did that opportunity happen? Speaker 2: It seems like all of my opportunities happened serendipitously. I was at Malcolm X College [City Colleges of Chicago] this time; I wasn't at Harold's [Chicken Shack]. But I went to Malcolm X for Kwanzaa celebration. And this election had just happened. [Rod] Blagojevich had just become the governor. And a friend, Bamani Obadele, was also at Malcolm X that day. We were getting awards during their Kwanzaa celebration. And I had known Obadele since he was a kid at Robert Taylor Homes when I worked at CHA [Chicago Housing Authority]. And I remember seeing him one of those years when we were down there at the [Jacob H. Carruthers] Center for Inner City Studies [at Northeastern Illinois University] getting ready to be in the Bud Billiken Parade, and we were all sort of supporting [HM] Roland Burris' run for the governor, I remember seeing Obadele running around going door to door for somebody named Blagojevich, you know, that I didn't really know anything too much about. And so, when we gets elected I see Obadele at the Kwanzaa, and I say, "Okay, so your guy got elected. What you going to do? You know, do you have a role in the administration? Are you going to be working? What are you going to be doing?" And we started talking about some of the opportunities, and where he thought he wanted to work, and some of the things he wanted to do. Because he was very interested of course in young people, in youth development. And I guess that sort of put me on his mind. Because as it turned out, because he was a person that had worked early on for Blagojevich, he was a person who had a lot of influence and voice about things. He was in some of the meetings when people were coming up and recommended for things. And he said, "You know, you would really be great to te the Human Services Secretary. Are you interested?" And I said, "Sure." But I just sort of said it casually, because quite frankly, I didn't know much about it. I never thought much about it, because I spent most of my time working in academic and other kinds of circles. So, I didn't know a lot about it. So, the next day he called me and said, "I need your resume, because I'm going to this meeting to try and decide who's going to the Secretary. I'd like to be able to nominate you." I said, "Are you kidding?" Because again, I said it casually, and I never thought it was going to develop. He said, "Oh, I'm serious. You know, I think you would be good. You did great things at CHA and, you know, they need somebody like you in this position." So, I sent the resume, and that night somebody called me. They said they'd like to consider me, and they'd like me to come in for some interviews and what have you. So, I think I went to the first interview, maybe two, I don't know. I'm thinking I went to one. But I know over time, there were three different interviews. So, it may have been after the second one when I was offered the position, and I said, "No." Because I really liked being at the Center. I was happy to be back there. I felt comfortable, I liked what we were doing. And I didn't want to be in a situation where I thought that politics was going to get involved in what I was going to be able to do. I've always really been fortunate to have some autonomy where I was, and be able to bring something to the table. And I thought this might be more bureaucratic than what I was interested in. Story_ID: 81616 Speaker 1: So, two people called me after that, initially. After that, some other people. But [Illinois deputy governor] Louanner Peters, who was very much involved in the administration--and our careers had paralleled in a lot of ways, even though we didn't know each other yet. And she said, "I really wish you would re-consider." And [Bamani] Obadele called and said, "Listen, did you get a call? What happened with this... with that?" I told him I got it, but I didn't think I was going to go, because I really liked being at the Center. He said, "Look, I don't want you... I don't want to have to come down to the [Jacob H. Carruthers] Center [for Inner City Studies at Northeastern Illinois University] and picket you. You need to really re-consider this. And you really need to understand what kind of job this is." So, I said, "I don't want to move to Springfield [Illinois]." Because I thought you had to move to Springfield and all that. He said, "You don't have to move to Springfield. Let me come and talk to you about it." And then some other people who I knew and trusted also came to see me about it. Because by this time, the word is sort of getting around. And people at some of the agencies started calling me to say, "We really have never had anybody like you in a job like this. And I know you don't think this is like you, but that's precisely the reason why you ought to go. Because it's going to be a shift in the way things are done, if you do. And then this impacts a lot of our people." So, I started... I went online and started trying to understand the position, which was huge, much huger than I had imagined. I mean, it was like a $5 billion dollar budget, and it was a huge staff of like 17,000 people. And it just seemed really too big. But, it was at the same time, again, an opportunity to start some new things, to put them on an even bigger playing field. And after people talked to me about the way decisions were usually made and funding was really done usually, I knew I had an opportunity to get more resources to people who needed them. And so, I ultimately agreed to go. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So this is in what month? Of 2000... well, you can't-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I do remember. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I started in February of 2003. Story_ID: 81617 Speaker 1: Now, it's interesting you thought you would have had to move to Springfield [Illinois]. I would have thought the director would have been in Springfield, too. But the office was actually located on Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois], wasn't it? Speaker 2: The previous director had lived in Springfield. They said that I could live here if I went to Springfield enough. Because a great number of the people who were impacted by the programs of the Human Services were in Chicago. And a lot of our offices were in Chicago. The main thing was to move around. And so, I'd go to Springfield and usually be there like Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday. I'd be in Chicago on Monday and Friday. And then going to the other parts of the state--because I had, there were over three hundred offices that were in some way or another associated with Human Services. And I decided I was going to try to personally get to as many of them as I could. So, we would drive and go to all of these different places. Speaker 1: What percentage... you probably know this. I mean I don't know if you-- Speaker 2: I probably don't. Speaker 1: --it's on the tip of your tongue. But what percentage of the population of the State of Illinois is actually in the Chicagoland area? Speaker 2: Frankly, I don't remember that. Speaker 1: Yeah, I would think just off the top that most of the overwhelming majority of the people in Illinois are in Chicagoland, what we call the surrounding communities. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Chicago and the surrounding communities. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And certainly the urban population-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely-- Speaker 1: --that needs those services is sort of, is-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --located here. So, it does make sense that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the director-- Speaker 2: But remember our services are a lot of different services. Because DHS [Department of Human Services] was formerly six different departments that became one mega agency--Social, Mental Health-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Your Alcohol and Substance Abuse, Community Health and Prevention, Human Capital Development, Rehab Services, and one other that's escaping me at the moment. But all of these that became one. But the fact of the matter is they hadn't become one. They still functioned separately. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that was the first order of business for me, was to try to create them into an integrated whole. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, well, what did you do, as that being the first order of business? Speaker 2: Well, I started working with people who were there. See, the interesting thing about it is you have to do two things. You have to build your team. Because when a new administration comes in, there are certain kinds of positions that they can replace. And then there's the vast majority of them that are your people who are working, no matter who's in charge, okay. And they're sort of like civil service workers although the phrase is different, the term is different. So, I worked on getting some people I thought were creative who had come in to help do things. And then I started looking at getting people who were part of the old and the new, so we wouldn't get one of those "we/they" kind of things or "You're the so and so people as opposed to the so and so people." And we formed groups. And sometimes you start with the easiest things. When the agency was six different agencies, they had divided the state up in different ways. So, they didn't have a common map. So, what was Region 1 in Mental Health might not be Region 1 in Alcohol and Substance Abuse. And I'm like, "Okay, this is so easy. First of all, let's get one map. So, I had each department pick their representatives who were going to be part of this whole thing, to plan this new thing, and decide how we're going to do things regionally, what's the logical way to do it? What's this and that, and so forth? People who worked there had never been consulted about how this was going to happen. They were just told that it was going to happen. And a whole other layer of supervision went over them. So, the department had seven of everything--the six from the different departments, and then the seventh. So, we had seven Human Resources directors, seven Technology Directors... seven of everything. And I said--and we were in a situation with a big deficit. At this point the state [Illinois] had a $5 billion deficit. And of course, it did strike me that that was the same as my budget. So, I was very keen on using my budget wisely. So, I said, "We're not going to have seven things. We're going to have one chief technology officer; everybody is going to come up under that. And that's how we're going to deal with this surplus and of this. And this is how we're going to start cutting, and cutting our expenses. But the deal... and the difference was that the employees who were selected by their co-workers had an opportunity to be in these regional committees to decide how things were going to be done, and how we were going to run this. Story_ID: 81618 Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Yeah, that's... so you have a lot of re-shaping of how things. Speaker 2: Right. And then I decided... I wanted to think about how I could talk to 17,000 people. And I decided, well, the technology, that's how. So I started doing a weekly piece called "On the One." You know, how do we get on the one, how do we get on the same page? And I would send out these messages about what we were looking at, and invite people to get involved in it, and invite people to answer me back. And if they did, I would answer them myself. I read my own e-mails and what have you. And that was a way to start getting people engaged. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. It was fortunate that you were re-introduced to technology at the House of--. Speaker 2: No. introduced, it was not re- introduced. I was still writing on long yellow legal pads when I went to the House of Blues. Speaker 1: Alright, okay. Speaker 2: But it helped me, because I took that with me everywhere, to look at how to use technology to improve the work, and how to refine the way it's done. Story_ID: 81619 Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, well, so, you were in that position [Secretary of the Illinois Department of Human Services] until November of this past year? Speaker 2: Until October-- Speaker 1: October? Speaker 2: --of '09' [2009]. Speaker 1: '09' [2009]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. And you know, did you... now you hadn't worked under any other governor, I guess? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Other than [Rod] Blagojevich? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So, everything was pretty much the same. And so, did you, what did you think? Now, he's so much in the news now, and so much is being said about his alleged attempt to sell the seat of [HM President] Barack Obama in the Senate. How was he as a director? Or did you even come into contact with him that much? Speaker 2: After the interview-- Speaker 1: I mean as a governor. Speaker 2: After... at one of those three job interviews I referred to, we met. After that point, I think we only had one other meeting in the whole time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were deputies, okay. And at that point, [Illinois deputy governor] Louanner Peters was the person responsible for the social services. And she was the person that I did most of my interacting with in terms of my work. And I was very happy about that, because she came from that background. We had a lot of similar sensibilities, and I was really glad that she was the person that I would be most relating to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was, however, surprised that I was on the cabinet but there weren't any cabinet meetings. Speaker 1: None? Speaker 2: One, the whole time. And I'd meet people from other states who would talk about how they met with their governor once a month. Because I had the biggest budget in the state, and you would think that maybe there would be a little more interest in that. And I said, "Well, you mean you actually meet with your governor? You know, we don't meet." But it was a different model, you know. The one thing I will definitely say in his behalf is that the years that I was appointed [2003], he appointed more African-Americans to top level positions than any other governor in the United States. And there were some excellent appointments of people, and it was great to have that kind of team of people to work with in all these other areas, you know. It was... I don't think it's been like that... I think the numbers steadily dwindled. I don't think that anybody ever got that many. And these were people who had some considerable reputations and have gone on to do great things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Greater things. Story_ID: 81620 Speaker 1: So, when you look back at this period of time, what would you consider to be your legacy with the State [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, I don't whether it's a legacy or not, because I don't know if it's still going on. But one of the things I think I did that was very significant was change the way the funding was given out. Because I developed a competitive grants process, as opposed to people just deciding who was going to get that money. And it opened up the doors for a lot of people to get funded who had never been able to get funding in the past, particularly black and brown agencies. The money shifted dramatically in using certain of the black agencies as conduits. It was very important, because there was a tiered process where certain mega agencies would get all of the money. And they'd have little outposts in your neighborhood, as opposed to the grass roots agencies and the black and Latino agencies being able to get funded directly. And so, I changed that. I think the other thing of which I'm very proud is something we did called Team Illinois. The idea was can we go into some communities that, no matter who's the governor, never get any help? Can we see what are the most poverty stricken communities in the state that just don't get anything? And can we go in there and look at how we can all work together? It was called Team Illinois because it wasn't just going to be just human services--how to get everybody engaged in that. How do you get economic opportunity engaged? Because this stuff isn't about welfare; this stuff is about economics. How do you get Corrections engaged? How do you get Public Health engaged, and so forth? And so, the first community we picked was Pembroke [Illinois], Hopkins Park [Illinois]. You know, just a little over an hour or so from Chicago, but looking like the rural South, in terms of the opportunity and the housing and the circumstances there. Speaker 1: That's exactly what was running through my mind. I was thinking-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's the city with the black cowboys, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Out there in Pembroke. Speaker 2: Yes. And we wanted to use an asset based strategy that said rather than talk about what they don't have--because that's what people talked about all the time--let's talk about what do they have, you know. They have the black cowboys. They do organic farming, they ride horses, they do [Marcus] Garvey fests; they do other things. There's pride, there's people that remember its founding by [Joseph] "Pap" Tetter, right out of slavery who arrived there on a covered wagon. His descendants are still there. There's a history, there's a genealogy, there's self-reliance. How do you build on that, you know? So, I was proud that we started the work. I do not think it accomplished nearly what we had hoped that it would. We were trying to work with existing resources. It needed additional funding. We did a lot at the beginning, but in... maybe after the first of the year or so, it sort of lost steam. Because all the agencies--who were having to still keep cutting their budgets because of deficits--consider this really still a Human Services thing, you know. I think Environmental Protection stayed engaged. You know, they did some things that were very important. Transportation... because people had started using Pembroke as a dumping ground. They removed thousands and tens of thousands of old tires and things like that, that people had dumped. I think some things happened to feel proud about, but not enough happened. But we went there; we went to Savanna [Illinois], which is in the northern part of the state. That's a white community that had a lot of challenges. We went to a certain section of Aurora [Illinois]. We went to... wow, I thought I'd never forget these communities. I can't think of them all, but we went to a variety of communities. And then other neighborhoods starting asking us, "Come and bring Team Illinois. Come and bring Team Illinois to our community." We couldn't really expand, because I thought it makes no sense to expand if we can't finish the work in the communities where we already started, you know. I thought that was very important to do. Again, we made some good inroads, but not nearly enough. Story_ID: 81621 Speaker 1: We were talking off-camera about some of the other... Dixmoor [Illinois], Phoenix, Illinois, Cairo [Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Well, there were a lot of challenged communities here. We went to Cairo, we went to that area as well. We didn't get to many of the communities that they wanted us to. Because, again, I felt it didn't make sense to keep adding communities until we could finish the work... or get the work at a certain level in the communities where we already were. Speaker 1: This is an initiative that did bring resources to... Speaker 2: It did. Speaker 1: --people who had-- Speaker 2: And people got jobs. We had job fairs in Pembroke, a lot of people got work. We just did some things in a different way. Story_ID: 81622 Speaker 1: What was your most difficult moment in this job [Secretary of the Illinois Department of Human Services]? Speaker 2: There were many of them, plus there were layers and layers of this. And it was difficult sometimes to get things through, because of the issues of political influence and the roles that that played--the role that that played in terms of decision making and having to go before various committees to get approval for things. For the very first year [2003], shortly after I was there, was budget time. And I was absolutely terrified, because I didn't know that I had command yet of this budget, you know, or of all the workings of the department. And sometimes when you were having to cut--because each year we'd be forced to pull... to tighten the belt. And so, we were in a situation of increased demand, but diminished resources. So it was always difficult to decide what. And you might think you could decide strictly on the basis of need. And we were certainly trying to create that by setting up a process that mirrored the federal government, in terms of you having to write proposals and everything instead of somebody just sitting down and deciding you were going to get some money. And we established some committees of people other than ourselves to review and grade and rate proposals without knowing whose they were, and all those kinds of things. But it was still difficult to get things done. Because at the end of the day when it was time to vote, certain people aren't going to vote for stuff if they're not getting anything. And so, this stuff is very difficult, you know. And it was... if you haven't worked in it, you may think you know it, but you really don't... because I certainly didn't think I was naive about things. But clearly, I was. Because I found out a lot about how things get done and how decisions get made and so forth, and how you really have to spend time trying to make sure you got some votes for what you got. So, trying to design things right isn't all of your work. Part of your work is making sure you can get some people who are willing to support it when it comes up for a vote, you know. So, one of the things I can really say is that in each one of these positions, I have learned a lot. And I learned a lot there about the importance of doing the pre-work, and going out and talking about this thing before it comes--not just trying for the first time to go before some committee and present some idea, you know. You know, I learned to see who's on this committee. Can I go talk to them ahead of time? If they've got a problem with this, what is their problem going to be, and all the rest of that, so I'd know how to move my things forward. But I still got into a huge brouhaha my first year with the inimitable Mike Madigan and others about how I was looking to do things. Story_ID: 81623 Speaker 1: It's probably time to talk about your candidacy to... as president of Chicago State [University in Chicago, Illinois], I believe. And there was so much ink about that, and so much written about it. And tell us about that. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: How did that come up? Speaker 2: Well, I was approached by a search committee to... when the position was available for Chicago State presidency. And I was really happy about that, because I had had an interest in that, you know. I had wanted to go back to higher education; it was absolutely my first love. Chicago State is a huge, urban university, and I had a lot of ideas about things I could do. So, when I got approached by the search committee, I did apply for the position. That was a very, very difficult thing. Because usually... I'm sort of spoiled about jobs, you know. People approach me. I interested. We work things out, and it may happen, it may not happen, but usually it does. There were a lot of political underpinnings in this. And the students and the faculty of Chicago State felt, and rightfully so, that they had been left out of the process. So, at the end of the day when they get two candidates whom they think are politically connected... I mean, nobody really realized that the State job [Secretary of the Illinois Department of Human Services] was the first time I ever had one; and that me and the governor [Illinois Governor Rod Blagojevich] weren't exactly hanging out, you know. But they get two people who have had these kinds of jobs-[HM] Wayne [Watson] from the city, me from the state. They said, "Hey, what happened to all the other candidates, and why didn't we have a role?" You know, and then it turned into just a massive mud-slinging about both candidates and about the process, and about there being a process that wasn't open--that didn't allow them to have a voice. And I think for some, it wouldn't have mattered who the candidates were at the end of the day--they didn't have a voice. Then they also said, "How did you get applications from all over the world and end up with two people right from our backyard, you know?" So folks characterized them, and both of us, in a very negative way. For me, I had had a situation at the Department of Human Services where I fired someone who subsequently brought a sexual harassment suit against my chief of staff. I did not fire the chief of staff; I placed them on leave pending the outcome of the investigation. It went to trial, they won. In other words, the chief of staff was upheld that there was no sexual harassment and all that, and she was allowed to come back to her job. But the person, one of the people associated with this, was also associated with a group of people at Chicago State. So, when this thing came up, all of this came back. They said, "Hey, here's this woman who let somebody who was accused of sexual harassment stay on her job. And she didn't fire them and she didn't do this, and she had drivers... and she did this and that." And all of that came up, and so there was a big whole negative thing. Subsequently I didn't get it, and not necessarily because of that, but you know... I didn't get it. Because both candidates were equally castigated, so I can't say I didn't get it because of castigation. But I didn't get the appointment. So, I still worked for Human Services, because unlike what a lot of people said, I wasn't fired, I wasn't looking for a job. I was approached, and I was interested in the job and decided to go for it. So-- Speaker 1: Was this the first time that you had been subject to-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --public castigation? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, by seeking a public position? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And this, it's different, isn't it? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. It was very disturbing for me. And frankly, I've never wanted to go anywhere where people didn't want me. And, but at the same time I had a lot of people calling me saying, "We hope you come, we hope you get it. We hope you this... we hope you that," students, faculty, all that. But they weren't nearly as vocal (Laughter) as the other people. In fact, sometimes they were downright closet about this thing, you know. Because a lot of people were like, "Whoever gets it, we don't want to have gone on record for the other person, because maybe there'll be consequences to that." So, I, you know, I had a lot of mixed feelings about it. I was sorry that that happened, you know. I felt that the thing should have been different. I sympathized with the issues about the process, because I'm a great believer in stakeholder involvement and participation--a great believer in shared governance, and clearly that didn't happen. And that meant whoever came was going to have to come with this cloud, you know, and have to deal with that before anything else. Story_ID: 81624 Speaker 1: Now, did this public castigation in any way impact what you were doing with the State [Illinois Department of Human Services] while you were employed with the State? Speaker 2: I can't... I don't know. I don't know. And I say I don't know, because by this time we've got a new governor [Pat Quinn], okay. We've got a new governor, and everybody knows that at some point or another, they're going to get their own team. So I don't know how he interpreted it; he never really spoke to me about it. But he never asked me to leave, either, you know. I really like to think that my work spoke for itself; and I did some really good work. And I had a lot of broad community support, and I've had broad community support in these positions. And it's always helped me, you know. The support I have from the community helped me a great deal in my position with the State. Even when I had some issues around my first budget with [Mike] Madigan, it was the community that came to my defense, you know. They brought buses of people from places who said, "We support Secretary Adams." And it had a lot of impact. It had impact on some of our elected officials who were not independent voices in Springfield [Illinois], but who only did what they were told by Madigan, and the people who called on them. So, that was interesting, too. So, I don't know really how Governor [Pat] Quinn was impacted by this. But I did know that it was getting close to the time for me to go. Because when you take these positions, you take them understanding that they're not permanent; that everybody who comes along at the top has a right to want... and should put together their own team. It's got to be some people that you have confidence in, you have trust in, and what have you. Now, people pick them for a variety of reasons, some of which are those reasons. And so, I knew that eventually I was going to need to make a move. And I think I'd done it long enough, actually. But I was then offered another position within the State. And that was something that had great appeal to me, and that was to go to Africa. I had always wanted it. And in fact, when I started looking around for things and started thinking, "I know Human Services is a big, big center for anybody's administration. And the new governor, whoever he is--if it's Quinn who was subsequently elected--but even during his interim, they're going to want their own person. What might I want to do if I'm looking for something in the State? And somebody approached me about, "What other things might you want to do?" And I said, "I'd like to go to Africa," because I was interested in that. And I'd always had some things going on in Africa, always been engaged in opportunities there and so forth, and had been there as a consultant and so forth. And anybody in African-American Studies, the idea that I can go there to work was near and dear to my heart. So, I was offered, and accepted a position as the State's Trade Officer for Africa. But I ended up not taking it at the end of the day, for a variety of reasons. It was not appropriately resourced, so I wasn't going to have the kind of staff that I needed to take on something that was going to involve a continent, not a country. The salary and the benefits in terms of the housing and everything--because I was going to need to move to Johannesburg, South Africa--were not sufficient. Because I knew I had to still maintain my home in Chicago [Illinois]. It would have been sufficient, had I not had to keep two places. But because Governor Quinn became the governor as a result of [Rod] Blagojevich's impeachment and hadn't been elected yet, it was a risk to move lock, stock and barrel and give up your home here. So, I needed to just keep two homes. And I started weighing all that. I had a family member, my oldest sister, who I had very major concerns about being that far away from, for health reasons. And so, I had decided that I was going to take her along. That was the only way I was going to feel comfortable. Then when I thought about the fact that I'm putting everybody at risk and inconveniencing everybody for something that may not last--that all depends on the election. You know, it's always at the whims of the political appointment, no matter what you do. I had second, third, and fourth thoughts. You know, I believe in intuitiveness and spirit. And it just came to me one night that this is not something I should do. Story_ID: 81625 Speaker 1: In the meantime, I had been contacted by a search firm about the DuSable Museum [of African American History]. But I had told the gentleman that called me that I was going to Africa, and that although it sounded like a great opportunity, I was planning to go to Africa. There was a huge press conference with the governor and everything, making this announcement about me going to Africa. When I got that revelation that I got that night about not going, I think I stayed up all night and waited until the next morning when it was a reasonable hour, so I could call the guy from the search firm and say, "Look, is that DuSable opportunity still available? You know, do I have time? I'd like to throw my hat in the ring." And when I reached him, he said, "Oh, my goodness, you're just in the nick of time. And yes, I would love to offer your name among the three that I'm going to advance to the board. So, that's what happened. Speaker 2: Okay. And you were selected? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Now, you, you were very familiar with the DuSable Museum? Speaker 1: Oh, yes. I was familiar with the Museum, familiar with, of course, the founder [HM Dr. Margaret Burroughs], who was someone I've admired for years and had been a person that patronized the Museum for a long time. So, I was familiar... familiar with some of the challenges as well. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Not as familiar as I would become later, but familiar. Story_ID: 81626 Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the tasks you took on when you--? Speaker 2: Well, I think under-resource. I mean, and that's a task I'm still very much engaged in--trying to come up with what it really takes to move forward to run a world-class museum, and at the same time to be engaged in the expansion and the capital campaign for the building that we've acquired, the Round House, which is an historical building built in 1880 that's going to take a lot of money to make into a museum. Because it wasn't built for one, just like the building in which we're housed wasn't built for... as a museum. And when that happens, when you're making an adaptive re-use, it's always much more costly, you know. The DuSable [Museum of African American History], though, is near and dear to the hearts of the people of Chicago [Illinois] and beyond. So, people love the museum; you have something to build on there. People love [HM] Dr. [Margaret] Burroughs and her work and what it has meant. So, I'm looking to build on those things to catapult us to another level. And I think that I have assembled--I'm in the process of assembling--a really great team of people, some of whom were already here, to work with to do this. And I think that, you know, there were a series of leaders here. I think every now and then an organization needs new life, you know. I think that's true of any of them. It's always dangerous to have the same people in a situation for too long a time, because whatever their thoughts are, they already had them. You know, sometimes you need to have a fresh injection, and I like to think I brought some fresh ideas to the table. Story_ID: 81627 Speaker 1: Can you give us kind of a history of the development of DuSable [Museum of African American History]? I think people watching this probably don't know that it started at the home of [HM] Dr. Burroughs. Speaker 2: Well, the DuSable Museum started in the home of Dr. Margaret Burroughs. She was an early proponent of African... everything--of art, of studies, of political engagement. She was an activist in every sense of the word, as well as an artist. She was a contemporary of Paul Robeson and Charles White, and some of the most interesting and outstanding cultural people of our time. And she had, I think, in her home sort of a salon, if you will, where people of various--well, not of various types--but people who were progressives politically and in the arts--and would gather and talk, and plan and do things. And she was one of the earliest people to begin to travel to Africa. And because our interest was growing in things African, people always wanted to know about her experience, and know about the things that she brought back with her. And that kind of demand really made her start opening up her home. This place started in the basement of her home, a mansion, really, on Michigan. And so, that developed. She started as the Ebony Museum. She and a few associates started it in her home. So, and I remember going to it when it was in her home. I remember going to two people's houses to learn about Africa--Dr. Burroughs and [HM] Etta Moten Barnett... because she traveled, too. And she brought things, and she would invite us into her home and explain what these items were and where she had gone--she and husband and all of that. And she-- Speaker 1: Mrs. Barnett was a famous actress. Speaker 2: Right, and she lived in a historic home on King Drive. And so, they both had a role in molding our African sensibilities and getting us interested in those kinds of things. And I remember when this building was acquired. It had been the former administration building for the Park District Police. And everybody was so happy to see it grow to this building. And then subsequently the addition that's called the Harold Washington addition... which gave even more space... mainly auditorium space... some limited exhibition space. But there's demand for a great deal more. And I'm really proud to be a part of this movement to now expand and grow the Museum even further. Story_ID: 81628 Speaker 1: Now, what is the Round House space? What space is that? Speaker 2: The Round House is a building that was done in 1880. You know, Washington Park is a historic park. It's an [Frederick Law] Olmstead park. And the building was designed by [Daniel H.] Burnham. And it was the stables. If you recall, in Washington Park, they used to ride horses. The bridle paths and everything's still here. When I first moved to Chicago [Illinois], they still had horses in that Round House. So, it's that beautiful stone building that we're going to convert into an expanded DuSable Museum [of African American History]. Speaker 1: Now, is the present site going to abandoned, or will the institution-- Speaker 2: Absolutely not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, we're going to grow. And we hope that we're going to be able to grow across, and create one campus. They closed off that little part of the street... and just that little one block... half a block... and have a continuous campus presence. We pledged to do lots of things on these grounds--historic re-enactments, and all kinds of things. And of course, I'm going to go back to my favorite love, technology, and we're going to do a virtual museum as well. Speaker 1: Right. For those who don't know, and have never seen DuSable, it is located in a park. Speaker 2: The largest park in the city of Chicago, Washington Park. And the most historic park from the standpoint of black people and black history. Speaker 1: That's right, referred to by the community now as Harold Washington Park. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Originally it was George, but-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, one time we called it Shabazz Park, too, if you recall. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: We tried to get the park re-named after Malcolm X. Speaker 1: That's right. So, so, well, just having left the city, you know, a few years ago and coming back and visiting--you know, working for the HistoryMakers archives back and forth--I've just noticed a tremendous amount of growth here at DuSable [Museum of African American History]. It just seems as though... well, tell me what you've done, because I, I-- Speaker 2: Well, as I told you, we're working on our virtual museum. We plan to have an on-line museum as well. Because students who come here from school sometimes have a relatively short visit. You know, they're sort of grouped and taken from place to place. They don't get a chance to sort of linger by themselves. We want them to be able to re-visit on-line what they saw; play games and re-inforce the learning; follow some links and find out more about DuSable or [HM] Dr. [Margaret] Burroughs, or whatever the exhibits are of the day. We want to engage in that way. And so, we're working on that now, and we've engaged in a partnership with Chicago Public Schools toward that end. We also have created a mobile fleet. Our mobile museum will be going into action in late October [2010]. And it will be able to go--I'd like to say it can go anyway Jumping Jack goes. It can go to schools, and neighborhood festivals, and block clubs, and street fairs. And it's going to introduce people, not just to the Museum, but to DuSable himself [Jean Baptiste Point du Sable] and what his accomplishments were. We're going to take the museum to the people and let them see what's going on. We're going to show up somewhere on a corner near you. And when we get there, we're going to give out passes so people can come to the museum as well. We have two vehicles--one we call the Scout, where we can send out storytellers and what have you. And one which is a mobile museum, where people can actually get on and see an exhibit. We plan to do both scheduled and unscheduled visits in neighborhoods. So, in addition to going to schools and daycare centers, we're going to do something called the DuSable Drive-by. Story_ID: 81629 Speaker 1: That's good. My job to constantly remind us that people don't know, or may in the future might not know who DuSable is. Speaker 2: And that's why the major exhibit in the [Robert Russa] Moton Museum is about DuSable [Jean Baptiste Point du Sable], so that our children understand that one of the most significant cities in the world [Chicago, Illinois] was established by a black man. It was established by a black man with great vision and foresight, who started businesses, who really sailed right down by that river and began trade and what have you, and started this industrial place that you now see before you. Because we think that it can let them see what they can do. Because, you know, people say, "What can one person do?" Well, that's what one person did. Speaker 1: Right. Now, I know DuSable was a trader, a fur trader from Haiti. Speaker 2: Of Haitian descent. Speaker 1: Haitian descent. Speaker 2: Right. And we have a strong affinity for that. As such, we've become the place to be. I mean, when the earthquake happened and folks started organizing around Haiti, [HM] Congressman [Bobby] Rush had his meetings here, had his commemoration here, working a lot with the Friends of Dusable which is a Haitian group, and the Haitian Professional Organization, an organization to re-build the Artists Cultural Center in Haiti and what have you. We see that DuSable affiliation is very important and significant for us. Speaker 1: Okay. And the site of the founding of the city is down near the-- Speaker 2: Near the Chicago River on Kinzie. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Right down near the NBC Tower and the other buildings-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --near The Tribune Tower. Story_ID: 81630 Speaker 1: So, I know this is also a film series that's significant that's going on. Speaker 2: We've been doing a lot of films. We're doing a film series called the "African Jubilee," which is the celebration of fifty years of independence on the part of many African countries, you know, who became independent in the sixties. And so, we've been showing African film. We have several film series, plus we make films a part of our public programming, in terms of whatever exhibition we have. So, when we have the exhibition about the Black Panther Party, in addition to the scholarly panels and the activist panels and so forth on that period, we also show films of the period and documentaries about it, and so forth. And then we do just for fun, outside on our grounds, we do the outside "Movies in the Park." So, this Saturday we did The Wiz. And over two hundred people came, and their families to watch the movie. Speaker 1: This... it appears to me, and maybe I'm wrong. It seems like the community is more engaged with DuSable [Museum of African American History] now than at any other time. Speaker 2: I think they're more engaged, and I think they're going to get even more engaged with some of the programs that we're going to be doing. We did an outside Gallery 37-type of program this summer called "Conversation Peace," where we brought African-American and Mexican American youth together to talk about peace, and to do an art project about that. The result of their work is going to... we're going to tour some of their schools and then serve as a conversation piece around which to have discussions about race and about non-violence, and so forth. We're doing a huge opening for our newest exhibit, "The African Presence of Mexico," that involves both cultures coming together on our grounds--dancers and elders and young people. We're going to a youth summit of African-American and Latino youth around their common issues. We think a museum has to be a living... very organic thing. And so, our slogan is "History Lives Here." Story_ID: 81631 Speaker 1: Okay. What, I guess... ideally what kind of resources do you see the DuSable Museum [of African American History] having? Speaker 2: Well, I would love it if anybody looking at this... to give me about $40 or 50 million dollars. I'd like to spend some of it to complete the capital, excuse, me, complete the Round House, some of it to bring this museum up to date. We need to digitize all the information about our collection and our archives; we need to be able to keep it all on site. We're spending money now for off-site storage. We need to keep... you know, so that we can keep everything in ideal condition. We need to do a lot of work to organize this very special collection. DuSable is fifty years old next year. We're the oldest, longest running African-American museum. As such, our challenges, in terms of cataloging and archiving and digitizing this collection and making these materials accessible to the public are greater than that of smaller newer museums, who don't begin to have the collection. Again, the community has been generous to the Museum in terms of its collections. We have some of the most important collections around. And we want to be able to make this stuff accessible to scholars, or what have you. That's one of the things that will happen in the new building--a library, a technology center... ways that people can access this. It needs to be used, not stored. Story_ID: 81632 Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Tell us a little bit about the collections that are housed here at DuSable [Museum of African American History]. Speaker 2: Well, the collection is extensive. We've got a fabulous African collection of very classic pieces, not your airport art, but your real serious pieces. [HM] Dr. [Margaret] Burroughs set the standard with her travels and the things she's brought, and we've acquired a lot of excellent things. We have some beautiful African-American art. We have Henry O. [Ossawa] Tanner works. We have Charles White, [HM] Elizabeth Catlett. And we have some major collections like the work of [HM] Vernon Jarrett, that's currently being archived by the Museum in collaboration with the Black Metropolis Research Collaborative. They're helping us with the cataloging of this collection. We've got things from the estates of Mahalia Jackson and Joe Louis, and other people. DuSable is very fortunate. We have an excellent collection. Story_ID: 81633 Speaker 1: Okay. I know over the years it's been an issue of accreditation for the Museum, in terms of-- Speaker 2: Well, let me speak to that. Because accreditation really revolves only around one factor, and that is the cataloging and archiving; everything else I think has been addressed. And I think the very extent of the collection is a problem. It's a blessing, but it's also the reason why the Museum hasn't been accredited in the past. Because they began to do this manually, and now all of this must be done with technology. So, I've been working on that. I've only been here for a few months, but already we have the necessary software to do this. We've engaged folk, and we're working on doing the archiving for both... doing the work on the archives as well as the actual collection, the material effects. We have placed items in our collection that we're concerned with in the Museum's storage, so that they're kept properly and kept at the right temperature and all that. We've applied for a grant that we're hoping to hear positively from to re-do the area on site where we keep items that are significant, but don't have to be kept quite in the same way, so we can also make it temperature controlled areas and what have you. I've engaged in additional space, so we're moving things out. And we're cataloging them as we move them out, so that when they return to digitization, then all the other work is easier to do. It's a very expensive and laborious process. So, although I'm giving it a lot of attention, it will be years before it is done. Because for example, we have the [HM] Vernon Jarrett collection, the one that we're currently archiving. It is considerable. If you think about a man like this, and the extent of his work... his journalism, we have his library... the office that he had at his home at the newspaper and at his summer home. Now, for the average person, they might think that we say, "Okay, Vernon Jarrett, three desks." Wrong. Every single item, every single piece of paper, every pen... everything must be noted, must be given a number... must be entered. The person handling it must have on certain kinds of gloves and certain other things that must be placed in certain kinds of sleeves and all of that. So, the amount of work that any one person can do in a day is very limited. And that's why I talk about resources. You have to have enough... I mean there are museums that have twenty people on staff doing this kind of work. You know, and DuSable has traditionally only had a couple of people. So we're engaged in collaborations now, and we've got some experienced archivists and researchers working with us. And I'm looking for major funding, because I need to retrofit this building--we're doing the other building appropriately--and still keep the off-site storage while all this is going on, and do all of this work over, okay. Because even that work which has been started, you have to get a common system and put all of your work on this system. So, we now have what is considered the superior supreme museum collection system. Our folks have been trained in it, they're working on this, and we see this in our future. That is all that is the inhibitor to this. We have also just finished our first Museum Assessment Program grant where you have people come in, they do an assessment, they tell you what things are unique to do, and get you on the pathway. And there is a trajectory, and you have to go through each one of those. So, even if I mysteriously cataloged it overnight, you couldn't get accreditation overnight. Because after the Museum Assessment Program 1, there's a Museum Assessment Program 2. And there's a Conservation Assessment Program, and so forth. And we are moving through each of those phases. So, I'll be able to report to the Board as well as to the community, "Where are we?" "When did we get started?" and "Where are we along the way?" I think some of this transparency has also been necessary. Story_ID: 81634 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. We did not talk about the Paradise Group, I don't believe. And we need to talk about that, I guess. That's one of them. Speaker 2: Yes. Well, you know, I'm a child of [William] Clarence Adams. My father was an entrepreneur as well as a professional man who, by the way, went to Tuskegee Institute [now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama] and I think was very influenced by the philosophy of Booker T. Washington that said you'd better have your own. You'd better have your own business; you'd better do your own thing. So, most of the time when I have worked, I have always had something else that I was engaged in. And for a period of time, I was part of something called the Paradise Group. And we were a video production company as well as a video equipment company. And during the period that we were active, we were able to do some pretty significant things. We were the first women especially... of any color... I think to be authorized Sony dealers in the U.S., certainly the first black women. And we did the Harold Washington Library [in Chicago, Illinois]. We did all those studios, all that equipment; all that stuff came from us. That was our biggest contract. We also did the 911 Center. We did the public address systems in the International Terminal at O'Hare Airport [Chicago, Illinois]; we did those kind of jobs. On the production side, we did a lot of what's called industrials. Those were videos about social issues like teen pregnancy and substance abuse treatment, those kinds of things. And that's really how I got engaged. Because the other two principals were already involved in this; they were involved in Communications. Then they got ready to do something on teen pregnancy and they needed a subject matter expert, and they asked me. And when I got involved in it, it opened up a whole new area of work for us to go after. And so, I became one of the partners. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we stayed around for a while, maybe close to ten years actually. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, the organization doesn't exist today? Speaker 2: No. It was hard work; it was hard work to do that and to do something else. I wasn't prepared not to do the "something else," because I liked a lot of the work. Plus, the equipment business--whereas it sounded lucrative because we had really big contracts--we didn't really make much money, because these were things we had to bid on. It was mainly government type of work, and the margin was very slim. And then you'd have to wait so long for your money, you know. So, that got to be a thing where at the end of the day I said, "Do we want to still keep doing this?" And you know, you had to put your personal resources at risk to get money to fund the things you were doing and so forth and so on. I'm still paying for some of those Paradise Group days. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Your role was chiefly as administrator of the-- Speaker 2: And creative in the sense of writing and going for money. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And presentations, I'm good with presenting and selling. Speaker 1: That's right. I mean you're... that's right. Story_ID: 81635 Speaker 1: Tell me this. We always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today? Speaker 2: Well, (unclear) our community has to be so much more self-determining. We need to try and take things into our own hands. We are the solution. We may not be the problem, but we are clearly our own solution. I'm very concerned, of course, about the lack of opportunity and the lack of entrepreneurship, and the fact that our community is a community where everybody else can come and do business and make money but us, you know. That bothers me, because the lack of this is reflected in so many other ways that has our children seeing the negative street economy as the way to make money. And that has a violence visiting our communities that is so, so, detrimental... detrimental to the spirits of our young people, to their... what they see as their hope and their possibility. And so, we have to put much more in them, and make them see much more about the possibility of who they really are and the things they can do. And we have to it through our activism, and not so much talking. You know, I'm looking at what happens every time there's a shooting--some more people get up and have another forum and do another talk. It's not about talking, it's about walking. It's about doing things, and setting up models, and setting up programs for our kids, and developing youth entrepreneurship, and us inhabiting those vacant storefronts and establishing businesses and creating thriving communities. And we have to show this, not talk about it. The kids say, "Be about it, don't talk about it." And this really... what we have to do is a lot more activism in a different way. It's not about marching and about sitting in, it's about taking control. It's about creating new Black Wall Streets and doing things in that manner, and not seeing your highest achievement being how far you advance in someone else's company, but how many companies we have of our own. Story_ID: 81636 Speaker 1: Okay. When you look back on everything you've done to this point in life, is there any major thing that you've done that you would do over again if you could? Speaker 2: Oh, I'd do a whole bunch of things over. You mean do over because I enjoyed them, or do over because I messed them up? Speaker 1: Well, that you would do differently. Well, it could be... you know that's the question. Speaker 2: Yeah, because they're both. They're things I do because they were great. And there are things I'd do differently because I've learned more. But is there one watershed thing that if I had to do I'd do over? No, not really, you know. I embrace every single bit of it. Story_ID: 81637 Speaker 1: Okay. Likewise, when you look back over all the positions you had... you had many positions and many opportunities to, you know, work and to serve the community. What would you consider today to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't have any one thing, okay. People will say to me, "Ooh, you're at the DuSable Museum [of African American History]. I bet you really like that. I bet that's a lot better than your last job." And I say, "Guess what? I liked the last one just as much as I do this one." When I'm in them, I like them and I'm passionate about them. I bring everything to them. And that's what people really need to understand, that it's you who make the job. You know, you bring it to you, if you understand who you really work for. You know, if you work for your people, that's what you do. The minute you start doing something else is the minute you stop doing your job, you know. I say if you... the minute you start trying to keep your job is the minute you stop doing it. Because you're more concerned about what somebody thinks about you than about the work you do. And you really need... our people really need folks to bring their whole selves--their whole heart and mind and spirit to the work--if you're really engage in trying to help your people. And I think that's what all my jobs have had in common. I think I've had some extraordinary opportunities to put this stuff into work. It's a different setting, but it's really still the same work. I think that the [Jacob H. Carruthers] Center for Inner City Studies [at Northeastern Illinois University in Chicago] for those ten years was very formative for me, in terms of what I learned. And it wasn't just at the Center. It was the times; it was that time period and who was swirling around and all the things that were happening. It was being a part of that 60's [1960s], 70's [1970s] cultural revolution in Chicago that really molded me and made me, and hold me to who I am, and helps me bring that to wherever I work, you know. It was the organization called the Catalyst that I became a part of that also had to do with that, where we actually vowed that we would work for our people and not these institutions. Because sometimes it's going to put you in conflict with the institution. Then you have to be prepared to walk away. And if you're not, it's going to compromise what you can do. Speaker 1: Right. Now that's a significant event, the Catalyst. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 81638 Speaker 1: Now, tell us a little bit about your family. Before I ask my last question, tell us a little bit about your family. Speaker 2: Okay, well-- Speaker 1: I know you have a daughter. Speaker 2: Again, I was born in Louisville, Kentucky. I'm one of three daughters. My father, [William] Clarence Adams, was what they called a race man. Speaker 1: Now, not so much that; not in retrospect. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But about your family today. Speaker 2: My current family. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. I have a daughter, Nia Malika Augustine. And she was born at a time when we were starting our independent schools and what have you. So she had the opportunity to come up at Ugima, and then go to Blyden and have an independent education like a number of other folk, and really see and understand what it was about to be coming up in what we would call an Afrocentric frame of reference. And I think it has influenced her as well as her peers to be entrepreneurial... to want to have their own, to be able to do their own thing. Her name Nia Malika... you know, Nia means "purpose," and Malika "queenly and masterful" is a name that has reverberated around the country. We have met at least fifteen or twenty other Nia Malika's, all of whom were named after her. It's interesting, because I just met one recently, a young lady at the Museum Association. She said her name was Nia. I said, "Is your middle name Malika?" She said, "Yes." I said, "Well, you're named after my daughter." She said, "No, I'm not. My father named me after he saw the picture of a little girl in the newspaper." I said, "Yes, and that's my daughter. And the paper was Muhammad Speaks." When my daughter was born they were opening the Guaranty Bank... the Nation of Islam. And her dad and I started her account, a savings account at the Guaranty Bank. And they were very taken with this, because she wasn't even a year old yet. And so, they decided do an ad. And they did an ad around her first birthday, with her and her birthday cake... and her starting her new account. And the ad is a full-page ad, and it says, "Nia Malika celebrates." Well, people all over the country who saw this who were pregnant... who had girls, who were Afrocentrics... said "Nia Malika, we like that name." And so, she's been engaged in a project of finding the other Nia Malika's, all of who were born within about two years of her and all who... the ones that we found who are doing some very interesting things around the country. I think she's planning at some point to do a reunion, an exhibition of some kind around the Nia Malika's. She's in marketing, in what they now call "cause-related marketing." Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I know you have one sister here in Chicago. Speaker 2: No. I have no sisters in Chicago [Illinois]. I have a sister who lives in Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And one who lives in Louisville, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay, alright, I'm sorry, okay. So, so-- Speaker 2: My sister in Louisville is a housewife. My sister in California is a psychologist. She's retired, formerly with Santa Monica College [Santa Monica, California]. Speaker 1: Did your... is your father still with us? Speaker 2: No, neither of my parents are living. Speaker 1: Okay. Did they, how did they react to your career? Speaker 2: Well, both very proudly, of course. As I said, my father went to Tuskegee. He was a race man. He was very interested in working for your people. He really, really influenced my thinking about staying in your own community and working for your own community. He was a very successful person that never left the neighborhood he grew up in, because he thought it was important to stay and to give back. And he always volunteered. And he was very proud that he could send his children to college, as well as other kids. He was a father figure for many kids in our community. He was a coach as well. And my mother [Laura Elizabeth Knox] was, again, a housewife, a strong woman, a Sunday School teacher, a positive influence also in the neighborhood and in the community. So, we were really very fortunate. I consider myself very fortunate to have the parents that I had, and to be sort of the last one. I was like ten years after my next sister. And there'd been a generation of earlier kids that were kids of my parents' siblings. And so I was very much after the fact, and I benefitted from that, because I had lots of different kinds of parents--you know, my biological parents, and then my older siblings and cousins and what have you. And they put a lot of attention into me, and it gave me a level of confidence that has definitely stood me in good stead. Story_ID: 81639 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there anything we haven't touched upon that we need to cover before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I can't think of a thing. So, you can go right to it. Speaker 1: You seem sort of anxious to-- (Laughter) Speaker 2: I'm freezing. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Ma'am how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: By my work, okay. I think your work is what speaks for you, you know. What things did you put in motion that you were able to keep in motion? What have you contributed to in your community? You know, we believe in institution building, and believe in what we can do around maintaining and sustaining the institutions that are necessary to have a real community. That's why I'm so excited about being at the Museum [the DuSable Museum of African American History], because it speaks to the institution builder in me. I think your work is what you should be remembered by. Speaker 1: Right. Thank you so much for spending time with us. Speaker 2: And thank you, Larry..