 Story_ID: 670028 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: It's [HistoryMaker] ReShonda Tate Billingsley, R-E-S-H-O-N-D-A, Tate, T-A-T-E, Billingsley, B-I-L-L-I-N-G-S-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind the name ReShonda? Speaker 2: You know my (laughter), I would love to say that there's some profound African proverb behind it, but my mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] was a--in that say it loud, I'm black and I'm proud era and so she, she just loved the name. You know, it's one of those that she felt exuded confidence and, and she was just in that era being proud, and so that's, that's it behind it. It's--you know I always would say, "What's the deeper meaning?" And she would say, "I love the name, it, it exemplify, exemplified being proud of who you are and where you're going." Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: September 7, 1969, Kansas City, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a, an author, a publisher and an editor. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: February 1, 2017. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 670029 Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as sort of a warm up and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I am all things seafood. Shrimp, shrimp and salmon, love it. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Pink and green. Speaker 1: All right, now that (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I know why (laughter). Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall, love fall. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: One--some place I have never been and that's Turks and Caicos [Turks and Caicos Islands], I would love to go there. As far as favorite vacation, I don't have one. I'm a workaholic. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Stop talking about doing it and do it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that's a message I just heard. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 670030 Speaker 1: So, I'm gonna ask about your family history, your mother's side of the family and your father's [Bruce Tate] side, but we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Her name is Nancy Bernice Kilgore [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She's October 14, 1948. Speaker 1: And where? Speaker 2: In Smackover, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Okay, now how do you spell that? Speaker 2: S-M-A-C-K-O-V-E-R, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Now, there's got to be a story behind that name? Speaker 2: I know, a lot of people think that's not a real place. It is, it is on the south part of--in the south part of Arkansas and it got its name by the--when it was discovered, they couldn't get over a big river there and the founders were like just, "Smack me over," and the name stuck, it just stuck and it is--it's a very small country town, but I, I love it. It's where my roots are. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now tell us, now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side, the Kilgores or any of the others and how far back can you trace 'em? Speaker 2: Well, my--I can go back to my great-great-grandfather. Most of my family originated in Arkansas, and the family land stayed in our, stayed in our family for years. It's really only this generation that started kind of letting it go by the wayside, but my childhood is full of memories on our land that had been in the family for years. Speaker 1: Okay, was there any story about how the family acquired the land? Speaker 2: Well, my mother--grandmother's mother worked, you know domestic and the--her father [Aaron Hicks] was a sharecropper and ended up getting the land that way. One of the things how they were able to build their house and have their own land cultivating is because they were very--they were the, the black people in the town that the white people trusted and hired. My grandmother [Pearley Hicks Kilgore] did a lot of cleaning and domesticated work, and so--for the area doctors. So, they would, when they passed on they would leave her gifts just because she was someone that they all knew and trusted as was her mother before her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, their history is in domesticated work in the area. Speaker 1: Okay, all right now so you can go back to your great-great-great-grandfather? Speaker 2: No, my great-great-grandfather. Speaker 1: Great-great-grandfather, do you know his name? Speaker 2: Charles Hicks [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay, and was he a sharecropper or? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories in your family about slavery or, or the, you know, the various struggles in Arkansas? I know, I mean we struggle all over the country, but I know Arkansas has some tough (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, his--Charles' father was actually lynched we were told. Slavery was, and they were, they were born into slavery. My, my grandmother grew up in share- where they were sharecropping, and Delcie was her mother, Delcie Hicks. So, it was Charles [sic.] and Delcie Hicks who was my grandmother's parents who we--they died when I was like two or three years old. Speaker 1: Okay, did they say, did anybody give a reason as to why he was lynched, I mean other than racism, you know, but? Speaker 2: You know it's crazy but he was accused of stealing some potatoes, and, and so we don't know a whole lot about--other than the fact that he had been accused of it and, and he--they were adamant that he did not do it. Speaker 1: And you don't deserve death for that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know. Speaker 1: That's for sure, so this was--I take it that the--like a lot of situations, a complicated situation. You've got a great-great-grandfather lynched, you got your grandparents who have you know found a way to ingratiate themselves to upper class white people in town. Speaker 2: It was, and it, it--my mother, it really bothered her growing up. She was, so of course she was in college [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] during the 1960s, my grandmother did not believe, she wasn't one of those protesting ones. When they, when the protesting and all of the civil rights came, she wanted my mother inside, and it was always, "You better not be out there, because we created this safe environment." You know I hate to say it like this, but, "But the white folks like us, we don't wanna mess that up," and I love my grandmother but that was, that was kind of her mentality, because we had found this safe place if you will. Story_ID: 670031 Speaker 1: Now, your mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] grew up, did she grow up on a--in town or on a, on a farm? Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She did, she grew up in the country and so they--you know I heard the many, many stories and she would show us all the time how far she had to walk to, to school and it was a dirt road because they lived way back off in the woods and the stories of the, the school bus coming to pick up the white kids and passing by them during the snow and you know their, the white kids would get joy out of the bus splashing them and would make fun of them and they walked almost two miles every day as the bus came and picked up the white children. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know the name of the school that she attended? Speaker 2: Yes, Smackover, Smackover Middle School [Smackover, Arkansas] and then Smackover Colored High School [Smackover, Arkansas]. Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother--so, did she get a chance to finish high school? Speaker 2: She did, she finished high school and then went to the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff [Pine Bluff, Arkansas]. It was Arkansas A&M [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College] at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, that's right it was A&M back in those days. So, she was there during the latter part of the Civil Rights Movement, I guess? Speaker 2: She was. Speaker 1: Yeah, but she you know 'cause most of the kind--'cause I'm about most the same age. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I know it was pretty much--in a lot of places it was the real big dramas and stuff were over? Speaker 2: Right, she--even from the time in high school when she was saying her, her some of her friends would try and gather up and they would go do protests, and they wanted to go to Alabama. She was, my grandmother [Pearley Hicks Kilgore] was not having it at all, but she did point out, she pointed out specifically when she was at Arkansas and A&M, I don't even know what the protest was, but how my grandmother was adamant that she better not leave that room. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, did your mother ever participate in any (unclear) (laughter)? Speaker 2: She did--she snuck one time and then she said my grandmother had spies all over the place because she hadn't gotten back in her room good before my grandmother knew about it and so she never went again. Speaker 1: Okay, now what did your mother focus on in school? Speaker 2: She was business, a business major and she, she did not finish, she married my father [Bruce Tate] and she had one year to go, she left her junior year. Story_ID: 670032 Speaker 1: Now let me go to your father's side, and then I'll put them together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Bruce Edward Tate [Bruce Tate]. Speaker 1: All right, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: It is 4/23/46 [April 23, 1946]. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: Norphlet, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Norph-- Speaker 2: Norphlet, N-O-R-P-H-L-E-T. Speaker 1: Okay, and is that near Smackover [Arkansas]? Speaker 2: It is, it's right next to Smackover. Speaker 1: Okay well how far back can you trace your father's family? Speaker 2: I actually can only do my, my great-grandfather as well on that side. Speaker 1: And what was he doing? Speaker 2: My, my grandfather [Horace Tate] was in oil and gas and then my--his father was, did just kind of woodworking, woodworking type of work and he worked in Norphlet for the, the man that used to do the horses. What are those called? The blacksmiths. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, worked for black--okay. Are there any stories that are passed down in the family about? Speaker 2: Yeah, not--on, on my father's side not as much. My, my grandparents, both actually, you know ended up doing well because my grandfather got in oil and gas, and so, my, my father's side were considered well off for a black family at the time, though they had so many children, but they weren't, you know they weren't struggling as much. Speaker 1: Now, what did your grandfather do in the oil and gas business? Speaker 2: He, I don't know his exact title, but he, he would accompany them out and kind of do surveying but he wasn't an engineer, he didn't have a background. I think he just worked his way up the ranks. He worked for a place called Lion Oil [Lion Oil Company] in El Dorado [Arkansas]. Speaker 1: So, he was doing a job that had he (laughter), maybe (unclear) you hear these stories a lot. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Where people learn to do something. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Working on a job and they can do--they're showing people with degrees how to do it. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: When they come along behind them and that's a common complaint you hear. Speaker 2: And because he never got to go to school to get the degree, you know he could only show them and he was always called in to do the work that they were getting the title and the pay for. Speaker 1: Yes, okay so now, your dad have any stories about growing up in--? Speaker 2: You know, one of the things that--their stories were just always centered around family because it--my grandparents owned a lot of acreage in Norphlet and so you know the stories were just always about their family and all this land, but it was--it's in the middle of the woods (laughter), so you drive and drive in the middle of the woods and you open up to all this land, and so I would always wonder how did you find this land in the middle of the woods? And it was, you know they--it, the same thing they ended up getting that land given to them. My grandfather's father did, was sharecropping and he actually did get the land, but it was in the middle of the woods and they cleared it out and, and built a happy existence. Story_ID: 670033 Speaker 1: Okay, the reason why I ask about these stories is that often I know in--I know I'd go down south to visit my father's people, he would sit on a porch. They'd rather be out there rather than watching TV and they'd tell stories. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: About something that happened on the railroad. Something that happened in church, something that happened to somebody in another town or an animal that could do tricks and all kind of stories, you know. So I don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we grew up-- Speaker 1: And since you're a writer, and you are a good writer, you pick up--I just wondered if you heard those kind of stories growing up? Speaker 2: The problem is that my father [Bruce Tate], and I don't think that he, he knew writing and all. My father was a storyteller. The only problem was my father was a fiction storyteller, so we--he would just make up stories and just go for days, so. Speaker 1: Well, that's fine I'm not, that's fine, I'm asking about all that actually. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so, that, I think that's what ignited my love of storytelling because we used to do just that. We would sit on my grandmother's [Tate Billingsley's paternal grandmother, Naomi Burns Tate] porch and he would tell us stories--you know he would tell us stories about his growing up, his past and then he would make up a story about--we'd see a fly sitting on the, on the porch and he would tell us this whole background on this fly and how the fly had family here in Norphlet [Arkansas] and was visiting and it would fascinate us, but he could spend an hour just telling us this whole story about the fly or, or Charlie the rat and I just think of we just--that ignited a love of storytelling. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, that could be entertaining, I mean it really can be true, people sitting around fabricating stories. Speaker 2: (Laughter) And you know at the--we're little, we're like, "Wow, how do you know all this about the fly?" He's like, "We have a secret code," and he'd just go--and it just entertained the kids. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, that's what--so, at any rate, so did your dad have a chance to finish school? Speaker 2: He did, he finished from Arkansas A&M [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so (unclear). Speaker 2: So, when he graduated he got a job offer in Kansas City [Missouri], and he was a year above my mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell]. Story_ID: 670034 Speaker 1: How did they meet? Is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: Yes, they met when my mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] was in the ninth grade, he [Tate Billingsley's father, Bruce Tate] was in the tenth and they met at a basketball game, Norphlet was playing Smackover [Smackover Colored High School, Smackover, Arkansas] and so they, they met there and it's only about fifteen minutes away, the two cities and just became smitten with each other ever since then. So, then they went to college together [at Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas]. Speaker 1: Okay, they knew each other from high school on (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: All right and so Norphlet [Arkansas] is like within traveling distance from Smackover [Arkansas]? Speaker 2: Yes, it's, it's the next town over from Smackover. Speaker 1: Okay, so what do you think about? Speaker 2: About fifteen, twenty minutes, so well, in terms of miles, probably ten miles. Speaker 1: Okay, so he could get over there in high school (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yes, he, he was driving 'cause I remember my grandmother [Tate Billingsley's maternal grandmother, Pearley Hicks Kilgore] saying his, you know his--again, his dad [Horace Tate] worked in Lion [Lion Oil Company, El Dorado, Arkansas], in the oil so he would get his dad's car and come see my, my mom because my mother would always talk about how she could never go there. My grandmother would just make them sit on the porch. Story_ID: 670035 Speaker 1: Now when you, when you think about your parents' attitudes, their sense of humor, their--the way they walk, the way they talk, their political views, their talents, you know, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My humor and my storytelling side definitely my father [Bruce Tate]. My ambition, I, and, and my work ethic is probably my father as well. My perseverance is my mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] by all means, my--but the difference is my mother has always been a safe player. She plays it safe in the box, and I'm completely opposite, but that, that whole hard work ethic comes from both of them. Both of them believed in working hard, it's just that my mother stayed in the box and my father went outside the box, and I'm more outside the box. Speaker 1: Okay, okay now do you have siblings? Speaker 2: I do, I have a younger sister, Tanisha [Tanisha Tate]. Speaker 1: And what does she do now? Speaker 2: She's a teacher in Houston [Texas]. Story_ID: 670036 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory would be--I remember it being four and telling the, the sitter, and it drove my mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] crazy, I guess that's why I remember it, because--I told the sitter--she asked me something and I said, "We can't do that when I get home 'cause we don't have any lights, our lights have been cut off." And I just told everybody we passed (laughter). I told the sitter, I told the people in the grocery store, everybody that our lights had been cut off, and so my mother at that time was trying to explain to me, "You can't go around telling people private, personal business." But I was fascinated with that, so that's probably my earliest memory. I do remember always being, having a book in my hand, always, always reading and always eating. Those were two things I just always as a little girl just always remember, and even as a teenager, the book used to get me in trouble all the time because I would take a book to dinner, I'd take a book to a funeral. I'd take a book everywhere trying to sneak and read. Story_ID: 670037 Speaker 1: Okay, what was your favorite literature in those days? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou 'I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings' is when I said wow this is--I wanna do this. I love this. You know just growing up I loved to read, but it wasn't until that book that, that I felt like that was in my soul. That was something that I was meant to do, to, to create words. Speaker 1: About how old were you when you read that? Speaker 2: I think I may have been around thirteen or fourteen? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you were pretty far along then, but--okay, so when you were a little kid did you read too (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, I read all the time but I think I read you know just whatever I could get my hands on. I, I would read a lot of children's books, you know I don't know that there's one that resonated with me at the time, I just know even when I think of the pictures that were in my grandmother's photo album, it would be pictures of me with books, and so it wasn't one in particular that--Maya Angelou's is the first one that I remember having an impact on me. Speaker 1: Now, did you have access to a library when you were growing up? Speaker 2: I did, because my grandmother [Tate Billingsley's maternal grandmother, Pearley Hicks Kilgore] cleaned the library. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so she cleaned the, the light company building and the library was right next door, and so she did both buildings and we would go with her while she cleaned at night and then we would just sit there and just read, read, read. Speaker 1: That's something, now this is a benefit, a hidden benefit to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, was the library open to black people ordinarily, I mean in a lot of southern towns it was not open-- Speaker 2: It was not. Speaker 1: --until the mid-'70s [1970s] (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, we never, we never went to the library any other time, just during, just at night when my grandmother was cleaning. And so my sister [Tanisha Tate] was, was much younger than me, but she would get a little kid's book. I would just explore it while my grandmother was cleaning-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I never even thought about it. I guess that really was a benefit because we went, we went on a regular basis. I think she cleaned four night, four times a week and we went with her. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So this--when you read 'I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings,' you had a sense that you wanted to write yourself? Speaker 2: Yes, because I would, I would always love making up stories. My mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] called it lying but I had this active imagination and so what I did as a little girl, I would always remember rewriting stories. So, I, you know the 'Goldilocks and the Three Bears' [Robert Southey], I would make a different ending (laughter). 'The Three Pigs,' 'The Three Little Pigs,' I would write my own version of that and so I didn't realize at the time that, that was a desire for writing, I just loved to re-craft it in my own mind, and then when I read 'I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings,' I said okay wow this is what I wanna do. I wanna have this type of impact on, on people when they're reading. Story_ID: 670038 Speaker 1: You came along when television was a big impact on children and there also were, well let's just start with TV and radio. Did--were you exposed to a lot of television when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I--when I was growing up we had the three channels, and I remember they would, you know, you had the ABC, we didn't have cable and so and then those channels went off at ten o'clock, and so you know we only had one television and we just, I, I just never remember sitting in the house watching television as a little girl. We were outside playing or I was somewhere reading. Speaker 1: Okay, all right what about the radio or music, you know? Speaker 2: Not until my teen years did I get into music and that's probably because when I was much younger we were in Smackover [Arkansas] and there were no radio, there were no black radio stations. My mother and father [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell and Bruce Tate] would play records all the time and my father at one point even owned a, a little club, so he had all kinds of records. Speaker 1: Okay, so he had a club for a while? Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: That sounds like a--yeah do you remember the name of it? Speaker 2: Masseys, M-A-S-S-E-Y-S--him and a friend opened this club. Speaker 1: But did it stay open long? Speaker 2: It was, it was open a few years. Speaker 1: Okay all right, and mainly I guess for adults, right? Speaker 2: Yes, it was for adults but it was more like a--it wasn't just a party, party club, it was--they would go and sit and there'd be some people over here playing cards, and some playing dominoes and it had a bar. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And a dance floor. Speaker 1: All right, a jukebox? Speaker 2: Yes, jukebox. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think they called it a supper club or. Speaker 1: Did they serve meals? Speaker 2: They, they served light meals, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, did your mother help with it? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother helped with it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That's something now, if you were in and out of there you would see a whole different world too (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know, but we could not go there. The only time we were ever allowed was during the day when we'd be there with my father. So, I have no idea what it was like at night. We would be with my grandmother [Tate Billingsley's maternal grandmother, Pearley Hicks Kilgore] and my mother never allowed us in the club. You know we'd go in there during the day with my dad if he had to check on some work. Story_ID: 670039 Speaker 1: We always ask this question and can you describe the house you lived in and the--what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: You know, it was (laughter), I just remember you could stand in the front door and see through the back, and so it was just kind of a straight shot. Speaker 1: So what'd they call a shotgun house? Speaker 2: Shotgun houses. Speaker 1: Three rooms in a row. Speaker 2: Right, so it was two bedrooms on this side, no, all three bedrooms are on this side. So, it was three bedrooms. All three bedrooms are on this side and then you could see straight to the back. But my father [Bruce Tate] is a, is a builder, a construction worker. So, he was always adding on. So, he would add on a den or add on a back room. So, wherever he lived he was always adding on. He added on to both my grandparents' houses well. Speaker 1: Okay, now that's something that people--I hear these stories all the time of black men knowing how to add rooms onto houses and it's something like a, not, I mean it's a special skill to have, but a lot of people seem to be able to do it in those days (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah. He-- Speaker 1: Or help each other do it. Speaker 2: Right, and so my father to this day, he still and we--he fell off a ladder recently and we said it's time to stop adding onto the house. So, because he was building another room to add onto the room that he's already built on, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something, when you consider today in Washington, D.C. you can't find that same percentage of men-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that know how to do that, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, my husband [Miron Billingsley] can barely hammer something in place (laughter), let alone build a whole house. Speaker 1: But, he's got another skill though, right (unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Fortunately, but that's--yeah, that's something that a lot of those kind of building skills. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Electrical skills, plumbing, you know. Could your father do all that? Speaker 2: Yes, he does all of it. Story_ID: 670040 Speaker 1: Oh, I was asking you about the sights and sound and smells of growing up. You described the house (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so that--and another, just very vivid memory, it's mosquitos, we had just really, really bad mosquitos in Arkansas to the point that they would drive us in, but I just remember the, the neighborhood. We lived at the top of a hill, and so it was always kids running, and you know I got my first scars running, riding the bike down that hill and I don't know how to stop. So, you know I, I crash and so I have scars to still prove it, but it's those memories that were, that kind of I think shaped me, the playing outside. We had that one TV, the only TV we had was in the living room and it was one of those typical ones that had the, the antennas on it and we had the foil on the end of the antenna, so I, you know I have warm, warm, vivid memories of that, but it all to me was just family and friends, the whole, you know, memory of growing up thee because I have to make my kids [Mya Billingsley, Morgan Billingsley and Myles Billingsley] go outside now, so I think about how you know my mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] was like, "When the street lights come on, it's time to come inside." Because we stayed out until the very last moment. Story_ID: 670041 Speaker 1: Tell me about school, what's the name of your first school? Speaker 2: My--I went to school, I went to several different schools in elementary school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When we moved to Houston [Texas] is really when I, I guess I can say you know I have vivid memories, sporadic memories prior to Houston at nine, but at, at--when I moved to Houston I went to Petersen Elementary School [Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: How old were you when you moved to Houston? Speaker 2: I was nine. Speaker 1: Okay, and where in Houston did you all live? Was it Third Ward or Fifth Ward? I know that's important to Houston (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) I know. Neither, we lived in Southwest Houston. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, this is part of the boom in Houston. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know when the Sun Belt Houston that I know people in my state were trying to get to when they graduated from college. Speaker 2: And, and that's where, why I think--my mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] actually remarried which is why we moved to Houston and we just, it was a nice neighborhood, a big house. Speaker 1: Well how did you--how did you feel about that? You know your parents breaking up? Now that had to be kind of traumatic for you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was. I think I held out hope 'til last year that they were gonna get back together (laughter). It, you know I was a daddy's girl and so, you know and my stepmother [Helen Tate], I love her to death. My father's [Bruce Tate] been married to her now for thirty years, but at the time I just, it was, it was very hard on me because I was such a daddy's girl. It was easier for my sister [Tanisha Tate] because she was younger, but it was, it was a difficult time for me to, to adjust and I think the thing that got me through was this hope that oh, they're gonna get back together, even when both of them remarried, I kept saying they're gonna get back together. Speaker 1: I suppose children do think that, they--you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They do think that and, so, at any rate, so was it surprise that you, I mean did you move all of a sudden or was it a--? Speaker 2: Well, my mother. Speaker 1: Or did you know about it long in advance? Speaker 2: No, my mother, my aunt fixed my mother up on a date, and within six months we, we were moving. I had a very hard time with the move. The, my stepfather [Clyde S. Blacknell] had a little money. He had been in the [U.S.] military, so he was buying things for everybody in our family, so everybody liked him, except for me. Speaker 1: Okay, so they got, did they get married in Arkansas and then move to Houston? Speaker 2: They got--well, he, he was from Houston and they came to Arkansas and they got married in Arkansas and then she moved, moved us to Houston. Speaker 1: Okay all right okay, so he was trying to. Speaker 2: He was, he brought me a Jermaine Jackson album for my permission, and so I remember he gave me that 'Let's Get Serious' album and I was like okay, I guess so, and he brought my sister a Cabbage Patch doll. My mother always jokes that we sold her out for a Jermaine Jackson album, but that was to get us to be okay with moving to Houston. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But my father stayed in my life the whole time, so it's--and still is. Speaker 1: So would you go back to Arkansas to visit periodically (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We did, we would go back, spend summers with my father. Spend--we would alternate between Smackover [Arkansas] and he lives in Little Rock [Arkansas]. He had moved to Little Rock and so we saw him on a regular basis. Story_ID: 670042 Speaker 1: In elementary school did you have any special teachers or mentors that emerged? Speaker 2: Not elementary, but sixth grade I did and I was deathly shy. Everybody finds that hard to believe because of who I am now but I was deathly shy growing up and I had a teacher in middle school, Ms. Lacey and I still talk to her to this day, Lilly Lacey [ph.], who she was the meanest teacher I ever had (laughter), but it's like she saw something in me and so she would always demand more and she was always working to pull out that person inside of me is what she would always say. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so what did she teach primarily? Speaker 2: She taught English. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: English and reading. Speaker 1: All right, and what was the name of your junior school, I guess? Speaker 2: Dowling Middle School [Richard Dowling Middle School; Audrey H. Lawson Middle School, Houston, Texas], D-O-W-L-I-N-G. Speaker 1: Okay, Dowling Middle School, okay. Story_ID: 670043 Speaker 1: Dowling Middle School [Richard Dowling Middle School; Audrey H. Lawson Middle School, Houston, Texas] or junior high school? Speaker 2: Dowling junior high. Speaker 1: Okay, junior high, and okay, so did you start to write any? Speaker 2: I did, I wrote my--I used to write poetry, so I started out writing poetry all the time and then I actually had my first published piece at fifteen. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is in high school, right? Speaker 2: High school. Speaker 1: Okay, and where'd you go to high school? Speaker 2: Madison High School [James Madison High School, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay, Madison High School and okay, all right so tell us about what happened, how did you get this piece published? Speaker 2: There used to be a magazine called True Confessions and True Confessions was a salacious magazine that had all these racy story stories in them that a fifteen year old had no business reading let alone writing for and they were supposed to be true stories that readers had submitted. So, I wrote a, a story called, I stole my sister's husband. I left out the fact that my sister [Tanisha Tate] was twelve and I was fabricating the whole thing, but I, I wrote this story just about how I'd gone in and, and seduced her husband and taken him, and they ended up publishing it, and they sent me a check for one hundred fifty dollars. I was so excited, but I never cashed the check because I was too scared to tell my mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] where the money came from. Speaker 1: Oh, your mother, so she didn't know? Speaker 2: She had no idea, no. She didn't know. I mean this was, this was like a written form of Playboy magazine so, True Confessions was not anything I wanted her to know I was--I had a story in. Speaker 1: Yeah, True Confessions was out there for a long time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: I remember when I used to see it on the stands. Speaker 2: Yes, yep. Speaker 1: And I never read 'em, they were on the stands and then I'd read all the sports stuff when I was that age. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, I was reading, that, that's all I was reading, but True Confessions I did see people were reading that and it would stay out there a long, long time you know in those days, and people don't read magazines like that. Speaker 2: Naw. Speaker 1: Not at the same rate. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Because there are even adventure magazines for men and Argosy. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And all these things, I never read those really. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But they--but the people had read the stories about adventures in the woods and hunting and all that kind of stuff. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And then women had the romance magazines and for--so one hundred fifty dollars, that's a lot for those days. Speaker 2: I know, but I, you know and it--my mother always jokes now she would say, "You should have told me. I would have fussed on the way to the bank." But I think I just wanted, I looked at that check for so long, I was just so proud and then I ended up, I don't even know what happened to the check. Story_ID: 670044 Speaker 1: Now didn't your mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] tell you at one time that making up a story is a lie unless you write it down and then it's a fiction (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yes, then it's a story. If it comes out of our mouth (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Then it's a story, right, right. Speaker 2: --it's a lie, if you write it down. Speaker 1: If you write it down then it's a story? Speaker 2: Yes, and so you know and that was one of the things because I would--I remember when my mother, my parents were still together. I would just out of the blue start acting out a story. I had written a story about a little girl that had passed out and we were in Smackover [Arkansas], we were going from Norphlet [Arkansas] to Smackover, and my sister [Tanisha Tate] told my parents, "ReShonda [HistoryMaker ReShonda Tate Billingsley] won't, won't wake up, she won't sit up." And so, my father [Bruce Tate] pulled over to the side of the road, the truck actually broke down, and I would not lift my head. I just--my whole body was limp because that's what I had written in my story and so my parents were freaking out. They ended up flagging down somebody passing by, they took us to the hospital in Smackover to--there was a small like clinic and the doctor, who my grandmother [Tate Billingsley's maternal grandmother, Pearley Hicks Kilgore] cleaned for he examined me. My mother was crying and I'm just, I'm still not lifting up. My eyes are rolled back in the back of my head and Dr. Warren [George W. Warren] was his name and he came in, he examined me and then he said--my mother was like, "What's wrong with her?" And he told me he said, "Sit up gal," and I just kind of sat there, he said, "I said sit up, gal," and I just kind of sat up, and so my parents freaked out. They said, "Why would you do all of that?" And I said, "That's what the little girl did in my story, so I was just trying to carry it out," and my mother ended up having to leave the room before she killed me. My dad was always the, the buffer, but he, and he explained to me, "You know you can't do stuff like that." But I said, "That's how when I wrote it and she did--she never woke up." And so, little stuff that made no sense in my mind and I think I was ten at that time, no, I might have been eight at that time and it made no sense in their minds, but it made perfect sense because that's, that was the story that I wrote. Speaker 1: So, you had a very active imagination. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: And internal life that was--yeah. Speaker 2: I don't know where it came from, I mean I just out of the blue I would come, and the reason my--the whole--my mother said that it was a lie 'cause I had come in, I said my sister broke her arm outside playing at--we used to gather up the leaves to burn the leaves and so I came in and my mother said, "Well, where's your sister?" I said, "Oh, she's out there. She just broke her arm jumping in the leaves." So, of course my mother ran out there and my sister is just playing in the leaves, and so my mother said, "That's, you know, that's a lie coming out of your mouth." And I said, "Naw I was trying to work through a story in my head," and so it would get me in trouble a lot (laughter) and so, I, I have no idea why I used to--I would, I just don't know why I did stuff like that, but it was just that imagination always at work. Story_ID: 670045 Speaker 1: Now, now I haven't asked you about this but tell us about your church life. Now, did you--was your, did, were you raised in a very religious family (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, well, they, my grandmother [Pearley Hicks Kilgore] we were at church Sunday through Sunday (laughter). We had you know, Sunday four services, we had Monday night choir rehearsal, Tuesday night business meeting, and so my mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] was raised in the church like that so, when my mother got grown and with kids, I guess she said, "Okay, I'm gonna drop the kids off with my mother, and I'm going on and y'all go to church with her," because my, my childhood memories are going to church with my grandmother. We had to go all the time. Speaker 1: Okay, now what was the name of your grandmother's church? Speaker 2: Sweet Home Missionary Baptist Church [Smackover, Arkansas]. Speaker 1: Okay, Sweet Home Missionary Baptist Church. Now, what is the difference between a regular Baptist church and a missionary Baptist church? Speaker 2: I have, I, I think that's just the name. I don't think there is. Speaker 1: I think there is a reason for it. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah, but I, I don't know that's why I asked. I know it has something to do with proselyting. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, see I don't, I don't know. Speaker 1: Unbaptized and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I, you know I don't know what the official, or is it in--it's a Baptist church, is it in a--it's a denomination of Baptist but I don't know if the missionary Baptist churches have fellowships with each other only. Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or (unclear) I don't know. Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: There are lots of 'em in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Lots of missionary Baptist churches and they're usually the smaller churches and you know, I can't think of a large one you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, well we still--that's the church my mother grew up in, that's the church I grew up in. Even every time--when we would move to Houston [Texas], we still had to go there and so it's where we have all our funerals, it's where everybody is, is buried. Speaker 1: Did the--okay, so there's actually a graveyard adjacent to the church (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, right in the back. Speaker 1: Now, that's the way it is in a lot of towns. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What--did you have the same reverend for a long time? Speaker 2: We did, Reverend Smith [ph.] for years until he died. Story_ID: 670046 Speaker 1: I have to ask this and with apologies to Reverend Smith [ph.], was the church [Sweet Home Missionary Baptist Church, Smackover, Arkansas] a source for drama, you know, in--? Speaker 2: You know it, it was but it wasn't some of what you see now. It was, because it was a smaller church, the--I think our biggest drama was too many shifts, you know. So, you have, you had the pastor, Reverend Smith, then you would have the, the deacons, and then you'd have the mother board and so you had--and these are all older people who have been there for years, so I think our drama always was around who was in charge and who was gonna do what. But one of the things that I do love about my grandmother [Tate Billingsley's maternal grandmother, Pearley Hicks Kilgore], about my mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] is, they always shielded us from adult drama, even in my very big family, extended family, we had a lot of drama there and the only way the kids would know about it is if we're peeking around the corner and you know eavesdropping. Speaker 1: Well, those are the days and the times I guess, it was probably like that in a lot of rural areas now where adults don't tell children (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --things, there was a time, I don't know if it's still going on some places now where adults just, "That's not children's business," and they didn't say--I many of the things that children know now, they did not know (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and there--I mean there's so much I found out when I was older that I was just like wow all of that was going on and we had no idea. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so was there a lot of secrets in your family that you discovered (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There, there were, there were--you know there were instances of, of infidelity, abandonment, there was arrest, all of that and as a child I had no idea. I have eight aunts and uncles on my dad's [Bruce Tate] side, six on my mom's side. So, we have a large family and, and it was always some type of drama that I've learned about since I was older, but at the time we had relatives arrested for bank robbery (laughter), we had--just all types of things that we had no idea. We're just out in the front yard playing oblivious to all the drama. Speaker 1: Okay, so in Houston [Texas] did your, were you compelled to go to church in Houston (unclear)? Speaker 2: We were, we--I grew up there, when we moved there my mother did pick up the mantle and we went to New Faith Missionary Baptist Church [New Faith Church, Houston, Texas], where I remained a member until I moved. Speaker 1: Now, did your mother go too at this point (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, my mother went. Speaker 1: Okay, so. Speaker 2: And made sure we were there every Sunday. Speaker 1: All right, it's interesting 'cause she didn't, you were saying she didn't really go that much with your grandmother (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think once my grandmother--when she had my grandmother, she was like, "Okay, you all go with your grandmother, I'm gonna sleep in," but I think once we were in Houston she didn't want us to lose that core and because it was built in, it was ingrained in her, it was part of who she was, there was never an issue and, and we were there every Sunday. Speaker 1: And from what you say, she took on, to some extent your grandmother's caution (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She did. Speaker 1: You know, wanting to be safe. Speaker 2: Right, and I think, now we didn't go like my grandmother was there every single day, but my mother made sure we were there on Sundays, and, and getting the word. Speaker 1: All right, so did you play a prominent role in the church at all as a youth? Did you, did they have a youth choir or a youth? Speaker 2: They did, I'm not a singer, I was always the one doing the, the Easter plays and, and the speeches. Story_ID: 670047 Speaker 1: When I was in high school [James Madison High School, Houston, Texas], I started doing the newspaper. Our--we did a newsletter. Speaker 2: Okay, so this is good, so here's your community is able to utilize your writing skills. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And recognize 'em you know when you're, you're still like a youth. Speaker 1: And, and gave me a platform to, to really just kind of soar and I really enjoyed, I enjoyed doing that. Speaker 2: So, was that your reputation in high school too, someone who could write? Speaker 1: It was. I was our class poet and I just, I was always writing stuff in, in school, in high school, writing and reading. It, it would get to the point that my teachers, you know how you used to read out loud? My teachers stopped letting me read out loud, because I would read world history like the ten o'clock news, because I wanted to be an, an anchor, so I would read you know, "Columbus [Christopher Columbus] discovered America," and so I--then the class is all cracking up while I'm trying to read the history passage like a, like the ten o'clock news anchor, but I loved doing that and so. Speaker 2: If that is the case you were probably too good for-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --the rest of the class. Speaker 1: I know and so they would be entertained by it and I'd look--but I, I was serious (unclear). Speaker 2: The teachers were irritated by that? Speaker 1: They--I guess they were irritated because the kids would then all crack up and start laughing and so they, it would take us off course, but I did, I did all the speaking. I was the class announcer in addition to being the class poet. Speaker 2: Ok, so that--over the PA system [public address system] and that sort of thing (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, every morning I did the morning announcements. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 670048 Speaker 1: Now was television bigger for you in Houston [Texas] than it was in Arkansas? Speaker 2: It was, you know the, by that time we had expanded some, but again I would, the only thing that I was into at the time which may sound crazy was the news, and I think that was because I wanted to be a newscaster, so I--even when I would go outside and play, I would come back in at five o'clock to watch the news. Speaker 1: Now, if I remember correctly, the first black woman on network news, and I don't know about in Houston, I mean locally, but was [HistoryMaker] Carole Simpson. Speaker 2: Carole Simpson, yes. Speaker 1: Did you pay attention to (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, I was just--I was mesmerized by Carole Simpson, loved her and I would always emulate her and then in Houston, it was Melanie Lawson. So, I would sit there and I would mimic Melanie, and my friends would think I was weird because we'd play--we'd be playing kickball or anything and I'd say, "Okay, it's five o'clock, I gotta go watch Melanie," and I would go inside and sit there and watch her and mimic her and then as soon as the news went off, I'd go back outside and play some more. Speaker 1: Now, is Melanie Lawson black too? Speaker 2: She is. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, is she still? Speaker 2: She's still there. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: So, she's been there years. Speaker 1: All right, okay so, yeah, so you can see that was an attractive occupation you wanted to? Speaker 2: Yes, so there were, there were three things I wanted to be growing up, and, and I was just always one that I felt like I could do all of 'em. I wanted to be an author, an anchor and an actress, and I remember there was a counselor that told me, "Okay, this is a--," she was a tenth grade counselor [at James Madison High School, Houston, Texas]. She said, "This isn't kindergarten, you can't do all those things. You have to pick one." And I just always had the philosophy why, why can't I do them all? Story_ID: 670049 Speaker 1: Now were there any special teachers at Madison High School [James Madison High School, Houston, Texas]? Speaker 2: Mrs. Reed, once again, the meanest teacher there, her name was Mrs. Joyce Reed [ph.], I think it's Dr. Joyce Reed now, and she was a history and economics teacher, and because she was so mean and hard, on the first day of school I remember the other history economics teacher was Coach Scales [ph.], the basketball coach. So, we would all--if you had Ms. Reed on your schedule, you would kind of mark through it and change it and we all would--Coach Scales would have seventy-five people in his classroom and Ms. Reed would have three, and so she came down to his class and said, "You, you, you, you come with me, you're gonna be in my class," and I was one of those yous and I was so just devastated because she was so mean and I just, I absolutely loved her because she pushed us. She made us do collegiate level work, and she always made us be better than we thought we were, and so I went to the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] prepared because of her. She actually went to surrounding universities, found their coursework, and would make us do it as extra credit, and so it really did prepare me for college. Speaker 1: Okay, so now how did you, how'd you rank in the class at graduation time? Were you, did you--seemed like somebody could write and read at the level that you would (unclear)? Speaker 2: I did, so I think I may have been like twenty--and, and I was, we were doing, there was a big controversy at my school because I was in the twenties but the most--the top ten were all people that had not taken advance level classes. They were ranking us at that time the same, so I remember that one of the girls that graduated number four, she had like three home ec [home economics] classes and so we all had advanced chemistry, advanced economics, and so all of the people that took the, the easier, remedial classes graduated before us. They've since changed the grading system, but so I was in the twenties but you know it was a big controversy. Speaker 1: Yeah, that would be a controversy, that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that's not fair. Speaker 2: Yeah, and she was a friend of mine, the one that graduated number four, but she had, I think she had one basic math class, and all the rest she had typing and, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it all figured in the GPA [grade point average]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's--that doesn't seem right. Story_ID: 670050 Speaker 1: Did you apply to other schools other than the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas]? Speaker 2: I did, I applied to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], which was my dream. I got in there, I also got in Lamar University [Beaumont, Texas], there were several that I applied to. Howard was where I really wanted to go, and the University of Texas came along and gave me money-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and so that's how I ended up there. And so, my mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] was already nervous about coming to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] when we were from Houston [Texas], but the fact that the UT gave me a full ride kind of cinched the deal. Speaker 1: Okay, she was more comfortable with you being in Texas? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, she was very nervous about me going across the country, but then there was no argument once--Howard didn't give me any money, and UT did. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1987, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The fall of '87 [1987], the University of Texas, Longhorns and all that. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Big school. Speaker 2: It was a very big school. I, I loved the school, we had a community within a community. I was ill prepared for the school. Now, my teacher--Ms. Reed [Joyce Reed (ph.)] helped me in terms of academics, the--my freshman biology class had five hundred people in it, and so because I was used to smaller classes that--I just wasn't used to that and so I would get--I came into the class and there'd be so many people I had a little portable television cause my class was at the same time as 'All My Children' and so I would sit in the back of the class and watch 'All My Children' on my portable TV. You know, and I mean, why didn't I just stay in my room? I, I figured that out about midway through the semester, just stay in the room and watch it. So, it just, so I struggled my first semester. I struggled bad because my mother was strict, so then you know I'm here in UT and I could stay out as long as I want. I'm struggling with these big classes. I had a 1.7 [grade point average] my first semester of my freshman year. Speaker 1: That's bad, but just a word about 'All My Children' this is the time if I remember from the old 'Tom Joyner Morning Show,' 'All My Children,' there was an 'All My Children' report on the 'Tom Joyner Morning Show'-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, I think I remember that (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in Chicago [Illinois]. I think that's just before he moved to Houston. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But he actually gave an 'All My Children' report, it was so popular in the black community. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: There were two black characters (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jesse [Jesse Hubbard] and Angie [Angie Baxter Hubbard]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Jesse and Angie and they were the--you know--black America followed them, I mean and they would even you know they'd talk about, some people would tape it and play-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --it back late at night when they'd come home from a day at work. Those stories were so compelling, but what was it about 'All My Children' that was so? Speaker 2: It was Jesse and Angie, it was--I was just, I loved them, I followed them, and, and I'm watching them during biology. You know I could have scheduled another time. I don't know, I just went when I got my schedule and I realized it, I bought a little portable TV with some of my scholarship money, and I would sit in the back--and it was a good five hundred people in the class, so the professor never saw--but I was really, I just loved the show. Speaker 1: So, this is one of this raked auditoriums where it looks down-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --on the landing? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: At the bottom, yeah. Speaker 2: Yep, and so after, after that 1.7 my mother said, "You know you're coming home if, if you flunk out, you're coming home." And I was not trying to go home, so I pulled it up my second semester and had a 3.7, so I was able to keep my scholarships and, and stay in school. Story_ID: 670051 Speaker 1: Now, was there a--any kind of a black student organization on campus? Speaker 2: There was, you know everyone hears UT and they automatically think that I'm in, immersed in this world of, of white students. We had a very active black student union. In fact, you know, I mean and this may be a bad thing, but, that's, that's all I had were black friends because we had our little community within the big UT community. So, the student union was very supportive. I was in various organizations, and so you know I, I always felt at home at UT, even when they, they had some racial incidents, but we had such that tight knit community that, that I never felt out of place. Speaker 1: Okay, now it was a--wasn't there an incident where there was a sniper or something in the University of Texas in the (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that was before my time. Speaker 1: That was before your time, okay. It was in the '80s [1980s] I think (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Right, it was in the '80s [1980s]. Yeah, okay so now you joined AKA too. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you do that your freshman year or? Speaker 2: I did it in my junior year in 1989. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so that was--you know another avenue where I had, had a, a tight knit organization and community and I absolutely loved being a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]. Speaker 1: Okay, and was there any kind of cultural club or, or periodic you know readings of books or bringing authors to campus and that sort of thing at the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas]? Speaker 2: There was not, that was one of the things that was kind of lacking in my opinion. Any of, anything that we did in terms of, of culture came from us, so there were no black authors brought in, so I never saw that. My, the AKAs did at one time bring in Jewell Anderson [ph.], and so I was fascinated by, she's a writer, I was fascinated by her speaking and her words, but my entire time there that's the only one that, that I recall. Speaker 1: Okay, all right and what did Jewell Anderson write? Speaker 2: She, she's a motivational speaker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think her latest one is like 'The ABCs of Success' [ph.] or something like that (simultaneous). Story_ID: 670052 Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite professors at the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas]? Speaker 2: Yes, Dr. George Wright [George C. Wright], who went, who eventually moved on to become the president of Prairie View A&M University [Prairie View, Texas] and hired my husband [Miron Billingsley], but he was the director of African--he was my African American studies professor, and one of the reasons why I really liked him because I took African American studies like most black students at UT thinking okay, this is an easy grade. I'm black, you know, black history, and it was one of our hardest classes because he challenged us and he made us think and he made us research more than what we had already known. So, he was one of those teachers that had a lasting impact on me. Speaker 1: Now, was there, now you're in Austin [Texas], yeah, so--I'm sure I can't think of anybody that's there. What were, who were some of the--were there any African American English professors? Speaker 2: At the time, no. Yeah, we had--it wasn't a whole lot of professors, African American professors at all, and then I was in the broadcast journalism track, so there were even--I don't recall ever having one once I you know got into that track, 'cause you have to audition to be a broadcast major. Story_ID: 670053 Speaker 1: Well tell us about that, the broadcast track and what was that like? Speaker 2: It was very difficult because I had--that's something that I'd always wanted to do and then we--I found out that they auditioned to be a major, to major in broadcast journalism and out of UT [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], a school of, you know, forty, fifty thousand, they took twenty-four students in the fall, and twelve students in the spring. And so, the first time I auditioned for the fall, I didn't make it and I was mortified. I'm like, this is what I've always wanted to, what do I do now? And so, I made it on the second time that--and so I was one of the twelve that made it, but, the, the--why it was so hard is you know it's like a lot of newsrooms, they're gonna have their one and two spots for African Americans, and so I was lucky to, to have that one spot in, in the fall when I--in the spring when I made it in. Speaker 1: Okay, now you're, I think you're younger than [HistoryMaker] Roland Martin, but. Speaker 2: Roland and I are the same age. Roland was at Texas A&M University [College Station, Texas] at the time. Speaker 1: Right okay. 'Cause I figured he was in--I knew he was in school in Texas at the same time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He graduated-- Speaker 1: Did you know him at all? Speaker 2: I, I knew him in college. He graduated from my rival high school in Houston [Texas], Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School] and--Madison [James Madison High School, Houston, Texas] and Yates were rivals in high school, and then we went to rival colleges. Speaker 1: Okay, Texas A&M, yep, okay so, yeah, we--so did you--I mean television is, it can be really difficult because of--unless you really form relationships with people, and it's oftentimes hard for black people if you're the only one there. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you have that any difficulty like (unclear)? Speaker 2: You know I did because there was this unspoken threat. So, if there's an African American woman already there, one of the things that I found sad was we were so--many of the newsrooms that I worked in, you didn't see people willing to help, and not that they were just against you, but there all--there was always this fear that there's only one spot for us, there's only two spots at maximum. So, if I help you become great, then you're gonna end up taking my job, and so I did experience some of that. The only time I didn't was when I went to the station that Melanie Lawson was at [KTRK-TV, Houston, Texas], and I don't know if it was because she had been there so long, or she's just that, she is just that sweet of a person, but she actually took me under her wing, and embraced me once I worked there as an associate producer. Speaker 1: Oh I was talking about college (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay I'm sorry, okay. Speaker 1: I'm still talking about college, but that's, that's you know I under- (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, well the, the--I was an intern in college in, at a station in Austin [Texas], where I experienced that, the black woman syndrome and I remember thinking I'm just an intern, I'm still in college. You know why, why is this force working against me, and it was that whole--because you could come out of college and take her job. Speaker 1: Okay, now Austin is, I think it's the center for public television in Texas in a sense. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know (unclear) did you have any contact with the public TV station? Speaker 2: Not television, but radio. I used to work for KAZI [KAZI Radio, Austin, Texas], which was the public radio station at the time, and that's where I built my news, that was my first on air job as a radio news reporter. Speaker 1: KAZI. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's, you know, that means work in Kiswahili, kazi. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) I had to say that for those who might know who are watching this, but it means--yeah, it means work. Story_ID: 670054 Speaker 1: You graduated in what '91 [1991]? Speaker 2: Yes, '91 [1991]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right and you got a B.A. in? Speaker 2: In broadcast journalism. Speaker 1: Broadcast journalism, okay now I know you're a member of the National Association of Black Journalists? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you join in those days, or did you? Speaker 2: I joined when I was in college [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did they approach you about joining or how did you find out about it? Speaker 2: Oh, I immediately approached them and I was a member throughout college. In fact, got my first job through an NABJ career fair. Speaker 1: Okay, all right that's good to know 'cause we've interviewed a lot of members of NABJ. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: A valuable organization. Now, did you consider going to graduate school when you graduated? Speaker 2: I didn't because experience in, in television was more important that the graduate school for what I wanted to do. I knew that I needed to get in there and get that experience. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had some internships in college and then-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --what was your first job? Speaker 2: Well, my first job was actually not in television, it was for the National Enquirer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was--when I graduated I had a hard time finding a job in television, and we had a--I had interviewed at that NABJ job fair with the National Enquirer and they ended up calling me. Speaker 1: Okay, what was it, so did you work in, in--where'd you go (unclear)? Speaker 2: Lantana, Florida. Speaker 1: To Florida? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, what part of Florida? Speaker 2: Lantana, it's right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Lantana, okay. Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) outside of West Palm Beach [Florida]. Story_ID: 670055 Speaker 1: One of the things that a lot of people didn't know is the National Enquirer didn't make up stories. It was the Weekly World News and so because they're all on the tabloid stands together they were guilty by association. The National Enquirer was gossip, and when I first, when they first asked me if I wanted the job I'm like, "Yeah, right. You know I'm a real journalist, I'm not going to write gossip," and they told me the starting salary and I said, "Okay, when do I start?" (Laughter) And I took the job because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They paid well? Speaker 1: Yeah, they paid very, very well. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: In fact, my first year there, everyone there kept saying, "If you're going to get out you need to get out now." Because these were old people that had been there a long time, but they said they had become too accustomed to the pay. And it's hard because you got big raises every year, so it's hard to walk away once you get used to, to making that type of money, but my mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] was so ashamed of where I worked. She used to tell people I worked for a top secret government agency. They'd say, "Well, what's ReShonda [HistoryMaker ReShonda Tate Billingsley] doing these days?" "Oh, I can't talk about it," 'cause she didn't want anybody to know I was working for the Enquirer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know and I, I had--I'm a--I was a journalist. I had no intention of going and digging up dirt and gossip on celebrities, but I got in, I got sucked into that pay (laughter). Speaker 2: Now, that's interesting and they say you gotta get out quick because you can get stuck-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --if the pay is good and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, the pay is great. Speaker 2: But the, but your pride goes down the drain (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It does, the things we had to do to get the stories, the-- Speaker 2: Like what, I mean tell us some stuff? Speaker 1: So, there was one, the Anita Hill and Clarence Thomas incident was going on, I went to Oklahoma. I had to pretend to be a law student to try, and 'cause if she had known who I was she wouldn't talk to me. So, I had to pretend to be a law student and she was over the Black Law Students Association [National Black Law Students Association], so I already felt bad about having to lie to the woman, but I'm digging, you know I'm a reporter, I'm digging up the dirt and my editor was--she had a dinner at her house and my editor said, "Okay, when she goes in another room, I need you to try and go through some drawers and see if you can find love letters from Clarence Thomas." And I just--okay, I was put on this earth for a calling greater than this, I cannot do this type of--but that's what we had to do. We-- Speaker 2: That sounds like fiction. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean the way you describe it, it sounds like fiction, but this is actually what the-- Speaker 1: And I, you know I have to admit, I wasn't that good at it. I wasn't good that good at being a reporter for the Enquirer, because I (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you didn't find any letters (laughter)? Speaker 1: I, I didn't look. I didn't look (laughter), and, and you know I did, I had to tell my boss that I did, but that's not who I am, you know and there were instances where they would send me to Little Rock [Arkansas] to find this illegitimate child of Bill Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and little things like that, that I just-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a whole Internet industry based on this boy, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And there are pictures and stuff. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And then next to Clinton. Speaker 1: Well, they sent me there to, to find that and I'm chasing this down and everything, every day I was just like okay, I was, I was--this is not who I am. This is not what I was meant to do and so a day before my one year anniversary, I ended up putting in my notice. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause this could, I imagine that having, putting that on your resume could stigmatize you. Speaker 1: Well, what it does on my resume and, I do put it on my resume. I wrestled with that in the beginning, it does, it made it a, a talking point, and so everyone that would bring me in for an interview would always ask me about it and then I became that one that was remembered. And the--and walking away, and I think if I was still working and enjoyed it and all of that it would have made a difference, but a lot of people are fascinated by it, but we did not, we could not make up stories. The only time I got in trouble at the National Enquirer was because I assumed. I was doing a story on the women of Warren Beatty, all the women he had been with and I assumed that he had slept with Natalie Wood because of a timeframe and I put that in my story and I got in trouble, because you have to validate. Now, if your sources are lying, that's a different story. Speaker 2: Okay, so the National Enquirer I shouldn't get 'em mixed up with the Globe and those other papers (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, the Weekly World News but it's guilty by association, everything is on, on the, on the grocery store stands, so people always confuse them. Speaker 2: So, it's salacious gossip, but it's not-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --necessarily false? Speaker 1: Right, it's, it's people, it's Oprah Winfrey, you know I'm just using in general--it's, it's Oprah's hairdresser on the payroll, it's you know family members of celebrities selling their stories. So, that's how the Enquirer gets all of their information. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. I know they were sued, they've been sued several times, sensational (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, but people, a lot of people only sue for show. They've only lost lawsuits, they lost one to Carol Burnett because they actually had people going through her stuff [sic.] and Roseanne Barr, but most people sue and then that gets the news and the lawsuit is dropped and it goes away. Speaker 2: Yes, the Carol Burnett story that, that is--you hear the most-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --publicized, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 670056 Speaker 1: Well, how long did it take to get another job? Speaker 2: It didn't take long, I went to Houston [Texas] and I am a, like I said I am an outside the box thinker, I go around the back door to get in and so I knew that I wanted to work in television, so I took a job in Houston working for a black newspaper, and since I wanted to work in television I figured let me do some TV stories. So, I did a big expose on the lack of African Americans in Houston television. So, I had to interview all these news directors and I pulled public records, and we looked at how they did not have enough African Americans in Houston television, and of course, one of the, the news directors at the ABC station ended up calling me in to, for a job. Speaker 1: Okay, so what paper was it? Speaker 2: The Houston Defender. Speaker 1: The Houston Defender. Speaker 2: Which to this day I'm still working for. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, they brought you in, they--did they give you a full time job or part time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was working full time, but the, the publisher is, she's like a mother. She knew that television was my true passion. So, it was actually her suggestion to, to find a way to get into the TV, get in front of the TV people and so she was always supportive of, of what I wanted to. Speaker 1: So, you were hired by Channel 13, is it Channel 13? Speaker 2: Channel 13. Speaker 1: Houston, it's--what is it called? Speaker 2: KTRK [KTRK-TV, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: KTRK, okay. Speaker 2: So, I was hired there as an associate producer, so I worked behind the scenes. Speaker 1: Okay, what are some of the stories from those days? 'Cause how long were you there? Speaker 2: I was there for two years, '93 [1993], I was there for two years. Speaker 1: Ninety-three [1993], '94 [1994]? Speaker 2: Ninety-three [1993], '94 [1994]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, what are some of the stories there? Speaker 2: Well, I covered daily news, so whatever was going on of the day. Speaker 1: Okay, any stories that you remember that you covered that would be of interest? Speaker 2: The Branch Davidians, the David Koresh and the Branch Davidians. Speaker 1: That was a big story, yeah. David Koresh had a group called the Branch Davidians and they lived (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --in Waco. Speaker 2: Waco, Texas, yes. Speaker 1: They had their own compound, they were heavily armed. Speaker 2: Right, and the government ended up going in, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the government went in because there were reports of child abuse-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and other things. Speaker 2: That was a huge story in the area at the time. Speaker 1: Yeah, well it took up the lot of air time on television, there were--they had real time broadcasts from the site. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: With the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] forces out front. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Surrounding the--and the--I think when they finally took it, it was a tragic, you know the fire. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Members of the Branch Davidians. It was similar to MOVE in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: In that sense, yeah, so did you, I mean did--on a story like that you stay on it like almost twenty-four hours a day or what? Speaker 2: We don't, we didn't do twenty-four hours, but we covered it daily. Speaker 1: But I mean you, as a reporter, were you out there? Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was associate producer at this time, so I was more kind of the research and the gathering at that time, but yeah, the reporters do, but, but myself I was just a producer at the time, associate. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so you didn't have to go there? Speaker 2: I didn't have to go there, I'm, I was the one back in the station pulling it altogether. Speaker 1: Okay, in '90 [1990], '91 [1991] this is--in Houston, the Geto Boys who were the biggest rappers. Speaker 2: Yes, yep. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I remember. Speaker 2: I was friends, actually friends with James Prince who owns Rap-A-Lot [Rap-A-Lot Records, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, he was, he was, that's, that era. Speaker 1: Right, right Bushwick Bill. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, right 'Somebody's Watching Me' [sic. 'Mind Playing Tricks on Me'] (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Right, and that's how the country found out about the Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas]. Speaker 2: I know, yeah, they put 'em on the map (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 670057 Speaker 1: So you were there like a couple of years, '93 [1993], '94 [1994], then where did you go? Speaker 2: Then I went to Beaumont-Port Arthur, Texas as a morning anchor. Speaker 1: And what station was that? Speaker 2: KJAC-TV [KBTV-TV, Port Arthur, Texas]. Speaker 1: KJAC in Beaumont, now Beaumont is famous for all the athletes that come out of there. Speaker 2: Yeah, and that, they're actually, it's Beaumont-Port Arthur, is what the, the market is called, and KJAC was based in Port Arthur [Texas]. They've since moved to Beaumont [Texas], but. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, any stories from that area that you (unclear)? Speaker 2: You know, no I anchored so I never was out in the field, I was a morning anchor. Speaker 1: Okay and this, what affiliation do they have? Speaker 2: NBC. Speaker 1: NBC, okay, all right. How is that different being the anchor? Speaker 2: I, I liked anchoring except when the big stories come out, I wanna be out in the field, but I did enjoy--I was a morning anchor. The, the hours were hard, I had to go in at three o'clock every day, but I, I loved being that you know, the first person people wake up to bring the news to them of what, what's going on in the world, so I really enjoyed anchoring and I did that for, for three years. So, I may have my time off a little because I think I was there--I left there in '96 [1996], so I went there in '93 [1993] 'cause I was there for three years. Speaker 1: So, was management supportive of you pretty much and did the crew support you, 'cause I've heard--[HistoryMaker] Carole Simpson had some horror stories she told me about? Speaker 2: You know it, but they, they did like me. My, my--the man that hired me, the news director, he liked me a lot because of my aggressiveness. He actually, when I found out about the job I called him. I called him and he said, "Oh, I'm about to make this job offer to someone else," and I asked him not to (laughter), I said, "Why don't you just give me, let me drive down there, meet with me in the morning before you call this person. I guarantee you, you won't be disappointed." And he was a little taken aback and then he said, "Okay," and I, I did and he offered me the job on the spot. So, he had always been supportive of me, but when the tides turn, the tides turn, and so you're--he was supportive until the next great, you know, thing comes along, and it, it--this woman came and wanted the morning anchor spot, and so they kind of--it gets cutthroat when it's time, they, they're ready to move you out. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so did--you said you enjoyed doing that and you had been practicing reading news for years. Were you a fan of Oprah Winfrey when you were (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, gosh yes. Speaker 1: I didn't ask about it, but I should've (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Oprah was, Oprah was the all to be, the end all. She just was the, the one that, that most little girls that wanted to be in television emulated. Growing up, when I was very young it would be Mary Tyler Moore, then, then it moved on to, to Oprah Winfrey and Carole, and so I always, I wanted to do exactly, follow Oprah's path from the, working in news, and then going on to get a talk show. I think that was most little girls' dreams at that time. Speaker 1: Did you ever have a talk show in those days (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did in, in Beaumont-Port Arthur, I had a talk show. Speaker 1: What was the name of your show? Speaker 2: I think it was 'Black Voices' [ph.]. Speaker 1: Now, this is an era where most stations had some sort of a-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --black talk show. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And now I don't think they have them because of FCC [Federal Communications Commission] rules, I mean they had to have community, you know, specific community involvement to get their license (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --in those days. Speaker 2: Most, most of 'em have gotten rid of them. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So there are hardly any left, I think there's one in Detroit [Michigan], but the whole city's black there. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: But there's yeah, so 'Black Voices' did you have any significant guests on the show? Speaker 2: You know I did mostly community because Beaumont-Port Arthur is small, it was just mostly community type stories. Speaker 1: Okay, all right did you see that as some--a growing kind of thing for you like Oprah or did you? Speaker 2: I did, I mean it had been my hope. I knew that it wasn't going to--I wasn't going to branch out much there because it was such a small station, but that was something that I had hoped to see myself growing into. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in Beaumont and Port Arthur for how many years, from '94 [1994] to (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, I actually--'93 [1993]. So then Channel 13 [KTRK-TV, Houston, Texas] would have only been a year-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because I went to Beaumont in '93 [1993] and I was there three years as a morning anchor. Speaker 1: Okay then '96 [1996]? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 670058 Speaker 1: Where'd you go in '96 [1996]? Speaker 2: I went back to Houston [Texas] and I worked as a reporter trainee for the NBC station there, KPRC [KPRC-TV]. Speaker 1: So, why a trainee, now you should be a pro by now, you're really? Speaker 2: 'Cause I needed, I wanted to be in a big market and that was the job title (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was the entry level. Speaker 2: That was that they--because in--now, now they hire straight out of small markets like them but because I skipped over the middle, middle sized market I had to go in as a trainee. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was one of those situations where we talked about earlier. I did, I loved worked there, but I was doing reporter work. I was breaking stories, I was on breaking news. I'm on the news every day getting reporter trainee money, and you know there were some black producers there that fought that. They said, you know they weren't understanding, if I'm doing everything that all the other reporters are doing, why am I still classified as a trainee. And so ultimately that ended up playing a role in my decision to, to leave and go to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. Speaker 1: Okay, and when did you go to Oklahoma City? Speaker 2: In '97 [1997]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you weren't there long? Speaker 2: Yeah, right I was only there a year. Speaker 1: So, Oklahoma City, all right and what's the name of the station? Speaker 2: KFOR-TV [Oklahoma City, Oklahoma]. Speaker 1: And okay, and what affiliation? Speaker 2: NBC. Speaker 1: NBC, yeah okay, all right and what role did you? Speaker 2: I was a reporter at first and then I was promoted to weekend anchor. Speaker 1: Okay, now in--are there any stories from Oklahoma City? Speaker 2: Yeah, there were between tornadoes which I loved doing, I love chasing tornadoes. My mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] would think that was the craziest thing ever, but I covered a lot of tornadoes. I was not there for the Oklahoma City bombing, but I was there for the aftermath of it all. Speaker 1: Okay, so it had been bombed already when you got there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It had been bombed already. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's the Murrah Federal Building [Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, that shocked-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: --the whole country. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: That was the craziest thing that's happened here before 9/11 [September 11, 2001]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: And so as you can imagine that was an ongoing story constantly, and so we did a lot of coverage of that. Speaker 1: You know--that was 1997? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, that's yeah, I can--those images I mean they just shocked everybody. Couldn't believe it. So, you were there 'til '97 [1997] and then what happened in '97 [1997]? Speaker 2: I was, so I was in Oklahoma City until--I went there in '97 [1997] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --and I was there for five years until 2003. Story_ID: 670059 Speaker 1: During all this time are you writing? Speaker 2: I am, I wrote my first book in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. I, I decided to stop talking about writing this book and write the book, and it, my husband [Miron Billingsley] played a large role in it because I am very frugal and I would not buy a computer, so my husband took, took some money out of our savings, just about all of our money and went and bought me a computer, and said, "Now, write this book." And so, I wrote it. I could not get a book deal because I sent it out to several places, query letters and I couldn't get any feedback so I decided to self-publish. And I self-published the book in 1999. That was my first book, 'My Brother's Keeper' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley]. Speaker 1: All right okay, and the computer, was this a desktop? Speaker 2: It was a desktop. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay and people were using Microsoft Word by then, right, I think? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay so did you have any help with it? Did anybody proofread it for you or, or? Speaker 2: Well, I, I would have readers kind of give me feedback, but I knew that I, I wanted to make sure that it could stand up against any other book on, on the shelf. So, I hired editors, I hired cover designers. I hired professionals so that I could deliver a professional product. Speaker 1: Now, this is the key part. What was the book about? Speaker 2: It was about three kids that grew up in a family with domestic violence and how it affected them when they became adults. So, I was trying to break that generational cycle of abuse that a lot of families suffer from, and I was very proud of the book. I put a lot into it. My mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] read the book and hated it (laughter), and I said, "It's, you know, my first book, why do you hate it so much?" She said, "People are gonna think that's us." So, she makes me wherever I go, let folks know that (laughter) that I did not grow up in a family full of domestic violence. It was just my imagination, now I had seen domestic violence in extended family members and the idea for the book came from one of those family members I asked her why she stayed, because her husband was very abusive and she had kids. And she said well, "It's not like he hits the kids," and I just--that fascinated me because I don't think she realized the damage that she was doing to her children, one boy and one girl, and so that's where the whole, you know, basis for the book came from and her son did grow up to be abusive as well, but it was passing that on without parents realizing it. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you address that in the book? Speaker 2: I did, I did, it's, it's a young man and he's struggling so hard not to follow in his father's footsteps and he ends up doing just that, and so it's the whole tragedy of, of trying. It's called 'My Brother's Keeper' and it is this family trying to rebuild after that. Speaker 1: Now, is there a Christian element to that story? Speaker 2: Most of my books are faith based. I am a Christian who writes fiction, but I don't write Christian fiction, because I write reality, and in the real world, the, the crack [crack cocaine] addicts I know don't say, "Well, pass the pipe gosh darn it," you know (laughter). I write reality and so those, that's why I always like to say, say that there's a faith based element, but you know you're not gonna get one of my books and expect to be hit over the head with the word of God. I, I just you know I believe in telling stories and letting the faith seep through the stories. Story_ID: 670060 Speaker 1: How did the book do initially when you put it out in 1999? Speaker 2: So, I self-published. And when I self-published I knew that I had to spread the word about this book. That was a time black authors were kind of coming onto the scene. [HistoryMaker] Terry McMillan had done well, but it was hard getting the word out and so again, me being the outside the box thinker, I had to figure out ways to let the world know about this book. So, I would do things, I was in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], I would call a bookstore here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and say, "Do you carry my book, the book 'My Brother's Keeper' by [HistoryMaker] ReShonda Tate Billingsley?" They'd say, "No, we don't have it, never heard of it." I'd call back about three hours later and say (adopts deep voice), "Hi, do you carry this book called 'My Brother's Keeper'?" And so, I would disguise my voice and do that three and four times a day and finally the bookstore would be like, "We don't have it but we need to get it 'cause everybody's calling about this book." And, so I did that in store after store, day after day and it caught a buzz, and I ended up having a, having an agent contact me and said, "I've heard a lot of great things about this book, and I'd love to take a look at it," and I signed with her and I've been with her ever since. Speaker 1: Now, that sounds, sounds suspiciously like shades of National Enquirer (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, I know doing what I gotta do to get this story out, huh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I knew that I needed to get--I knew that the story was good, it was just a matter of getting it in front of the people, and so once people started reading it, they were like okay this is a good book and so, you know I knew that it was just a matter of letting them know and then I, my talents could take it from there. Speaker 1: Okay, so now in 2001 it was republished, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is this by (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it was picked up by Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they, it takes a while, so they didn't re-release it until 2003. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, they re-released that same book. Speaker 1: Now, in the meantime, 2000--well, in 2002 you, you won the Black Writers Alliance Gold Pen Award for best new author? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, what's the story basically there? Speaker 2: Well, and so that is a predominately--I think I might have been the only African American at this whole conference, but it was for 'My Brother's Keeper.' I submitted it to--it was a Nova Lee Nation Award [ph.], she was a, a well known writer at the time and I submitted my manuscript and I won for it at the greater Dallas, greater Dallas writers association conference. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is the Black Writers Alliance, right? Speaker 2: Oh, okay so, yeah, I won quite a few awards. So, I thought you meant the Nova Lee Nation, so the greater writers, Black Writers was also a conference that I went to and I won, won an award for it, just the manuscript, the book itself, and so all of these are before it was picked up. So, I did, I sold about six thousand copies on my own, before Simon and Schuster re-released it. Speaker 1: That's good, that's good. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, it was re-released in 2003? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: By Simon and Schuster, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 670061 Speaker 1: And your next book in 2004 was 'Let the Church Say Amen' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] which is the foundation of a trilogy, basically? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Let--it's about two families, right? Speaker 2: It's about a, about a family and a pastor who gives his all to the church, so much so that he doesn't see how he's neglecting his family and what I wanted to do was show--even though this is a pastor, this could be any man in any job who works so hard for their job that they don't realize how their family needs them just as much, and so that's what I wanted to write about. What ended up happening was because the book had a church title, people started classifying it as Christian fiction, and I caught a lot of flak behind that because it, is not Christian fiction. I did, I had a couple of curse words in it. I have--and you know I don't write gratuitous, I don't write gratuitous sex, I don't write gratuitous cursing. Everything I write has a purpose, but when you pick up a book and you think you're about to read Christian fiction, so I caught a lot of flak, to the point that sometimes I would read the reviews and they would have me in tears, but for every bad review, I would get ten great reviews, but you know how we do, we focus on the bad. But that book is what ended up putting me on the map. Speaker 1: What were the responses good and bad to your work, I mean what did people like about it? Speaker 2: A lot of people liked the truth, I mean because what happens is many of us will go to the club Saturday night and then we get up and to the club--go to church on Sunday morning, and so those are the type of characters that I would write about, so people could relate. So, one of the, the biggest things that I got from people and one of the most positive things were, "Your characters are so relatable. This story is relatable." There were people that would say, "I'm struggling, my family is struggling just like the people in this book," so in terms of the positive side, I got that a lot. The negative was the people that said, "I picked this up because I thought it was a Christian fiction book, and you had this character say a bad word, so I'm mortified." There was--I got a couple of, "You're gonna rot in hell" emails, and those are the ones that sent me to, to tears because they would said, "Well, your character is homosexual and he didn't pray hard enough," you know. And you'd wanna reply, "Write your own book," (laughter), but you know you take, try to take the high road, but I would get a lot--I caught the biggest amount of flak because my character didn't pray the gay away, and I think at that time when that was released you saw that was big, a big, the whole DL thing was a big, down low thing was a big thing going around. Speaker 1: Right, I remember that. Speaker 2: And people kept saying, "He could just pray this away," and I don't have--I didn't have that in my book. I had this family really struggling with one of their son's dealing with that, and I, let the family deal with it and not say okay, now he's cured at the end of the book. So, I caught that. One lady said she, the book was garbage and she was gonna use it to hold up, her coffee table that had a bad leg. So, I would get that kind of thing all the time. There was one station in Virginia that was going--had me come in for a book signing and they ended up canceling it because they said they read the book after inviting me, and they called the book soft porn, and I was mortified because I don't have any, I don't have anything like that in there, but they said they ended up canceling it and the bookstore was a Christian bookstore started selling the book behind the counter like it was a Hustler magazine, and so the way I found out was a woman contacted me and said, "I don't know who you are, but bought your book because they didn't wanna sell it to the woman in front of me." And so, that kind of, the controversy ended up making more people go and read the book, and then when they read it, they were like okay, this isn't bad, but that's what me on the map. Speaker 1: Was the controversy had, did it have more to do with having gay characters or, infidelity, or what was the major issue (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The, the primary one was the gay character, the gay son and then the only, what they considered soft porn there was a line that said, "She lowered her head in his lap," and I moved on, I didn't say anything else, but they considered that soft porn, which was just crazy to me, but that, you know that was their prerogative, but the, the biggest thing was not, not having him pray that gay away, and people kept saying in the black church, "He's a father, but he's a minister, so how is he gonna just accept that his son is gay," and so you know I, I caught that a lot. It just, it was really shocking to me, but that's what created a lot of the controversy. Story_ID: 670062 Speaker 1: All right, we were just discussing off camera the contradiction it seems that I mean, that if you wanted to find gay black people, I mean a church is one gathering where you're sure to find some, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, but it's-- Speaker 1: And can point them out, but. Speaker 2: --it was like the dirty, dirty little secret, they didn't want to address it and so I, I really did catch a lot of flak behind that. Speaker 1: That is really--well, it's real though. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I mean it's a real controversy in the black community and black people are still wrestling over this gay issue. There's a pastor in Atlanta [Georgia] that-- Speaker 2: That just passed? Speaker 1: Did he just pass, the pass, the one that walked to Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] grave with Bernice King [HistoryMaker Bernice Albertine King] to condemn homosexuality over Martin Luther King's grave or (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yes, I don't remember his name. Speaker 1: He was wrapped in a Torah on--. Eddie Long [HistoryMaker Bishop Eddie L. Long]--did he just pass away? Speaker 2: He just did. Speaker 1: Did he? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He was accused of molesting (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --young men and you know at any rate, yeah it's always just--I--it's hard to believe that this is an issue, you know, in the black community. Speaker 2: Right, and so you know even, even if you look at the reviews on it ['Let the Church Say Amen,' ReShonda Tate Billingsley] you would see, but the hate--the amount of hate mail I got was just unbelievable, but what I ended up having to focus on were the few, were the people that would say, "Okay, this is gonna help. My daughter just came out and this book helped me accept her, or this book helped me deal with it." So, I had to end up focusing on those and not the, the people that would automatically stand in judgment of me and my salvation based on something that I wrote in a book because a character didn't pray hard enough, and it, you know every book that I write even though it's fiction, I do a lot of research and I had yet to research one gay person that said, "Okay, I'm cured 'cause I prayed hard enough," you know I'm sure they're out there but the majority that I interviewed, that wasn't their story. Story_ID: 670063 Speaker 1: Do your characters, I guess solve their problems through their faith? Speaker 2: No, not all the time because again, I write reality and you know in the real world, you and I we could pray all day and still not have our answer or still not have our problem solved. So, I don't write happily ever after endings. I write, I will wrap up a story, sometimes it's, you know, it has all come together. Most times it doesn't because that's the way of life. Speaker 1: Now, Tyler Perry, who is, as we sit here is an entertainment giant, and has entertained millions and has created a media empire in Atlanta [Georgia] and across the country. He's--one of the criticisms of his work is that you know people find themselves in a horrible situation and they're saved by the gospel or in the church at any rate and they in essence pray-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --away their problems. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, just again, that's, that's not my reality. I believe God is capable of anything, I believe he can, he can help us work through any type of problems, but I don't think that every--each one of our stories wraps up that nicely. I don't think that you know we, there's this--church doors burst open and everybody comes to Jesus and we all live happily ever after for everyone. I don't believe that that's how things happen on a regular basis, so that's not what you'll see reflected in my work. Speaker 1: So, but--I mean above all this criticism, your books are selling to the churchgoing black audience, and others too I'm sure? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But especially to them even if they have from under the counter, well (laughter). Speaker 2: And I, I think it was, I think I made that mark because they could, because it was finally, somebody's not preaching at me. Finally, somebody understands that I, my walk with God is a struggle. Somebody understands I got a cursing demon or I got this kind of problem, and so those are--you see those stories reflected and so you don't feel--I hate reading a book, especially one that may be a faith based book and now I close it and I feel like the biggest heathen ever (laughter). I want a book that speaks to people and so that's what I write. Speaker 1: Are there any characters in your work atheist? Speaker 2: I, I do what I, what I do is I'll have people that are just like they've turned away from the church, they don't believe in the church, so I, I cover a wide variety of people. I have the overzealous people, I have the people that are just completely away from the church and from God. So, yeah, I do. Now, one of the things--while faith is, always an underlying theme, it's never what I call a character in my book. So, you, you're not gonna get a book and be hit over the head with a word, with gospel, a message. Everything I do is a subtle, it's subtle so that you can just enjoy a book and not feel like you're you know being, going through a bible study lesson. Story_ID: 670064 Speaker 1: Okay now this book in 2004, 'Let the Church Say Amen' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] is the one that you know sets off a trilogy. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you start really reaching a lot of readers. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, with this book. How many copies did this one sell? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh I, I to date, we're hundreds of thousands, we're well into we've sold many, many. That's my highest selling copy--selling book. Speaker 1: And this one is the first one where Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.] helped from the very beginning, right? Speaker 2: Yes, I had a wonderful editor that kind of helped me shape the story. We, we ended up they, they published it, they were worried about the name because of the whole Christian fiction thing, but they decided to keep the name and they've been pushing it. They've pushed it ever since, and then we did book two which was 'Everybody Say Amen' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley], and they wanted a book three, and so the book three ['Say Amen Again,' ReShonda Tate Billingsley] is the one that won the NAACP Image Award, but the whole series, the trilogy has done very well for me. Speaker 1: Okay, now establishing your success as a writer is--now, I can ask you, what is your process? What is your writing process (laughter)? Speaker 2: I would (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wanted it get, to get out that you're successful though. Speaker 2: Yeah, I would love to say that I go sit on the mountain in Maine and come up with these fabulous ideas while the waterfall is in the back. I have three kids [Mya Billingsley, Morgan Billingsley and Myles Billingsley], I'm writing as this one over here is yelling that so and so looked at me the wrong way, and the dog is chewing up my kid's DS [Nintendo DS], so I write among chaos. I just write, and for me that is the key because otherwise life will always get in the way. So, I can't let the fact that the two girls are over here fighting because one wore the other's shirt stop me, and so I write with all of that going on. I just make sure that I write every day. Speaker 1: So, your youthful talent for compartmentalizing your imagination and reality is, that has a real function in this situa- ? Speaker 2: It does, it does and so one of the things I can literally--when, when my kids were small I would--they'd have their little play laptop and I'd sit them on the floor and I'd tell them to make up a story while mommy sits here and write, and so I'm able to do all of these things, and including all the other jobs that I do because I know that I have to focus. So, that's a large part of getting it done. You can talk about doing it, but you're not going to do it until you focus in on that project, and so you know just making sure I do all of that despite what is going on around me is how I've been able to do all of that. Speaker 1: So, do you write, I mean do you find yourself like working on your--work all the time even when you're a reporter or? Speaker 2: I do, and so I remember one time I was covering the Andrea Yates trial, she's the mother who drowned her five children and during the courtroom scene the medical examiner is going, is up and is giving all of this detailed, extra information that as a television journalist it's not gonna really do me any good, and so I'm, I've learned to listen with this ear as I write a chapter, and so one part of my brain is focused on this chapter and the other is still paying attention to have key words to know when I need to look up and pay attention. And so, I remember I was scribbling away and a reporter from a competing station came over and said, "Okay, I, I have to ask, what are you writing about? I'm scared I've missed something?" And I said, "Oh, I'm writing chapter seven of my next book." Because I utilize every spare moment and I think that's how I was able to balance the careers, how I was able to get everything done because I spent, I believe every minute you spend talking about what you don't have time to do, could be spent doing it. Speaker 1: Okay, now this, this award in 19--in 2004, Library Journal's Best [Library Journal's Best Books], you won the best, it's called the Best Books in Christian Fiction award in 2004. Now, that, did that stereotype you? Speaker 2: Yeah, I and that's why part of I, I caught it and I used to fight it all the time, fight that label because bookstores would label me as Christian fiction, writers would label as Christian fiction and I'm screaming from the rooftops, I'm not a Christian fiction writer, I'm a Christian who writes fiction, but I'm not a Christian fiction writer. But, the bookstores would classify me as that, I'd win awards as that, and so it was a fine line I had to walk for the longest. Eventually, I just got to the point where I just stopped fighting it and just, you know if you read it and you like it, you like it. If you don't, you don't, but it did. That's where the challenge came from, because if a bookstore says to you this is a great, Christian fiction book you'd love to read and you're a devout Christian fiction reader and you get it and you say, "Okay, wait a minute." Then you're mad at me, but I'm not the one who sold it to you as Christian fiction, so that's why it was a challenge. Story_ID: 670065 Speaker 1: Now, in 2005 you published a book called 'Help! I've Turned into My Mother' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, tell us about that? Speaker 2: I write non-fiction as well and this was just about the good, the bad and the ugly of turning into your mother. A lot of times you hear that as a negative connotation, "You're just like your mother," and, and you know what I wanted to say is my mother [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] raised a pretty good, pretty good woman, so that's not such a bad thing to turn into a mother. So, it's the good and the bad and the ugly of, of turning into your mother. Taking the good things that she's, she's brought to you, kind of setting the bad to the side and it was just about that journey and other women as well that I talked about in becoming their mothers. Speaker 1: Okay, you know, I wonder sometimes where the idea comes that you, that people have to disassociate themselves from their parents rather than accepting-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --good things and see it as an intergenerational transmission moving on, you know. Speaker 2: And that's exactly what I wanted to explore, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah it seems like the people feel compelled they have to destroy the predecessor-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to be themselves. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So, 2006 'I Know I've Been Changed' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] is published, and you're named the 2006 Texas Executive, Woman on the Move too-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --it's saying and then there's another book published called 'Nothing But Drama' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley]. So, these are two that are coming out-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in 2006, 'I Know I've Been Changed' and 'Nothing But Drama,' tell us about those two. Speaker 2: Well, 'Nothing But Drama' is the first of a teen series that I have. I have a teen book, and what I wanted to do is--I had my nieces with me for the summer and they were fifteen and sixteen and I wanted to get them away from the TV and have them go read. So, I'm, I'm a big reader so I sent them to my library and they came back with Zane, and Eric Jerome Dickey and those are friends of mine, so I really, I enjoy their writing, but they write for adults, not, not for teenagers. And so, I told them to go find different books. So, I pulled some books for them, Toni Morrison's 'Bluest Eye' ['The Bluest Eye'], Ernest Gaines' [Ernest J. Gaines] 'A Lesson Before Dying' and they were just grown, they were like, "We can't, we don't want to read those." And I couldn't find a happy medium, so that's when I noticed there was a void. So, I decided to write it, so 'Nothing But Drama' is the first in, in a series of books for teenagers. They're drama filled page turning books, but without sex or profanity for teenagers. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And then 'I Know I've Been Changed' is about a television news anchor from a small town in Arkansas who moves to Houston [Texas] and tries to forget her country trouble filled family, and despite my background it's not my story. That's my story and I'm sticking with it, but what I did do with that is I pulled a lot of--that would probably be the closest book that I have to my own history and my own family and I really enjoyed writing that because I did draw so much from, from my family, but what I loved about it was the reaction that I got from readers because my mother, this was another one she groaned about, but I had to tell her we're not the only one with a crazy cousin Ray-Ray in our family, and so that's what I loved about this book was the feedback from others saying "Oh, my god, you were in my family. My family is just like this." And so, that was 'I Know I've Been Changed' and I think that's why it resonated with a lot of readers. Speaker 1: Yeah, Ray-Ray and Peanut, they're all related, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah in every family, and there seems to be a sentiment. I saw that when 'Soul Food' came out. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: There's a black uncle who's either in the upstairs in a room by himself or. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: But this is--this resonated with so many people, I mean with me too. Speaker 2: And it's, it's because we, we--so many of us live it and now we're able to see it, see our stories or read our stories when that, that is something that many of us hadn't seen and at that moment you get to see okay, some people are actually are living this just like I am (laughter). Story_ID: 670066 Speaker 1: Now 2007, now you're cranking these books out, 'Blessings in Disguise' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley], 'With Friends Like These' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley], 'The Pastor's Wife' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] and 'Everybody Say Amen' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, (laughter). Speaker 1: And that's all published the same year? Speaker 2: Yeah, one of the things the, the teen books come out a lot more frequently than the other ones do. So, those were the 'Blessings in Disguise,' 'With Friends Like These,' those were all continuations of the teen books, and the, the adult books, I generally only do one adult book, but I ventured into a new genre with 'A Good Man is Hard to Find' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] so, that's why you'll see me when I have multiple books out per year. Speaker 1: Okay, now 'A Good Man is Hard to Find' is that 2000 (unclear)? Speaker 2: I think that may have been later. You know after you get forty-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --they start running together, okay. Speaker 1: But 'The Pastor's Wife' is, as a subject is, has always been a juicy subject for writers and movies and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: It is and one of the things that--my books teach me a lot because this book taught me even though I make up things, that I need to do a little bit more research because I wrote about a church in Houston [Texas] called Lilly Grove Missionary Baptist Church and the pastor's name is Terrance, and again I made all of this up. Well, I was at a book signing and these people came stomping toward me in all purple shirts, it was a group of people and their shirt said Lilly Grove Missionary Baptist Church, and their pastor's name was Terry [Terry K. Anderson] and so they automatically assumed I was writing this book about their pastor and so that kind of taught me, go and do some homework and make sure even though you're writing fiction, you're not actually taking some real names, but you know it was about finding him a wife and it, this one was a Christmas story, so that's why it, I had a multiple book release in that same year. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 670067 Speaker 1: Now at the same time you're working now too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --and, okay 2008, three new books came out 'Can I Get a Witness?' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley], 'Getting Even' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] and 'Fair-Weather Friends' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Was 'Fair-Weather Friends' a teen book (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And 'Getting Even' both of those were teens, so I would do teen books, two teen books. Speaker 1: But those are shorter works I take it? Speaker 2: Yes, they are. Speaker 1: For a shorter attention span, right (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay well what kind of feedback were you getting from the teens? Speaker 2: Oh, it was awesome. I mean there were, there were the teenagers that are finally saying that "I'm finally able to see myself in the story." It was four, four young girls and so you know the feedback was phenomenal. The parents were loving it. This one woman sent me a picture and she said, "I just had to find you online because this is what I came home to," and she had three girls and they were all three in the living with the television off and they were reading the book, and she said, "I've never had this happen." And so, I would get that type of thing all the time. The libraries, I'm very prominent in libraries all of the country for that very reason, because the kids would look at it and say, "Okay, I can relate. I'm this girl, I'm that girl," because it's four main characters and so they saw themselves in the pages. Speaker 1: Now we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Walter Dean Myers, actually at the association of black journalists [National Association of Black Journalists] when they were in Atlanta [Georgia] several years ago, in 2007 or 2008 [sic. 2005], and he gets a similar reaction from young black males. They read--some of their first books are read--you know are his books. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That they read. What about the black males, do you have any books? Speaker 2: I do, now one of the, the challenges that we've had is, is that my books have girls on the cover, and that's a battle that I'm kind of waging with--was waging with my publisher because you know they have target markets. My books are for everyone. The young men that read it love it, but I, it was so prominent to me. I was in--it might have been Dayton, Ohio but I did a library event and there were about six young men that were there and the librarian told me they were all former gang members that she'd gotten to get into reading and I, I loved it and they all had my book, but they had brown covers over the book. They had covered, they had put a paper bag cover over the book and they loved it and we had a great discussion, but they didn't want people seeing 'em read this book with this girly cover, and so that was a challenge that, that I had with Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.] but they act- they loved the book and, and most young men that read it do love it. It's just that cover. Speaker 1: Okay, okay 'cause those books, your books cover like cover a lot of issues that men young men have too. Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your relationship issues, you're coming of age, or attracted to the opposite sex or somebody. Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Speaker 1: And you've gotta deal with, you know, the consequences. Story_ID: 670068 Speaker 1: Two thousand nine [2009] 'Friends 'til the End' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] and 'The Devil is a Lie' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley]. Speaker 2: Yes Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And 'Friends 'til the End' is a teen book and 'The Devil is a Lie' one of the things that I like to do is I like to take a, a, something you think you or the way you think you might react and flip it up for you. So, that's about a woman that wins the lottery. When she goes to claim her winnings, her ex-husband shows up with the woman he left her for and informs her the divorce was never finalized and they'd like half the money. And one of the things that I find is a challenge as a writer is love for you to automatically think you're gonna hate this guy, and as a writer my job is to make you love him, and so that, you know I feel like I succeed with that, but one-another of the things that I find is often I have side effects that I never expected. With that book I got a lot of people that went back to check their divorce decrees, and the amount of people who said they had--they didn't--their divorce was never finalized was unbelievable to me. I had relatives who did it and people just automatically assumed that the divorce had been finalized. I would think that if I got a divorce, I'm gonna make sure that it is, but it so many people across the country who does not, who do not have that finalized and did not know it was finalized. Speaker 1: That's something, you think that people would know. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: It costs money to get a divorce, right? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, 2010 there are three new books, 'Caught Up in the Drama' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley], that's a teen book I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: 'Holy Rollers' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] and 'Drama Queens' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley], so, we got two teens books (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Two teen books. Speaker 1: Drama series. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, and 'Holy Rollers.' Now, what is 'Holy Rollers' about? Now, this is--what's remarkable about your titles all resonate with something that people say in the community? Speaker 2: I know, I know (laughter). 'Holy Rollers' is three women that used to chase professional athletes, but when they got a little older they felt like they couldn't compete, so they started chasing pastors, and it's, it's one of my most popular books because of, just the, the realness of it all and that came to me. I was at an event in Atlanta [Georgia] and I had gone down to the bar area to get something to eat and it was women everywhere, and a lot of them had Bibles, but they also had on these little short skirts and low cut tops and I asked the, the bartender what was going on and he said, "Oh, it's a ministers convention here, and these women came here to catch. They have groupies just like the athletes do." And so, my little creative mind just started churning and that's where 'Holy Rollers' came from. Speaker 1: Oh that's a story--yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I've played a lot of basketball and I, there are stories about women that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --hang out, outside the gyms and go run to the hotels if they know somebody's gonna be in town. Speaker 2: Yep, well now they're doing it for pastors (laughter), as well. Speaker 1: And may not have just started. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter), I'm sure it's been going. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's interesting, that's just an interesting concept. So, 2011, 'A Good Man is Hard to Find' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, here it comes, now, this is a book for adults, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And 'Say Amen Again' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] is another one. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, it's the end of the third book of trilogy now. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I don't know if there's gonna be anymore, but. Speaker 2: No, it's, that's it. It-- Speaker 1: Okay, character Roderick dies in this I read right. Speaker 2: In 'Say Amen Again'? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And one of the things, well, 'Say Amen Again' I took the main character from that book and I did author a--three, four more books with another author. So, the series lived on but it was part of a, a book that I wrote with Victoria Christopher Murray. So, it's four more books after that, but as for the trilogy, it ended there. Story_ID: 670069 Speaker 1: 'A Good Man is Hard to Find' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley], now, what is the premise behind this one? Speaker 2: It's romantic suspense which is another genre and it is a, a television celebrity who ends up going and is, is searching for true love and she doesn't see the man that's right up under her nose. She doesn't see--because he's not all that she's thought him up to be. So, it was a--I was dipping my toe in the romantic genre, romantic suspense genre. Speaker 1: Okay, what was the reception of this one? Speaker 2: It was very good, I was actually on a tour. I was in a play called 'Marriage Material' [Je'Caryous Johnson], a touring stage play, and so I was on tour during that. So, I got a lot of publicity out of that book and we did very well with it. Speaker 1: Okay, now the stage play was based on--was it based on the book or? Speaker 2: It was not one of mine, it was someone else's--was doing the stage play and they asked me if I wanted to be in it. We had, we had, it had the singer, R and B singer, Tank, Jill Marie Jones who was in 'Girlfriends,' so he had a pretty much all-star cast. So, he, he needed a non-star to balance it out I guess, and so he had me play a, one of the smaller roles in the play. So, we traveled all over the country with it. Speaker 1: Oh, okay how long did you do that? Speaker 2: I was on tour, so we were gone for three months, yeah. Speaker 1: So that fulfills your third (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --wish for occu- for acting? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: All right, is there any more acting in the future? Speaker 2: Well, I've been in both of my movies so my goal is to get more lines as each movie goes. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Story_ID: 670070 Speaker 1: In 2012, 'The Secret She Kept' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley]. So, now the question is asked here, "How far will you go to save a person you love after they have kept a dangerous secret for years?" Speaker 2: Yeah, 'The Secret She Kept' is one of my books that nearest and dearest to my heart. It deals with mental illness, and it is about a woman that meets and marries the man of her dreams, but doesn't tell him that she has severe bipolar disorder. And mental illness runs in my family, but like a lot of African American families we just kind of brush it under the rug, we don't address it. We take our problems to Jesus and meanwhile our loved one continues to suffer, and so that's what I wanted to, to do with 'The Secret She Kept.' That book is probably the one that has resonated the most in terms of helping people. There are people that suffer from mental illness that have written--are grateful to have their story told. There are family members that say, "Okay, this is what's wrong with my sister," or, "This is what's wrong with my loved one." And it's just because we don't talk about it and that's what I wanted, I wanted this book to help create a dialogue where people talk about mental illness. Speaker 1: It's a common situation that's just now starting to come to light. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I mean as a, as a diagnosed problem. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: We've said--it's been said for years in black families, So and So is crazy you know or they--and you know it's just thrown out like that. Speaker 2: Right, and that's what, you know the uncle up in the bedroom, and then so that's what we will do and I wanted to just get away from that stigma to show it's okay to talk about this. Speaker 1: Now, David Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher], when he was a--what do you call it, the surgeon general. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, he spoke--I heard him speak and he--that's what he talked about. His topic was mental health in the black community. Something we don't deal with. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We don't, we deal with it like they're crazy (laughter). Speaker 2: Yep (laughter), there's a line in my movie that, she says, "I knew she was crazy, but I thought she meant like girl she's crazy, not she for real crazy," and that's how we, we look at a lot of it. It, it's you know nobody takes it, or didn't used to take it as, as serious and what I wanted to show is if you have a pain in your heart, you'll go get that check out. If your arm breaks, you'll go to the doctor. I wanted to make it okay that people see that if something is wrong in your mind, it's okay to go get help with it. Speaker 1: You know it was said by someone back in the late '60s [1960s], that if you're black and you're not paranoid, something's wrong with you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause we live in a situation that makes us paranoid. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I mean to be sane is to be paranoid. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And there's so many things working against our people and so many tensions and that it's hard to sort out where clinical crazy might be different from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --a reaction to-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --a real sit- you know, a real oppression in situations we find ourselves in that stress us out. So, I mean how--did you try to deal with that in the book? Speaker 2: Yeah, one of the things that I wanted to make sure of is that we're talking about those issues and the triggers, that's what I call them around us, triggers, things that set us off that we--a lot of times we just blow those things off. So, I wanted to make sure that all of that is addressed. Story_ID: 670071 Speaker 1: All right, 2013, all right 'The Motherhood Diaries' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] and 'A Family Affair' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley]. Now, 'The Motherhood Diaries' is about your-- Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: --motherhood right? Speaker 2: It's, well, it's about motherhoods, so it's also the good, the bad and the ugly of raising kids in the new millennium. So, it's my story along with several other mothers contributed short stories. Just kind of an issue of dealing with motherhood and raising their children. Speaker 1: Okay, now do your non-fiction books do as well as the fiction books? Speaker 2: They don't do as well, but they still do well. And, again it's because I put a lot of humor in, in everything that I do, and so the, 'The Motherhood Diaries' is full of humor and, and the word of mouth gets people talking about 'em, but no, non-fiction never does as well as the fiction. Speaker 1: Okay, I know there's a story I read online about your daughter [Mya Billingsley], being on Facebook-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --or one of the social media platforms that--with a bottle of liquor or something-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --or a glass of liquor (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know it's funny, people call me the mother of social media shaming. That was never my intention. This was before people started shaming on social media. My twelve year old had an Instagram account and we had talked about it and she posted a picture of, of vodka, her holding a big bottle of vodka. It was unopened and she said, "Wish I could drink this, smiley face." And so, when I saw it because I monitor her social media, I made her hold a sign that said you know, "That since I wanna hold, post pictures of me holding bottles of liquor, I'm obviously not ready for social media and will be taking a hiatus, bye, bye." And I just had her post, put that on there on her Instagram page before we shut it down, and I put it on my--what I thought, my private Facebook page, and I called my girlfriend and said, "Wow, you know this thing has been shared two hundred times." And she was in the gym, and I said, "When you get upstairs, go take a look at it," and so she went up and looked at it. It was about fifteen minutes later and it had been shared two thousand times and then it went and was shared, so today it's been shared about 2 million times. I never expected it to go viral. It did and again that was one of those things where both sides started weighing in. I got a lot of publicity. I did the 'Bethenny' show. Dr. Phil [Phil McGraw] called, Steve Harvey called, all kinds, I did 'Dr. Drew' and I caught a lot of flak and there were people that were saying that I was embarrassing my child and I was going to--my child was going to hate me, and my, my philosophy has been it's a new era with children. And so, for this particular daughter, I knew that her punishment needed to be where you show out, is where you get shown out. And she didn't see anything wrong with what she had posted, and so I wanted to send a message to her that, that is was something wrong with it and the best way to reach her was to go the same way she had posted it, and so that's what got me the, the where it made it go viral, the whole attention of it but as one women told me on 'Dr. Drew,' that my child was gonna die of embarrassment, and you know was gonna hate me because I embarrassed her. I said I've never seen a tombstone that said, here lies Susie, she died of embarrassment. And my daughter really says now she's so glad that it was that picture that went viral and not the first one. So, she learned a valuable lesson, but you have to know your children before you make a decision like that and so I knew that she could handle it and I just didn't expect it to go viral like it did. Speaker 1: So, the relationship with your children is really the point anyway. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: If you don't have that it's no (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, absolutely. Like my middle child [Morgan Billingsley] is a lot more sensitive. I don't know--she wouldn't have been able to handle the, that nationwide, even though that's not why I had done it with my first one, I wouldn't have posted it at all with my middle one 'cause I know her, her emotional state, and so you have to know your children, and, and know what types of lessons they think they'll learn. Story_ID: 670072 Speaker 1: Okay, and the book 'A Family Affair' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] now is this a, this is a fictional--? Speaker 2: Adult novel, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, adult novel, okay. And what is this one about? Speaker 2: It is about a woman who, whose mother dies. They grow up in poverty and she discovers her father is actually a, a very wealthy man who, her mother used to be housekeeper for, it's kind of the Arnold Schwarzenegger story but, but I wrote it before the Arnold Schwarzenegger story. The mother was a housekeeper and the father got, got the housekeeper pregnant and they sent her away, and so she finds out her father is this wealthy man and it's about rebuilding that relationship. Speaker 1: Now, this is a wealthy white man? Speaker 2: Yes, it's a wealthy white man. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, this is the story I've heard sitting in this chair. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: A couple, a few times. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know and yeah, I'll tell you something after this is over about that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: But that's something, it's a story that resounds in our history. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It's something that's not, it's not that farfetched. So, how was that received? Speaker 2: It was very well received, again it did come out--you know a lot of people thought I had based it off the Arnold Schwarzenegger story, but I had written it before then and like most of my books you know it was one that--people love reading about the family dynamics and so that was one that was well received as well. Speaker 1: Okay, so two- 2014 as we get close to where we are now (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: 'The Motherhood Diaries' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] with two and 'What's Done in the Dark' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley]. So, 'The Motherhood Diaries' is a continuation. Speaker 2: Is a continuation, non-fiction, and then 'What's Done in the Dark,' I'm a big what if person and I asked the question on my social media, "What if you made the mistake of sleeping with your best friend's husband and he dies? What would you do?" And so, my, I really did expect most people to say, "Well, you know I'm gonna suck it up and, and tell," you know, "face my consequences." Most of the people, hundreds and hundreds of replies and everybody said, "I'm outta there, he's dead, why should I tell?" And that fascinated (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh so he dies on the spot? Speaker 2: Yeah, he dies-- Speaker 1: While they're-- Speaker 2: --he dies. Speaker 1: While they're making, oh. Speaker 2: He dies that night, they have a--it's her best friend's husband, they have a one time, one night affair and he dies. So, the question is, do you call for help, or do you get your stuff and run? And most people said, "I'm running, I'm gone," (laughter), "'cause he's already dead." And so, that fascinated me and so that's where the story was born from. It is one of my most popular books, just because the dynamics of it all. People are, are, you know most people will say, they're gone. There are people that'll say, "No, I'll stay and face the consequences." And so, that's what that book is about. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a heavy one, yeah. Story_ID: 670073 Speaker 1: Now what are you working on now? Are you--did you publish in 2015 or? Speaker 2: I did, in 2015 I had a book called 'The Perfect Mistress' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] and it--that is an oxymoron, as a married woman of twenty plus years, but it is about a woman who learns how to be the perfect mistress from her father, by accompanying her father when she's a little girl, and so one of the things that I do, is I write a lot about motivation, what makes us who we are, and she becomes who she is because her father dragging her along, she didn't, he didn't realize what he's doing, and I think a lot of times we don't to our children and so he creates the perfect mistress because he had her accompanying him all these years, and then the, the way it affected (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) While he was tipping around? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: The way it affected her relationship with her mother, as well. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, that's and now, anything coming out this year? Speaker 2: Yes, in 2017 in August I have 'Seeking Sarah' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley], and it is about a woman who abandons her daughter. You hear all the time about fathers abandoning their children, but this is a mother who abandons her child. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now you--I asked you about the process and somewhat about the audience, but is your audience primarily Christians who see this as Christian literature? Speaker 2: Actually, no, I have a mainstream audience, I--one of the things that, that I love about what it is that I do is that I reach so many. I reach the people that are at the club Saturday night and the people that are at church on Saturday [sic.] morning and then the people that do both. And so, my, my target audience is really just that mainstream audience. I don't, in fact there are some Christian, strictly Christian fiction readers that don't like me, because they, you know, they don't want--they're looking for a certain type of story and mine has, it's all encompassing, I'm doing the good, and the bad and the ugly. Story_ID: 670074 Speaker 1: Well tell me about the life of your work in TV, on TV and in the movies? Speaker 2: In terms of what has been made into movies (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: So, 'Let the Church Say Amen' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] was my first book made into a movie. It was--I, I got that movie deal by being nice, and I know that sounds like a cliche but I was at a book signing and this young lady came up to me and she had on a McDonald's uniform and she said, "I'd love to buy a book, but you see where I work, I don't get paid until next week." So, I bought her the book and I signed it for her and I sat there and talked and she ended up giving it to her sister who worked for an airport bookstore in Phoenix [Arizona], and one day Juanita Bynum was coming through that airport bookstore, Juanita Bynum, the minister, and she asked for a recommendation and the girl said, "You should read 'I Know I've Been Changed' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] because this woman was so nice to my sister," and she convinced Juanita Bynum to read the book and Juanita read it. She contacted me, sent me an email and said you know, "I'd love to talk to you about this book." I didn't answer because I thought it was spam. I was like yeah, right Juanita Bynum's emailing me. She got in touch with my editor and long story short, she said, "I love this book and I want your permission to take it to Hollywood," and I said, "My permission? Do you want me to drive you? I'll come down there and pick you up." But she took the book to Hollywood, that's how I got on their radar. You know it is a long process to bring a book to a film and the--eventually Regina King, the actress came on board to direct. Her sister, Reina King, they have a, a production company. They took on the project and they carried it through until BET [Black Entertainment Television] picked it up and BET released it, Queen Latifah produced it and T.D. Jakes [HistoryMaker Bishop T.D. Jakes] was executive producer on it. And so, it was released and we shot it in 2012, it was released in 2015 and it did great. It was on--it aired on BET and is currently on Netflix. Speaker 1: Okay, now, there's another one too, right? Speaker 2: There is and so, in the midst of all this, there's--I was approached by the vice president of original programming for TV One, who also was interested in some of my projects, and she especially liked 'The Secret She Kept' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] and so they bought the rights to that book and it aired last year in 2016. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I've gotta catch up with these, to tell the truth, I've got to catch up with them (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'Let the Church Say Amen' is on Netflix and then TV One currently has 'The Secret She Kept' in rotation. Speaker 1: Okay, any other projects? Speaker 2: Yes, TV One is actually--they had also had the rights to 'The Devil is a Lie' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] so they will be--I don't know which book they're doing next, but they have another book and then BET bought the rights to 'I Know I've Been Changed' as well as the rest of the series, the amen series. Speaker 1: The amen series okay, now I was gonna ask about that, if they were going to do the whole thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, so they have the rights to all of those. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, hopefully (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I assume they do it with the same actors and (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, we hope so, what ends up happening a lot of times the character that played the main person in 'Let the Church Say Amen,' she [Naturi Naughton] ended up going on to a successful show, 'Power' so a lot of times those type of dynamics play a role in it because now I'm sure what (laughter) you know, what they got her for before, it would be different now. So, I'm not sure how that'll play out. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's interesting how they--'cause when I was reading when I first saw all the information about your books, I assumed it was Christian literature and such, you know. I made the same assumption by, about the TV show 'Greenleaf.' And then I saw it, and it's not just about being a Christian, it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --there are a lot of dynamics there that play out in that setting-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know and that's a stage for a lot of drama-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to be acted out because it's and, I don't know if you agree with this, it's black organizational life. Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: It's the community setting, I mean there are other communities too, but the church community is the most prevalent community we have. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And. Speaker 2: And one of the things that I found though with my writing, with 'The Secret She Kept' I was on a conservative talk show radio. They had me on for the whole thing with my daughter [Mya Billingsley] going viral, and so he said, he said do I--I'm sorry, he said, "Do I--can I read this book?" And I, I said, "Can you read," and he said, "Oh, you know I never even thought about that." But because it was a black woman on the cover, he just automatically assumed it wasn't a book that he could relate to, and he read the book and he ended up getting back in touch with me and he said, "This book was awesome, but I would have never read it," and so that's a challenge that I face quite a bit. Speaker 1: Now, that's something that black people will probably never think to ask 'cause we're always the one's reading everybody else's-- Speaker 2: We read our work, but they don't read ours. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's kind of bilingual-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in a way that--I mean there are some white people that will-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --but, and always have-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --but they are, they're people that see it, just like the boys that won't read a girl's book-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --if they think, if they think it's a girls book. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 670075 Speaker 1: Do you think you'll ever involved in screenwriting itself? Speaker 2: I will, you know I love screenwriting. I, I submitted the screenplay for 'The Secret She Kept' and the first time I submitted it, they said, "Okay, stick to novel writing," and so then that means I go back and need to do some more homework and I did a lot of research on what makes a good screenplay. I studied it, so my goal is to eventually get into screenwriting. One of the things that I've, I learned the biggest difference is, is as an author, I'm trying to include everything, and so the screenplay is only supposed to be the essence of the book, but in my early stages of writing, I'm trying to include all the important stuff. Well, I'm the author, so everything I wrote is important and you have to really take off your author hat, and put on a screenwriter's hat, and so I would, I would definitely like to branch out into doing the screenplays. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, what about directing or (unclear)? Speaker 2: I, yes, all of it, I would love to do all of that we, as a matter of fact, my publishing company [Brown Girls Books], we have acquired the rights to several of the screen rights so that we can move over and produce our own content, produce our own films. Speaker 1: Okay, are there any other products associated with your books that you know? Speaker 2: No, right now it's just the, the movies. I do have stage play rights that we've been approached about people wanting to take some on the road with stage plays. So, it's just the movie and the books for now though. Speaker 1: Yeah, the stage platform is really growing. I mean. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Especially with the church crowd. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Doing good with the church crowd. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: People--'Mama, I Want to Sing!' [Vy Higginsen], and those early, stage plays designed to fill up these massive auditoriums in black communities like Chicago [Illinois], New York [New York] and other places. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know have revived the careers of some of the actors of, you know like Billy Dee Williams has been on the stage-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] Melba Moore and other people you know that, you know, on these tours, it's interesting, so. Story_ID: 670076 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about--now, you've won, you're a five time winner of the NABJ in the words competition (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Now, what is the in the words competition? Speaker 2: It's a Spirit in the Words competition, it's a poetry contest that NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] had every year. I am a spoken word poet and so they--Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC] was sponsoring it and I would go every year and win, and then people just started complaining about me winning and they ended up canceling the competition. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). So you're a poet, you're considered, you're a good poet. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You're-- Speaker 2: Yep, it was a five thousand dollar prize. I won it every year. Speaker 1: Gee whiz, okay, all right, so, now, you're an Essence bestselling author? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well, as we said before you won the Image Award for outstanding literature [NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Literary Work, Fiction] in 2012 from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. You, in 2014 you won the African American Literary Award for Best Christian Fiction for 'Fortune and Fame' with Victoria Christopher Murray? Speaker 2: Christopher Murray. Speaker 1: Okay, so once again you're being categorized as a Christian (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know. Speaker 1: --fiction writer. Story_ID: 670077 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point is there any major thing you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: You know I've often thought about that and I think the Christian fiction label, as much as it bothered me, you know I wouldn't fight it. I just, if that's what people wanna classify me as, as long as I can reach the other readers as well. The problem comes is there are a lot of people that would not read me because they're like I'm really not into Christian fiction. So, that was a challenge that I faced. Luckily, I managed to overcome that. It's still a slow process in terms of there are still a number of people that think that's all that I write and the reason that I don't like the label is because it does, it boxes me in. Just because there are, you know the, the stigma is people are like I don't wanna be preached to, so I'm not gonna read a Christian fiction book, so you know I, would I, I fight it as much? I wouldn't, I would use my time elsewhere, because I spent hours in front of my computer crying behind that. And so, I wouldn't, I wouldn't focus as much attention on that, and the biggest thing is I would write earlier. I wanted to do this long before I did this. Story_ID: 670078 Speaker 1: Okay, would you advise anybody that wants to write to write? Speaker 2: I would, you know and it's as simple as setting a small goal. If you say three pages a day, five days a week, no matter what, well before you know it you'll get done, but you're never going to get done if you keep saying okay, I'm gonna do this and you don't set clear, concise, a clear, concise pathway to make it happen, because life will always get in the way. So, it's about setting that time, well I said three pages a day. Well, the first day, may be a little hard. Well, the second day I did thirty pages. The third day I may do thirty more and before you know it you're done. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I think that's good advice to people, take it one bite at a time. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Instead of conceptualizing the whole thing at once. Speaker 2: Right, and one of the things I also tell people is that they look at a final product that I've done, a final book, and then say, "Okay, I just don't know that I can create that." Well, I couldn't create that either. It takes several drafts to get to that point, and so I always tell people, stop trying to create what you see on the shelves in the beginning. Just get it all out. So many of us have a story to tell, so it's a matter of getting that story out and then you go back in and make it pretty. Speaker 1: Now, do you know, when you conceive of a story, do you conceive it from beginning to the end? Speaker 2: Oh no, no I'm always typing, and so I'm in the middle of writing and like oh, my god, no she didn't just do that. And so, the characters, I let them take on a life of their own. Sometimes the book will be done and the characters will come tap me on the shoulder and say okay, that's not how I want this story to end. My husband [Miron Billingsley] say I need to stop telling people this, but how, that's my process. And so, they'll come in and I let the characters organically do what they're going to do and oftentimes I don't know that. We have to turn into Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.] an outline of how our story will be and that's what they put on Amazon and so I'll go sometimes, I'll always have to check it because what I send in, in the beginning before I started writing the book, 90 percent of the time it's different from what I ended up with. Speaker 1: Now, this is a process--I've heard other writers say it. You know (unclear) your husband, it sounds like an episode of 'The Twilight Zone.' Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: There was an episode once where the writer would write the character and the character would knock on the door and show up, but other writers have said the same thing, that, that the characters--August Wilson. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know said that he would have like voices in his head, I mean the people would talk to each other and he would just write down what they had to say. Once he got on a subject and he knew what the characters--had the characters clearly defined, they would take over. Speaker 2: Yeah, and one of the things they, they're so prominent with me I'll go to my husband and start talking about people and I'll say, "You know Eric did this, this," and my husband has gotten to the point now, where he goes, "Wait, are these real people we're talking about before I get too invested in this?" Because they're, they're vivid and I'm talking about them as if they're real people, but it just it's all part of the writer's process. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So when you start a book you know what the theme is, but you don't know necessarily how it's gonna begin and end? Speaker 2: Right, so I have the foundation. I don't know the direction they're going to take. I don't know how it's going to end, even when I do an outline I still often, I, I'm not restricted to that outline. I know this is the, the blueprint, but I may decide to go in a different direction as I'm get- actually getting into the construction of the project. Speaker 1: Do, do your characters usually resolve their problems? Speaker 2: No, because again, I don't wrap everything up in a nice bow. What I do, do is I want the reader to have satisfaction. They may want more, but I want them to feel like okay, this issue has been resolved or, there's some type of satisfaction at the conclusion of the story. There, it's not gonna wrap up all nice and pretty, but I don't want you to throw the book down and go, "Okay, what happened next?" I want it to, to have some kind--type of resolution. Story_ID: 670079 Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite writer? Speaker 2: I am an avid reader, I love reading. I'm, I'm a contemporary fiction reader, but one of the things I'd love to do, is I love discovering unknown. I love reading a lot of self-published authors that people may not have ever heard of, but some of my favorite contemporary writers would be Daniel Black. I read a lot of my, my business partner that I write with, Victoria Christopher Murray, I read mostly all of her things. Daniel Black is definitely a favorite--Lolita Files, and then I love reading just kind of up and coming authors, more established authors. I read--a lot of my friends' books, Pat Tucker, I love reading her books as well. So, they're, they are a number of--I'm always looking and listening. I do a lot of audio books as well. I get everything Eric Jerome Dickey has on audio book, and I used to be a big E. Lynn [HistoryMaker E. Lynn Harris]--so you can see I'm more of a contemporary reader and discovering of new readers. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what's your favorite work of yours? Speaker 2: My favorite would probably be, gosh you know that's like saying which child do you like the best? Now, my girls [Mya Billingsley and Morgan Billingsley] would claim it's my son [Myles Billingsley], but you know I think 'The Secret She Kept' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] because of, because of the, the issue with that. In terms of popularity and what I love talking to people about, it would be 'What's Done in the Dark' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley], but I always try to do my last book, it's kind of my most, my best work. Because I, everything that I do, I try and learn from the previous book. So, it's hard to put to--narrow down on a favorite, but it would definitely be between 'The Secret She Kept,' 'I Know I've Been Changed' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley] and then I love talking about 'What's Done in the Dark.' Story_ID: 670080 Speaker 1: How have you become more effective in what you do, I guess from the time you started until now? I mean how, in what ways have you improved? Speaker 2: Well, one of the things I've improved, it used to take me seven to eight months to write a book. In today's climate, you just don't have that kind of time, and so I can write a book, fairly quickly, but the way that I'm able to do that is I dictate a lot. So, I'll take a--I have an app on my phone. As I'm driving, I'll dictate into that, and so that has streamlined my process, and so that's just my first draft though and then I go back in and I do several more drafts to clean it up. So, I've gotten more efficient in that regard. However, when I worked full time, I felt like I was more productive. Maybe it was because I knew I only had a certain amount of time to get something done. The business side has also improved greatly for me, because I didn't see what I did as a business before, but now I do. I see you know the whole publishing of books and doing, you know, writing of books as a business and, and my art is a business. Speaker 1: Okay, is the, does the business side create more urgency than the art, or it is--are they equal? Speaker 2: It, well you know the business side, writing the book is only half the journey. The other half is letting people know you have it, and when they have so much to compete with, the social media, seven thousand television channels, you have to find new and innovative ways to reach readers, and so that, that's part of the challenge and that's where the business comes in, and knowing that side helps a lot. Speaker 1: Okay, so I know you do a lot of travel-- Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: --in relationship to promoting your work. Speaker 2: I do because again I have to get out and get in front of people. I don't do as many book signings as I used to do, but I do do a lot of events, and a lot of speaking engagements. Speaker 1: Now, do you take increasingly a larger role in the marketing of your work in terms of conceptualizing what the cover's gonna look like and? Speaker 2: I have a fabulous team at Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.] that has always been very good at that. One of the reasons they get behind me so is even though I have all of these books with them, I maintain my self-publish mentality. So, if they send me on ten cities, I'm gonna add five of my own. If they do all of this for me, A, B, C, and D, I'm gonna do E, F, G, H, and so they love that. They love that for every action they do, I have another action that I'm gonna try and match it with, because the marketing is crucial to the success of a book and so I take that into account and try to use that approach on every title that I do. Speaker 1: Do you think you'll ever stop writing? Speaker 2: When they put me in the ground. I love it, I love--you know there are times you look up and you think wow, I love this so much, I would do it for free. The great thing is I don't have to. I, and so I always say what is your passion, what is that one thing you would do for free and for me it is writing. I would write for free. The great thing is that I do something that people wanna pay for my art and, and I'm very blessed for that. Story_ID: 670081 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: You know the, there's, there's a whole list with the current administration [of President Donald John Trump], but I'll stay away from politics. You know it's, it's one of the things that I really hope that we do is, is to get back to the family side, the whole it takes a village side. My father [Bruce Tate] used to work, I mean my husband [Miron Billingsley] used to work in the school system and one of his students had brought a gun to school and he called the mother up and so she came mad because we had interrupted her soap operas. And then she said, "Why are you picking on my son? I'm sure there are other kids here with a gun." And it's that type of mentality that I would like to see us get away from. To get back to the it takes a village and being accountable for more than just ourselves. I, I really would like to see some more togetherness and us coming together. Story_ID: 670082 Speaker 1: Well tell us about your family, I know you got married shortly after you--did you get married in college [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] or? Speaker 2: No, I got married in 1996, five years after college. My, my husband [Miron Billingsley], I actually met in Cancun, Mexico. We went to the jazz festival [Cancun Jazz Festival] and we both were living in Houston [Texas] and we're both originally from Arkansas, but we met there and I got married in '96 [1996]. He went to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] with me and then moved back to Houston with me, so he followed me around as I built my career and I ended up having to follow him. It was his turn to build his career, and he moved to North Carolina to become vice president of North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] there--North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University] in Durham, North Carolina. So, we, we've been living in Durham, we love it, my children are thriving. I have three children, they are sixteen, fourteen and nine. The two girls [Mya Billingsley and Morgan Billingsley] are the oldest and then the nine year old boy [Myles Billingsley]. Speaker 1: Okay now you mentioned your, your mother's [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell] reaction to some of your work, what about your father [Bruce Tate]? Speaker 2: Oh, he's just a proud daddy. He's so proud I don't--now, I can't tell you if he's read any one of my books. He did see the movies. My stepmother [Helen Tate] reads everything, and I think she just tells him about the books. I don't think he's read any of 'em, but he's, he's super proud. I was inducted into the Arkansas Black Hall of Fame, which is a, a huge honor and so he was there the whole time and just the look on his face was, was priceless for me because he was just one proud father. Story_ID: 670083 Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss you think before I ask my last question. Speaker 2: Well, just my company, my Brown Girls Books. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of the things that, at Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.], I'm with a division called Gallery Books. My business partner Victoria Christopher Murray is with Touchstone and we're the last two African American authors standing. The industry has changed so, and they've gotten rid of a lot of their authors of color and so we're among the few that are left, and so we decided that there are so many talented authors out there that aren't getting a, a way in, they don't have a chance to publish. Some of our most favorite authors no longer have book deals, not because they aren't talented, but because of the changing industry. So, we decided to start a publishing company and it's called Brown Girls Books because we're two brown girls, but we have authors of all races. We have white authors, Hispanic, we have children authors and one of the things we did not expect was for the company to take off like it did. We have over forty authors, one of our authors is NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] nominated, and we take pride in being able to give fresh voices, especially, a chance to be published. We are very big on quality and we're about to celebrate three years, so we're very excited about that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Anything else? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, and I'm sorry I didn't ask you about that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's okay. Speaker 1: I apologize, I should have. Story_ID: 670084 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy I guess. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: You know if you looked at what I would like on my tombstone it would say she did because I don't ever wanna go into my grave with regrets. I want to say everything that I set out to accomplish, I accomplished--realistically, because I'd love to star in my next movie with Denzel [Denzel Washington], but that's not real realistic right now, but I would, I, I just wanna, my legacy to be, she said she would, and she did. And it's just about following your dreams. I'm a firm believer in whatever it is you wanna do, if it's open a business. If it's write a book, whatever it is, find a way to make it happen and do it. And so, I'd love to leave this earth, the minister can end my eulogy with you know, she said she would, and she did. Speaker 1: All right, well thank you very much. Speaker 2: All right, thank you, my pleasure. Speaker 1: Okay, I enjoyed that (laughter). Speaker 2: Wonderful, wonderful. I did too. Story_ID: 670085 Speaker 1: These are my heartbeats, my three children. Mya is the oldest, Morgan [Morgan Billingsley] is on the other end and Myles is the little boy in the middle. This was just kind of, we're big on family and so this was at a family gathering with us just hanging out. Speaker 2: This is my husband Miron [Miron Billingsley], and my stepson Xavier [Xavier Billingsley], who had just become a member of Omega Psi Phi Fraternity like his father. He is currently working in Costa Rica for the embassy. Speaker 1: In spring of 1989, I pledged Alpha Kappa Alpha at the University of Texas at Austin [Austin, Texas] and I have had a sisterhood with this group of ladies ever since. This was one of our reunions. They are vital to who I am. They're just, it's a sisterhood, a strong friendship that has withstood two decades. Speaker 2: I am a journalist and this was a, a missionary trip to Haiti which was an eye opening experience where I got a chance to go and I covered a local church that took a trip to Haiti. So, this was talking with a little Haitian girl. Speaker 1: About what year is that? Speaker 2: That was '93 [1993]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this is that same trip to Haiti. These were another little group of kids. That was so eye opening because they helped me have an appreciation for the simple things in life. Speaker 1: I was a reporter for FOX 26 News [KRIV-TV] in Houston [Texas] and myself and this reporter here, Isiah Carey were always doing speaking engagements and this is he and I speaking in downtown Houston. Speaker 2: I also taught at Langston University [Langston, Oklahoma] and so this was me teaching a broadcast writing class at Langston in Oklahoma. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Hard to believe I was just sixteen years old on that picture and as a cheerleader at Madison High School [James Madison High School, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: This was one of my first book signings at an Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority conference for my first book 'My Brother's Keeper' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley]. Speaker 2: This is New York [New York] at the BookExpo America conference, where I got a chance to meet [HistoryMaker] E. Lynn Harris and get to know him from there, but this was the first time we met. He was a great author that I respected. Speaker 1: That is a, a book signing for my book 'My Brother's Keeper,' and a reader. Speaker 2: Like mother, like daughter, that is my middle child, Morgan, who is also an author. She has written two books, working on her third and this is a book signing where she sold all that I didn't. Speaker 1: That is also me teaching and speaking at Langston University in Oklahoma. Speaker 2: Graduation day, May 1991, where I received my degree from the University of Texas at Austin. Speaker 1: Very active in UT Austin, this is my sophomore year when I moved into a dorm that in 1988 had never had an African American resident. It's sad that you were still having firsts then. This is me outside that dorm. Speaker 2: My husband and I at my first book signing for 'My Brother's Keeper.' We held a book release party and that is me in clothes that are three sizes too big. That was the style (laughter). Speaker 1: This is my business partner, my writing twin, Victoria Christopher Murray. She and I do a lot of touring together, we also Brown Girls Books together and co-write four books and this is us on tour. Speaker 2: This at the books--the film release of 'Let the Church Say Amen.' I'm with Regina King, who's in the center, she was the director. Hosea Chanchez who was one of the star, and Brely Evans who was also a star. Speaker 1: The Houston Chronicle did a big full page feature on me and my style and, and things that I like and so this is me showing, showcasing that work. Speaker 2: This is my son in Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] who asked for a toy and when I told him no, he went and convinced the lady to buy my book 'My Brother's Keeper' and said if he sold it, would I buy his toy, and he got her to buy it so I had to buy his toy. Speaker 1: Clever (laughter). Speaker 2: This is actress Jill Marie Jones from 'Girlfriends' and actress Patrice Lovely from 'Love Thy Neighbor.' When we were on tour in a stage play called 'Marriage Material' [Je'Caryous Johnson]. Speaker 1: And these are my children again, my heartbeats at a Christmas photo. Speaker 2: That is my company photo when I was at KJAC [KJAC-TV; KBTV-TV], Channel 4 in Beaumont-Port Arthur [Texas]. Speaker 1: At the anchor desk [at KFOR-TV] in Oklahoma [Oklahoma City, Oklahoma] getting ready to give the news. Speaker 2: That is my junior year of high school, seventeen years at Madison High School. Speaker 1: My firstborn, Mya Simone Billingsley [Mya Billingsley]. Speaker 2: This is me on the road, on tour for a book signing for 'Help! I've Turned into My Mother' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley]. Speaker 1: This is the cast of 'Marriage Material,' Jill and Patrice along with T-Boz from the group TLC we were all on tour together along with Kier Spates, the comedian. Speaker 2: I travel a lot, this is me in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] about to go on the air to promote my latest signing. Speaker 1: This is twenty-five years after meeting these ladies when we all pledged at Alpha Kappa Alpha. We continue to get together to have brunch. Speaker 2: Oh, we did that one. Speaker 1: Oh, we did this one? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is the set of my community affairs talk show. Speaker 2: What's the name of it? Speaker 1: 'Black Voices' [ph.]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is a book release party with my best friend and my children's godmother, Jaimi Canady, for the release of 'The Devil is a Lie' [ReShonda Tate Billingsley]. Speaker 2: This is my induction in to the Arkansas Black Hall of Fame, along with Ne-Yo, the singer. I was honored to be inducted as notables from Arkansas. Speaker 1: This is a book signing in Little Rock, Arkansas with the owner of Pyramid Books [Pyramid Art, Books and Custom Framing] and my sister-in-law. Speaker 2: Was that in Little Rock? Speaker 1: Yes. My son, Myles Julian Joseph Billingsley [Myles Billingsley]. Speaker 2: My mother and my sister [Tanisha Tate]. My sister has listened to my stories since she could listen, and my mother who has pushed me to be the best. Speaker 1: We just did this--signing in Little Rock, yeah. We need to do that one. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Ah, the cheerleading, we did that one. Speaker 2: High school, let's see. Speaker 1: We don't need that. Speaker 2: Okay, here we go. Here's one that we didn't do, a polaroid. Speaker 1: That is my mother's wedding dress, had been passed down from her grandmother [Delcie Hicks], my mother, her, her grandmother wore it, my grandmother [Pearley Hicks Kilgore] wore it, my mother wore it and I just tried it on. Speaker 2: And that is a recent photo of my husband and myself, attending a community event. We just did one of those. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Whoa, hold on. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Something was looking like a shadow in there. Okay. Speaker 1: This is in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] after--in 2002 after my, the birth of my second child. Speaker 2: Couldn't get my parents back together permanently, but I could get them back together long enough to take a picture on my wedding day. That is my mother, Nancy Blacknell [Nancy Kilgore Blacknell], and my father, Bruce Tate. Speaker 1: And that is my husband and I on August 31, 1996 in Houston, Texas, Speaker 2: And you need the whole camera for my big headshot. That was me at nine years old. Speaker 1: That's cute..