 Story_ID: 391624 Speaker 1: Good afternoon. Speaker 2: Hi! Speaker 1: My name is Janet Sims-Wood [HistoryMaker Janet L. Sims-Wood] and I'm the interviewer for today, Mr. Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Ms. Brown could you state and spell your name including your middle name? Speaker 2: Oh [HistoryMaker] Jamie Foster Brown, J-A-M-I-E, F-O-S-T-E-R, B-R-O-W-N. Speaker 1: Okay and your date of birth and location of birth? Speaker 2: June 25th, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay and today's date? Speaker 2: I don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) February 5th. Speaker 2: February 5 (laughter), 2007. Speaker 1: Two thousand seven [2007], and the location of this interview? Speaker 2: It's in my home in Bowie, Maryland. Speaker 1: And the address? Speaker 2: Oh, I have to give the address? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, no, no. Speaker 2: Okay, your occupation? Speaker 1: I'm a publisher of Sister 2 Sister magazine. Story_ID: 391625 Speaker 1: I'm gonna start off by asking you some sort of People magazine type questions so just bear with me. What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: I have none. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, what about the favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Christmas. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: I have none. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Europe. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: What's that about? Speaker 1: And what does that mean? Speaker 2: What's that about, why are you doing that (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why are you doing this? Okay all righty. Speaker 2: How did that happen? Story_ID: 391626 Speaker 1: I wanna get a little bit about your background. Tell me a little bit about your mother? Speaker 2: My mom, I used to say, "Mom, you're so sweet." She's like sugar and butter, I just could make a pound cake out of you. She's the most wonderful woman, very smart, Mamie Lee Foster [Mamie Lee Harris Foster], and her mother Estella Mae Harris [Estella Harris], very smart women and didn't have a you know--I think my mother went to the eleventh grade [at Dunbar Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and she was the one that was--when the first satellites that went up she was a solderer and she was soldering this circuitry but it wasn't holding well so she put some of, some other metal there and soldered it in and she was always smart figuring things out and her supervisor said, "Oh, Mamie you're so smart," and so she was the one that--my father worked at a meat--at Chicago [Illinois] stockyards and she worked at the soldering company but she always saved money. She had learned how to save money and then when she had her children--that was the store. She always looked in the newspaper to find you know classified ads, she loved that. She found this store that I think it was thirteen hundred dollars to buy this school store and it was in the middle of five schools, three elementary and two high schools in Chicago, Illinois. She found that store and she says, "Look James [Peter Foster]," to my father, "Let's go and talk to this guy," and it was white people. They wanted to move out of that, you know it was transitioning, and they had nine hundred dollars cash and they said, "Well all we have is nine hundred dollars," he said, "I'll take it." That store was a cash cow, they would come home every night with bags full of coins that they would count, two, three hundred dollars a night you know, and she was smart like that. She had you know won a lottery ticket five thousand dollars. You know my, my mom and her family enabled us 'cause we lived with her mom. All of us lived in a four-unit building which was very important in terms of raising the children because that was the village, the uncle was there, the grandmothers, the grandmother was there. So my mom's family was very influential with us, raising us and helped them a lot because my father's family really wasn't there. He--his mother [Emma Foster] and father [Philip Foster] were dead. Speaker 1: Do you know where your mother was born? Speaker 2: She was born in Silver City, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Mississippi and that's where she grew up and then migrated to? Speaker 2: Chicago. Speaker 1: The Chicago area, do you know how old she was when she migrated there? Speaker 2: Oh, well she had, she had us and she got married when she was seventeen so I'm not sure how old she was when she came up here. I'm, I--she was a teenager though. Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit more about her, she sounds so interesting? Speaker 2: She had a real small waistline and big hips which--okay, and we would, used to like as--there were four children and we would see our mother coming and that--my father had always said, "Don't ever let your mother carry any bags or anything like--." She was like a little princess because my father although he was stern he cherished her, but we liked to as children lay on those hips because they were wonderful pillows and we would prop up her hips and we would lay on her and we were always laying on her just like puppies lay on their mom when they're feeding, and my father would come in and, "Y'all get off your mom, get up, you know, get up off of her," you know, he'd be jealous you know (laughter) and but mom was like, she was, she was so kind. I don't even think my mother ever whipped us. My mother was so--like when we got to be teenagers and if we were out late, this is so funny. If we were out late and she's laying up in the bed. It's like she wakes up and she realizes, "Oh my god, they haven't come home yet," and she'll lay there like this and she'll be afraid to turn over for fear she would wake him up, you know (laughter) so she'd lay there and she'd start laughing at herself, because she's like so afraid 'cause if I--if he gets up and he--cause he would get up and check every room, "Where are my kids," my father was very much on top on what would happen with his kids, but and so she was the, the kinder, gentler person, extremely smart, never said a bad word about anybody, and cute. Honey she used to get dressed up--my mom was something else. She would get dressed up and we'll be watching TV as kids and she'll come and she'll stand by the door and just stand there and she wore those shoes that had straps around the ankle you know, way back then and she'd just stand there like this until we'll look and we'll say, "Oh mom you look so good." "Oh, you think so, oh well thank you very much," you know she's (laughter), she was a little ham, she was very pretty, just very sweet, just a wonderful woman. Story_ID: 391627 Speaker 1: Did she tell you any stories about growing up, her growing up or? Speaker 2: My mother [Mamie Lee Harris Foster] was very--when--they grew up on the farm in Silver City [Mississippi], she and her brother Flemma Harris, Jr. and they were--she was driving a truck at eight, nine years old with the little stick you press down on the, on the gas. She was smart in school and she was just very close to my, to my uncles and they played a lot. They came from a very loving family. In fact we were raised with a lot of love around us. Daddy [Peter Foster] was stern but you had other family members that offset see his sternness and his discipline. I mean we really appreciate him today because all of the things that my parents gave us was the integrity, honesty, you know character building went into you know their building their children. At, at--I think we were like three, four, we were--we're stepladder kids, there's four--all ten or eleven months apart and my father started sitting us on the sofa about I guess I was four or five and we all had to sit on that sofa on Sunday mornings, and we'd all--he would teach us and she would teach us things about--he would teach us how men think which is very important today because a lot of our young girls just don't get that anymore, and they--my mother would teach us how to take care of a man. Even though she was a very independent-thinking woman she knew, she always catered to my father you know even when they had the, the store. They--the store they had, she would say, "Honey you want something to eat, you want me to fix you something cold to drink," and you know he always, you know but he would do the same, he'll do the cooking and then she'll do the serving. So it was all--we always saw that balance which I think made a lot of difference to us because all of their daughters, all of us have wonderful men. We have wonderful men in our lives and all of us are comfortable with men, we don't--we didn't grow up hating men or resenting them or anything like that. We enjoy them actually. Story_ID: 391628 Speaker 1: What was your father's name? Speaker 2: Peter James Foster [Peter Foster]. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Missouri, I'm trying to think--I can't remember where it was, what city it was and he had a rough life and his mother [Emma Foster] died, she got--injured a finger and gang- well you know back then white people didn't care about somebody working--a maid working and she didn't go to the hospital and gangrene set up and killed her. His father [Philip Foster] was a barber, he didn't care anything about 'em, they had to go stay with cousins and aunties and who treated them very poorly, made them work like--it was his two sisters [Bernice Foster and Essie Foster] and him and actually they, they made them work like slaves in the house and they didn't get much education or anything. Speaker 1: Did he share any stories with you? Speaker 2: He use to tell us about, "Listen honey you are sitting on a gold mine. You don't let anybody just go digging in your gold mine." He'd say, "You young girls you keep your panties up and your dress tails down and you're--." To my brother [Warren Foster (ph.)] he'd say, "And you keep your pants zipped up," he said, "and if a boy comes up to you and says, gives you a ring and says that we're engaged now so we might as well have relations," he said, "I did that I'd go buy an eight dollar ring and say okay, we're engaged now," (laughter), so he said, "Don't listen to any of that. (Laughter) You don't ever let them get next to you." He would take us to 47th Street in Chicago [Illinois]. We--one of the things that he would do, my parents did a lot, was put all the children in a car and we would travel in a car, we would ride around in a car. That's when no phones ringing, anything going on, no television was on and they would teach also when we're in the car. They would take us to 47th Street and they would show us derelicts and people on drugs, and just all kinds of debase- you know just terrible behavior by people. "You don't wanna, you don't wanna be like this, you gotta get your education. Now look at that, now they fighting, they cutting up, somebody gone get cut tonight." Constantly teaching us what not to do and what to do. Honesty was a really big thing with, with my parents you know, the character building. Also on Saturdays my father would go and buy Sam Cooke records or you know of--though doing, 'Do You Wanna Dance and Hold My Hand' [sic. 'Do You Want to Dance'], all those kind of records, and he would teach us how to, the first line dance was the Madison, he taught us how to do that. He taught how to do the Chicago bop, how to cha-cha, how to two-step and then my parents would take us on Saturday night to Giles Post [George L. Giles Post #87, Chicago, Illinois] which is like a VFW [Veterans of Foreign Wars] post and they had a deejay there and the deejay would play all this great music and my parents would play cards and drink beer with their friends and we would dance for them, and that was the most wonderful thing because we just loved dancing and showing off in front of our parents and they would dance with us also. Well Latinos do that now a lot, they'll take their children to parties and dance with their children. I think that's something that's missing in you know the--you know we've, we've lost that art of how to raise a family. Those were very, very fond memories that we have. Speaker 1: How far can you trace back to your ancestors? Speaker 2: My mother's grandmother was coal black and she was married to Mr. Johnson [ph.] who was white I know that much. I don't know anything about my father's parent's parents. It doesn't go back much further than that. Story_ID: 391629 Speaker 1: Are there any stories or legends or songs that might have been passed down through the family that you can remember? Speaker 2: Songs? Speaker 1: Uh-huh or legends? Speaker 2: My parents were the--they sang, they were evangelist singers and they traveled a lot, (singing) "Little David play on your harp, hallelujah, hallelujah." So my father [Peter Foster] would sing bass and tenor, he had that range and so there were four of them, his relatives, his--one of his cousins and his wife and they would travel around the country and, and sing, they--so we grew up on you know gospel music, but also country music. We--they sang a lot of country songs you know (singing) "You picked a fine time to leave me Lucille, four hungry children and a crop in the field," ['Lucille'] and my mom would just sing with him and we would all gather around they played the guitar. We would have those kind of family you know gatherings like that and my uncle he would play the piano and he, he lived downstairs with my grandmother [Estella Harris] and we would go downstairs and we would be, we'll say, "Mom what are you cooking, what are you and dad cooking up here?" "Oh, well we're having baloney and rice today." Then we'd go downstairs to grandma's house, "Grandma what you cooking?" "Oh, well I fried some chicken." Well we might just decide to stay there or if we didn't like that we'd go across the hall to my uncle's house and go and eat over there. So it was actually so nice you know just to play and then or we go down in the basement and play you know. So my uncle would--he would--when he would walk into the building, this is Flemma [Flemma Harris, Jr.], he'd say, "Where are those children Mamie Lee [Mamie Lee Harris Foster]," all four, the first thing he'd look for is us, and then he'd sit at the piano and say (singing) "Ain't nobody here but us chickens, ain't nobody here at all," ['Ain't Nobody Here But Us Chickens'] so I mean it was, it was fun. We had a good time-- Story_ID: 391630 Speaker 1: But they were strict and my father [Peter Foster] taught us about how there was a--at some point he, he was talking about how he had to deal with the mules and how he had to work from sun up to sun down and maybe get fifty, fifty cents or then that man would tell 'em, "I'm not paying you this time," he--so there were terrible stories like that. There were stories about his family found out that there was some money that was supposed to be given to ex-slaves and, and they stood up for, for that. They wanted to have that money and what happened was that the white people thought that they, they were being uppity, his relatives were being uppity and some--and, and one of the black people in town overheard these white men saying that they were gonna come and get my parents, my father's relatives and so told them. So they had to hide out in the swamp that night and make their way up to the north. So there, there were hurtful stories but he, he also talked to us about when he worked at the, the Chicago [Illinois] slaughterhouse and he said this is how we learn our, our about how to work and work ethics. He said that the men would be there goofing off, sleeping, had--maybe drunk the night before or whatever in the packinghouse, but he would always work, he would get to work early, he would do that man's work 'cause he said what--if you make the contract with that man, I don't care if it's ten cents an hour, once you have given him your word that you were gonna work for him, you give 150 percent because you made that contract. So he always worked really hard, he always was able to bring home, lot, big hunks of baloney and meats and stuff because the boss liked him and he stayed--oh, he taught us about perception. He said, "All right, James," Jamesetta [HistoryMaker Jamie Foster Brown] is my full name. "Jamesetta, you're working and you always in the corner talking to the girls and you whispering and y'all ha, ha giggling and all this," and he said, "And that boss is looking at you 'cause you're a great worker," you, you know 'cause I took shorthand, and typing and all that. I was really good. He said, "You're a great worker, but maybe that boss wants to give you a raise but it's in a position where there has to be confidentiality, you know confidential papers. He, his perception of you may: 'She's a great worker, but I don't know she's always in the corner with those girls and everything. I don't think I can trust her there,' so you have to always be mindful of what people are thinking about you, how they perceive you." So I was always very nice and cordial to everyone, but I was also very mindful that I'm in a workplace; my boss is looking at me. I have to do great work. Story_ID: 391631 Speaker 1: You said something about traveling around with evangelists, and they took the children with them? Speaker 2: No, when they traveled as evangelists they did it when we were real little. My [maternal] grandmother [Estella Harris] was there so my grandmother and them raised us a lot (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Raised you. Speaker 2: We spent a lot of time with my grandmother. I don't remember going with them when they were singing. We just, we remember seeing the pictures and hearing some recordings or if their friends came over they would sing the songs you know, and my father [Peter Foster] was so surprised because none of us could sing, we didn't, we didn't inherit talent at all not like that. What was interesting that we inherited was the writing ability. My sister Stella [Stella Foster] is with the--top columnist in Chicago [Illinois], with the Chicago Sun-Times and I became the publisher of a magazine [Sister 2 Sister]. None of us cared anything about it, none of us aspired to be a writer. We, we don't particularly even like it, we're just naturals, and my son, my youngest son [Russell Brown] turns out he's a great writer. So that ability was there but of course my parents didn't had that, and we didn't know. That's not something that was given to them you know. Speaker 1: How far did your parents go in school, do you know? Speaker 2: My father went to eighth grade and my mother [Mamie Lee Harris Foster] went to eleventh grade, Dunbar High School [Dunbar Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School] she went to in Chicago. Speaker 1: In Chicago, okay. Story_ID: 391632 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your memories of growing up. I understand you were in the group, you were in the Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] community, South Side? Okay, tell me a little about Englewood. Speaker 2: (Nods head) Well, Englewood was really interesting during that time because we had the South, Southtown YMCA [Chicago, Illinois] and I went to Kershaw Elementary School [Joshua D. Kershaw Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. We had white and black teachers, it was, I was--in elementary school I was okay. I was smart, was very smart. I always did more than the teacher asked and I got some awards and all that you know when. In high school I'm so--I never was a person that well could really fit into--I could not join sororities and all that. I never really--my father [Peter Foster] taught us about being individuals so that couldn't work for me. That Southtown YMCA was there and I gotta tell you that we were over there that we learned how to swim there, we learned how to do games there. I learned--I did African dance in there, we've learned how to play pool there. It was just and we had, back at that time, this was back in what the late '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s]. They had muscle-bound men back then. Back then men didn't work out like they do now. Now you see it everywhere, and these guys would work out, we were just, and we felt safe there. We could to and from, there were neighborhoods, it wasn't--there was a little bit. I mean my brother [Warren Foster (ph.)] got beat up one time. Some kids jumped on me one, I mean these were just things that could happen to a child. We had great teachers, my mother [Mamie Lee Harris Foster] and father were always up at that school making sure that everything was okay. They paid a lot of attention to what was going on with their children in terms of their education. So I went to--so South--the Englewood area they had Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois] and Parker [Parker High School, Chicago, Illinois]. I went to Parker which is now Robeson, Paul Robeson [Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois], and I was in the glee club, I was in a cappella girls chorus whatever, but I never really fit in with the other girls. I could never get into like the cheerleaders, I could never be inducted into any kind of organization or anything, I just didn't fit. I fitted in, in the draft shop, drafting with the guys. I always liked being around men you know, but it was like, it wasn't like being around men for sex or anything, 'cause glory be honey, that would've been the end of my life if, if I had gotten involved with that. My father, oh hecky nah, but it was just that I always--with my father with his influence on his daughters made us very comfortable around men which is, was so important and this is something I talk to you know fathers about today 'cause I'm with a lot of men in my business. Don't let anybody take your children away from you, especially your daughters because you're the one, they learn to love you first. So they learn how they should be treated from you. If they don't have you they're gonna be searching all their lives and make mistakes in who they choose you know, so I, I--and that was something where Aid to Dependent Children [Aid to Families with Dependent Children] how they push the man out of the house. That made the man and everybody else think the man doesn't matter and I think the man matters more than the woman in the end, so--more than the mother. Story_ID: 391633 Speaker 1: But anyway that, it was a--I did African dancing, I was able to travel a little bit, you know just around to go to those other schools--and did I? I'm trying to think if I, I didn't do any basketball at that time. I did that later when I was in Sweden, but it was a, it was a happy time. We got, if we ever did anything wrong I remember we went out one time down by the Outer Drive [Lake Shore Drive] and they were, my boyfriend and his friends came and took me and my brother [Warren Foster (ph.)] and my sister down there. Then we came home late. Lord have mercy my father [Peter Foster] was on the--waiting on the stoop with my mom [Mamie Lee Harris Foster] and my grandmother [Estella Harris] and them and honey, did we get whippings. He beat us all the way in the house and kicked my brother up the stairs. I mean I was like oh my god, but he, we would get whippings, hard whippings and my father was like this, "This house better be clean when I come in there." When he came we were in fear of him all the time, and we'd turn the TV off real quick, look around the house--did we clean up everything you know? And then he'll come in and he'll feel the TV to see if it was on or not. Now that worked against him, because he never let us--he would dance with us on the weekends and stuff and--and I mean it was just a double-edged sword. It was good in one way because he really gave us great, great morals and work ethics and all that, but he had us live in fear of him. So later on we didn't want--we didn't want to hear what he had to say, you know. It was just too much, we were grown people then, or he would say, "Y'all come here and sit down and everything." We said, "No, we didn't want to, stop fussing at us." (Unclear) go, go tell those children, go teach those children. We're grown, we're, we're all set. Stop you know sitting on top of us like that, so he didn't know when to let up. He worshipped--he loved his kids, he loved us. He would mop the floor, he would cook, he would get us dressed you know and make sure our hair was okay and he would say, "Oh my goodness, Jamesetta [HistoryMaker Jamie Foster Brown] you look really good today." I had on a white frilly blouse and black skirt. I was on my way to work. We'd all be up in the morning, he'd say, "Oomph you're gonna make some young man happy to see you today," and he said, "You always smiling, and that's very good. Always smile when you meet people." I'll remember that so well. He said, "It just opens them up to you," you know so he would just give the, those words of wisdom. So he was extremely important in our development. Speaker 2: Now did you graduated from Parker High School [Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: I graduated from Calumet [Calumet High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Calumet, okay. Speaker 1: I went to Parker initially. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And my mother [Mamie Lee Harris Foster] and my father [Peter Foster] got this store out on 81st [Street] and Vincennes [sic.], where Calumet was and she was gonna take my baby sister, my baby sister and my--Stella [Stella Foster], the one with the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times]. She was gone put them in that school and when she went to Parker to get my--their transcripts, they were so unorganized and so stupid it made my mom mad, so she took me outta school too and so my last year I was at Calumet and I graduated from Calumet. Story_ID: 391634 Speaker 1: Tell me about special events or holidays in your household, what were they like? Speaker 2: I love Christmas, I love Christmas, and I remember, oh that was just so wonderful, you know all the turkey and the cookings and the fixings and so I remember one, one night we got up early. We were so anxious and we went out there and I saw, I saw my father [Peter Foster] with packages and stuff and he'd say, "If you all don't get back in that bed, see Santa Claus ain't gone come, he's not gonna come tonight (laughter) 'cause you all are being bad and coming out here," and we were so scared, we were scared to death you know like, "Oh my god," you know. 'Cause my father would just put the fear of God in, in you and of course the toys were there. We didn't get many toys, they, they didn't have a lot of money but we would get our toys from our parents, then we'd go downstairs to grandma's [Estella Harris] house to see what she had for us and then we'd go next door to bruh bruh's [Foster Brown's maternal uncle, Flemma Harris, Jr.] house and see what he had for us. Then we would get dressed and go across the street to Francine [ph.] and Butch's [ph.] house who always had everything. They were just given everything from their aunts and uncles and just totally spoiled, but we enjoyed their gifts. We enjoyed it just--you know when you--we're taught not to be jealous of others, we were, we were taught all those things that--to be, be kind and, and you know I don't know it's--it was one--on one hand my father was like, "Black people they don't do this and they don't do that and they don't have this and they don't have that," and we're like, "We're not given the same opportunities that they are dad," you know. We knew that much, my, you know my sisters [Stella Foster and Shirley Foster Hunter] and all knew that much but he was always like you got to smart. You got to do this and you got to do that, and he was always down on black people. That we didn't like you know but he would help folks, so if my father saw--like when he would take us down on 47th Street, if he saw a man beating up on a woman he'd jump outta the car to go and help that woman. My mother [Mamie Lee Harris Foster] used to say, "You could get stabbed, you could get shot you know. You don't know who these people are." So I mean he would say one thing and then do another (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do another. Story_ID: 391635 Speaker 1: Tell me your siblings' names and their birth order including yourself? Speaker 2: Warren Lee Foster [Warren Foster (ph.)] was the oldest one, he's passed on. Stella [Stella Foster]--then there's Jamesetta Foster [HistoryMaker Jamie Foster Brown] that's me and then there's Estella Mae Foster, that's the one with Chicago Sun-Times and Shirley Ann Foster [Shirley Foster Hunter] who's a speech therapist. Speaker 1: What street did you live on? Speaker 2: 3848 South LaSalle Street [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: South LaSalle okay. How do you describe, how do you describe where you lived, the block where you lived on? Speaker 2: The block we lived on we knew everybody, we would play softball there, we could be out late at night and playing in the vacant lots. We, we could walk to the store you know as kids. There were a couple of fires there that really burned up a couple of the kids, that was--devastated us and then there was another fire where the children were left at home like little babies, like four or five babies left at home by themselves with a kerosene lamp and it caught fire, but we were able to save 'em and my mom [Mamie Lee Harris Foster] took 'em in and was--and was feeding them and was trying to put clothes on 'em and stuff and we were like, "Mom can we please, mom can we keep 'em, please mom don't let 'em go back," and it was like, she was like, "We can't do that." Well of course as children we didn't understand why can't you? The mother's not good, why can't we keep these kids, but now what happened one time, this is one of my strongest memories is that I was riding on a bicycle on the hand bars of a bicycle. I don't even know who--I don't know whose bicycle it was or who I was riding with. I see a wallet down in the gutter by the curb and I jump off the bike and I get the wallet and I go home and I tell my parents you know I found this wallet. This wallet has sixty-five dollars in it, this is in the '50s [1950s] you know and then, and some identification and all that and my father [Peter Foster]--I gave it to my father, and he said--he went outside and he saw the woman had--that who had lost the wallet was hysterical, she--that was her paycheck that she had just cashed. Her rent was there, her grocery money, that was everything right there and so she was looking for it and people were--and she was offering five dollars reward for the wallet, the money, the wallet back and people were looking for it and my father just you know very quietly went up to her and said, "Come with me," and then he brought her to the house and, and he gave her, her wallet back and with all the money intact, and she says, "Oh." He said, "My daughter brought this and said that you know she found it on the street, but of course she's going to give it to me to find out who it was that lost it," and so she said, "Oh, let me give you five dollars for her," and my father says, "Oh, no this was our blessing to be able to help you." Now that kind of thing carried through with us, those were the lessons that we learned. My sister Stella grows up to be this, the secretary to Irv Kupcinet at, at the Chicago Sun-Times, now this, this is a Jewish man and they had the Purple Heart Cruise [Kups Purple Heart Cruise] every year. Well Jewish people would send money into her, to her desk for him just to give to the foundation with no name, no nothing, no--never took a dime. A lot of people would've been tempted to do that but never took a dime because you know you could take a little bit of money and that could affect you for the rest of your, your life. You could lose your job for that. I've known people to shave off fifteen hundred dollars somewhere but they lose their job which was thousands, and thousands of dollars and the stature, so you know those lessons learned were--I just, they're, they're just invaluable that you know what we learn from our parents. So that was a strong memory for me. Story_ID: 391636 Speaker 1: Tell me about graduation from high school, and then what did you do after that? Speaker 2: When I went to Calumet [Calumet High School, Chicago, Illinois] that was, that school was almost mostly white at that time. It was transitioning which was fortuitous because this vice--assistant vice president, the assistant principal there was able to--I was put into this society of girls because my grades were good, we were smart kids. My parents [Mamie Lee Harris Foster and Peter Foster] was not you know they weren't having dumb children, and so I was just, I was the only black kid in there and it was horrible actually because the white girls would not accept me. I remember we got on the train I--they had--they were gonna take a train ride to Washington, D.C. to see the sights, you know historic ride. I was the only--and my parents got the money together for me to go. They were so happy that I was able to do this, to expand my mind and all of that. Those girls were--I had to sit on the train by myself every--you know they--nobody would sit next to me in the dorm, in the hotel room I had to sleep by--you know off to myself. Nobody talked to me, I was just alone the whole time. It was a miserable time, I think that was the first time I really, really experienced prejudice you know, just being ostracized, but I'm not an angry woman. I'm not and I tell people this all the time, that was their problem. If, if they don't want to be around me they're at a loss because I have a great spirit, I care about people. I feel like I'm one of God's angels and I look for other earth angels and so we can protect one another here because the devil's always busy. So anyway that was a, that was a hard time but being at Calumet also was a fortuitous because that assistant vice president knew about Equitable Life Assurance Company [Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States; AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company] and so we got jobs as soon as we got out of high school we started working at Equitable at the--well, honey, my girlfriend and I, Betty Starks [ph.], whose passed on now; Betty had a boyfriend named Diesel [ph.] and he had a friend named Carl [ph.] and so she wanted--Diesel would said, "Don't you have a girlfriend that Carl can go out with?" Well, we got on a like a house on fire, all of us did and we had the most wonderful time with these guys, they were so much fun you know. They'd knock on the door and we'd say, "Who is it," and they'd say, "Errrh." That was their answer like, "Well it's us." We would go--what did we do? We would go--they would go to a store and buy crackers and buttermilk and hog head cheese and ham or whatever and then we'd go down by the Outer Drive [Lake Shore Drive] and park and eat this food and talk and laugh and they'll tell us about their experiences or whatever it was, wasn't no sex going on at that--I was, I'll tell you I was scared to death okay? So--then Betty and I the next day we would go to work and we're sitting there and we're filing cards. Computers were just coming on, they were big sort, you know those big data things to sort the data, the cards. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But we had to file everybody's claim by hand and she'd be sitting across from and I sit over here and we'll be talking about what happened the night before with Bootsy [ph.] and Carl, with Diesel and Carl and honey he would--we would be laughing and I'd, I'd be the one talking every time but Arnold [ph.], our supervisor, short little round face white guy would come--said I--somehow I always knew that, when Arnold was coming so I would be quiet (laughter) then Betty would be talking and he'd say, "Betty Starks, zip the lip, I mean now it now you just zip the lip." She said, "Well why you always picking on me, she was talking too," you know (laughter) so, but I was--I--even if I was talking I always worked well. I always worked very, very well and so I kept getting promoted. Story_ID: 391637 Speaker 1: And then I was told by a white lady on the bus how she--how you could still go to college. She said, "I know a friend of mine that went to college for ten years, she was working right after high school but she went to college for ten years and got her degree," and I said, "Really?" And Equitable Life Assurance [Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States; AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company] they had a--they would pay for you to go to college. So I went to them and I said well I wanna learn how to--I wanna go to college. I wanna learn shorthand, I already had taken typing in high school [Calumet High School, Chicago, Illinois] and I was starting to take some courses and court reporting and all of that. Next thing I knew they had pushed me up to working at--with the sales people, some of the sales staff at Equitable Life Assurance and Company and then I worked there and then I was--somebody heard about me. I'm trying to remember--who used to be there and Zenith Radio Corporation [Zenith Electronics LLC]. They were looking for a black woman to work for the president of Zenith because at that time it was in the '60s [1960s] and they wanted to have--and that's--so I said okay. They said--they had me go and meet with these people and the PR [public relations] person Mr. Nail [William A. Nail], Bill Nail who in the end hires me for him. He is a very difficult man, very difficult, fuss at you and everything. Well he loved my dirty drawers because I was a hellified secretary. I mean I could type, I took shorthand 120 words per minute. I--oh, you know what? That happened after--when I left Equitable I went to--I'm sorry, I went to Teletype Corporation and I became the--in the working in the patent department which you really had to know how to--I had to take 120 words per minute shorthand and typing, okay. Chemical patents, mechanical patents that stuff was really, really difficult, with like a thirty minute lunch break, but I was good so, then that's when I met this guy Swain [ph.] and he took me over to, to Zenith and that's when I started working for Mr. Bill Nail. Then I--shortly after that I met my husband to be [Lorenzo Brown], and Mr. Nail didn't want me to go down to visit with him 'cause he was teaching at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] in Birmingham [sic.], and Mr. Nail said nah--I said, "I need to have Friday off." "No, you can't have Friday off." He had his wife call me, she said, "You know Bill's scared you gone go down there and marry that boy." I said, "We--I ain't getting married," you know, which I was. I did get married a week later. Story_ID: 391638 Speaker 1: Now how did you meet your husband? Speaker 2: I was going to school right, Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois], I was taking those courses, I was still working and it was an early morning course I had just finished it and I was on my way to meet my fiance, but I used to have like two or three fiances but that's another story (laughter) I used to have to switch rings you know depending on which one I was with at the time, but anyway I was on my way to meet one of 'em and, and I was gonna pass through the lunchroom, and I see this guy sitting there. It was just, he was just really handsome with this big afro and he's facing this way, I'm over here. Well there's a guy right here he's talking to and this guy right here liked me and always wanted to talk to me but I never gave him the time of day except for that day. So when I saw him, when I saw this guy, I came and sat down and--right here to talk to this guy, but I was looking at this guy okay and asking questions and my husband to be never said a word. He just ate these eggs, he was eating breakfast and I saw him get up. I was checking him out, I said wow, he's bow legged, oomph, that's kind of sexy you know, and then he came and he puts ketchup on his eggs and I said ketchup on eggs that's really different you know. So anyway it turns out that he had been teaching at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama]. He was an alum from Roosevelt University. He had just dropped off his girlfriend and had stopped in to have breakfast. I was on my way to see my fiance. So all of that was like the, the--you know I asked my husband about--we sat there for like ten, ten--'til about ten and I said, "Would you like to go for a drink?" Ten o'clock a.m. Now I'm not a drinker but I had found this place that use to be up under the subway in Chicago [Illinois] on State Street. Where the drinks were like fifty cents a shot you know so. They said, "Well, okay", and so he and that guy said okay, and I took 'em down there to have drinks and we're just talking. I can't even remember what we're talking about but I'm--I'm thinking I'm talking about my life and school and all that, and so then it's time to go home and so the guy said--I said, "Oh well I gotta go home, I guess I gotta take the subway." And the guy says, he said, "Oh I can drop you home." I said, "No he can take me." Talking about my--that guy okay, about Lorenzo [Lorenzo Brown]. And oh and he, Lorenzo, was like, "Oh, oh, I'll take you." I didn't even know whether he had a car or not but he did, and I spent the day with him and we went to his--he said, "Do you mind I got some errands to run. I've got to go to pick up some cleaning," he took me by his sister's house the one that's upstairs the ones who are here now to meet them and then that's when his girlfriend called. He had just broken up with her and his--and she called when we was at the sister's house, and he was, he got off the phone he said, "What do you think?" He says, "She's so upset, she's crying. What do you think I should do?" Well by that time I was like this guy's pretty corny, I don't really like him. So I said, "You should go back to her (laughter)," you know like that. And so he said, "You think so?" I said, "Yeah you should go back to her," but then I said--oh, he took me to get ice cream and some, and some barbeque and stuff like that and it was okay you know. I went home, "Okay see you later." He called, he kept calling and calling and he went back to her and she dogged him again. Story_ID: 391639 Speaker 1: So I went out with him a couple of more times and he would come over while I was, you know I'd be doing my homework and stuff like that and you know he said, "Well can we go out or anything like that?" I said, "Hey I gotta do my homework," and that's something he talks about that even today, thirty-eight years later. He says, "You will always get your work done first, you never let anything else come in between that." So anyway he, he would call me, he went back to Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] and he asked me to come--if he could come visit me that Thanksgiving. I met him around May, I think it was April, May, and at first I said, "Aw no, I don't think so." Well, I'm gonna go down to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], my girlfriend and I, were gonna go down there and meet some guys. He always called me Saturday morning eight o'clock in the morning. I was always nice to him though even though I was irritated because my mom [Mamie Lee Harris Foster] always said when you find a good man even if you don't want him don't ruin him for someone who will appreciate him. So I was always nice to him though. I wasn't really feeling him you know. So anyway he kept calling so he said, "Are you still going down to Fisk for Thanksgiving?" I said, "Nah I don't think I'm going." He said, "Well can I come see you," you know. I said, "Yeah you can come up here. I'll cook for you." That's what I said, so at this time I was living with my girlfriend, it was like four of us that hung out. So I told my girlfriends, I said, "Oh, this guy Lorenzo Brown," you know I hadn't even talked about him to them. "He's coming up and we're gonna cook for him," so I'm getting, you know let's make some chitterlings, we gone have some turkey you know, I wanted some greens and all that. "Okay we'll help, we'll help we're here. Who is this, who is this?" I said, "It's that guy that calls me every Saturday morning," you know but we--you know I said, "We're go on and do this." So I went to my other fiance's father who was a butcher and said, "I need a turkey." I was awful (laughter), I'm ashamed of myself--anyway (laughter) so I went to his father. I said, "I need a turkey," and the father brought a turkey and the, the chitterlings by. My girlfriends were making the greens and stuff, so he was gone come and this is the night before, I had an accident. My--I ran into a car, somebody ran out in front of my car on a highway and I ran into the back of a car, ran out in front of this man's car and he stopped all of a sudden. I barely could get it home. The, the radiator was busted, I had to stop constantly and fill it up, it was cold and everything. By the time I tried to put it in the garage I scrapped up the car in the garage. I was a mess and I called my brother and I told him, "Warren [Warren Foster (ph.)], I just messed up the car and I had an accident and everything," and he said, "Okay well I'll come over." Well, Lorenzo called I didn't know he was gone be in town [Chicago, Illinois] that soon. He said, "Oh, I'm in town can I come by?" You know I had some Southern Comfort, he came by. Well my girlfriends had never seen him, I was like oh my god, I hope my fiance's father doesn't come when Lorenzo's here and he did, it turned out that he did come before Lorenzo got there, but my girlfriends when they saw this fine hunk of man walk in there they were like, "What!" Oh my goodness they acted so silly, they were laughing and giggling and everything and pulled me into the bedroom, "What's he like?" I said, "What do you mean what's he like?" "Well what's, you know what's he like in you know?" I'm like, "I don't know." "Child, do you think he'll be generous to me this Thanksgiving?" I said, "I don't know." They were just like all up into him you know. Well I was like and all of a sudden I was like well maybe I need to look at him again (laughter) you know and so he--that weekend he--oh, oh my sister Stella [Stella Foster] came by and was grabbing him by the collar talking about, "You gone marry my sister," you know this is Thanks- the next day. She didn't even know him that well you know. Anyway long story short he asked me to marry him that weekend. Speaker 2: Oh, wow. Story_ID: 391640 Speaker 1: And then that was--and then he asked me to come down to Birmingham, Alabama to spend the weekend with him. I said, "Spend the weekend with you? Oh man are we getting married?" Yeah he said you know he said, "I could see you spending your life with me." So I tell my mom [Mamie Lee Harris Foster] and them, I said, "Well I think I'm gonna get married. This guy asked me to marry him, Mom." And I said, she said, "Well do you love him?" I said what she ask me, my mom said--I said, "I don't know, I guess so," and she said--I said, "Momma I don't really know him that well." She said, "That doesn't make any difference because," she said, "when you marry 'em they change anyway. This way you don't have no surprises." I'm like what (laughter) okay. My girlfriend brought over her old, old moldy yellowed gown talking about my girl's getting married and everybody was excited. So I went down there, I get down there my husband is a militant in Birmingham, Alabama okay? Afro and everything, he comes to pick me up at the airport and he's like, and I'm like this little-I'm like this bourgeoisie girl okay, working at Zenith Radio Corporation [Zenith Electronics LLC] and everything. He comes to pick me up and he's got his students with him and he's in Atlanta, Georgia 'cause I flew to Atlanta 'cause he wants me to meet the people from SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] you know and then he wants me to meet the bourgeoisie blacks 'cause this is what he's all into. You know he's teaching this ghetto economics down at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] and then he, he gets down there he sees me, I see him and you know he's like you know what, he checks me into the hotel and everything and he says, "I don't think you, you can fit into my life, you know. You know you a little too bourgeoisie and all that," and I'm like, "Okay," and he was like wanted me to sleep with him. I'm like, "I'm not sleeping with you in your room," I'm sleeping with the girls that you know--that his students. Anyway he's irritated (laughter), and the next morning he said, "Look, I'm gonna give you your seventy dollars," that's how much it cost there and back, it was thirty-five dollars each way. "I'm gone give you your seventy dollars you can go on back home, you know but I got work to do." So I'm like what the hell am I gone do now. I am embarrassed because my, my family, my friends know I'm going--I'm down here with this guy and they think I'm gonna get married. What are my parents gone say because I'm not living with my parents, but it's--you know they're still over me, they're still in my head. I call up on one girlfriend that I know down there, and I said, "Girl can you come and get me?" I said, "I'm at this Peachtree Hotel." I tell her, she comes and gets me and she rides me around. I said, "What am I gonna do? I'm embarrassed." She--and I said, "I, I can't go back you know home and I'm not married, and I'm down here with this guy you know who would believe this?" I'm twenty-two at this time and she, she starts talking to me about she had broken up with some guy. She had me go--I don't even know how I got to be at her ex-boyfriend's house and went in there and I said something, I don't even know what I said to him but anyway she had me doing errands for her. Then when she, when I got back to the hotel there was a note from Lorenzo [Lorenzo Brown] that he left at the desk and said, "Look gone to pick up--gone with (unclear) to the airport to pick up someone, and see you later." And I'm like well, when did he leave that? She--and the person said, "If you hurry up you can catch him coming out of the parking from the, you know, the hotel." I caught him, and I said, "I'm here," and he says, "Well, get in," and his student, this female student was sitting next to him so I had on the outside you know. He had his students in the car. Story_ID: 391641 Speaker 1: Let me tell you, we, we're gone to the airport to pick up Kathleen Cleaver, who was traveling around--they were looking for Eldridge Cleaver and she was just traveling, so she was just decoying. So here we--now you know I'm not into the movement, I'm not list--I'm not really one of those people into the movement so I'm listening, we're in a car. We go pick her up and she's paranoid like, "Who are these people?" Now these--Willie Ricks [Mukasa Dada] who's from SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] is--knows her and he's the one hosting her and he's also the one hosting us. So he says you know he said, "Well these are students from Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] and this is the Professor Brown [Lorenzo Brown] and all that." So they take us to this house, that's up in, in Birmingham [Alabama] up on a hill and its dark okay? We get to this house and we go inside and she sits the kids down, the students down in front of her fireplace and she's talking about the movement and the military, you know. I'm going, I'm in the bedroom, I see bullet holes and blood stains on the walls and stuff. I'm like how the hell I get here, you know and, and Lorenzo's friends are trying to hit on me while he's in there you know being educated by Kathleen Cleaver. On the way out I have a big afro and I'm skinny and I'm light skinned. Our car was parked half down the hill, her car was parked at the top of the hill. We get up and go get in our car, so there's two cars, there's another teacher you know--okay, two cars, two teachers, students. We go, I go get in my car and we're driving back to Atlanta [Georgia]--now from Atlanta to Birmingham. All of a sudden the, the teacher, the other teacher pulls his car over and Lorenzo pulls over too and he says, "We're being followed, we're being followed." Lorenzo says, "Yeah I know, just keep on going." I'm like, "Followed, what's going on (laughter)? Why are we being followed?" I get to his apartment and it's cold in this apartment. He's got blinds up, shades up that you could see in, but you can't see out. So people can look inside the house but you couldn't see outside the house, he had put 'em up backwards. I had to change clothes in the bathroom, it's just one room. Anyway I was so uncomfortable and I said, "Where am I sleeping?" And there's only one bed (laughter), I'm like, how, lord how did I get in this mess? Turns out that the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] follows me instead of Kathleen Cleaver thinking that I'm her, so when they realize that they followed the wrong person they thought was intentional and that I was the decoy. Well honey they were calling up the--my parents [Mamie Lee Harris Foster and Peter Foster], they were calling my sister, they were calling up friends of ours who were policemen, they called the school and everything. They wanted to have us front and center at Miles College that Monday you know. So when Lorenzo went in to, to school, they had the students, they had the other teacher there. The other teacher was, "Well what are we gonna do, what are we gonna do?" Their phones were tapped, his phones were tapped. It was so funny--they wanted me, and Lorenzo said, "Oh no, no you can't have her." They were listening to everything--that weekend they were listening. Lorenzo knew they were parked outside of his house and when he would call or talk to some of his friends he said, "Well Jamie's [HistoryMaker Jamie Foster Brown] down here," 'cause he had told everybody that he was in love with this girl named Jamie. Honey, he said, "You know the, the FBI's here and they're trying to follow us and wherever we go and, and they always lose us and just makes me lose confidence in my government." I mean he was irritated and he was egging them on and everything. They interviewed everybody, they wanted me, and he says, "No, she's my guest, I brought her here, I brought her down there, she wasn't a decoy. I'm not gonna let you talk to her, she hasn't done anything." In the meantime everybody's all upset. Only thing I'm thinking about is like daggone I'm down here and I'm not married (laughter), my parents are gonna kill me. Oh, my god how can I go back, and then the prin- my, my boss I knew he was gonna expect me that Monday and everybody's worried about that and the FBI and I'm worried about what my daddy gone say, okay, so. So I was pretty calm, I wasn't even involved with all this that was going on so Monday they took me to Lucius Pitts [Lucius Holsey Pitts, Sr.], he was the president of the college. Everybody says, "Oh, there she is, and she does African dancing and she's so cute and all that," and Lorenzo started looking at me like well maybe she's not so bad. Story_ID: 391642 Speaker 1: So as we were talking about your future husband, you finally got married? Speaker 2: He thought I was so brave because I didn't get caught up in all that and he thought--everybody thought I was so cute and everything, so. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sorry, and speak. Speaker 2: You were talking about your future husband, so you did get married? Speaker 1: After we came home that night from the president's party, reception he had, it was about two o'clock in the morning and I said you know. He said, "Well you've held up pretty good," and I was looking at he, he started looking at me more favorably now since everybody was like ooh, she's so cute and oh. So anyway he was reading me poetry 'cause he use to write poetry and we were in front of a fireplace actually and so I asked him I said, "We didn't get married, we didn't--you know we can go on and get married," and he says, "Okay fool." So that was the proposal. That was Tuesday morning about 2:00 a.m. We were married that Saturday, you know. No family was there, the only body--he had his friends from Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama]. My girlfriend from Atlanta [Georgia] who had me running errands for her ex-boyfriend and she came down. That was the only one I knew and we got married. The whole wedding with the dress and the dashiki that he wore and, and the black wedding cake with white writing on it that we had the, the white folks in Birmingham [Alabama] do that. They said, "You wanted a black wedding cake, what did they say?" I said, "We put it right, no they put it in the window it was so pretty," and it was his friends that came by with the refreshments and everything. We got married in his house and Lucius Pitts [Lucius Holsey Pitts, Sr.] who was the president of Miles College married us and we came--I had to run--I got dressed in a neighbor's house who we found out later they were like thieves and stuff, but anyway we didn't know that but got dressed in their house and I had run through the alley in the rain to get up to, to Lorenzo's [Lorenzo Brown] apartment where we got married and we had refreshments and that night--oh, we had told the men, Lucius Pitts, "Don't say anything about she has to obey me 'cause she's not gone do that anyway and I don't even want you to put that in." My husband was always a feminist, you know. He believed in women just doing their thing, you know. He's such a wonderful person, and so anyway he--we got married, people left. We got in the car drove to Marion, Alabama where he's from. T.D. Jakes [HistoryMaker Bishop T.D. Jakes] is from there, Beyonce Knowles' father Mathew Knowles they're all from there--Coretta Scott King, all of those people are from there, Marion, Alabama. And got there in the middle of the night, it was about two hours to his grandmother's place. Their old family home in Marion, Alabama. His auntie was there taking care of the grandma, she was eighty something years old. The most beautiful thing I ever saw in my life, when I walked in there they had the high beds and she--we had woke her up coming in and she was straddled over a coffee can peeing (laughter) because she didn't want to go to the bathroom she was right next to her bed, and I said, "Look at that lovely vision." This was the first time she had seen me and the first time I had seen her and we fell in love. She had that--she had gray, long black hair. You could tell she was Indian [Native American], you know, long, gray hair, beautiful black skin, and Lorenzo's mother [Mabel O'Neil Brown] and them had they, they didn't feel too good about me in the first place, but Big Ma, that's her name because she fell in love with me it was just, it was love at first sight. So that's where we spent our first honeymoon, our honeymoon night was there. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 391643 Speaker 1: Tell me about how did you transfer from there to Switzerland? Speaker 2: Sweden (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sweden. When I met Lorenzo [Lorenzo Brown] when we were sitting in there in the cafeteria [at Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] he was saying that he was thinking about going to Sweden because he had been fired from Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] for being too militant, but then the students had protested and Lucius Pitts [Lucius Holsey Pitts, Sr.] had brought him back. So he said but during that time he was thinking about to Sweden because he was interested in this ghetto economics. Sweden was a capitalist country that had this highly developed social welfare system you know. He was interested in how they did that you know. They took care of the elderly, they took care of the children, they took care of the poor, people lived well. You know high taxes, 50 percent of the--but you lived well. You went to school free, you know you could become a doctor free and whatever so he had all kind of set those things in motion because we--when we got married and my--I was like this, Lorenzo would have ideas and he was like oh, he would say let's and before he could even get it out I would say let's go you know and so he was--I mean my husband expanded my mind. You know here I was like the only place I had ever gone was D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and before that was just downtown in Chicago [Illinois]. He's talking about going to Europe and while we were married in Birmingham [Alabama], now going back to Birmingham we get married. I'm scared to death down there, this is '68 [1968]. I mean there's all kinds of riots and everything going--Jesse Jackson's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] coming down there and the police are awful. This is the first gun we ever had you know and I was sleep with that gun up under my pillow. I was so afraid, because we were marching and doing all these things down there the police could come in at any time and they did come in on people all the time. So it, it was a heady time and it was a frightening time too for me, but he--my, my husband said something about going to California that there was a professor that had taught there at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--at Miles College and they had invited us--him out to California. I said, "Really," I was on the phone minutes later ordering a ticket, you know, California! I didn't know until I got out there that they were white (laughter) you know. They picked us up at the airport. I said oh, okay, but that's my husband's best friend still today you know, so they had a daughter, two daughters. Leslie [ph.] was one of 'em who was absolutely in love with Lorenzo. She was eight and she just had the hardest time dealing with me you know and it was like, "Mom, I know I got to love her because that's Lorenzo's wife, but I just don't know--see how I can." She was just (laughter)--it was so hard for her but I--we went to their place. They lived seven hundred feet from the ocean, it was beautiful, we had a wonderful time so that was really like oh my god, this is just amazing you know. Story_ID: 391644 Speaker 1: And then the next thing we, we finished that semester out, went back to Chicago [Illinois] before and you know we--and I had processed us going to Sweden. He [Foster Brown's husband, Lorenzo Brown] was gonna go for one year and get his master's [degree]. He had, had worked on his master's at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York] but hadn't done his paper, hadn't done the paper, but he wanted to go to Sweden for one year. This was a one-year program, okay. So I was gonna go over there for one year with him, but during this summer--I had--you know I always got jobs, I always worked. Got a job at Foote, Cone and Belding at, in Chicago, I had great skills so I could always get a job, just this temporary thing. So I'm waiting, working for this guy, a little Jewish guy, sweet as he could be and he said, "Oh you're such a great secretary," he said, "And you have such a nice attitude." He said, "My friend Irv Kupcinet," that was his best friend, Irv Kupcinet's, Kup's Column, in Chicago, "His, his secretary is pregnant and she's leaving and she needs a secretary. Are you interested in a job?" "Well I'm going to Sweden in September I can't take the job but my sister may be interested." She worked at Quaker Oats [Quaker Oats Company]. So I tell my sister Stella [Stella Foster] about the job, "Oh I don't think I'm gone get it," you know she's always the naysayer--she can't get it, he's not gone be interested in her and everything, I'm like girl. You know he wanted a resume, "I don't have a resume." I said, "Let's make up one (laughter). We'll make up a resume." So we got the resume, I gave it to Al [ph.] and he gave it to Kup. Okay, we didn't hear from Kup and so my sister said, "I told you we weren't gone hear anything from him," (unclear). So I said--what turned out Kup lost it, so we had to do a resume--you know I said, "Well Stella just send in a copy of it." She hadn't a copy so I had to make up the daggone thing again. So anyway she goes in for the interview, lord that was a marriage made in heaven! Those two--it was such chemistry between 'em, I mean they just loved each other from the beginning you know, and she started, she got the job as his secretary and through the years after she, she started writing but I'll get to that later just when I--she was a secretary for years. Story_ID: 391645 Speaker 1: I go over to Sweden, I get my, my field com [ph.] which is like a master's [degree] in languages. My husband works on getting his Ph.D. in economics. It's an eight-year step, we went there to be there one year. You don't get a Ph.D. over in Sweden in no, in three or four years. It's like being knighted. He gets over there, it's very cold, it's dark. It's like being in a monastery but at the same time he can focus on his work and what he's doing because he was so distracted before, and in Sweden you don't, you don't, you take the test when you're ready. You have three or four times to take that test, it doesn't matter if you fail it. You have--you can take it over and over again, but the test is five hours long. We said, "Five hours, what the heck. Who's gone be doing what in for five hours?" We just couldn't even understand it. You take one test a semester. Child when we got in there honey five hours came so quick (laughter) and left because it is so intense. You bring in your lunch, you bring--I mean they don't play over there. So life is, life is amazing over there. We're very--it made us very open-chested, we're meeting all kinds of people from all over the world, we're students and we're, we're eating African food and we're eating you know food from Colombia and all the friends from everywhere, I mean it's just a potpourri of culture and, and we're excited and we started--Lorenzo [Lorenzo Brown] has a fellowship from Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia] and, we, we cleaned, we cleaned, we were cleaners. We would clean post offices and stuff like that. People wondered how we got our money, but we--he had the fellowship and I--we were working at the same time and going to school. Story_ID: 391646 Speaker 1: Started having our kids over there, we had both of our sons [Randall Brown and Russell Brown] there. He would--before our sons came, what my husband and I were married four and a half years before we got married--we had children. That's important, it gave us time to know one another before a third party became involved because when--we had an idyllic life. We had a very idyllic life because we could jump up and go hitch--we would hitchhike down through to Amsterdam [the Netherlands], Rotterdam [the Netherlands]. We would just jump up and drive down to Germany to visit friends or up to (unclear), we--he--we were having a ball, and what happened oomph, my--we met some Cuban people and they became like our family and Lorenzo [Lorenzo Brown] and I were footloose and fancy free and having a good time and everything, and we--one time we were eating 'cause we always went over there to eat. Honey, they had the best food, the black beans, the rice, the pork and all that stuff, and we're in the kitchen eating and we see the family members, the two daughters and the mother back there and they're whispering and we are aware that they are talking about us and so we said, "What's going on, what's going on?" "Well we're just wondering why you all don't have any kids?" Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And we're like, "We ain't never thought about it." Well, honey that was the end of it for me because once that got in Lorenzo's head, he was determined to have some kids (laughter) and I was the innocent victim 'cause he knew my cycle and everything so (laughter), so I was vulnerable (laughter). We were there--the summer came, it was--I had gotten a scholarship to go study in Spain, Asturias, Spain up in the mountains. Oh, my god I was so sick, I said, "My god Lorenzo the altitude is killing me," you know I said, "it's just making me nauseous." He said, "Oomph, you're pregnant." I said, "Unh-uh, I can't be pregnant," and he said, "Oh yes you are. You're pregnant," you know. He had nausea also, it turns out I was pregnant so I carried this little knucklehead [Randall Brown] and it takes--you know I go through sixteen hours of labor and I'm telling you I was like okay, I'm going through labor. This very nice intern is there, his name is Dan [ph.], but I'm like at some point (laughter) this is just too much pain, this is just too--this is like ungodly pain, I, I felt like somebody had reached up inside me and was pulling my guts out and so I just told 'em after a while, I was like, "Okay, you know Dan, you and Lorenzo got this. I'm gone. Y'all can stay here and have this baby, but I'm outta here (laughter)." I said I am--my husband said, "Where the hell, where you going, lay down." I mean it was like I, I had lost my mind (laughter). I was having an out of body experience, it was like I was watching this girl have this baby here I'm like, and I kept--when the baby came because they didn't give me anything and I, I can't have kids I have to be induced. I'll go through all the pain and everything but it ain't gone open up. Child so finally they induced me and I have--I hear all this screaming and screaming, I said, "Who is that screaming (laughter)?" It was me (laugher) oh my god. Who--women, God what did we do to you to make you let us go through all this pain? Oh my god and my husband was sitting up there talking about--I said, "Give me drugs, drugs, I want drugs (laughter) who's got drugs," and he said, "Jamie [HistoryMaker Jamie Foster Brown] please, please no drugs think about the baby." I said, "Shut up, just shut up." I said, "Don't look at me you like Jesus Christ on the cross, don't look at me like (laughter)," he was looking like he was in pain. Anyway that little knucklehead came, white as he could be. Now we're in Sweden, everybody is whispering through the hospital, "Oh there's a colored couple up here--black couple, they just had a baby." Everybody wants to come see this brown baby, well they run to the nursery and they can't find it (laughter), 'cause he looked whiter than the other babies, got blonde hair and everything else. They said, "Well where is the baby, where is their baby?" Story_ID: 391647 Speaker 1: So he comes out he's normal you know, he's got a stork body, he's got big lips, he's got cradle cap, he's got-- worse than that, he won't let us sleep. He's colicky, this goes on for a year, it's like the demon seed came into our house. Here we were this idyllic couple we're like wait a minute? Who's gonna get up and, and feed him tonight? Who's going to rock him, I mean we're going back and forth. We're having a lot of problems here. He gets Pityriasis rosea which is I don't what the English name is, something Pityriasis rosea, I don't know, anyway so he has to go into the hospital for a week. I go there too at the hospital, I stayed with him for a while 'cause I'm breast feeding. Randy [Randall Brown] is a nightmare, so we had to figure things out and this is what my husband always idea okay, both of us can't be up every night. We, we're exhausted, we're irritable, we're yelling at one another, so in the hospital they had given us these plastic bottles, with nipples on it. So as I breastfed with one breast I would express the, with the other one and freeze it in these bottles so one night we took turns. One night I breast--get up and feed him and everything, the next night Lorenzo [Lorenzo Brown] would get up and breastfeed him, you know breast milk and okay? So that every other night we could sleep. Story_ID: 391648 Speaker 1: Both he and I were on basketball teams, we were on--there was the Stockholm Stars [ph.] they were deserters from America, this is during the Vietnam War, so they're--we, Lorenzo's [Lorenzo Brown] on the Swedish team, he plays against the, the American team and of course we bond with them and so they, they form a--all their wives who were Swedish women too, they have a girls team. So I was on the girls team and they're on you know--and he's on the guys team. Wonderful situation because the guys would come to our practice, we would go to their practice and after we practiced we would all, it was about eighteen of us, go to this place called Just Between Us [ph.] and we'd order you know steak and French fries and beer and wine and all that and then Sweden is very expensive but we would share everything. So that was our family over there, even though Rennie and I were in school and these were deserters we were, you know you still--you, you gravitate to your own. So that--it had gotten so Randy [Randall Brown] was so disturbing in our lives at night that I had said, "Honey, you go. I'm too tired I can't, I can't go." I mean when I came home from the hospital Lorenzo had set up the bed, we had a mattress on the floor--okay we were students but, and had set up all the diapers and the changing station, everything. Everything was perfect, clean, my husband cooks, cleans and all that. The mirrors, the floors looked like mirrors, he had waxed the floors, he wanted everything perfect, but I would you know waking up breast feeding--this was all a shock (laughter), this was all a shock for me. I said, "Well you go, you know leave me here with the child." He said, "Let me explain something to you," he said, "You and I were together before this child got here and you and I gone be together when this child leaves. Now I'll take care of everything else, the packing of the clothes, washing, cooking, you just take care of that kid, but we are not letting that kid separate us," and so I said, "Okay," so I would drag myself there which was very important because it's true. A lot of women--they sacrifice their husbands for their children. The children grow up, they leave. The husband feels neglected; you see what it's not good. Story_ID: 391649 Speaker 1: So Rennie [Foster Brown's husband, Lorenzo Brown] and I figured out that system and one night you know, we would go to bed shaking the baby carriage, trying to make sure Randy [Randall Brown] was sleep and one night I realized like hey, I'm not shaking the baby carriage, it's morning time, and it's light outside and Randy slept through the night. It was like oh, I'm so happy! We were so happy! So that was the first child, and my parents [Mamie Lee Harris Foster and Peter Foster] came over, everybody was excited. Randy was a big baby he, he started off small but that was the breast--you know he was like two pounds bigger than the other children, and we all--it's three of us--how many were, there were three of us that had babies at the same time. One woman who was in, in the ward with me, she had plenty of milk. I had okay milk. This, the other woman--she wouldn't breastfeed her baby. She was Swedish but she was, she was mindful of her breasts. She didn't want her breasts to sag or anything, so in, in Swedish hospitals they don't play with this breast milk thing you understand. They put my son on my breast, I fell asleep, he was only supposed to be on there for five minutes. I fell asleep for forty-five minutes, by the time I woke up he had chewed half my nipple off. I was like, "Okay, that's it, all right we're not going to breastfeed anymore," and they said--I said, "Look at my nipple it's halfway off." They were like, "Oh, no we'll just put some ointment on it and--put him right back on there!" I mean (laughter), I was like oh my god. They don't play with that because they want that child to have the best and they gave us beer four times a day, light beer, 'cause they like the hops, the hops was good for the breast milk. Fed us and they kept me there for eight hours, I mean eight days. You know I was like, "Oh, I wanna hold my baby," they said, "Just rest, you gone have to hold him for the rest of his life. You let us take care of him now while you rest," 'cause they want, they want things to be nice for the child. They don't want any abuse or anything like that. They care about people and children and old folks over there, it was just a wonderful idyllic place to be in (simultaneous). Story_ID: 391650 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you able to stay in school at the--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I stayed in school with that knucklehead. We would--Rennie [Foster Brown's husband, Lorenzo Brown] and I would--we would--when we put him in daycare we would, we would bicycle through cornfields to school and we would--I would go to class, he had a research, they all--as he was working on his Ph.D. I would come out of class, we would have, we would have lunch together and then when I finished my classes we would sit together while he was still doing his research and I would do my homework and we'd bicycle home. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That night. We would pick up Randy [Randall Brown], feed him, put him to bed--8:30 at night the tea kettle went on. So it's over there at that time there wasn't a lot of television. Television came on at 6:30 and went off at 10:30 something like that, but that tea kettle would go on and we would fix tea, and both of us had naturals and we would bring out the comb and the brush and the bergamot hair grease and he would--I would sit in between his legs and he would part my hair, scratch my scalp, oil it and braid it, every night, and I would do that to him. So that was an hour, hour and a half. That's when we bonded, that's when we would talk, "Well today you said this to me. This hurt my feelings. Why did you say that? You know my father use to say that to me. That wasn't a good thing, blah, blah." "Well I didn't know that," I mean just really, just sharing all kinds of emotions or embarrassments or joy or whatever, and that--and when we would have company over we would braid their hair. And then our company used to say, "A family that braids together stays together," but people--that's how the, the households worked. They would come over, we would sit them down and braid their hair and we would all be in the room together, the husbands, the children, everybody and we'd all be doing something with the other person, maybe, maybe it's they're playing cards, or Solitaire over here, maybe somebody's playing with a child, but we're all there. That's called, they call it, stor familj, which is like big family but we weren't all--big families usually live together, but we weren't living together but we would share times together like that. Somebody would go, "Okay, who's--who's cooking today?" "Well, we'll cook but I think it's your--you guys' time to shop." Everybody, nobody waited on anybody, everybody did their own thing. You know they would make their own bed, so we weren't a burden to like anybody. Like when I got to the states and when my sister and them came over, you know they sit back like entertain me, fix my dinner, make the bed, you know I'm like I don't need you Americans over here (laughter). It was just, you know it was a different kind of spirit that, that we got from there. Loved, loved it, it was really wonderful and there's all kinds of nationalities. Speaker 1: And so how long did you stay [in Sweden]? Speaker 2: Nine years. Speaker 1: Nine years, and he got his Ph.D. finished. Did, were, did you finish your course? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. Speaker 1: Now what did you--what did you study? Speaker 2: I studied Japanese, English and Swedish, English, Japanese, English and Swedish. I had to translate everything from Swedish to Spanish, and Spanish to Swedish and Japanese, same thing. So I had to do it from their language not from English. Speaker 1: Um-hm, wow! Now was that--that was your job? What did, what did you--? Speaker 2: We were cleaning. Speaker 1: You were cleaning the post offices? Speaker 2: See my husband told me when we went over there, he said, "Now I'm in school, but what are you gonna do?" I said, "Well I guess I'll be a housewife," he says, "No you're not. A housewife is nice but that means nothing to me. I need a conversation," so he's like, "you gonna get in school," (laughter), so I did. Speaker 1: Well that was good, that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 391651 Speaker 1: What happened, how--you stayed over there nine years and then you came back to the states and--? Speaker 2: Yeah, well he [Foster Brown's husband, Lorenzo Brown] got a job at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] teaching economics with Dr. Cleveland Chandler and Dr. Houghton [ph.]. He was there for several years and then he went to, he went to (unclear) the federal and then he ended up at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. I ended up at BET [Black Entertainment Television], as a secretary to Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] when they were just starting, and he--I grew, I became a producer and, and that's because--how did I become a producer? Because I was good--I got the job because I was excellent as a secretary. My father [Peter Foster] had told us, "You gotta have these skills, you can go to college if you want to but you gotta have typing and shorthand because that opens the door wherever you wanna go--you can go." Now today it will be computer skills, I imagine then you know. So when I, when I wanted to--BET was looking for a secretary. Bob Johnson had said he wanted cute people, and he didn't want fat people or people with big feet. Honey, by the time he got all these cute people in there that didn't know how to type, didn't have good sentence structure, didn't have--grammatically they were a nightmare! When I came along honey, I was like the coming of the Christ, because when I, when they heard about me I went to a, you know, a temporary service, not a temporary you know one of those services that farm out jobs, and I took the test and they sent me to BET. Honey I went in there. Speaker 1: We're gonna stop for a minute, okay. Speaker 2: I went in there and took those tests. They wanted to hire me on the spot and they said, "Bob is not here, so can you come back tomorrow to meet--." No on Thursday, I went on a Tuesday. "Can you come back on Thursday to meet Bob?" I said, "Okay, I'll be back." Story_ID: 391652 Speaker 1: You were talking about your job at BET [Black Entertainment Television] tell me a little bit more about that? Speaker 2: When I came in there and I--Bob [Robert L. Johnson]--they gave me dictation, I take the letter. I worked at--I had worked at AT&T Teletype [Teletype Corporation; AT&T Teletype], I had been a patent attorney's assistant. I had to know how to line a letter up everything had to be perfect when under that training, so of course going to BET that was a snap for me. So what happened was they wanted me to come back to meet Bob that Thursday. I had taken the test on Tuesday and with the advertising director and Bob's secretary. So, I come back on Thursday Bob is like, "They're pretty excited about here, right?" And I said, "I guess so." So he said, "Okay, take a letter." I took the letter, corrected it, not that it needs a lot of correcting from Bob 'cause Bob went to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], he's very smart. Typed it up perfect, made some changes that I thought were applicable. He said, "Hm, impressive. So, is there anything about you that is not good or that you lack in?" I said, "If there is I haven't found it yet," so he hired me and I became the advertising secretary. This is right at the beginning, just a year after starting. I had to do everything, I mean I had to do traffic, I had to get all the contracts together, I had to take all the, all the letters from Bob when he was trying to build that company and get advertisers in it. I learned a lot, every time something went wrong and things were going wrong all the time. Bob would call me in and put his hands in his pocket and say, "Take a letter," and straighten it out or explain it or whatever. Now the first--now Bob was getting his 'Video Soul,' everything was canned and he was just buying stuff at that except for black college football. He would actually tape that. So the first time that he decides that he's gonna have 'Video Soul' done in house. They choose Donnie Simpson from WKYS [WKYS Radio, Washington, D.C.] and Sheila Banks who had done you know I think she had been on public television. Donnie hadn't been on television, but he's a very handsome, very popular radio guy. They needed a pilot, they need to shoot a pilot, so they needed somebody to write it. Bob tells me, "Write a pilot." I'm like, "Write a pilot for TV show?" I had no idea but you know what I figured it out, that's what a good education will do, it helps you figure things out. I wrote, I went home I got some press releases, I remember writing about George Benson who said that he hears music in his sleep, when he's on the plane and stuff and I wrote some dialogue for her, and--monologue for her, monologue for him, some dialogue together and they shot it. Bob came in another time, he says, "Look at this, what do you think? Do you think we should take this advertising?" He's talking to me and Janice Thomas [ph.] who was my immediate boss. It was Lee's Press-On Nails. "You think we should take this?" "Well, why not you know?" I mean we were just, we were--Bob wasn't a television man, he was a businessman. We were winging it and we were figuring it out as we went along. That gave me a lot of--that was good training for, for me starting this magazine. Story_ID: 391653 Speaker 1: Also, when I was in Sweden, we got together with the deserters' basketball team--the war--amnesty had come from the Vietnam War, the church and the National Council of Churches had dried up their money supporting the basketball team, the deserters' basketball team. They had no monies in order to travel or get uniforms or anything, so what were they to do? My husband [Lorenzo Brown] and I said, "Why don't you give parties?" "What kind of parties?" "Well, fix some soul food and, and you know charge people for coming in there." They looked at us and said, "Okay, do it." So all of a sudden my husband and I are in charge of making money for the team. So what we did was that we ordered some seeds, collard greens, mustard greens, seeds from the United States, have 'em sent over. Rented a plot of land for twenty dollars a year from the Swedish government and planted all these seeds, went to the stockyard, about 50-11 times to try to find chitterlings. They didn't understand what chitterlings were. So we're saying--no, first they gave us cow intestines, we got them back and tripe. We opened up the black sack and we were like, "What the heck? This is not what chitterlings is," but we didn't really know what chitterlings were at first, 'cause we had always bought 'em in a--they were already packaged. Then somebody heard that we wanted chitterlings and that it came from a hog and one of our friends said, "Well, my, my mother or my parents are, are slaughtering some hogs so we'll bring you the chitterlings." We said, "Fine." Well they were full of stuff you know, we were pressing--that we were pressing this stuff out and we were--the, the trying to get rid of it, the toilet backed up. We had to put it in black bags and send down the chute, it was a nightmare, hours and hours and hours but we were on our quest for chitterlings. Then at the end of--almost at the end of the night after doing that we see some worms fall out of it and we were like, "Oh hecky, no." Well there was a guy down the hall who was studying to be veterinarian. He told us those are earth worms, blah, blah. Okay we go back to the slaughterhouse; we try to explain what we want from the pig. Now all this is in Swedish and the next thing we know, we get just the very end of the chitterlings and the butt of the pig, so we got butt holes. We're like, "No, (laughter) this is not what it is." Finally we expressed to them what we wanted and they said, "Oh, okay." They called 'em a name in Sweden and we got these chitterlings like twenty cents a kilo which is ten cents a pound. They would you know power hose it, clean it out and everything, we go back we make sixty, seventy pounds of chitterlings in one sitting, my husband and I; but we would cook, we would cook the chitterlings, we would make (unclear) which was blueberries and dumplings and, and we would make sweet potato pie. I would fry up chicken and I would--we had greens from the garden and so we advertised to all the Americans around there and the Swedes soul food. My husband would go and talk this deejay, get you know--who would order records from overseas. He would record hours of that and we got a place and we had parties, and we would make money. Story_ID: 391654 Speaker 1: We learned how to do things, you know that was like just being strong, being smart, figuring things out, great education you know. I say that because later on I see how Bob [Robert L. Johnson] is doing what he's doing. He's figuring things out, there's mistakes every day, we don't know what the hell we're doing at BET [Black Entertainment Television], but Bob is always, he's addressing one problem at a time, and he's addressing most of 'em through me, through my writing and I remember he came back. He went to do a presentation at Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio]. I had, I had typed up the presentation and everything and he had won. They were gonna give us Listerine and one other product and he was so excited, he was so excited, he came to me and Janice [Janice Thomas (ph.)] and said, "Let's, let's go out and have lunch," you know, and I said, "Bob," I said, "Well how did you do it?" He said, "It's like I was like 'Please Mr. White man, if you let me just do this like,'" he said, "I was on my knees." Not, fig- you know it's figuratively. "I'll, if you let me do this I'll you know, I'll let you be the first one to do like black soap operas, whatever--I told 'em whatever he needed to hear at that time." So I said, "Well how do you know what to say?" "How do--why are you accepted?" He said, "Let me explain something to you." I'll never forget this. He said, "You can be, what the black man can be accepted if you're like Michael Jackson, Michael Jordan, Mike Tyson. You have to be liked by the white man," 'cause Bob understands, we're in their world. We're not--they're not in our world. We're, we're a guest in their world, and he said--I said, "Well how do you do that?" He said, "Well I went to a white school. There I learned their ways," and he said, "You gotta know when to hold 'em and when to fold 'em." He said, "For instance you can be in there kicking it and having a good time with them with the white guys and stuff, but you know talking smack or whatever, but when the white woman comes in there you don't talk about her ass or you know, you don't get a--even if they are you gotta know when to hold 'em and when fold 'em, you know. You gotta be smart," and he said, "Then you're chosen." He was chosen by John Malone [John C. Malone], and John Malone was the one who gave 'em the money to start BET. Bob had fifteen thousand. John gave him half a million [dollars]. Every three months we had to prepare all these documents and papers where we would go up to him and George, John Malone, George Katusche [ph.] and I think it was another guy and they had to show this, this is what we did with the money these past three months and these were our goals. We made those goals we need some more money you know. So he had to go to him constantly until he was able to get on his feet and do it on--do it all on his own. I mean tremendous lessons learned, tremendous (simultaneous). Story_ID: 391655 Speaker 1: You produced 'Video LP' and 'Video Soul'? Speaker 2: Yes, just threw me in there (laughter). I was a secretary, I had a choice of staying a secretary to--as we were growing now, we're growing and bringing in more and more people on, we're taking on more programs and I had a choice. I wanted to be in advertising, but Bob [Robert L. Johnson] and them weren't gonna have it. Either I was either going to stay a secretary or go into production. They--because they were hiring producers and they needed assistants, I chose to go as a producer because I didn't think that I would go otherwise in the company, so. Speaker 1: How long did you stay? Speaker 2: Four and a half years. Now, what happened with that, they hired a producer. They made me his assistant, they--I was working ungodly hours because when you're in television and film or newspaper whatever, they--that's a lifestyle, that's not a job you know. You just gotta work until it gets done. It was two hours, it was a two-hour program, it was live and the guy got fired, and so there was nobody to take his place but me and I had to be in there with an intern, and I was working 'til like midnight, coming back at 6:30 a.m. in the morning. Two hours of programming is a lot, I had to--I was one of the first video programmers in, in the United States. I had to look, program all these videos and time 'em out and write the scripts and book the acts to come in there. I had to do everything, and Donnie Simpson was there and Sheila Banks had moved on. It was just his show at that time. Lots of things happened during that time. When it was time to hire a producer I went to ask for that job and they said no. They needed to have somebody who had two or three years' experience, blah, blah. Now I had been doing the show. Okay? They hired Donnie Simpson's part-time deejay who, who was a Jewish boy and they hired him and he had not produced anything, but he had a good story. He was Donnie Simpson's friend and he said that, "I can get you Lionel Richie, we can go to the American Music Awards," which all--he couldn't do any of that. So they put him in over me. Well, this guy had a lot to prove because he had just said that he could do all these wonderful things and so he says to me, "You do not write the scripts anymore, I'll do the writing; I'll choose the music; I'll do that. You just book the acts." Well, honey that was like letting the lion out of the cage telling me I book the acts! Okay I'll book the acts. You mean I don't have to do the day-to-day anymore but just call up the stations and entertain the acts and all the executives? Okay, that's what I did, and I would take them to my little house and I would feed them and they, you know, the executives would spend the night and everything because I was trying to lull them away from MTV [Music Television; MTV]. Everything is by MTV at that time 'cause MTV had broken Duran Duran and they were in 20 million homes and everybody wanted MTV and where BET [Black Entertainment Television] was only in 2 million homes at that time and it wasn't important to black acts and everybody wanted to be on MTV, but MTV wasn't having black folks. They didn't even want us, okay? So I said um-hm all right, also black people didn't have video budgets, a lot of video budgets so a couple of groups you know, they didn't have a budget to make a video. I'd tell 'em to come on in to BET, I'll put three cameras on you, play the records, go on and lip sync, that's your video. Helping the groups out; I would help out--I said look I could, you know if you, you can't get on MTV but I'll give you twenty minutes on my show, I'll even give you two hours if it was big enough. I mean I was booking Luther Vandross, I had Phil Collins coming up in there, and they was like, "Phil Collins?" I said, "Black people like his music," you know so I was, and Billboard [Billboard Magazine]--I was being written about in a lot of different places too. Story_ID: 391656 Speaker 1: Child, that little green-eyed monster started oh, raising its head 'cause I was being written about in the media, so the guy that was--the producer got really upset about it, my boss was like, "You can't do anymore, you know any more interviews." And I was the one that was bringing in music. They weren't interested in ads from the music industry at that time but the music industry had a lot of money. They were only into sending Coke [Coca-Cola], [U.S.] Army and things like that. Bob [Robert L. Johnson] didn't care anything about the music industry, 'cause, he didn't like the music anyway, you know he was old school, so but I had bought from that guy who was the original producer. He had been in the industry so he had taught me a lot. I knew who was who and all that. So anyway I gave my all no matter what or how mean BET [Black Entertainment Television] was to me, and they could be mean. When those artists or any executives or anybody walked through that door you would've thought it was my company, because my father [Peter Foster] had taught me if that man made a contract with you and you agreed to work for him no matter for how little money, you got to give your all, and so I took care of everybody, I always smiled. People thought that was my home, and they thought that--they were like oh, so the artist when they would--when the executives would get new artists, they would say, "Ooh, we're going to BET, you are gonna meet Jamie Brown [HistoryMaker Jamie Foster Brown]." So my repu- my reputation preceded me so the artist was like, "Oh we're gonna meet Jamie." Now this is what happened. We had the two hours of a live show ['Video Soul']. I would require the two hours before they had to go on that they would be there 'cause I had to make sure that the artist would be there, if not we have to change the script and everything. Donnie Simpson would only come like five or ten minutes before it was time for him to go on. So I had two hours to sit in there with that artist. So I would ask 'em questions. I'd look at the little press release bio and stuff like that, but what was your father like? I don't see anything about him and you know I just started asking questions about it and then when they would go on I'd say, "Donnie ask 'em about this, Donnie ask 'em about that," because I would have gathered more information. So that's how I got my interviewing skills, because I was sitting (laughter) there with them the whole time. Story_ID: 391657 Speaker 1: Anyway after four and half years I got pretty frustrated and I left you know so. Speaker 2: What did you do after that? Speaker 1: Well there was a guy, a white guy named Joe Larose [ph.] who always would like to talk to me. He had a magazine called Impact, the music industry magazine, and he said to me, every day he would ask me questions. I always had the curiosity of a layman even though I was in the business, I was still a layman in terms of--I still thought that people actually were inside the radio singing when I would hear a record on the radio (laughter). So I always asked these questions, I always saw differently from everybody else you know, so every time he talked to me he would come away with really interesting stories and then he would start--he was one of the people that would write about me all the time and he used to call me up at one o'clock in the morning, wake me up, "Downtown Jamie Brown [HistoryMaker Jamie Foster Brown], what are you doing?" I said, "Joe I'm sleeping." "Oh okay but listen girl you need to have your own show or you need to get away from BET [Black Entertainment Television] or you need to be with MTV [Music Television; MTV] because every time I talk to you you're special and you need to write. You need to write the way you talk." I said, "Joe I don't write." "Yes you do." "No I don't." "Yes you do." I said, "Joe I write, up next three videos, or, here's three videos in a row, or I copied something from a press release." He said, "You can write," and he was after me for months and so but BET you know he said, "You need to write something in my magazine you know," and he said, "Maybe a video column where you, you know," and he said, "Figure out a video column." Well, BET wasn't hardly gone let me write nothing. They had just banned me from being in the back--any kind of media. So I had to figure out what to do and Bob [Robert L. Johnson], I told Bob Johnson one night I said, "Bob you know what?" I said, "People always wanna know what our programming is gonna be and there's no way to put it," I said, "but I can put it in Impact 'cause it comes out every week and I can let them know what we're doing so people can look and see what's on the channel." He said, "That's a great idea, you can do that." I said, "Okay so that's my opening," so my boss wouldn't say no. So but I was scared, he had told me that on a Wednesday and it took 'til that following Tuesday to call up Joe and say I'll try and write something 'cause I, I didn't know how to write, and I waited until the end of the day on Tuesday and called him up at 6:30 at night and his son answered the phone and I said, "Can I speak to Joe?" He said, "Oh he's not here right now." Joe had just died ten minutes before I called. Speaker 2: Oh my goodness. Speaker 1: A month later I left BET. It was like I felt that his spirit pushed me out of there and that he--so I left BET in July, and I was just home. I was devastated, I was so, I had, I had a rash going down my throat and my back because I, I had had a hard time at BET, and it seemed like no matter how hard I worked, they didn't appreciate it and they took my, my staff away from me, everybody I trained they'd take away, it was bad. So anyway but I always kept a smile, I always did the job. Story_ID: 391658 Speaker 1: So honey later on Joe's [Joe Larose (ph.)] the sec- his secretary took over and she asked me to continue with the column and I did, I started writing a video column and--Backstage Passes [ph.] is what I called it and I would tell you things like how much the video cost, what happened on the set you know, how did they get that shot and it started being picked--you know picked up in the newspapers different places. Parents could sit down and watch the videos and discuss it with their children because they've read how it was done, and so the writing caught on and a couple of other newspapers asked me--magazines asked me to write for them and I, I--they rejected what I wrote, saying that, "Well it's not timely enough" whatever, and so what happened is that I went to bed one night and I thought I'm gonna publish this myself. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I'm gonna mimeograph it, that's what I was thinking and so by this time I had left BET [Black Entertainment Television] and my girl--but I had made so many friends in the music industry they didn't want me to leave. So they would keep me, they would take me to their conventions and things like that, pay for me to come and set up a room for me, feed me and all that and they said, "How much is it gone cost for this thing?" I said, "Oh about sixty dollars," this little, you know this mimeograph machine, then it was six hundred dollars. By the time I got it all together it was two thousand dollars to print this little pamphlet and I called Sylvia Rhone from Elektra Records and asked her for an ad and she said--now, she didn't care anything about a new magazine, but I had helped them years before you know. So she said, "Well how many people is it going to?" I said, "Nine hundred," I'm just making up numbers. "Well how much is that?" I said, "Thirteen hundred dollars." "Okay," called up Art Kass, Jewish guy from Buddah Records, same thing, "Okay," that's how I started and that was eighteen years ago. Story_ID: 391659 Speaker 1: Tell us about the magazine, your baby? Speaker 2: Well Sister 2 Sister was actually--my sister Stella [Stella Foster] and I would always be on the phone talking mess, "Did you see that?" "Why did they say that?" These people are getting on our nerves, you know. It's just us talking to one another and this woman Laura Randolph [Laura B. Randolph] that worked for Ebony, I had helped her a long time ago get an interview with Donnie Simpson when she was a struggling writer, and now she writes Sisters Speak [Sisters Speak: Me As I Wanna Be] or whatever. She, she and my husband [Lorenzo Brown] taught me how to write and she named it Sister 2 Sister 'cause my sisters and I always talked you know, but it was always about--you see we didn't have royalty, we had personalities, we have celebrities, we don't have royalty, like in the Motherland, however, we do have advisors, we do have those people who decide who the next Whitney Houston's gonna be, who the next Bobby Brown's gonna be or Jay Z. Who are those people? So I started writing about people behind the scenes too as well as the artist and it just really caught on. So the--I always felt black people don't have enough information, we don't--we rely on white media to do, to do it or you know, we don't teach enough, but to teach us we can't be the final call, we have to make things enjoyable for us because our lives are so much harder. So I felt like, ooh, I can write all about this entertainment thing, but I can drop science, I can, I can put things in there to make us think you know, so it just became you know, it was supposed to be fifteen minutes of reading every month and it just grew. My husband, oomph I didn't have any money 'cause I had--my husband was only making seventeen thousand dollars a year, yeah--a little bit more. I didn't have any money so I couldn't pay anybody to do this you know, the layout. We had tried a couple of times and the people disappeared so my husband went out and bought a computer and a book and read it and learned how to lay out the magazine, and my husband edited the magazine. So in 1992 my son, my oldest son [Randall Brown] was shot four times and you can probably look that up and, but anyway I mean everybody was upset, Tom Brokaw came out and did a story, The Washington Post did a huge story on it and when the woman from The Washington Post, [HistoryMaker] Jackie Trescott came out to do a story on him, that's when my husband said to her, "Well you know I see my wife doing this magazine, some months she makes money, other months she doesn't you know and I just think she--it could be a business so I'm thinking about quitting my job and working for my wife." I said, "What, I'm not making any money with this, I'm living off of you!" You know I'm like what is he talking about? I just knew he was a nut, nutting out. Two weeks later he quit his job and he's been running the magazine and, and--I wouldn't have it if it wasn't for him. We didn't have any money we did it with Mastercard, Visa. He's smart, he knows how to move the money from one checking or credit card company to another. He figured out how to deal with the printers and checking with what they were doing. I mean we have gone through hell and high water, I mean literally we have just created this magazine. We're like the little choo choo train that could and what we've done is almost miraculous because you know it's a 98 percent death rate on magazines, and we've been able to stay alive all this time, and making a profit. Story_ID: 391660 Speaker 1: Who are some of the people that you profiled in there, and what was-- Speaker 2: T.I. (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And who stands out the most to you? Speaker 2: Well actually Bobby Brown, and everybody said, "Why you love Bobby so much" because in all the years I have been in this business, and I've been in it since like '81 [1981], he's the only artist that ever showed, showed concern for other people. We sit in front of these artists two or three times a year, they never ask you, "How you doing? How's your business, can I help you out," anything like that. Bobby did, Bobby Brown did--when, when he was cutting up, got married to Whitney Houston and cutting up in the hotels and they were saying he was out with other women and they was in the tabloids every week and Whitney's supposed to be mad about this, that and the other. Bobby never--he never answered any of the media, any of the rumors nothing like that, and we had to increase the circulation of the magazine [Sister 2 Sister]. We had to make it four, four color; it was only black and white with one color. We had to put more hips on the magazine, make it bigger. Well that costs a lot of money. Where were we gonna get that money from, you know? And because we always paid our bills, our credit was like through the roof, very high, our, you know, we were able to, but we always paid our bills. So there was a black man at the printing company where we worked that said, "You all need better terms than what you are--you all pay every month. You can talk to them about you know deferring some of that cost." So he was the one who hipped us that. We went there, renegotiated our deal with them in terms of the terms and like it was gonna be fifty thousand dollars instead of twenty-five thousand dollars but they were only gonna charge us twenty thousand dollars a month, and then they would defer the thirty thousand you know. That's like giving us a thirty thousand loan every, every month. That's because we had great terms, great you know, my father--my husband [Lorenzo Brown] would say, "Look we can't pay this right now but let's--this is the payment plan." He would always go to them, they wouldn't have to chase him down, he would chase them down. "Look we're having problems right here getting our money in from the record labels or whatever." So they--with Bobby when we had to increase the magazine and increase the cost of the magazine my husband said, "Why don't you get Bobby Brown to give you a story." I said, "Bobby's not talking to anybody." He said, "It won't hurt to ask." When I asked Bobby said, "Will this help your business," and I said, "Yes." He says, "Okay." He had been offered six figures to just talk to any media and had said no. With me--? Story_ID: 393706 Speaker 1: You were talking about your magazine, Sister 2 Sister, and could you talk about that a little more for us? Speaker 2: Well Sister 2 Sister became important to the industry because I profiled not only the artists, but who, who were the people who made the artists, you know, the--who were the advisors, who, who were the court, you know, what was the courts consisted of? And also I, it's very truthful, I never change anything anyone says so they came to rely on the magazine and I have it so that it's almost as if the reader is there with me, so and I still have those layman questions so I have a knack or a skill of asking the questions that everybody wants to know. Speaker 1: Um-hm, some (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sometimes it gets me in trouble, sometimes it doesn't but, but pretty much even if they're mad at me and I scold them also 'cause they're my kids. Black people belong to me, I just feel that you know they're, they're in my charge. I have to help them as much as possible and everything is not right, everything is not all good and so I fuss at them about it a lot too so. Speaker 1: What were some of the questions that you sort of normally asked people? Speaker 2: I would--if something was controversial about what happened to them, I will ask them, "Okay, I'm giving you the opportunity for you to clear this up." Now why is that important? When I studied history and English and had to read the English lit for years, whatever was written about that particular artist or that personality or whoever it was, that's what I believe about them today. That is their legacy, so I have to explain to--especially black people is like, when people put stuff out there on you, you have to have it written somewhere that this was not true or your version, because it's not always just about you. It's about your children, it's about your legacy, it's what people believe about you. So I have to tell them that. Black people still are not as savvy as they should be about the press and what they should do. Also the press--they should also support their own press. We tend to once we get big enough we wanna go somewhere else and we don't, we don't wanna pay the money for us and everything. Those are lessons that have to be learned because we weren't taught that way-- Story_ID: 393707 Speaker 1: --In fact we were taught not to support one another, but I have great patience with black people. Okay because for what happened to us as a race--if you took that and it happened to one person where you were raped, you were told that you weren't worthy, that you were ugly, you're stripped from your family and you were oppressed and beaten. If that was done to one person that it would take a lifetime if--with a hundred psychologists to get you well again even if you, if you could get well again. We don't have psychologists, we, we have each other. We have individuals to help one another through this. I just have a way, a different way of looking at things and even when I get artists to write and do, do caricatures in the magazine [Sister 2 Sister], black artists tend to write someone with flared nostrils and veins popping out, and anger and I said I'm not an angry black woman. I'm a happy woman basically you know so I want, I want to deal with our happiness. I want to deal with our magic because we're the most magical people on earth. We are, especially our men what they do in the gutter today is emulated around the world tomorrow. I recognize that, I may not agree with everything they are doing in the gutter today 'cause I surely don't. They're still my kids, you know so I embrace them and I think they feel that, the children feel that. I don't scorn them, I don't look down on 'em and my generation, our generation didn't talk to those children, we abandoned them. We left them like a--you know a cancer to grow in the ghettos. We moved out to the suburbs we had better living and the hell with those people and you can't do that because it will come back to bite you in your butt which it has done. Story_ID: 393708 Speaker 1: So, I mean I've been threatened and you where--you know some of the rappers didn't like what I wrote about them and everything. They've called me the Big B and all that, but later on they always come back you know. They know that I don't, I love them you know, I don't not like them. You know I don't not like--I don't not like them if that made sense so. Speaker 2: And you're speaking about gangster rap as in-- Speaker 1: (Nods head) I speak about gangster behavior you know, you know if you say you're a hustler that's what you're gonna be and I know that when they get older they're gonna feel bad. They don't have--they're not--want their children to buy into that even though they've used it to, to flourish--used it on our children you know. So, it, it gives me the opportunity--I, I want at the end of the day that when I have to meet my maker and he's gonna say, "Okay [HistoryMaker] Jamie Foster Brown you know I gave you an opportunity to talk to others, I gave this magazine [Sister 2 Sister]. You have access on the radio and television. To whom did you speak and what did you say?" And I would just, just tell him, I'd say, "Lord you need to sit down 'cause I got a lot to tell you about what I said" because I have to be brave enough to say things to--whether they wanna hear it or not at that time. The words have to be put there because words are very important. When they say sticks and stones may break my bones but words will never hurt me, that is the worst thing anybody could ever say 'cause I can hit you right now and you can be repaired from repaired from that hit, that hurt, that immediate thing, but if I hurt, hit you in your mind especially as a child I can hurt you for the rest of your life, you know so in the beginning what's it worth? And then rappers say, "Well we're not role models." I'm say if you decide not to wear shoe laces, hundreds and thousands kids emulated you. I mean all of us are role models. Why are you not a role model when you have more influence than anybody? I mean a brain surgeon can't, can't fill up a stadium twenty thousand people to come and see him because he, you know, you know, separated two brains from the Siamese twins, but you can. You can get that many people in there but you don't want any responsibility that's not right. Speaker 2: What are some of the other things that were spurned out of you (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That I can ask the rappers? I ask 'em what's their sex life like you know. What was--I ask them a lot about when they were children. I wanna know, I wanna know what kind of pain have you gone through and how did you get through that pain? So my magazine is set up to teach, it's not just to entertain because I have all these children, black children in the community that have trauma every day which a lot of the rappers have had, but how did you get through it? So and not only rappers, I have the largest circulation of gospel news also inside of my magazine. So I wanna know how Fred Hammond, Yolanda Adams, how'd they get through it? Don't just tell me that you prayed and called on the Lord, you have to take steps also; the Lord help those who help themselves. How did you help yourself out of that situation? So it's always a teaching thing that that's--you know I'm always thinking that, what did I get out of this? What can--what did my people learn from this? Story_ID: 393709 Speaker 1: What came after Sister 2 Sister, now I know you're still doing it but you said something the Downtown Locker Room [DTLR]? Speaker 2: Yeah, recently about three weeks ago I started on Downtown Locker Rooms which is really interesting. These are high-end sports paraphernalia stores and apparel that boys, young men from fourteen to twenty-four they frequent--this is a very difficult demographic to reach. They're not reading the magazines, they hanging out at malls or whatever, an in these Downtown Locker Rooms it's very expensive stuff, twelve hundred dollar jeans and jackets and all that. They've got six or seven plasma screens there and I'm on those screens and it's like, "What's Up with [HistoryMaker] Jamie Foster Brown" because through the years I have interviewed all these rappers especially as they come out and I have all this footage. So you might see me interviewing Nick Cannon in the bathtub. You might see me lotioning Snoop Doggy Dogg's [Snoop Dogg] legs, and so they see intimate segments like two, one or two minute segments of me with these artists, and I introduce you to--you know this, this week you'll see me at The Game's house cooking dinner with him and his mother [Lynette Taylor] and next week you'll hear him talking about his girlfriend and his child. So every week, every week they change it and it loops around, you know, you know if you buy commercials in there and your commercial is shown eight hundred twenty-five times in a month in all those stores, so. Speaker 1: How did you get that contract? Speaker 2: Well I heard--it's called Pop network and this, young men, young black men that had developed this program, content management of how to get into all--into the stores and before they were just playing videos and just little interviews here or there, whatever they could put on there just to entertain the customer. They don't want anything longer than a minute, a minute and half because you know they want--you know Downtown Locker Room wants you to shop, and I heard about it and the--one of their lawyers knows me and so he was telling me he was inviting me to come to their opening or reception or something like that and I said, I said you know what I've got all this footage and he told them about it and they were just over the moon when they heard about it. Speaker 1: Oh, wow that was a great opportunity and a great opportunity to reach young people. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Since you said, yeah they do not read. Speaker 2: And I think it's interesting because I'm a baby boomer, you know that--but I, that's another thing because I love my children. They send for me, they want me to go to their weddings, to their baby showers and everything, and they don't deal with older people so much. You know young people like to stay with young people but it's two of us that are like that, me and [HistoryMaker] Bethann Hardison, who's Kadeem Hardison mom, we're like the elders. Story_ID: 393710 Speaker 1: That leads me into this Intergenerational Celebration, tell me about that, how did that get started? Speaker 2: Um-hm, well Intergenerational--well I have to put--the rappers are, are--they are the ones that speak to the youth I mean today, you know that's who they listen to, they don't listen to Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], they don't listen to Walter Fauntroy [HistoryMaker Reverend Walter Fauntroy], they don't, you know maybe Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] now because Al isn't so controversial a little bit, but so if they're--the kids are listening to them give them something to say, and so my thing was to put them with congressmen and congresswomen and corporate people who become brothers and sisters with them so that they have access to those people should they get in trouble, should they wanna know how to act or how to behave about certain things or should they want to learn because once rappers have, have experienced something they tend to talk about it and that's what I wanted them to do and at the same time I wanted to close that generational gap where our older people don't understand our younger people. Story_ID: 393711 Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the awards that you've gotten over the years. Speaker 2: I don't know, I got, I got 'em, I--they're there I don't even know what they're called (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I understand [HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun had you in the Congressional Record. Speaker 2: Yeah she put me in the Congressional Record and [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters has written me up also in the--you know they feel like I educate. I've gotten the Eagle, Anheuser-Busch Eagle Award, I got a wonderful award in--from Chicago [Illinois], but I can't remember the name of those things. Speaker 1: Well I saw one in there it's the Golden Scissors Award lifetime achievement [Golden Scissors Awards], gotten that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The Matrix Award [Matrix Award for Professional Achievement]? Speaker 2: That was presented to me by a group of white communications women and Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] came and presented that award for, to me. You know he was my chosen person. They asked me who do you want to present the award and he was in the midst of doing a $825 million deal and stopped it and came and gave me that you know--talked about me in a way I was floored! I was amazed at what, what he remembered about me, the wonderful things he said. So I was really pleased. Speaker 1: You've spoken at The John F. Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.], effects on pop music, Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: At Harvard? Yes I did, I was invited there because Anna Perez who was the--she was Barbara, Barbara Bush's PR [public relations] person. She went on to work for Michael Ovitz and she invited me to come there and speak which was really an honor. Story_ID: 393712 Speaker 1: Tell me about the Betty Shabazz book ['Betty Shabazz: A Sisterfriends' Tribute in Words and Pictures,' ed. Jamie Foster Brown]? Speaker 2: Writing that Betty--it's so interesting through the years I've never really had a conversation with Betty Shabazz and I would see her everywhere, and I loved Malcolm X, but I was, always intimidated by her but I would just go up to her, "Would you like something, another glass of water or anything like that?" I was subservient to her always, my head was always bowed. She got burned by her grandson [Malcolm Shabazz] and I was supposed to see C. Delores Tucker. I was supposed to see C. Delores Tucker because C. Delores Tucker was, was mad at the industry. You know she was after those rappers and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. I was trying to guide her as to how don't come after the children, they, they don't know any better and they--in many ways that's their only way outta the ghetto you know it, you have to teach them, but anyway it was--I loved her I thought she was a brave woman. I was on the phone talking to her and a friend of hers hanging out with and--C. Delores was like, "Yeah Betty got burned, but she's gonna come out it, I know she's gonna come through it" 'cause she was asking, "Where's my purse, where's my purse," and everything. I said, "Dr. Tucker, she may not wanna come out that." I said, "If she's 85 percent of her body burned, she may not have fingers, she may not have a nose and everything," and she was like, "Oh, oh," you know and I said, "My husband [Lorenzo Brown] was burned and he was burned over 10 percent of his body and I'm telling you it's not easy to recover from that and she's lost some skin," and I'm telling her about all the infections and everything and she is just having a fit, and then I said, "Well tell me about her?" I said, "Does she ever have a boyfriend?" She said, "Oh yeah she did, she liked this preacher up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], blah, blah but he wasn't returning her calls and all that." And I said, "Really?" She said, "Yeah, she liked to shop 'til she dropped, she was in St. Johns [St. John, U.S. Virgin Islands] shopping. We use to go shopping." So she started telling me about her, Myrlie Evers [Myrlie Evers-Williams], Coretta Scott King and all that and the lady who was listening on the phone Von Alexander said, "Jamie [HistoryMaker Jamie Foster Brown] you should write--" 'cause I started writing about that and she said--this is where I said I like to teach. I like for people to know things up under the surface you know and so Von went and talked to some people about my writing a book and she became a part of it, the agent became a part of it and it--everybody became a part of it and what I decided to do was to interview all of her girlfriends and people that have worked with her. Found, I had my cousin in Detroit [Michigan] go to her school, got, got a picture of her in, as a drummer in the band and she was a drum majorette and found the woman that had gone out with her at fourteen years old on her first double date and you know, just--I, I interviewed everybody, Dr. Height [HistoryMaker Dorothy Height] to Gloria Steinem to Mary J. Blige, people that didn't know her but were influenced by her, to Brandy and we just put all that, put all their what they had to say about her in there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And how, you know I wanted to know well when Malcolm was shot who, who physically put their hands on her and took her outta there and where did she go, you know? Just how did she make it, who, who took care of her? I found out it was Ruby Dee's [HistoryMaker Ruby Dee] brother and she had been living with Ruby Dee's brother--Malcolm because remember they had been firebombed before that. Story_ID: 393713 Speaker 1: So I did the book ['Betty Shabazz: A Sisterfriends' Tribute in Words and Pictures,' ed. Jamie Foster Brown] for Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.]. It was really eye opening, it was also very eye opening that her cronies and her friends did not want me to do that book and would not participate including Coretta Scott King. Speaker 2: Did they say why? Speaker 1: "Who are you to do her book?" Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, but I gave the kids fifty thousand dollars of my money, I wound up with almost nothing, 'cause I got, I donated money to the six daughters, I gave it to them, but her friends just felt that. Speaker 2: Did they probably want a scholar to do it or something? Would they consider a scholar (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or one of them or the daughters something like you know but they--nobody did. I, I had to do that book in seven months, and I had to have it done on, on the anniversary of her death. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: I'm still in touch with her grandson [Malcolm Shabazz], he--you know that's a tragic story too, but Myrlie Evers [Myrlie Evers-Williams] told me this wonderful story, it is the most delightful book to read. It really is you know. The storytelling is amazing. Speaker 2: What did Myrlie tell you? Speaker 1: She talked about how Coca-Cola took her, Coretta and Betty [Betty Shabazz] to a spa one time and Betty was there before they got there and how--when they went to see Betty, Betty had her hair standing all over her head (laughter) 'cause she had just come from, she had just come from a massage. How they learned how to do--she could do the Electric Slide, honey she could bowl. She had boyfriends down in Jamaica and I mean just, amazing stuff, just things you would never imagine about this woman. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know how fantastic she was, so. It was really a good book to learn. Speaker 2: Any other books in the making? Speaker 1: I've just been asked to do another book, 'cause I just did this fifty, forty-eight page salute, tribute to Gerald Levert and this publishing company was so impressed with it they want me to write a book about my life and stuff and-- Speaker 2: It should be very interesting; yes it'll be very interesting. Story_ID: 393714 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me a little bit about the house here, it's, it's a fascinating house I heard. Speaker 2: This house--I lived in a tiny little house in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and I was fussing at my husband [Lorenzo Brown]. I said, "I work too hard and this house is so little and I've outgrown it and I can't have people over here because it's not nice," and you know 'cause I'm dealing with people from General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], Diamond Chrysler [sic. DaimlerChrysler; FCA US LLC] and stuff like that and I couldn't entertain it was so tiny, but people loved that little house for some reason. So I said I need a bigger house and I was looking in Washington, D.C. and Washington, D.C. is crazy like everything is like seven hundred thousand, eight hundred thousand dollars and you're getting nothing for it and I couldn't find anything that made any sense, but I--my, my dermatologist is right down the street here and I used to come around this road constantly and I use to see this house with this long, white picket fence, but there's a lot of foliage here, trees and stuff I could never see the house. I could just see the picket fence and snatches of a little white building and but it would always enchanted me and I had saw that it was on sale. It was on sale for like a year or so and one day I had to bring my husband out here. He had to go to the dermatologist and we were passing by and he said, "What about that house right there," and I said, "Ugh that house has been for sale a long time for a year, it's on this highway. You know I never wanna live on a highway and who's gonna--how are you gonna park and all that," and I'm just fussing at him. So I take him to the dermatologist, he says, "Let's go look at it anyway," and we called, we stopped outside out the fence and we called the realtor and said, "Is anyone living in the house?" "Well kind of sort of." "Can we go and walk the grounds?" He said, "Yeah you can go there and walk the grounds." You know they had just dropped the price of it 'cause it had been on sale, a hundred thousand dollars you know for--they dropped the price a hundred thousand dollars 'cause it had been on sale for so long. They were, the family was frustrated. So we're walking this way in front of the house and we look back there and there's this road and there's this barn, and there's another house and a chicken house, and a--all kinds of houses. There are eight, nine structures on here and we said, "What is all that?" He says, "All that's part of the farm," and so we said, "This was a farm?" "Yeah, they own all that property around there, you know all that--and that's all that they kept, they kept three and a half acres," and so on the way out the groundskeeper comes and he lets us in the house to see the house and he tells us when the owner of the house who's eighty something years old, Safronia [ph.] when she comes up, she drives up from Virginia and she sits in the house on the weekend and just remember all the stories and the parties that they had. This use, this was the big house, this was the house that people later on told us they use to--as children they walked past here and see all the parties up here. These people belonged to the DAR [Daughters of the American Revolution], they were [U.S.] Navy lieutenants, they worked at the White House [Washington, D.C.], they were socializing. It was a cow and tobacco farm. So Safronia talked about how her mother and father, how her father was--had, they--he had married Eva Walker [ph.] who lived up the road and this was Sam Walker [Samuel Walker], Walker Texas Ranger's niece and they had moved to the city. They had lived out there, they had been out here. They had a house from the 1700s her, her grandfather had that house, Pop Duckette [ph.] was his name and that house was right out here in the front and you know they had to chop wood and you know. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know one of those houses and Joe Ray [ph.] she had moved to--he married her and they moved to the city and he wanted to move back out here in the country and she's like, "I'm not moving out in the country unless you build me a modern house," and this was the house with the bath. They had an outhouse but the put the bathroom inside. He made his own electricity and she said, "And I'm not chopping any wood". So he put fireplaces in but they were not for wood (laughter), not wood fireplaces they, they had--what do you call it, wood burning stoves-- Story_ID: 393715 Speaker 1: We fell in love with her, my husband fell in love with Safronia [ph.], she was beautiful and shocking white hair and we talked to the groundskeeper and he had--his father had worked on here--worked here as a child and had grown up here and then he had worked here as a child. His father became very close with Safronia's brother, and they became brother and so Safronia's brother, Castle [ph.] actually built that house for the father to live in, the, the groundskeeper's house and we moved in. Like we bought the house--my mother [Mamie Lee Harris Foster] died at September 11, we bought the house on September 27th. We moved in, in November right before Thanksgiving and we had all this decoration done. I mean it was a lot, we had to take down every wall, every ceiling in here because it was crumbling. It was over a hundred, it's a hundred years old and we had to update the wiring and everything in it. We didn't expect that and we did this during the time of grief because we were grieving. My husband and I were grieving, we looked up one day and said, "Oh my god, we created this?" We didn't even, we can't even remember most of it, how we did it, we don't know how we did that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She died in September and my father [Peter Foster] was dying and died in February. So the house has been photographed in Southern Living and it's also been featured on HGTV 'If Walls Could Talk.' Speaker 2: Wow, now the decorations, you have some lovely decorations here. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: You, you and your husband did that? Speaker 1: Um-hm, when, when my friends came over 'cause where we lived before was okay, but it was a tiny little house. It was like not even half the size of this, this is ten rooms and it was a frame house. This is a frame house too, but it was one of those old houses they built back in the '20s [1920s], nothing special and the workers, blue collar community. My friends were just shocked when they saw this and I had been telling my husband I knew I had the (unclear), I always had a way of dressing and you know my mom always told me, "You don't have to designer tell you what to wear, you got a brain just like anybody else, so you can put your clothes together just like anybody and do your own thing," and she used to, we used to be the best dressed kids in school when we were in grammar school because she would go to Catholic Salvage [ph.] which is like Goodwill or some place and find little skirts and petticoats for five dollars, five cents, twenty-five cents, ten cent, and pull it all together and make us look wonderful, but my friends were and I kept telling my husband, I said, "Rennie [Lorenzo Brown], look what was inside of me all that time," and it just never could come out you know and then I always look and I see things differently, just like Joe [Joe Larose (ph.)] said, "You hear things differently, you see things." I process things differently. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Who knew, nobody--I didn't know. I'll tell you this, as a child I used to daydream and I used to daydream that I would live in a beautiful house and I would come down these stairs and I would have this beautiful foliage around the flowers and I worked at home, and I used to think well how was this possible because I don't sing, I'm not a singer. I'm not a writer, I don't--what would I be doing at home. I would have to be working at a corporation. Well today I live in a beautiful house and I come down the stairs and I work at home. I don't work anywhere else but at home, and it's like I'm like, God did you do that, did you hear me, did you hear me saying those things and questioning? It's like he gave it to me, because who knew I could write? Who knew my sister [Stella Foster] could write, you know? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: We never aspired to be writers, I never aspired to have a magazine. People say, "Ooh we know that's your baby and everything." It [Sister 2 Sister] is not my baby, I said I mean it was like somebody singing in the shower one day and Clive Davis of J Records comes by and hears 'em and signs 'em, I mean it's, It was just that crazy for me. It was never anything I wanted to do. Speaker 2: I see lots of hats and lots of shoes. Speaker 1: Lots of screens, those are Patti LaBelle shoes. That's Pebbles' [Perri "Pebbles" Reid] tour, tour luggage. I just, I like colors. Those are that's [HistoryMaker] James Ingram's hat up there. I wear a lot of hats also. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I have things, I collect things. I have Gerald Levert's suits. I collect things from artists, Mariah Carey's perfume bottles and stuff like that. I, I like our history. Story_ID: 393716 Speaker 1: You were talking about some of the artifacts and things that you have, you said you had Patti LaBelle shoes, how--and who some of the other things that you have? Speaker 2: I haven't collected a whole, whole lot. I have a lot of like autographs and tee shirts and special things like that from the artists and letters they've written to me. I really want to fix up the barn and have those things in the barn. I've have Jennifer Holliday's shoes, Patti gave me like seven or eight pairs of shoes and a hat, yeah and Pebbles [Perri "Pebbles" Reid] gave me a beautiful fan and purses and all of her touring luggage, you know even the luggage that opens up like that and becomes like a closet, a dressing room for you and that huge, huge sofa in there that she has which is like her football and basketball watching sofa which is like, it has an ottoman the length of the sofa, it's very--about six feet deep sitting you know, so I see things that I'll ask the artist for, "Can I have that scarf? Can I have that hat?" They generally you know give it to me. I, but I mean I like--light and everywhere I go if I like I got those curtains there from England. I'll have like English lace curtains and I'll buy things from France. I like little things, things from Sweden, wherever I am I, I just try to get--Jamaica tile I'll put that in the kitchen, the kitchen is salmon color as well as mustard with some periwinkle blue in it and people find that fascinating, but that's my husband's [Lorenzo Brown] choices and colors too and you know with copper lights and lots of chandeliers. Speaker 1: Yes, the chandeliers are beautiful. Speaker 2: Yeah, and each room has color in it. My husband wanted--he didn't want, he wanted white. "Well we should have white." I'm like I did white when we were at the other place. I'm not doing white. I wanted to live inside of a jewel box and I wanted it so that when I came home I felt pretty and I felt comfortable. So when I'm away and I'm away a lot, I travel a lot. I have to say goodbye, I say Mommy's going, I say that to the trees and the house and the barn and I, I tell it okay Mommy's back you know because it's a very, it's a very peaceful place and then it has the wrap-around porch it's screened in, it's just--you know false fireplaces, but upstairs is the lilac room and everybody that comes here is like, "Which room is mine?" They claim the rooms and we put special beds in almost like heavenly beds so people have wonderful, restful sleep and when they're here. My husband and I are very much into people sharing our home and you'll see lots of sofas; there's sofas all in the bedrooms so you could sleep maybe about I would say twelve, fourteen people here very easily. Each room can be--we designed the rooms so the living room could be shut off and become a bedroom, the, the--there's two living rooms. There's the front parlor and the back parlor and each one of 'em could be bedrooms, the sun room which is like an office but it's a bedroom on the other side. We designed it so we could have a lot of company. We've had twelve people here at one time. Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah it's just lovely, it's just lovely. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Tell me about the grounds again, what, what how many buildings? Speaker 2: Have a three-car garage, one-car garage, a functioning smokehouse to smoke ham and all that in there and dairy house where they have wells, we have the wells all over the yard. We have a chicken house, we have the barn, we have the tool house and we have the groundskeepers' house, and then we have barbecue pits down the way and a pond that was built by Italian laborers who came here to build Rock Creek Park [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Oh wow. Speaker 2: Yeah, so and it is three and a half acres and they are houses all around us and what they did, the family sold off everything and then they you know developers developed all these beautiful homes around us and this, there's nobody across the street. This is pretty isolated. Speaker 1: It's beautiful, it's really beautiful (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you. Story_ID: 393717 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you'd like add that something that maybe I didn't, that I didn't ask about? Oh, one thing I know I didn't ask about was the Washington Theater. Speaker 2: The Washington Theater Group [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: When I came from Sweden I didn't know what to do. My husband [Lorenzo Brown] came here--I had studied languages but not enough to be an translator and my husband came to work at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and I had no function, no, I didn't know what to do. We had two small kids [Randall Brown and Russell Brown], there are no family that lives here and had--well you know my husband had taught at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] and there was a woman named Jane Sapp, there was Jane and Hubert Sapp, they were teachers down there and she was a singer, pianist, kind of a radical and she--NOW, the National Organization of Women [sic. National Organization for Women] had invited her to perform and we ran into them, we hadn't seen them in nine years you know 'cause we had gone to Sweden to live and so she--we ran into one another and so she said, "Why don't come and--I always thought you would be a great agent Jamie [HistoryMaker Jamie Foster Brown]. Why don't you come and be my agent for the night?" So I said, "Okay," so I was you know at the event, people with Jane performed and people wanted to come back and meet her after she performed because she was so great and there was this woman named Irene Norris [ph.] and her girlfriend who came back there to meet Jane and they wanted to come and meet, talk to her the next day and Jane was staying at my house, in my little bitty house in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and so they came over to the house and so she's--Irene's, Irene is a lawyer and she's in NOW it's you know and I don't know what they were talking about, but the white girl who was with her, with Irene I was talking to her and she was saying that she had been married for four years--she had four kids and had been married for a long time, but had left her husband for Irene for this woman, maybe I shouldn't say her name? So anyway take that part out. Anyway (laughter) there was a white girl who was there with Irene who was her friend and I said that I, well we just moved here and I was just acting as a, an agent tonight for her for Jane but I really needed a job and she says, "Oh, well Irene has got the contract for 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow Is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange] which is coming back into town at the Warner Theatre [Washington, D.C.] and she's gonna be doing group sales and you--maybe you could help her with it," and I became Irene's assistant, and I worked my little behind off and that's kind of how I got into doing that and I formed the Washington Theater Group whereas I would do group sales for groups or churches whatever, for whatever plays came into town so I got--I would get the contract with the particular theater, but I would also do special things like if you worked at a company and you said oh, we're gonna have a Christmas party, but Jesus I don't know how to get any kind of entertainment. I need a tree, or I need somebody to sing, I need this and that. You would contact me and I would book, I was like, I was like a booking agent and so that's what the Washington Theater Group was. Story_ID: 393718 Speaker 1: Is there anything you would like to say that I haven't asked you? Speaker 2: Well, I was raising, raising the kids--was two boys, one went to Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], one went to the University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida], both of 'em worked in the company [Sister 2 Sister, Inc.]. I wanted them to work in the company because I think that black people need to learn how to build businesses and pass it onto their children even though my kids didn't want that. I said, "I did not send you to Brown University, nor did I send you to the University of Florida for you to take all that you learned and take it somewhere else, plus I wanted it so when you're sleeping you're making money, that you're not at the whim of somebody else that let you go and I want you to hire black people, I want you to be able to give jobs and opportunities to others." Those were my goals, Lord have mercy, but the kids--it was really hard on them. They would come home from school and we lived in a little bitty place, this is our living room and, and dining room was as big as this room here and we had five people working in that house and they would, they had no place to sit, they couldn't watch TV. They could hardly get dinner, you know, get something to eat, they were relegated up to their rooms and it was hard on them you know and they'll say, "We don't want no part of this business 'cause mom and dad worked seventeen hours a day," and I said, "I work hard now so that I can rest later you know and I want you to also." My oldest boy went to Brown, he hated it. That was the one who was shot you know four times and afterwards he, he went to Maret [Maret School, Washington, D.C.] which is a private school, he's really smart but he went to Brown and he--it was just too loosie goosie for him and they wanted--the kids there wanted him to try same sex and all that and he was like oh no. So he wasn't doing well, he wasn't fitting in so when he--I said, "Look, I'm paying twenty-seven thousand dollars you know for you to find yourself," I think it was a semester or year whatever. So he said, "Well I wanna quit, I wanna come home." I said, "Well come on home," and this was Christmas. He came home, he dropped out came home. I was doing 'Joan Rivers Show' ['The Joan Rivers Show'] and 'Geraldo,' I was doing all the little gossip shows and stuff and Joan [Joan Rivers] had invited me to have Christmas dinner at her place, 'cause she was having a Christmas party. So I asked Randy [Randall Brown] I said, "Do you wanna go up there with us? Your father and I are driving up there tonight to go to the party and we're driving back." He said, "Well I might as well, I don't have anything else to do." So he drives up there with us and so he's being introduced. Joan said, "Introduce him to Melissa [Melissa Rivers] girl, introduce him to Melissa." I said, "Melissa is twenty-seven years old, he's nineteen. She ain't interested in no nineteen year-old boy (laughter) you know," but you got all these Jewish people there. Heads of big corporations and they're asking about Randy, "Well--now what's your name young man," you know and I, and he said, "My name is Randy Brown and--." "Where do you go to school?" "I go to Brown, I went to Brown." I would say, "Well he went to Brown." "Oh you went to Brown, well my aunt is a dean there and my brother went there, my uncle went there," you know I mean, everybody went to Brown that's like, "Hey this is great, this is wonderful," and Randy just says, "I just dropped out." Well honey you could've heard the pin drop in the room. "You what? Oh no, no, oh, you don't drop out of Brown, you have to go back." And they started hammering him how important Brown is, what that school means to everyone, I mean, and, and how he has--the thing about Brown is that if you can get through it, you've liked you know, you're like knighted. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: By the time they finished with that little knucklehead that night and by the time we drove home he had decided to go back to Brown, wound up on the dean's list. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: The deans and them called up, they would call up and say, "We've never met a child like this--this just he's, he's just a wonderful person," and I--it was, to hear that, when Lorenzo [Lorenzo Brown] and I hear these things about our sons we feel that on what we have contributed to the betterment of society. Story_ID: 393719 Speaker 1: Randy [Randall Brown] was shot--during this time this was--he was shot in 1992 but I have been very, very vocal with the music industry about the kind of music and words and images that they were putting out there with men grabbing their crotches, and not caring about women and cursing and all these things, and I mean I had been just fussing about this and so one of the, the music executives was like, "Well why don't you just take care of your own, you take care of your own kids and you know." I said, "You don't have kids." I said, "I take care of my kids, I don't worry about my kids walking out the door and shooting somebody or hurting somebody. I worry about that woman down the street hurting me and mine." We don't live on an island, we're not alone. It affects us what happens to our neighbors and everything. So I'm arguing with him and I say, "Garbage in, garbage out, if you feeding these kids garbage, you're gonna get garbage out." I'm just a fussing. Ten days later, I had a party, was it New Year's Eve? It was ten days after New Year's, I had a company party [for Sister 2 Sister, Inc.] and my son is there and I'm always like hey, hey, no, they wanna go to a party, it's midnight. Nah it's fifteen, sixteen years old--, "Where are you going? Let me talk to the parents." "Well you can't talk to the parents?" "Well then you can't go." Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you are not walking out of here at fifteen or sixteen years old to go to a party at midnight. I am just sorry, this is not gonna be. "Well you just want us to be bored stiff, you just wanna--," you know they're bucking you then and my sister Stella [Stella Foster] was like, "Well you can just tell them that I'd rather for them to be bored stiff than to be a stiff on a board," you know so it was like (laughter) back and forth and all that. My husband is more, he's more lenient, so but my sister and I are really tough because I'm like, I got my heart in my throat every night when they go out. I don't know they were little black boys were eating concrete all over the place. I mean I saw, it was just so much and I so--Randy, I remember him walking and going out the back door. I said, "Where are you going?" "Dad said I could go out," just hostile 'cause he know I'm gonna say, "Why are you going," and I'm like, "Well who you going with?" "I'm going to take Coco [ph.] to, to the movies and then I'm gonna write my paper," but and he goes out and slams the door, and I said, "Lorenzo [Lorenzo Brown], did you tell him he could go out?" Now it's like nine o'clock at night? "Yeah he's just gonna take this girl," he--she wasn't a girlfriend she's just somebody that he had met and worked at McDonald's and Coco was leaving that Sunday. This happened on Friday, she was leaving that Sunday to go to school, go to college and all night long I just was like something's wrong here. I couldn't, you know after everybody left I was visibly--I had tell you that I couldn't sit right. I tried to write captions for the, that particular issue we were working on. I couldn't write captions, I drank some wine trying to calm down. I kept saying Rennie something's not right, just not--you know I don't feel right. We had taught the boys always call us wherever you're going from one place to another. So by the time I--we went to sleep during this time the young one Russell [Russell Brown], he--we're asleep Russell--Randy's not home. Russell's up and he's on the phone so--and he's watching videos. Parents can't monitor their children twenty-four hours a day, I'm just sorry--I'm you know society has to have some kind of responsibility. I'm not a, the military police, I'm trying to get dinner on the table (laughter), I'm trying to work, I'm trying to pay bills. I can't monitor the kids twenty-four hours a day and we didn't know Russell had gotten up and was on the phone. Story_ID: 393720 Speaker 1: So I got a phone call--no, I heard a shot and I got up out of the bed. I said, "Randy [Randall Brown]," and then I laid back down and about an hour or so later we got the phone call that there had been an accident, that they wanted permission to operate and you know there was something wrong with his chest. "I mean what's wrong with his chest? What do you mean? Where is the girl? Where is he?" You know this, "We're down at the Fairfax Hospital [Inova Fairfax Hospital, Falls Church, Virginia]." Finally they tell us that he's been shot and they had to operate right away. And I was trying to find out--where are you? We don't even know how to get down there, we don't know where we're at and I get that out of the woman, it's a social worker that they, they woke her up she said you have to come in, there's a shot, you gotta take care of the parents you know. My husband [Lorenzo Brown] and my son [Russell Brown], I just you know they're just you know they're shaking and I'm like, "Okay we gotta pull ourselves together, we've got to pull ourselves together," and get in the car and we go down there, we--they take us into a room and the police, the officer that brought Randy in, white Virginia cop, and he's like, "We said what happened, where's the girl?" "Well, Ms. Brown [HistoryMaker Jamie Foster Brown] apparently they kidnapped the girl, and then shot your son and we, we're, we're looking for them you know," and I said, "Where did this happen?" "Well Randy was at--your son explained to us that he was at the Sky Mall [ph.] down in Virginia." They came outta the movie house--they--oh, on the way into the movie house Coco [ph.] had gone with, gone with--had boyfriend had been some guy that she had broken up with. That was in June and this in January and a friend of his had seen Randy walking into the movie house with her, but a bunch of other people around too. He goes and calls this ex-boyfriend and says, "Hey Coco is down here with this guy and some other people," though the ex-boyfriend don't really care anything about--, "What, she down there with another man." By the time they come out of the movie house Randy stops to call me, but my son is on the phone. I don't know that he's called me. He says, "I'm gone take Coco home and then I'll--tell mom I'm coming on home." By the time he calls and Coco called somebody but her--neither one--neither her father or mother had a phone for some reason. Anyway by the time they finished calling they walked to the other end of the mall where the car is. Everybody has cleared out. This is one something in the morning. She's cold so she doesn't wanna walk to the car which is what kind of saved him, and so she decides to wait inside the glass enclosure okay, while he goes being a gentleman goes get the car. By the time he comes back he sees her inside with some guy beating and slapping her around and he gets out the car to see what's going on and these two guys come up 'cause this guy has called his friends. They come up and they say, "You got something to do with this?" And he said, "Well what, well no what?" And one guy hauls off and hits him. Randy, now, Randy hasn't--he's not an aggressive kid but he's angry so he hits the guy back so hard he falls down. Then he turns to ward off the other guy and while he turns to ward off this guy, this one who's on the ground takes out a gun and shoots him four times, as Randy gets--he's shooting him as Randy turns and gets back in the car, and as he's getting ready to drive away that guy who's shooting him says, "You punk," and he drove away and he looks back and he sees they're putting Coco in the car. Well he drives across the road over to another mall, he gets out and he goes to four telephone stations 'cause he doesn't know whether they're gonna call him, he doesn't really know what to do. He doesn't know whether they're gonna follow him or what or if they even saw where he went. Each the phone--he said mom you know (laughter), he told me later he said, "Mom you know you trained me so well to lock the doors. I would get out and try to you know no phone would work. I would get back--I would lock the door as I get back in the car." Finally, he goes all around the mall in the front of Hallmark Cards he, there's a phone that works and he calls 911 and asks them to come and pick him up. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 393721 Speaker 1: They come to pick him up--now this is the officer telling me this. He said, "Ms. Brown [HistoryMaker Jamie Foster Brown], your son asked us to come and get him and when we arrived he was sitting in the car just bleeding you know," and he says, "Your son says to us, 'Call my mom tell her that on my desk there's a telephone thing there and look for Coco [ph.]. Her parents' number is in there. They took her, there were three guys that took her that kidnapped her and I don't know if she obviously knew one of 'em.'" He said, they said, "Okay, we gotta get you to the hospital." They had an ambulance come and he said, "Well what are you gone do with my mom's car," he said, "Because I don't want it ticketed or towed." And they said, "Don't worry about we're not gonna you know have it ticketed or towed," but he's telling them what to do which was great because they're assuming that he's--this is a little black kid in Virginia but a drug deal had gone bad you know. They won't give him the benefit of the doubt. So he's telling us how--the demeanor that my son had. Actually my son was like and he says, "And I promise you Ms. Brown, within twenty-four hours we're gonna get whoever did this to your son." So they're all on Randy's [Randall Brown] side, so they put in the--they put us in the waiting room and we're waiting, we're like, "What is it, why is it taking so long?" Why, we don't know what's taking so long. Well the bullet is in his heart; we didn't know that, they didn't tell us that. We're waiting, in comes this nurse busting in, white nurse and she says, "Where are the parents of this child? You know where are the parents of Randy Brown?" We said, "We're the parents," and they said, "We just meet the parents of this child he was so wonderful," because when they brought him in they said--she said, "We were cutting his clothes off, belt and shirt and everything and he's like 'I am so sorry. I know that I'm an inconvenience to you all. I know you have more important things to do than to be bothered with me. I, you know I, I'm sorry to put you--.'" This is what he's telling the nurses and the doctors. So they're like over the moon like we're gonna save this kid, you know and they still haven't told us--they're in surgery. What happened was he was shot four times, it went through the arm and the leg, well one is still in his back, but there was one in his heart. It had entered the heart, the right chamber, but it had stopped. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And they had him wide open and they had said Dr. McMann [ph.] was in there, he was gonna be the heart surgeon, and Dr. Van [ph.] was the one who had 'em open and he was Vietnamese. Well, Randy had just played a real great game, eighteen points you know, he's in good shape, this boy's in good shape, he looks wonderful. If we give him a bypass that's gonna give him you know there's--complications could set in. So they were trying to decide what to do with him and Dr. Van asked Dr. McMann, "Do you think that I if took this bullet out that you could give--sew him up so that he doesn't die" 'cause that blood is pumping like that, and he said, "Yeah I think so," and Dr. Van took that bullet out and had one stitch they closed up. He still lost five, five cc or pints of blood, units of blood but he survived. Speaker 2: Um-hm that is wonderful. Story_ID: 393722 Speaker 1: It was the most--and everyday Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], Walter Payton, Michael Jordan I mean the whole music industry, I mean every--he was in the hospital [Fairfax Hospital; Inova Fairfax Hospital, Falls Church, Virginia] for about two weeks and we had, every time we came the carts were full of gifts and books and money and fruit and just everybody sending stuff. The music industry was so hurt behind it because they knew I had been so vocal about the violence that was in there and then you know that little boy he got, he got seventeen years. He was eighteen and he served nine and we said, "Why did you shoot 'em?" "I had the gun." "Why did you have a gun?" Just seeing stuff on the videos and thinking and his mother wouldn't even come to his--to the trial. She had tried, she--the grandparents lived in St. Lucia and they couldn't handle him. They sent it to the mother and she lived here and worked at a bank. She couldn't handle it so she was going to send him to the father who was in Haiti and the boy got off the plane to change planes in Miami [Florida], and threw his passport away so they sent him back here, and that's how that happened. So it was the woman down the street whose child hurt me and mine you know. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: So anyway, that was when we did the interview with The Washington Post because everyone knew I had been so vocal about that and then Tom Brokaw made Randy [Randall Brown] go through the whole thing. They had it on television and, and they wrote it up everywhere and that's when my husband [Lorenzo Brown] says that he was going to work with me when he was doing the interview with [HistoryMaker] Jackie Trescott. What was interesting about it is in that interview it demonstrates how we raised our children, you know the things that they were required to do. So other people were looking at that and wanted us to talk about it and they used our methods to teach parents how to raise their kids. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: That's a beautiful story and he's working in the business [Sister 2 Sister, Inc.] today? Speaker 1: Yeah he is (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wow, that is wonderful, that is wonderful. Speaker 1: He's the director of advertising. Story_ID: 393723 Speaker 1: Tell me why did you want to tell your story today? Speaker 2: Black people should--our history was taken, our ancestry was really stripped away from us, and I tell people every day, "You have to get what you can, get it in where you can fit it in." I interviewed my mother [Mamie Lee Harris Foster], my grandmother [Estella Harris]. I want years from now if I have grandchildren for them to know what they sounded like. What was their human like, what's the texture of their hair? What kind of clothes did they wear? As much history as possible we need to get it back. You, you just can't be frivolous with that. Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you've lived your life and, and what is important to you? Speaker 2: I, right now I think I have, I had a really strong background in the church and, I don't go, I don't go to church that often now. I'm really disappointed in the kind of culture, there's just something about it that's wrong and I--it's, it's okay to have wealth but greed is just over the top, it's just--I some of the churches really bother me and the ministers and it looks like they're praising the man and not the Lord, and that's--I find that some--that's disturbing. However, I'm a very lenient person, I, you know, that people feel they're being fed, fed what (laughter) sometimes I guess--but you know, but I, I think that I can easily say I can meet my maker and he'd be happy with me. Right now I wanna be able to move on and I wanna be able to separate myself somewhat from the magazine [Sister 2 Sister], bring other children along so that they can have a good life. This is a lifestyle, it's a great lifestyle and I wanna share that with other children, other black kids. Other kids, I'm not really prejudice but I'm in love with black people, but the other thing is I wanna see God's kids in other lands. I wanna go to Tibet, I wanna go to China, I wanna see what he's doing with his children over there so I do wanna share. Story_ID: 390826 Speaker 1: Ms. Brown [HistoryMaker Jamie Foster Brown] for those going into publishing what suggestions would you have for them? Speaker 2: You have to have an advertising base, you can't go into this just because you have, you feel that you have something to say or that you love it; that will make you broke in five minutes. It's a very, very difficult business to be in and people go in there and they have that, the--they buy the highest quality paper and they pay for these expensive photo shoots and you don't know whether it's gonna sell or not and/or even if you're gonna get enough advertising and every month, this is a cash and carry business, that printer wants his money whether you're selling or not, but if I do a magazine, I have to do my February magazine in December okay, so I put out all this money in December for a February magazine that doesn't go on sale until January, then it has to be on sale for a month, then it has to come off for another month and they have to do the tallying. It's three or four months before I get the money from that magazine when I did it in December. Suppose it didn't sell you know? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Every month though after that I'm still, I haven't gotten that month--that money from December yet, but now I'm into January, I'm putting out money for the January issue, and I'm putting out money for the February issue and I still haven't gotten that money from the December issue, so a lot of people don't understand that. You have to have, you have to have a lot of money or you have to have that advertising base you know you really have to--who, who's your advertising base and what's your target market? Story_ID: 390827 Speaker 1: Would you choose a different career path? Speaker 2: I think that this career path chose me, I wasn't looking for it. I think that you know God gave me enough foundation and wisdom to share and then he put me in a place where I had to share it you know with other people. I meet seven to ten people new almost every day and that's a lot of people to come in touch with and I speak to millions every month. That's a lot of people so. I think there's a purpose, there's a reason that he put me on this path. It's not like I wanted to be a magazine--I never even thought about that, never even thought about being a writer. Speaker 1: Is there something that you haven't done yet that you'd still like to do? Speaker 2: I wanna go see God's kids and I wanna, and I really, really wanna figure out a way how we can help our subculture of people who have been imprisoned, because that's a big subculture that we have. There's a lot of pain in our community and I just think, how can we help, how can we you know, people say rehabilitate but a lot of times those prisoners have never been habilitated (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Habilitated, um-hm. Speaker 2: So I'm going to start doing that, a lot of that sort of thing in the magazine [Sister 2 Sister]. Story_ID: 390828 Speaker 1: Is it anything you would've done differently or do you have any regrets about anything that happened? Speaker 2: I think, I've always tried to you know bring in extra money or bring in sponsors or, or you know investors and somehow God always stops it. It's like because every time they have their agenda and they don't, they wanna change what I do. What I do is I decide every month what I think my people should know. You know there's always this behind my head in my head what are they learning? What will they get out of it if they sit down and take the time to honor me and bless me by buying that magazine [Sister 2 Sister], what am I giving them you know? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And a lot of people don't think like that, and then the other thing is that media is so mean. I have never seen anything like that. They revel in hurting other people and I don't. I, I--that bothers me tremendously so I just wanna be bigger, greater, I want the magazine to have more impact and I want it to make more money because when it makes more money you have more power and you have more of an impact. Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] you know, he, he took out an ad for the Million Man March. People were surprised about it and he's all--you know he's for affirmative action and, and he's very vocal about this and I said, "Bob you know people are just shocked. I'm shocked that you even care" 'cause he's a straight up businessman and everything, he says, "These are things I've always said but now that I have money and power, now they're listening." Speaker 1: Um-hm, that's right. Story_ID: 390829 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and your concerns for the African American community? Speaker 2: Okay with the rap game, I'm--I, I see the downside but I see that upside. We have, we're manufacturing things now, we're owning stuff now and I see little baby black Rockefellers coming out of those, those who own--like the Jay Zs and L.A. Reids, their children are going to own and they're gonna build--empires are being built now that we've never had before. I see a sharing that we share a lot now. The old guard didn't share, I mean the old magazines and stuff instead of wanting to help or reach out to me they wanted to kill me. You understand what I'm saying? Well with the younger magazines like mine [Sister 2 Sister] and stuff, we help one another. We buy ads in each other's magazines. We, we help deals, you know hey if you come over here you know buy a paper from this guy, who I'll get a discount and you'll get a discount and that'll be easier you know. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: More and more we're trying to--we're not use- black people are not used to working together 'cause we didn't even have anything to work with for so long so we gotta kind of learn each other and we're just in the box, in the boxing ring kind of you know like we don't really wanna box, we wanna kind of dance. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That's coming, I see that, that's a good thing, and out of that rap business a lot of good things have happened you know. We got television shows, we're on--we're doing films, we're, we're in, in fashion. We are in places where we would've never been let in before so; that's a good thing. At the same time I do see a lot of pain, I do see the lesser ones they're gonna get left behind, they're gonna have less, they're being moved out, they are no jobs and all these children coming up in blended families is hurting me because I think it's very important you know this feminist movement where girls having babies without having fathers is like--sucks. You need the father, you need a man and woman to raise these children, I'm sorry this whole thing like, "Well I can take care of myself and everything." How you gone cut, cut a child out from half of what it is, this is not right, I'm sorry. I know how important--I could never have raised those boys [Randall Brown and Russell Brown] the way I did if their father [Lorenzo Brown] wasn't there, and that father is so important I mean my God I can't, I can't stress how important it is in how--who that girl chooses to be her husband or her mate. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And children are having these blended families and then you have the child but you don't want the woman. That's rejection, that's hurt, that's pain, that's, that goes into that woman, no matter--why isn't daddy with us and why is he with her, why? I don't care how you look at it, no matter how that woman tries to make it okay, it's not okay. That child feels rejected also, and so that's pain that goes into that child and back out into the community again, so it--those are the things that really concern me. Also, the, the educating of our people how you know what kind of jobs are they gonna have you know. It's hard enough for us, those of us who've been out here that haven't been in jail, what, what about those who have you know? They've got like strikes against them, they don't have the education, you know do we just throw them away? So I'm really concerned about that. Story_ID: 390830 Speaker 1: When you look back on your life, what stands out the most? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know. I'd guess it's the marriage that you know that my husband [Lorenzo Brown] and I--how did these two okay kids who weren't passionately in love or anything, how did we even get together? You know my husband told me years after we were married that--and this surprised me. He said, "When I saw you walk through that door," he said, "I thought to myself where have you been." I said, "Really?" He said, "When I put--laid eyes--." He made no movement to come to talk to me, he didn't say anything half the time, but somehow he knew I was gone sit there and talk to him. Somehow God moved us that way (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Together, um-hm. What values do you consider most important? Speaker 2: Well I value integrity and honesty. I--it is the sexiest thing in the world to me. Character means a lot and my husband, oh my god. He can't tell a lie (laughter) he can't you know. He is like you know and also if you say you're gonna do something do it. I also value friendship. If I'm a--if I'm in a position to help you, I'm gonna help you, but I have a lot of friends that are in position to help move, that won't you know. I just question that a little bit you know. I said, but you know I always say people do what they want do so. Speaker 1: That's true. That's true. Story_ID: 390831 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered and what do you want your people to say about you? Speaker 2: Actually I was thinking this the other night. I said I want to have a wing or something that my family's name is on. So this property here I'm in the process of trying to make it into a Jamieland, which is like a little Neverland for children and have the barn like a performance area so that when the artist come I can have kids who do well come and do workshops with them and have a little roller skating rink around the, you know, the driveway and little drive in, I just, I want where the county can use it for different things, for children who do well. Children who do well need to be rewarded you know and we need to talk about them instead of just talking about the kids that don't do well so. That's kind of what I want to do in the end. Story_ID: 390832 Speaker 1: What message or lessons do you have for your children and, and for the world? Speaker 2: Well I'm kind of in love with people, I find them fascinating and my sons [Randall Brown and Russell Brown] they--like I said before they are, they're good for mankind, they are very kind to others. My baby boy for two years before I even knew it was having parties once a month with Asians, Latinos and black Americans, and white Americans, young, twenty/twenty-five year old people and donating all of the proceeds to charities everywhere. He was arrested and put in jail for protesting the genocide in Darfur. His ambition in life is to help prisoners to rehabilitate them. I think that's very noble and, and very giving of him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I think that I'm doing my part, I wanna do more and I wanna teach us how to survive better, you know. I think little colored girls which is like you and me that we are under siege. I think things are hard for black women, very, very hard. We have very little to choose from, we're told that we are not submissive enough but yet we're left in positions where we have to be the man, the woman, the educator, the everything in the household, the breadwinner and there's a lot that's been--I think black women have gone through so much trauma because even first our children were and our husbands were taken away and killed and slaughtered and made, you know, made slaves and animals. Then we come up out of that and then our kids are killing one another with the drugs and all that so, and we're grieving more--more of black mothers are losing their children and we're burying our children which is not, it's just not good and those things are very painful to me. I mean I, my son is still walking around after being shot and I struggle, I'm still in pain and that was like in 1992. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And this is 2007. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 390833 Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important? Speaker 2: Oh, I love history because the--history has lessons, it teaches us. One thing that we haven't done is we haven't given our children the history of what happened to us so that they don't understand the shoulders that they're standing on or they don't even appreciate where they are today, they just think it just happened. I used to send my sons [Randall Brown and Russell Brown] to a Jewish family so that they, they could see that on Friday nights all of them are over there and they're talking to grandmom and granddad and they're recounting the history of what happened to them so that it never happens again and so that they're teaching one another how to be strong and how to be together and how to work together. That is very important to me and black people don't do that because our parents and them don't wanna talk about it. It was too painful, we don't--they didn't pass on our history to us. We stopped that in the '60s [1960s] when I'm black and I'm proud when a few of us started making it and moving out to the suburbs whenever we're thinking that we're making it, it's just so few of us who've done that and we left the ghetto to like I said to fester and the ghetto grew up and with music it came to us big, bad and in a hurry you know. So history is very--and words are very important and being able to look at things that have happened to others and learn from it is important which it goes back to when they read Sister 2 Sister it's important to me that they learn something. That, that person that you idolize went through this and this is how they got out of it. I don't want to hear about who was your favorite artist or who, who influenced you. I really could care less if Stevie Wonder influenced you. I want to know how you got out of that situation, you know. That doesn't you know, I'm not asking those pop questions, that's not interesting to me. Story_ID: 390834 Speaker 1: Is that what you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I don't know what my legacy gonna be like. I know I'm baby booming mommy in a hip hop world, and that's pretty much my legacy. It's like I have to--you know it's not easy 'cause nobody wants to hear something that they don't want to hear, you know so. Yeah people acting real funny and the older people--I, I don't fit with the older people, I'm not a child, I'm just in this lane right here, this is where I am. So I can, I can be with the children which is so important. I can kind of be with y'all over here but then you all are too rigid you know but you know it's okay, I can hang a little bit, but I really fit over here. This is where I'm in love with these kids so, and I put down, you know when Mark Brown said something about in that 'Beauty Shop' he had written a thing about all, all Coretta [Coretta Scott King], no all--what's her name Rosa Parks did was sit on her A-S-S and F Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and I put C. Delores Tucker on the phone with Mark and I was trying to tell her, "You have to teach these kids, they don't have a respect for what happened to us and what it meant. They just don't," we didn't--and he started telling her that see C. Delores and talking her, not, not addressing her as Dr. Tucker or anything like that and he said something that irritated her, and she said, "Well I don't think--" 'cause I told him, I said, "C. he wants to tape you." She got upset about something he said and didn't wanna do it. I said, "You can't do that. They don't know, you know." "Oh, I don't think I can talk to you," and everything. No, he speaks to millions. People will see his stuff you know and that's and, and this is where I got so disappointed with the Intergenerational [Intergenerational Celebration] in putting the congressional people and people in corporate people. Once I put, once I bring those kids out of their (unclear) which they're very nervous about they don't know whether these congress people are gonna yell at them about what they say, how they dress or whatever, but they trust me. So I bring them I said now I want you to be sisters with this congresswoman or this congressman and you know I bring the congressman there, they become sisters--I give or brothers, I pull them together. First of all these kids have power. They have words, they have powers they speak to millions and they have money also, but don't expect the kids to come to you after I put you together with them because they don't know how to come to you, but you can call 'em up and say, "Well I'm going to the state dinner. Mary J. Blige, would you come and see what it's like? Would you like to come to see a vote on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.]?" You know I can't get the older people to, to respond to the young ones once I put them in there. I say you have to be aggressive. I've made the, the introduction. I've forged the union. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: They don't do anything, they don't--they'll talk about those kids and boy how terrible they are, but they will not reach out to them, and don't think that those kids don't know that either. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: They feel rejected and they feel bad about 'em. They're like the hell with y'all, we gone do our thing, so. Speaker 1: Well I certainly thank you for your time today. Speaker 2: I thank you too Ms. Janet [HistoryMaker Janet L. Sims-Wood]. Story_ID: 390835 Speaker 1: You see my mommy. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, you have speed, go ahead and tell us about this. Speaker 1: This is one of my parents' anniversary, I must've been around eight years old, seven or eight. That's me over to the right, the little girl to the right and that's my mother and her husband, if his head is a little bit chopped off there but that, that's her husband, in the middle and those are friends and family there all celebrating their anniversary. That's--but my sister Stella [Stella Foster] is not there and neither is my brother Warren [Warren Foster (ph.)]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Which one is-- Speaker 1: That's Shirley [Shirley Foster Hunter], the little girl. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right gotcha. Okay and this one? Speaker 1: This is our neighbors and cousins that lived next door and that's my father and mother at the top of those stairs there with my baby sister Shirley over to, she's the--of, of the second from the bottom on the left. This is where we lived on 3848 South LaSalle [Street, Chicago, Illinois], but that house was taken down for the--build the Dan Ryan Expressway. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The one on the left? Speaker 1: That's my entire family, that's my brother at the top, that's me in the green dress, that's Stella who's with Chicago Sun-Times and that's Shirley who's the baby of the family and she's a speech therapist, lives in Bettendorf, Iowa and that's my father Peter James Foster [Peter Foster] and mom, Mamie Lee Foster [Mamie Lee Harris Foster]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is just a family shot here, I don't--that's not important, it's just-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: That's my husband Lorenzo and--that's Lorenzo Brown and [HistoryMaker] Jamie Foster Brown, that was taken last year around about I guess November of 2006. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next one, okay you're ready? Speaker 1: That's me on the left with Morgan Freeman and his wife [Myrna Colley-Lee]. I think that was at the black Oscars [Tree of Life Awards] out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], they have that before the Oscars and they--it's called the black Oscars. Speaker 2: Ready? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay ready. Speaker 2: This was taken at Babyface's [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds] house during a fundraiser for President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. You can see him at the top. I'm over on the left. Now you can see the woman in the middle between me and Naomi Campbell is Raymone Bain who is now Michael Jackson's general manager and the one, the lady next to Naomi Campbell is [HistoryMaker] Tracey Edmonds who's going with Eddie Murphy and then the woman next to her is Holly Robinson Peete and the woman next her--I think her name is Beverly Rifkind [ph.], and she's married to an industry executive, Steve Rifkind. Speaker 1: That's mom and dad dancing in the kitchen, those two were married, let's see, about sixty years. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sorry, go ahead (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mamie Lee Foster and Peter James Foster. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: My baby picture. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay go ahead. Speaker 1: I'm one and he's two, that's Jamie Foster, well Jamesetta Foster and Warren Lee Foster, my brother. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, all right ready? Speaker 1: That's Luther Campbell [sic. Luther Vandross] and his mom [Mary Ida Vandross] and me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Marilyn Crawford [L. Marilyn Crawford] who was a marketing genius in the music industry and Don Cornelius of 'Soul Train' and me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready? Speaker 1: Um-hm that's Russell [Russell Brown], my youngest boy who's thirty and my father, Peter James Foster. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 1: Nineteen years old, hard at work, working for Teletype Corporation. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 1: So I said, "Dad, you look like a chipmunk (laughter)," 'cause his little jaws. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay ready? Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-two [1992] this is the Brown family, from left to right, Russell's fifteen, Lorenzo, my husband, Randall [Randall Brown] eighteen, and Jamie and this was The Washington Post article featuring the family after he was shot, after Randy was shot and this came out June 21, 1992..