 Story_ID: 2866 Speaker 1: On the right side, there's [baseball player] Lou Brock. I just left him in Atlanta [Georgia] at the [2000] All-Star Game. He was my roommate when he first came from Louisiana and they put him with me. I learned so much about--I'm ten years his senior. I learned so much about business from him. Just business, you know, how to bid and how to negotiate, how to get things done. Speaker 2: And then, what about in the middle? That's you? No, in the middle, who's that? Speaker 1: Oh, that's [baseball player] Buck O'Neil. He's the one that managed the Kansas City Monarchs [Negro League baseball team]. He got me to start playing baseball. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, he's the one. Yes. Speaker 1: He's the one. He's my confidor and mentor, came to my house. I just went, and told my mom, "we want him to sign and play baseball." And she said, "well, you want him to play, you've got to take care of him." He said, "We'll take care of him." I didn't say nothing. I never talked that much. So he took me to Kansas City [Missouri] and just--he trained me and talked to me. And I came with another guy named [baseball player] Elston Howard. He played for the [New York] Yankees [baseball team]. First Black Yankee. Speaker 2: So, there were two of you, then, that year? Is that what you're saying? No, the Black Leagues, but two of us that went-- Speaker 1: Went over to the Majors. Speaker 2: Major Leagues, yes. Speaker 1: The same year. Speaker 2: Well, he went one year before me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I came, and Speaker 1: Did you come in '53 [1953]? Speaker 2: '53 [1953]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's gone now. We had completely opposite baseball careers. He was on a world-championship team, and I was on losing teams. And we still maintain our balance without talking about winning or losing. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And we lost him about five years ago, and his wife is now working on a book about his life 'cause nobody remembered him. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He was the first Black Yankee. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I mean he went through a lot of--but [baseball player] Jackie Robinson was on the other side over there, Brooklyn [New York], and he was in New York City, the Yankees. And they were beating the [Brooklyn] Dodgers [baseball team] all the time. So, Jackie did his thing, but they never really mentioned too much about Elston Howard. So there are people who do things and contribute a lot, nobody knows them, and they don't, they don't, they don't mind it. Speaker 1: Right. They don't mind it. Speaker 2: No. He didn't mind. I mean Jackie got all the publicity, [baseball player Roy] Campanella and [baseball player] Willie Mays and all that. But he just played, took care of his family, and just enjoyed life. He was always happy and always had a good time. We lost him. He got sick and they gave him some bad medication, and it didn't agree with him. He died. And I thought from that a lot of times, that--you're not a doctor, are you? But doctors sometimes, you know, from Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama, now Tuskegee University], you know, they experienced a hit down there. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: My generation don't have that great a confidence in doctors. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: You know, who are the good ones, and what can they do and how they do it. But they gave him the wrong medication, and he died. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let's just go over the names one more time. Speaker 2: That's me on the left, Buck O'Neil in the center, Lou Brock on the right. Me, left; center, Buck O'Neill. Speaker 1: [Ernie Banks with Former roomate Lou Brock and Buck O'Neil date unknown] [Location unknown] [Photo courtesy of Ernie Banks] Story_ID: 2867 Speaker 1: So now what is the year? What year is this picture? Speaker 2: Ooh, some of this I'd have to ask my mother [Essie Banks]. Let's see. My dad [Eddie Banks] died in '79 [1979], so it must be--gee, let's see. The bottom kid Glover was forty-three. This is thirty-five years ago. That picture is thirty-five years ago. Let's see how many we've lost. We've lost Benjamin, my dad, let's see. Speaker 1: Now, can you identify people here? Speaker 2: Samuel and Frances and Eddie. Ima's gone. Speaker 1: Okay. So, can you identify--there's your father, right? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Is that your mother? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See the two in the center? Speaker 1: Who was that? Speaker 2: This picture. Speaker 1: No, over here. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It's the mother and father. Speaker 2: Sister and me. Speaker 1: Oh, that's your mother, father, sister, and you? Okay. How old are you in that picture? Speaker 2: Let's see, thirty-five years ago. I would say thirty-three, thirty-four. thirty-four. Now, it''s a family that--my sister had a lot of difficulties. I'm the second child. She's the first. And she had a lot of difficulty in Dallas, Texas in her work and school 'cause everybody thought she was white. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. She would use me to balance off. She'd say--Claire asked me to come by her job so she could prove to people-- Speaker 1: --people that she was black? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause she worked with mostly blacks. She had a real struggle. Her friends were Black, Black, Black. I mean I hate to talk about color, but color is a big thing. Speaker 1: Color is a big thing. Oh, that's tough. Speaker 2: Like, when you go Atlanta [Georgia], if you're black black, you're not going to get too much in Atlanta. You've got to be light-brown skin and all that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: Now, explain to me who else was in this picture, though. You said this is a family picture. Are these sisters and brothers? Speaker 2: Sisters and brothers. Speaker 1: How many kids? Speaker 2: Twelve of us. Speaker 1: Twelve. Speaker 2: Twelve kids. My mom got married at sixteen. My dad was thirty-five. She shared with me something I didn't even know. [Banks' wife] Liz [Banks] got it out of her, that she was--I talk about going to church, 'cause she used to take all of us to church and stuff, and then she stopped going. I said, "you don't go to church anymore. "And then she, "no." And then, she told Liz that a minister molested her when she was twekve. Speaker 1: Oh. So she didn't--that was it. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That was it, yeah. Speaker 1: That was it for church. Okay, let's try to give names. Speaker 2: Can I name? Oh, you would ask me this. Speaker 1: Well, yes. Of course. Speaker 2: You would ask me all of this here? Speaker 1: Start from the upper left. Speaker 2: She would ask me. She would ask me, then. I knew, I said, "name all these people." Top left is Estella. Her son signed with the Texas Rangers [baseball team] and got into drugs, cocaine, and he's in jail in Denver [Colorado]. And that other one is Eddie, Jr. Eddie, a year ago--he hauled laundry all over Dallas--a year ago, he ran, and he hit a guy in a truck. Killed a guy and his kid, and then he died. He died at home. Died in a hotel, motel. He was kind of-- Speaker 1: Oh, it was in a hotel. That's what I heard. Speaker 2: Yeah, he went down to the motel. He was a brilliant guy. He got out the Air Force and just had all plans for life, buy a home, get married, and all that. And he did all that and found out his wife was gay, and he just--it just went the other way. He started drinking, and one little thing can turn a lot around. And then, Samuel is the next guy. Samuel was with some of his friends near home, and they were playing Russian roulette [game of chance with a loaded revolver]. And a guy shot him in the head at--I think he was sixteen, seventeen. But anyway, I was going to take him to California 'cause he's: "man, I've got to get out of here." I said, "come on. Go to California with me." And, you know, he'd holler: "I'll come to Dallas, and we'll drive out." You know, he just stayed around there. Some people get stuck in time and places and just couldn't move. And the other one is Frances. Frances. Frances was a very smart girl. She's the only one who came here to see me when I played [baseball for the Chicago Cubs]. Many of them didn't like coming to Chicago [Illinois], too cold, too big, and all that. And she met up with another lady and lived with her, and she died. I was really surprised when she told me that. The other girl told me, "we live together. We take care of each other." It was just a different experience for me, but it's all part of life. Speaker 1: Well, there are twelve of you. I guess you're going to have a lot of experiences. You'll probably touch on everything in life. Okay. Speaker 2: And the other way, that's Walter. Walter is a brilliant guy. He's a janitor down at the school, and he just didn't do anything. But, like, he's fifty. And that's my wife coming. Where's the Kleenex? Can I get a Kleenex? Speaker 1: You can keep going if you want or wait for Julie [interviewer]. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yeah, okay. And then, on the lower right there, that's Evelyn. And then, that's her grandbaby. Yeah, that's her grandbaby. In front of her is Benjamin. Next to Benjamin is me. Next to me is Edna, my oldest sister. Next to her is my mother, Essie. Next to her is my father, Eddie. Next to him is, oh, that's her children. My sister's children, those two kids there? I don't remember their names. Down below there is Glover Banks, the one with the bowtie. And the other one with the bowtie is Ricky. Ricky, the one with the bowtie over on the right. And--go ahead. Speaker 1: Who were Glover Banks and Ricky? Speaker 2: Who are they? Speaker 1: Are they brothers? Speaker 2: Yeah, my brothers. My brothers. There's another one, Don, that's not in there. I don't think he was born then. Don is forty now, so this is more than forty years old. Speaker 1: Did you cover him on the-- Speaker 2: That's Benjamin. Benjamin. He played for the Cubs and--got out of the Army, signed up with the Cubs. He didn't like the baseball. He came to spring training, and then he went to Lafayette, Louisiana. And then, he met this girl who took him to California. And he came back, and he dropped dead at home. And he was just a very talented--he was more talented at baseball than me, but he just didn't like it. Speaker 1: He was more talented than you? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. You'll find a lot of that. Speaker 1: [Ernie Banks' Family, date unknown] [Location unknown] [Photo courtesy of Ernie Banks] Story_ID: 2868 Speaker 1: I was doing a show, a radio show, and I took him [father Eddie Banks] with me. And while we were preparing of the show and, you know, the script and how to read it, I wanted the producer to record his voice. He's never done that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He'd never done that. Now, my dad came here [Chicago, Illinois]. He had never been on plane, in his seventies, never been on a plane. Didn't like being around whites. White folks scared him to death, and he never been anywhere. He just worked all the time. The people just don't go anywhere. They live in a world that's totally different. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right. That's right. Speaker 1: Like, my brothers have never been on a plane, and this is the year 2000. They've never been on a plane. Speaker 2: Oh, you mean some of them haven't-- Speaker 1: Some of them have never been on an airplane. Speaker 2: I understand. Speaker 1: They took me to the airport and said, "what is it like? What is it like being on a plane?" I was just, "you guys have--?" "No, we never been on a plane. Was is it like, flying?" Did you believe people like that? People in this world, they've never seen a lot of the stuff that we see every day. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And they have no interest in it. Speaker 2: That's right. What year do you think this photo is? Speaker 1: Sixty-four. When was [President John F.] Kennedy assassinated? That's when he was here. No. Let's go back further than that. Let's go back further. This is in the Fifties, '58 [1958] or Speaker 2: '59 [1959]. Speaker 1: [Ernie Banks with his Father on a Radio Program, date unknown] [Location unknown] [Photo courtesy of Ernie Banks] Story_ID: 2869 Speaker 1: That's [baseball player] Willie Mays and I in San Francisco [California], and that's when I came with my book, 'Mr. Cub.' He came over. We're good friends and nurtured each other through all kinds of different things. Speaker 2: [Ernie with Willie Mays in San Francisco, date unknown] [San Francisco, California] [Photo courtesy of Ernie Banks] Story_ID: 2870 Speaker 1: --one of my idols back--. That's [baseball player] Jackie Robinson. And this is in Brooklyn, New York, sliding at third base. Speaker 2: [Ernie Banks and Jackie Robinson, year unknown] [Brooklyn, New York] [Photo courtesy of Ernie Banks] Story_ID: 2871 Speaker 1: That's [actor, director, writer] Ossie Davis, [actress] Ruby Dee, and the producer on the left here and other producer on the right. And this is a movie we did called 'Finding Buck McHenry' in Toronto, Canada. Speaker 2: [Ernie Banks with Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee and Two Producers in a Movie called 'Finding Buck McHenry' in Toronto, Canada] [Toronto, Ontario, Canada] [Photo courtesy of Ernie Banks] Story_ID: 2872 Speaker 1: My dad [Eddie Banks] at Wrigley Field [Chicago, Illinois], sitting in the dugout, just me and him. Got out there real early. He didn't smile very much. Speaker 2: He's smiling in that picture. Speaker 1: No, I'm just saying he didn't smile very much. Like, I was going to add to that. I mean that many cultures around the world don't understand how we are because we smile all the time. They don't smile. They don't tell people they love each other, you go to certain parts of Europe. And he was that type of person.I mean he just was a thinking man that, you know, just did what he had to do. Did his job, go to work, come back. Speaker 2: [Ernie Banks with Father at Wrigley Field, date unknown] [Chicago, Illinois] [Photo courtesy of Ernie Banks] Story_ID: 2873 Speaker 1: He had a golf tournament. So he invited me and Liz came out to volunteer. They helped raise money for his-- Speaker 2: His foundation? Speaker 1: The American Cancer Society at that time. And up right there is [basketball player] Karl Malone, and this is at the old stadium [Chicago Stadium, Chicago, Illinois] here. And they were getting ready to play the [Chicago] Bulls [basketball team]. Speaker 2: [Ernie invited to Golf Tournament for a fundraiser for the American Cancer Society with pics of Michael Jordan and Magic Johnson. dates unknown] [Chicago, Illinois and unknown location] [Photos courtesy of Ernie Banks] Story_ID: 2874 Speaker 1: And I start out with five questions that I ask everyone. They have really no relevance except I ask everyone, and then we'll start. Speaker 2: You'll be short with them, or? Speaker 1: Very short. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Like one word. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: The fall. Speaker 1: Your favorite food? Speaker 2: Okra. Speaker 1: Okay. Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Pink. Speaker 1: Your--. Speaker 2: Can I add to that? Speaker 1: Yes. Okay. (Laughs). I've never heard a man say pink. Okay. Speaker 2: (off-camera voice) Remember, we talked earlier-- Speaker 1: That's what I told her. I'm trying to give her out--I'm not--I'll be very brief with it. Pink is because most of my life in professional sports in America--you're not listening. Speaker 2: I'm listening. I'm sorry. I just was making sure the camera was-- Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because-- Speaker 1: Are you going to move like that? Speaker 2: You going to shoot this, or are we-- Speaker 1: Yeah, we're shooting. Speaker 2: I'm just trying to explain--okay. And I say "pink" because most of my life in professional sports in America, I felt that I was living life "in the pink," that everything was pink to me because you travel first class, you're in hotels in first class, and people nurture you, and people fuss over you, and everybody come into your life. It's like another world when you're a professional athlete in America when I played. It's like living life in the pink. There's a song written by [singer] Edith Piaf about that. I used to play it in the choir all the time. Let me see can I think of it. Yeah, 'La Vie en Rose.' That's right. You got it. (Sings the tune). And she did. She lived life in the pink. She died a very lonely person on the streets of Paris [France], but they called her the "Little Sparrow." And that's why I say my life, living in the pink. I like pink. Many men don't wear pink, but I can wear pink when I play golf, and nobody responds to it that much. Speaker 1: And what's your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I like Switzerland. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Is "one chance is all you need." Story_ID: 2875 Speaker 1: I want to start out--'cause you were born in Dallas [Texas], right? Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Outside of Dallas or Dallas? Speaker 1: In Dallas. Speaker 2: And you're the second oldest? Speaker 1: Yes. First boy, second oldest. Speaker 2: I want you to talk about growing up. I'd like you first to talk about your mother and father. Let's start with your father. Just tell me what kind of person he was and what his name--his name was Eddie? Speaker 1: Eddie Banks, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, and go on. Speaker 1: Very quiet, hard-working. His joy was playing dominos and checkers to stimulate his mind. He read the Bible a lot, as much as he could, because he didn't read that well. The Bible is like a diary for him. He wrote in the Bible when all his children were born, what time they were born, where they were born. I was born at home. I'm from a mid--what'd they call it? What do they call that? Speaker 2: Midwife. Speaker 1: Midwife. I was born at home. So, he kept a lot of his information in the Bible. And he worked very hard. He didn't like people that much. He had a few friends. Most of them were his brothers, and I used to visit all of his brothers, and they all got along real well. But a very quiet man that just kind of stayed to himself. He was always real neat. He always shined his shoes. He always kept his clothes neat and clean and always wore a hat and didn't say very much. I used to ask him different questions, and he would be very quick, very thorough. And I like that. He wanted to play baseball, and he paid me to play catch with him because it was prior to [baseball player] Jackie Robinson coming into [Major League] baseball in 1947. And I didn't say anything to him. You know. "Why was I working and playing catch all the time with him and being the batboy for the team he played for?" I didn't ask him that, but I just followed his guidelines. But he wanted me to be a baseball player. Later on, I found that out. But I didn't know why he was making me play catch all the time. I wanted to go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and become and international lawyer when I was thirteen, and the reason is I saw so much unfairness around my own community, I mean people taking advantage of people and all kinds of different unfairness that existed--yet with insurance people, and you buy a car and all those sort of thing. I said, "gosh, I mean I'd like to be a lawyer, so I can protect and help people." And I thought that was my real gift in life. Story_ID: 2876 Speaker 1: Now, I want to go to your father's [Eddie Banks] side of the family. Did you have grandparents that were alive or great-grandparents that you knew? Speaker 2: I didn't know them. I'd love to have met them. My mother [Essie Banks] talk about it now. But she only reminds me my grandfather was a minister, and he wanted me to be a minister. But I never met him. I didn't meet her father. I never met her mother. And that is one kind of dark side in my life. I would love to have met my grandparents. Speaker 1: You're saying neither set of grandparents did you meet? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: That's the same with me. Speaker 2: And I miss that. Speaker 1: Well, no. I met on my mother's side, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I missed that, so. Speaker 1: Where was your father from originally? Speaker 2: From Marshall, Texas. Speaker 1: And how far is that from Dallas [Texas]? Speaker 2: That's about 125 miles. My mother was from Shreveport [Louisiana], which is nearby, about sixty miles away. So, I've been to Marshall many times, but I never connected with anybody that even knew him there. I've been to Shreveport, and I never met anybody that was connected to my mother. But I'd love to have been associated with them, and had a chance to meet them and went to a family reunion or something, but it never happened. Story_ID: 2877 Speaker 1: Okay. Your father [Eddie Banks], how did he meet your mother [Essie Banks]? You said that there was this--it's like a fifteen-year age difference? Speaker 2: Yeah. The way I understand it she was sixteen years-old. He was thirty-five. And they met in Dallas [Texas], and they got married. And that was all I knew about their relationship. And he worked, and she worked, and they were, you know, great parents. They were very honest with themselves and honest with me and my sister. My mother kept a clean house. She cooked all the time and my dad worked, the typical things that I thought in a family. The dad worked. My mother stayed at home and she worked occasionally doing housework, and she still brags about being the best person in the world to clean a house. And she taught my sister how to clean a house. And they were just, you know, a nice couple that, you know, with different ages that got along real well. Story_ID: 2878 Speaker 1: And now, describe your mother [Essie Banks]. I know she's still alive, but describe her. Speaker 2: She--. Speaker 1: And what's her name? Speaker 2: Her name is Essie Banks, very, very smart lady--got a wonderful sense of humor. She meets people well. My dad [Eddie Banks] was just the opposite. He didn't meet people well. He didn't like people that much. She was the opposite of that. She really liked being around people, talking and sharing some of her memories and laughing. And she enjoyed her children, and she enjoyed working, and she really enjoyed life to the fullest, although she was much younger than my dad, as I said earlier. But she was quite different, quite jovial. She liked family things. She'd always have everybody together for Sunday meals and go to church. She was very involved with the church. She took us to church. Almost every Sunday, we had to go and dress up and all that. So she's kind of the master of the family. She reads the Bible a lot, as much as she can read, and she talks about the Bible. And every time I talk to her, she would mention some scripture from the Bible that stands in my mind for the whole day. And then when I left, I used to call her up, "okay, give me the thing that I should live by today." And she always say many different thing, but the one thing I thought about a lot is that--I don't remember the proverb, that "life and death is in the power of the tongue." "Life and death is in the power of the tongue." So when I hear her say that, I didn't talk very much. I mean I just kind of got to quiet--I really didn't like to talk. I liked listening better than talking, and because I used to hear people talk, and most of the thing that came out of their mouth were real negative things that affected their own lives. And I used to think about that, said, "gosh, I mean boy, if people could ever, you know, look at their lives and think about how wonderful they are to even be here." Example, like people look in the mirror and say, "gosh, I'm fat. I'm too skinny. I'm too this. I'm too that." When I got over into sports, I used to hear that a lot. You know, negative things about their own life. Nothing positive about their own life. So the words that I learned from just what she would tell me--they're from the Bible--that I would live by those things and follow those things on a daily basis. But I like listening. That's what I really like. Story_ID: 2879 Speaker 1: Now, what is one of your earliest childhood memories? Speaker 2: (Pause). Don't really have any early childhood memories, some people I've been around that have been fascinating to me. I grew up with a young man named Rex Ellis that couldn't hear. He was deaf. He didn't have an earphone at that time--I mean an earpiece. But to be around him and see how he communicated with me, you know, by lip reading and whatever way he did it, I mean that was pretty unusual to me. And we were real good friends. We did a lot of things together. He played sports in school and all of that. But just growing up with a young man that was a close friend that couldn't hear, I mean he was handicapped but I didn't, and he didn't, we didn't press it on each other. Speaker 1: And any other memories you have of growing up around your family or friends or school? Speaker 2: Just my mother [Essie Banks]. One holiday, she had me wring a chicken's neck and that's what we had for dinner. And that was pretty unusual for me. And then, somebody stole the chicken after I wrung his neck. And then, I put him down and going down to get some hot water so I could put him in the hot water and pick his feathers. When I came back, the chicken was stolen. And my mother traced the blood all the way down to the neighbor's place, and we found the chicken, and the neighbor gave it back to us. But that was a pretty unusual experience for me at that time. Speaker 1: Was Dallas [Texas] rural then? Was it more like a big small town back then? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was a big city, but we just lived near the market. I don't know why. We lived on Katy Street. That's where the market, the produce--and came in from all parts of Texas. And that was pretty interesting to me because we'd go over there and buy different things, corn, watermelon, cucumbers, okra, and I enjoyed that, you know, just seeing people come from all parts of Texas on certain days to the market to buy things. And it was pretty interesting to see that, you know. Story_ID: 2880 Speaker 1: How many years are between you and your sister and you and your-- Speaker 2: Two. Two years all the way down. Speaker 1: All the way down. Okay. So the family was very bustling, you always having a newcomer? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So how was that? Speaker 2: That was very exciting. My sister did most of the things with the newborn, and I would, you know, help change diapers and all that kind of stuff. So, we kind of shared the responsibility with my mother [Essie Banks], and when she was pregnant, carrying the children around. We would always, you know, make sure she, you know, took the right steps and got her exercise and, you know, tried to eat right. It was an experience, a good experience. Story_ID: 2881 Speaker 1: Any special responsibilities? Was it you, you know, because you were the oldest son? You weren't a "junior," though. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Now, why is that? Speaker 2: I don't know. I have a brother that was--he was a "junior," the one next to me. His name was Eddie Banks, Junior. I don't know. My dad's name is Ernest Banks, and I liked the name because it's tied into money on both ends. When you buy a house, you've got to put down earnest money. I guess that's why. And then, my last name, Banks. And then, as I traveled through my baseball career, that's what I wanted to do, have my own bank, the Ernie Banks Banks on the Left Banks. They wrote it in the papers. And I worked at a bank, but that's what I really wanted to be, a banker. Story_ID: 2882 Speaker 1: I was just asking if you had any special role as the oldest boy. Speaker 2: Special role? Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Right. Speaker 2: No, just work. I understood work, and I picked cotton with my dad [Eddie Banks]. He took me, you know, in the fall to pick cotton, and I enjoyed that. He took me on his job to work, and I did that. Whatever--my life as growing up was kind of like, you know, whatever came up, I could adjust to it. I still do that now again in my life, whatever it is. Like Liz [Banks], my wife, will come up and say, "we're going to Japan." And I just adjust to things. And once I get into them, I find in my mind that "what can I learn from this kind of experience?" It's not that old saying, you know, "I've been there, done that." It's just the experience is always there. So, I mean, what can I learn from this experience, and is there anybody that I can help with this experience? I know they can help me, but how can I help them? So I just kind of get into things. Story_ID: 2883 Speaker 1: And I went to prom, and my mom [Essie Banks] made me go to the prom, and the girl didn't want to go. I didn't know any girls, so she got a girl for me. And I went to the prom. Bought me a jacket for fifty cents at Salvation Army, and I didn't want to go. She said, "well, you've got to go." So I went, and the girl left and went with somebody else. So it was all right. She said, "where did"--I forget her name--"what happened to Susie? Did you all have a good time?" I said, "yeah, we had a great time. she went home with James Harrison." "What? She wouldn't?" I said, "Yeah." So, she says, "that's not nice." Well, it happens. That's the way it is. That's the way life is. Speaker 2: Okay. Can I go back a little earlier than the prom? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (Laughs). You know, women are usually jilted on their prom night, not men. Speaker 1: Women are what now? Speaker 2: Women are usually jilted on their prom night, not men. Speaker 1: Well, can I tell you why? I mean-- Speaker 2: Don't tell us your universe story 'cause I'm in the room and I don't want to laugh. Speaker 1: I mean I could tell you why. I mean I was a skinny kid. I had a big old jacket on, and, you know, I mean--. And the other guy, James Harrison, was the quarterback, and he was very popular and all those kind of things. And, you know, I don't regret anything. It just happened that way. I wasn't, you know, one of these type of kids that always tried to look well and, you know, chase after the girls and all that. I didn't understand any of that. My friends use to take girls different places. A guy named Finey Sorba: "come on, man, we've got to go to this party." "What party?" And he'd take me over there and, you know, I just didn't--I was very naïve about many things for a long time. Story_ID: 2884 Speaker 1: I didn't have any concern for what other people, you know--naturally with all of us--"come on. Let's go here. Come on. Try this. Come on. Go." And at [age] seventeen, I went to Amarillo, Texas to play baseball. And I was playing softball on the church team, and the guys came up and say, "hey, you think you want to play baseball?" I said, "I don't know. Go down to ask my mom and dad." And they did. So, they took me to Amarillo, Texas. I never experienced anything going away. And I went out there and just adjusted to that, stayed in hotels where the rain was leaking and all that. And I came back. Mom [Essie Banks]--, "how was it?" "It was fine." I didn't complain about things. I don't feel that--most things are not perfect, and there's always challenges in our life until I got to the majors [Major League Baseballl]. Then, I began to see life in the pink. Speaker 2: Okay, I'm going to stop you. I want to go back. What was the young Ernie Banks like? I mean what did you dream of being? Did you have any dreams when you were young? And I'm talking about maybe even before teenage years. Was there anything that you sort of daydreamed about or thought about, or wished you were, or? Speaker 1: I was more an introvert, I didn't--. Sit in the back of the class and just listen to people. I just liked listening to people. And I didn't play sports. Bill Blair got me on the football team, got me on the softball team, got me up to the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] to play all sports. I had no real interest in many things that most of the young people were doing. I was not a boring person. I just didn't understand any of that. I read a lot. I stayed in the crowd, but I didn't say very much when I was with the guys, and they had the girlfriends. Everybody would do all the talking. I'd just sit there and listen to them. And but sports came later in my life, and it was occurred by somebody else. I had no interest. I didn't understand how you could put on a baseball team or a softball team twenty-five people together, and they do something worthwhile, 'cause most of them I thought was, you know, didn't like each other and had different frictions and all kinds of stuff. But I got into it and began to see that, how it all developed. But I didn't dream a lot; I just thought a lot. I was a thinker. I loved thinking. I don't see much of it now. I don't think we really use our minds as much as we should. We're not challenged enough on our mental capacities in our life. We just kind of fluff it off, but I like thinking. Story_ID: 2885 Speaker 1: Your mother [Essie Banks], she was a housewife. She stayed home. Speaker 2: And she, you know, worked. She cleaned houses for whites, and then she stayed at home. Speaker 1: Just think about that. She has all those kids, and she's still cleaning houses. And your father [Eddie Banks]? Speaker 2: He was a porter, you know. He did odd jobs and, you know, worked for Wyatt's for twenty years, a supermarket chain, loading trucks, washing cars or shining shoes, whatever. He adjusted to things real well in his life, and that was it. And he'd come home, give the money to my mother, take about two or three dollars. Go down and get him a half a pint. He wasn't an alcoholic, now. He'd get him a half a pint, and he enjoyed. Sit down and play some dominos with some brothers and a little checkers, and that was enjoyment. He'd go right back to work the following week. And that's kind of what I saw in my life as a young person is that you just do what you have to do. It's okay. The opportunities will come if you want to go over here or stay where you are. And he was like that. I just learned that from his life. He was ambitious, but he was happy in his own life. I think sometime we--never satisfied. We all want to go to more. "I got this. Now, I want more of this. I want more of that. I want more of this." But I just learned that, you know, be satisfied where you are, what you're doing. That's it. And she was the same way. She wanted more things, a little bit more. She wanted the houses and cars and all the material stuff. But he did not, and she used to get on him about that: "Eddie, why don't you start thinking about buying a house? Why aren't you thinking about buying a car?" He just smiled when he said he just didn't have any interest in that. Story_ID: 2886 Speaker 1: Now, you lived in the part of Dallas [Texas]--was there a black part of town? Were you in the black part of town? Was Dallas pretty segregated back then? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you go to an all-black school? Speaker 2: All-black school, and I lived near the school. And it was Safeway [grocery store] right there on the corner there, and my mom [Essie Banks] used to go down there and get pig feet, pig tails, ox tails, all that stuff out of the trash can, come back and cook it. We'll eat it and carry on. And during the war [World War II], I mean that's what's--many things, she would just find things to do and to make it and was happy with that. I learned from that, well, not happy, but being contented with where you are, I mean that you're surviving and you feed your kids, and, you know, we can pay our rent and, you know, food, clothing, shelter, the basic things of life. But I always would go down to that store and, you know, help work around the store. I had a job working at a hotel, mopping the floors and all that. I didn't like it. I quit, and I told the--I just walked off the job and came home. Mom said, "what, did you quit the job?" "Yeah." "Well, you want to get paid?" I said, "No, I don't want to get paid. They can keep their money." I just didn't like the way, you know, the attitude of the people and how they were, you know, expressing things to me and other people that was working in the hotel. Speaker 1: And how old were you then? Speaker 2: I was about sixteen. Speaker 1: Okay. What ways were they expressing? Speaker 2: Well, "get over here. Do this. Get over here. Do that. Don't do this, here. Why are you doing this, here?" And it always kind of got close to me when people, you know, kind of order others around without any reason, I mean like they're mad about you being there. So, I just left. I didn't want to be paid. I said, "I don't even want to go back to get my paycheck. Let them have it." I wasn't angry about it. I didn't tell her why. I just said, "I just don't care for that type of job. I want to find something else." Then, I got a job as a bellman at the hotel over there in Dallas. Story_ID: 2887 Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school and junior high and high school? Where did you go? Speaker 2: I went to JW Ray [Elementary School], and Booker T. Washington High School. And I don't remember much about the elementary school, just that I walked to school, came back and, you know, didn't have a lot of friends there. But, you know, I talked to the kid--listen to the kids, walked around and listened to them talk. So, most of them thought I was deaf and dumb 'cause I didn't say very much. I did my assignments. The teacher wouldn't ask me many questions. You know, all the smart kids would raise their hand first. And, you know, I just went along, did my assignment, turn it in, come to school on time. I always liked being on time for school, the last one to leave. I just liked to stand around looking. And I'd walk home and Mom [Essie Banks], "where you been?" I said, "I've been just standing around school." "Okay." I didn't, you know, like a lot of kids that play the basketball and all that. I just came home. Speaker 1: You had elementary and then junior high and high school, or was it elementary to high school? Speaker 2: Elementary, high school. Speaker 1: I heard someone else say that recently. So, you started high school in seventh grade? Is that what-- Speaker 2: Elementary school? Speaker 1: No, high school. Eighth, or what year did you start? Speaker 2: What is it? Ninth? Eighth? Ninth. Nine, yeah. Speaker 1: So, you were in elementary the whole time up until ninth grade. Speaker 2: That's what I recall, yeah. Story_ID: 2888 Speaker 1: So, were you playing ball on the streets and everything before? When did you start playing-?--I mean I read that in high school, you were, like, all-around athlete, really. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: I lived in high school. I went up to watch the football team practice, and Bill Blair got me to play. "Hey, you should be playing on this team." He called the coach over, and I went and got a uniform. I was just kind of nurtured in going in and running track. We had no basketball team. We had no baseball team at the high school I went to. And my mom only saw me play one football game, and I got hurt on that game. I broke my collarbone. And it was the last game. But I was encouraged to play sports, just like it is now in my own life. I mean somebody come along and say, "you've got to do this." "Okay. I'll do it," and that's what I did. I went out and started playing football and played basketball at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and then ran track, and that was about it--played softball, and that was about it. But I was not an All-American and all that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: Well, I didn't mean All-American, but you had facility in all of them, right? You were pretty good at all of them. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You weren't? Speaker 2: I was not. Speaker 1: Somewhere, I read-- Speaker 2: I was not. I played end on the football team. And the other kid that played end is named Joe Kirben, and I see him a lot. We talk a lot. He's done well in Dallas [Texas]. And he was, like, faster and, you know, better. And they threw all the passes to him. Once in a while, they'd throw the pass to me, but I was not an outstanding football player, you know, in terms of scholarships and all that kind of stuff. In basketball, just average. And ran track, I did the broad jump at track and the high jump and was just average type of athlete. And there were other players on the team that were much better, you know, and went on to scholarship to college and all that. Story_ID: 2889 Speaker 1: And so you finished high school what year? Speaker 2: 1950. Speaker 1: 1950, okay. And at that point, which of the sports were you enjoying the most? You talked about this whole thing of you were playing softball. Speaker 2: Softball. Speaker 1: And, you know-- Speaker 2: I enjoyed softball. Speaker 1: Now, why did you enjoy softball more than baseball? Speaker 2: Well, you could hit the ball. You didn't strike out a lot. You hit the ball. Everybody hit the ball. It was fast, you know, a fast game. And, you know, everybody had fun. It seemed like it was more fun with everybody playing it. It was not so much focused on winning and somebody being a star over the other. And I liked that small camaraderie. It was a church team owned by a guy named J.W. Whirl. And he was always there, and he'd kind of nurture us along and talk to us over and over again. But I really enjoyed playing softball. It was a twelve-inch [ball]. There's a sixteen, is the bigger, and a twelve-inch they played in Texas at the time that I came along. Story_ID: 2890 Speaker 1: And why do you think your father [Eddie Banks] encouraged you to do baseball? I mean did he know the fine distinctions between softball and baseball? Speaker 2: He did. I don't know. I've thought about it a little bit. Why did he--chose me to be the batboy for the team he played for, playing catch with him in the evenings and weekends? I don't know. Maybe--I feel that some parents can see before a child is born that he or she is special. That's the only thing I know. Before I was born, I think my father felt--this sounds corny to you, I told you I'm from another world--that I was a special child. And he nurtured me a little bit, the best he could. Many people do that today, Tiger Woods's [golfer] dad, Venus Williams [tennis player], Michael Jordan [basketball player], a lot of athletes, men and women--Nancy Lopez [golfer]--their parents, their fathers nurtured them to be whatever they're doing. That's what they want them to be. When I was drafted to go in the Army, my dad felt that I shouldn't go into the Army. He took me to a psychic, or--I still don't remember this--a voodoo. I didn't even ask him what. He drove me to Palestine, Texas. That's a good name for a city. But this lady, and she sit and talked to him, said, "your son is a very special child." He said, "well, he's going in the Army." And she said, "he's not going in the Army. He's going to play baseball like you want him to play baseball, and he's going to be successful." It was night, and she had candles in the window and all that. So, we drove back. Story_ID: 2891 Speaker 1: I did go in the Army. I hurt my knee as soon as I went in the Army, and I spent most of the Army life in the hospital in Texas. I got out of the hospital. I went back to our unit, and then we went to Germany. My knee got--had a problem again. I went in the hospital there. And then, when I got out, they were going around asking "who played baseball in the unit?" And one of my friends, Ronald Gilmore, said, "Ernie played baseball." He's my friend; I had been telling him that I played with the Kansas City Monarchs [baseball team] and all that. So he put my name on the list, and I was picked to play baseball. And that's where my life began. Something I really didn't want to do. And I came back, and I signed with the Monarchs, again. Then, the [Chicago] Cubs [baseball team] scouted me, and I came to the Cubs in '53 [1953]. Story_ID: 2892 Speaker 1: I played for Kansas City [Missouri] Monarchs [baseball team] before I went in the Army. I missed that. Speaker 2: Oh, you didn't say that part. Speaker 1: I didn't say that. I missed that, yeah. When I graduated from high school, I went with the Kansas City Monarchs. Buck O'Neil [baseball player and manager] came and signed me up to play with the Kansas City Monarchs. And I played for one year. I came there with Elston Howard [baseball player], and we were roommates and all that. And then, when I went back, then I was drafted into the Army. Speaker 2: So, how was that experience, you know, with playing for the--that was the Negro Leagues. What was that experience like? Speaker 1: It was a wonderful experience, you know, riding on the bus and stopping and eating peanut butter and sardines and, you know, just guys playing their harps and the guitars. It was just a wonderful kind of experience. And Buck O'Neil was the manager. And we'd get into small towns, get out, change clothes, go play the game, get back on the bus, ride to another town. It was very, very, very wonderful for me. I really liked that, so much so, when I signed with the [Chicago] Cubs [baseball team], I didn't want to come to the Cubs. And my friend, Sherwood Brewer, said, "Man, you're going to the Major Leagues." I said, "what is the Major League?" "It's where you want to be. I mean it's got all these great players, and, you know, you're going to Wrigley Field [Chicago, Illinois]. You're going to be playing with Ralph Kiner." He named all these people. I said, "I don't know them." "Well, you will when you get there. They're nice people." So, they gave me ten dollars and a ticket, and I came to Chicago. But I really enjoyed being with the Monarchs. I'm a type of person that I really enjoy my own comfort area. And I like being with the guys. I like their attitude. We cared about each other. And I was being taken out of that and going to a new dimension, and it was a big adjustment, although I came with another black player named Gene Baker. He and I came together. I didn't know him. He didn't know me. But we connected when we joined the Cubs, and we became real good friends. Speaker 2: Did he come out of the Negro Baseball League, too? Speaker 1: He played the Negro Baseball League, too. Speaker 2: Now, how many teams were there in the league? Speaker 1: It was four when I came. It was six, and then it dwindled down to four when I got in the league, and then eventually went out in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: And how long were your seasons? Speaker 1: Season was about 124 games. It ended-- Speaker 2: Wow, that seems a lot. Is that a lot? Speaker 1: It ended in September, began in April, ended in September. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But we moved around, you know, traveled quite a bit to other cities and small cities and some of the major cities, as well. Story_ID: 2893 Speaker 1: Who was your idol at that point? Did you have any idols? Speaker 2: When I went to Kansas City [Missouri] Monarchs [baseball team]? I had no idols. I respected Buck O'Neil [baseball player, manager]. He was the manager of the team. But I never really--kind of centered on people that were--I put at a higher level, a higher plane. I just looked at people as human beings trying to better their lives, and most of the guys trying to better their lives to get to the Major Leagues. That's the main thrust of all the players who play baseball, to get to the Major Leagues. And they chose me to go to the Major Leagues. So when I came, it was this, you know, really a surprise. I called my dad [Eddie Banks] and said, "gosh, Dad, I'm going to the Major Leagues." "You are?"-- We're rich"--you know, most people say that. "We're going to be rich." And he laughed, "Yeah." He didn't say it, "Yeah, right," but he was--he didn't get excited about it at all. Speaker 1: He didn't. Speaker 2: No, he did not. He just didn't get excited. And I'm like that, too. I don't get really excited about things, you know, because I know they go up and down. And, you know, I just try to stay basically the same, you know, the same plane. I mean it's wonderful. "I'm going to enjoy. I'm going to learn something from this experience. I've got to work to get along with people." And many of the media people kind of walked me through. There's a guy named Wendell Smith, used to write for the 'Chicago American [newspaper].' He was a black writer, and he kind of nurtured me through, I mean: "Do this. Do that. Be over here." And Gene Baker [baseball player]: "Do this. Do that and over here. Don't do this. Don't do that." I enjoyed learning, you know, how to deal with it. It's like walking through the unknown, or like living in the dark for me because I didn't play too much minor league ball. Most of them did, so it was all kind of a new step every time I moved someplace. And I just, you know, tried to learn as much as I could. Story_ID: 2894 Speaker 1: About the whole experience because you came right from the Negro Baseball League to the Major League, what--did you have a lot of coaching that was sort of necessary, you know, because--I mean were people mentoring you a lot? Speaker 2: Only Buck O'Neil. He helped me a lot when I was with the Kansas City [Missouri] Monarchs [baseball team]. But when I came to the Major League, you know, I kind of felt nobody really liked me. I kind of looked at that in my life. Nobody really liked me. I mean they might say it, but they don't even know who I am, so they kind of left me to kind of feel my way on, on around the park and so forth. Then the manager, the day I played, he came up to me in the last minute, said, "you're playing today." I wasn't surprised. I just, you know, just "okay." I didn't say anything, just went on out there and played. That was the end of it. "How do you feel about playing," some people: "how do you feel about this? How do you feel about this?" I never knew how to answer that. And some--"how do you feel about doing this? How do you feel about doing that?" I don't know. And sometime, they say, "why? Why did you do this? Why did--?" Some things I don't understand. I didn't understand it. Why were people asking me these kind of things, "how you feel?" You know, I'm just playing a game. That was it. It's nice to be, you know, doing something everybody think is special, but to me, you're just playing the game. That's what I thought I was supposed to do. So, I learned as I went along. I wasn't kind of trained on a day-to-day basis. Gene Baker [baseball player] helped me a lot, "play this way. Do this. Hit this way. Throw this way." I mean they kind of gave it to me, you know. And then, some things he did not give to me. Like one time, when we were playing in Mobile, Alabama, and we couldn't dress with the team so he and I were sitting on the bus, and--just he was talking. I was listening to him. I said, "gee, there's a Greyhound bus station right down there. I'm going to run down and get some candy. You want any?" He kind of paused a little bit. He said, "yeah." So, I got off the bus, went down, walked into the bus station, and everybody stopped. The bus was changing, all whites in there. Everybody stopped. And I look around; I was just, "gosh, what is it?" Finally, a guy came up, white guy came up to me and said: "you're not supposed to be in here. You've got to go around the back." I had no idea about this, so I went out. I went around the back and bought some candy, one said "colored" and "white." Came back and got on the bus, and he was just laughing like--I mean he was just really cracking up. I said, "why didn't you tell me about this, Gene?" And he was that type--the experiences are the best way when I came along. Somebody tell you "don't do something," you think about it. But you have to really experienced it. So my life has always been experiences. I didn't understand any of that. I didn't understand how people could be that way, and I was raised in a black neighborhood, went to school in a black neighborhood. I never could understand why people were the way they were. Why people carry hate in their life and don't know how to release it. These are the things that as I travel through what we're talking about, I never, never understood, still don't, that hate within us, that we can't learn to release it. We don't know how to release. It could be against anything. It could be against a house or anything, and cannot release it. But I didn't understand it, but Gene didn't tell me. I just experienced it. Most of the things in my life I experienced just by doing them. Story_ID: 2895 Speaker 1: I think it was, like, September 23rd that first year that you, you know, you hit a record, or you--what was it? Speaker 2: September-- Speaker 1: I thought I read somewhere September 23rd of your first year, 1953. Speaker 2: Three, that I hit a record? Speaker 1: You hit your first home run. Speaker 2: Yeah, in St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 1: In St. Louis. Speaker 2: St. Louis has always been a kind of place where they point to arrow to something special happened in my life. And I hit my first home run there. I hit my fifth grand slam home run. I mean I've had some pretty special days in St. Louis. I can't explain why. Maybe it's because the song they wrote many years ago. (sings) "A St. Louis woman, she wears her diamond rings." I don't know why, but St. Louis has always been (laughs) a very special place and pivotal place in my baseball life. I met some very nice people there. Monte Irvin [baseball player] used to play for the [Chicago] Cubs [baseball team]. I mean he was a few years older. He used to take me around different places over here and over there, and he would say: "well, it's time to go home now. We've got to go back to the hotel." I said, "okay," and we'd go back to the hotel. But for a long while in St. Louis, we could not stay at the white hotel. Jackie Robinson [baseball player] changed that and, you know, I kind of liked that, you know, staying at the black hotel. You know, you had a little more freedom and a little more comfort. And I played well in St. Louis. I really do. I still have good friends there now. Story_ID: 2896 Speaker 1: In this, you know, early part of your career with the Major Leagues, were there--you know, when I listened to you, everything was, like, it comes so easy, really, you know, everything sort of came so easy. But I'm wondering, one, when did you realize that you had talent? Was it when you were--or did you-- Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: I mean when did you realize you were really talented? Speaker 2: I never realized I had any talent for anything, for baseball. I feel I never had any talent. People tell me that. They would say that. What's happened? Speaker 1: No, I'm just asking [Banks' wife] Liz [Banks] to help me out. But go on. Go on. Speaker 2: People would say that to me, "you have great wrists. You have good hands. You--" what Liz is-- Speaker 1: Liz is supposed to be helping me out here. Speaker 2: All she's saying--what she's saying is that how you were able to focus and be in that ballpark and only concentrate on the ball. The connection that you had, even though you weren't a winning team, something in your spirit, 'cause you loved what you did, you did so well, you did it so naturally that you shun people telling you it was great because it was like your breathing. It was what you loved. So I guess that's what she wants to hear from you. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's all of that. I mean I actually play the game as if nobody's there but me. I had no conscious effort that people were watching, that these games were televised. You know, the [Chicago] Cubs [baseball team] televised all its home games when I came. I had none of that. It didn't even faze me. I didn't even know it was there. Many times I was walking around the ballpark, I didn't even say "hello" to my own children. I walked right past them. I kinda get into things a little bit more deeper. I think when I was younger, my mind was like, you know, way there. It was there-there. If I was playing a game, I was there playing the game. If I was eating, I was eating. If I was singing, I was singing in the shower. Whatever I was doing, I was in that. My mind was not on something else. I miss that. I loved that. I mean I was always centered into what I was doing. People would say, "well, I was hollering at you at Wrigley Field [Chicago, Illinois]. Didn't you see me?" And I didn't want to embarrass them. I'd be looking at them, but I didn't see 'em because my mind was in what I was doing. And mostly--when I hit a home run, in my mind, I was saying, "I'm this little ball. I'm going to get inside this ball that's coming at me, and I'm going to take a ride in it." So when I hit the home run, I felt like I was inside of that ball going out of the park. And the reason is at times, I always want to be away from where I was. You know what I mean, because everybody's around, talking and all kinds of stuff. For me to get away from that, "I'm going to hit this ball. And if it goes out of the park, it's going to be like me floating out of the ballpark." I was kind of that way for most of my career. And I don't know why people ask me that. I didn't understand it, "do you love what you're doing?" I wouldn't be here if I didn't love what I was doing. I wouldn't have this interest. I'd tell them, "I don't want to be here." It was a place--let me put it another way. Playing the game of baseball to me was like playing the game by myself. Not a selfish player, I didn't think about the crowd. I thought about what I was doing, what I needed to do. When the game was over, people will ask me different things. "We won," you know. "What did you do? What do you hit? Why do you hit it? What do you think about this? What do you think about that?" And I always tried to focus the attention on other folks. I didn't have any answers for that, you know. "Well, what kind of pitches you hit out of the park? What do you think about winning the game?" I mean those were questions I didn't understand. I really didn't understand any of that. But I just played the game. Story_ID: 2897 Speaker 1: Willie Mays [baseball player], Hank [Aaron, baseball player], we talked this a lot. "Just play the game," that's all. That's all I did, to play the game, love the game, be a student of the game, talk about the game. I talked about the game a lot, me and Gene [Baker, baseball player] did, you know, the strategies of it and what it meant and how to play, what other players feel about the game. And one time, I was playing--we played a game, and after the game, Gene, going home, Gene used to tell--we went to the park together. "So, Ernie, I want to tell you something." I said, "what's that?" He said, "you know, the players on the team are getting angry with you and me because we're--you're running to your position, you know, running out to position, running back in, and they don't like it." And I didn't understand that. My own teammates didn't like the fact that I was hustling and putting out and enjoying it. And they didn't like that. I didn't know how to answer that. I said, "what should I do? Should I be like them?" And then, in my mind, a lot of times I would say--you're talking about talent--in my mind, many games in the middle of the season, when it's over 100 degrees, team is losing, not many people in the ballpark, I would always--I mean I just thought about, you know, so many things. I wanted to slow myself down to keep up with them 'cause a lot of them sometimes didn't want to play, you know. They maybe partied. I don't know what they were doing, partied and had a few drinks the night before, 'cause we were playing all these day games. It's hot. And I just didn't want to show them up, you know, to be way above them. So sometime, I felt I had to hold myself back just to keep from making them feel bad. And that's what they would be, you know. They would feel bad. I mean: "oh, he's hitting all the homeruns. He done this. All the writers are around him, all the--." In other words, what I'm saying, I never really liked attention coming to me. That's what I'm really saying. I never did--for the attention coming to me. I always wanted the attention to go the other way. It has hurt my life many, many times. I mean all my critics, people associated with my life. "Why don't you talk more about yourself? Why don't you praise the things you've done?" I've never been that way. I've learned that from my father. I don't like attention coming my way. It just creates too much havoc. I don't feel comfortable with it. It makes me-- Story_ID: 2898 Speaker 1: How did you get the title "Mr. Cub?" Speaker 2: It was given to me by a writer named Jimmy Enright. That's an interesting name. Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: It was 1969. And he traveled with the team year-round. And he came up to me one day on the flight. He said, "well," he said, "you really are doing a wonderful job. You are 'Mr. Cub.'" And I didn't understand what he was saying, "you are 'Mr. Cub.'" So he began to write it in his column. Then, he wrote a book about "Mr. Cub." I says, "you really want to do this?" "Yeah, you're 'Mr. Cub.'" I said, "why don't you do this, whoever have the best year and do the greatest thing, they should be 'Mr. Cub?'" He said, "no. You are 'Mr. Cub.'" And I really shunned that. And it stayed with me. He wrote a book about it. Every time I go somewhere, that's what people refer to me as, "Mr. Cub." "There's 'Mr. Cub.' Here's 'Mr. Cub.' 'Mr. Cub' this. 'Mr. Cub' that." It actually created a tension to come to me, and it took me a long time to kind of deal with it because, you know, sometimes I wanted to be--just be myself with my friends, and people have kind of put me on another level. But Jimmy Enright, he was a writer for the 'Chicago American,' gave me that name in 1969, and it stayed with me always. And Mr. [Philip K.] Wrigley, who owned the team [Chicago Cubs], was--sanctioned that, and the general managers and all of them sanctioned that. "This is 'Mr. Cub.'" Story_ID: 2899 Speaker 1: What did you think about [Chicago Cubs owner] Mr. [Philip K.] Wrigley? Speaker 2: Mr. Wrigley was--he was like a--he was just a smart person. I wasn't around him a lot, but the little time I was around Mr. Wrigley, he'd always say things that I like. It was very short. He said, "where there's smoke, there's fire." I mean he used it. "If you don't like my apples, don't shake my tree," things that just meant right away what he was trying to say, you know. And he praised me a lot. In the papers, he praised me, "I wish we had more people that played like Ernie Banks." And, you know, I don't know why. He did that. He just taken to my attitude 'cause my attitude really is loyalty. I take loyalty over anything, and it kind of generated to him, said, "this guy's a loyal guy." And one time--I had never met him--in spring training when I first went there in 1954, I got a letter from him saying that: "my coach is saying that you're not trying. Where there's smoke, there's fire. I want to hear your side. Meet me at the park at 9:00." I didn't even know him. So I got to the park about 8:45. He drives up in his car, gets out, had a hat and a brown suit, and just he and I were sitting in the stand. He said, "I want to hear your side to the story of what my coaches are saying." And I told him, "Mr. Wrigley, I'm doing all I can." He said, "That's all I want to hear." So he got back in the car and left. Five years later, he told--one of the coaches that were there told me--said, "Mr. Wrigley made all of us look up the word 'loyalty.'" He said, "when you all get the definition of loyalty, you come back and you'll find out what Ernie Banks is. He's a very loyal person. So you all leave him along." And some of us need people like that will stand up for you, that have power. He stood up for me. And then, when I became a Ford [Motors automobile company] dealer, first black Ford dealer in the United States, he was the first one to buy a car from me 'cause he liked cars. He bought a station wagon. In fact, he made the deal happen. He called Henry Ford [owner of Ford Motors]. So from then, I learned that friends of our friends are also our friends. I learned from that that the spirit of friendship is the balance to life. You can have all the money in the world. You can have all the cars in the world. But friendship is the whole balance to life. Story_ID: 2900 Speaker 1: How did your feelings for the [Chicago] Cubs [baseball team] change when the owners changed? Speaker 2: It didn't change. I got thrown out, but my feelings didn't change. They threw me out. I got fired watching sports on NBC [National Broadcasting Company]. And one of my friends said: "aren't you angry about this? I mean why did they do it?" Someone said, "why?" I said, "Who knows why?" I said, "But who knows why people do things?" Later on, I let everything settle down. I went in to talk to the general manager, who fired me. I went in with an attorney. And he didn't have any voice. "That's it. We got a new tradition, and we don't want anybody around that's been around for a long time. And all we're going to offer him is just this." So we walked out, and we both said, "that's fine." And nothing else happened. So what I learned from that experience is that kindness always win. Kindness always win, no matter what happened in your life, it will always win over the long haul. And I came back, and they went on, started something else, and they asked me to come back and start all over again. Story_ID: 2901 Speaker 1: During your career, when you hit your 500th home run, it placed you in the [National Baseball] Hall of Fame [Cooperstown, New York]. What is your feeling on that? Speaker 2: Being in the Hall of Fame? Speaker 1: How did it feel? Speaker 2: It was different because everybody kind of came around me and said, "well, you're up for the Hall of Fame." And I knew what that meant, being in the Hall of Fame. So here the, you know, the media coming around and all that. You've got to wait, and then they call you and tell you you've been elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame. So they called. I was sitting around the phone, the TVs, cameras rolling, and [Chicago Cubs announcer] Jack Brickhouse, Lou Boudreau [baseball player] and all were there. And the phone rang from a guy named Jack Lang and out of New York [New York]. He said, "you've been elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame," and how many ballots and all that. So it was different because you don't go into a Hall of Fame 'til you're out of baseball for five years. So I had been out for five years. You know, I kind of said, "now, I can move on to something else," you know, after retiring from baseball. "Now, I can move to something else. I don't have to, you know, to connect myself to the game." I wanted to do many things after I retired, and I had started my own bank and was in the insurance business. I got fascinated with money, who has it, where it come from, how you make it, how you keep it, what you give away. I was fascinated with that when I worked at the bank. So when I went in the Hall of Fame, it brought me back into the baseball arena again. And I went to [Cooperstown] New York, and they have all the big ceremony, the press and all that. I came back to Chicago [Illinois]. They had a press conference, and, you know, I just went back and forth to New York. And then, my life really took a strange turn because in '77 [1977], when I went in the Hall of Fame, [Chicago Cubs owner] Mr. [Philip K.] Wrigley died. The next year, my father [Eddie Banks] died. And I made more appearances in '78 [1978]--the 'New York Times' wrote about this--I made appearances every--I made twenty-six appearances a month all around this city [Chicago], little league banquets, rotary clubs. There's so many organizations. I said, "gosh, I don't believe all the organizations around." You know, they'd ask me to come and speak, sign autographs, do this, do that, do that. Go over here. Go over there. Go here. And Lou Boudreau had told me that, "your life is going to really change; you're going to be real busy." So it was a time when a lot of change was going on socially in this city, and they were using me as a vehicle to express the social change in housing, primarily. Some senator came up with a lot of this. So he would go to a community like Glencoe [Illinois], said, "what do you feel if Ernie Banks moved into your neighborhood?" And a lot of people, "oh, we don't care. He's a great guy, blah-blah-blah-blah." And in some places, you know, they didn't. So he was just doing a research with my name. I didn't even know who he was, but I got letters from the people, said, "you're moving to this city. You're moving to that city," all the suburbs, 'cause they were trying to integrate most of the suburbs around Chicago. So I mean I was just speaking and talking and eating chicken and getting--I got food poisoning. Put myself in the hospital. Seems like nobody was ever around. Nobody was ever around. Told myself, I said: "where are all the people? Where are the people who said they loved me. Ain't nobody around." Story_ID: 2902 Speaker 1: I ran for alderman of the eighth ward [Chicago, Illinois] in 1963. You know, when Mayor [Richard J.] Daley was here-- Speaker 2: You ran for alderman? Okay. Speaker 1: 1963, and Mayor Daley was the mayor. And, you know, they asked him the question, "well, how do you think that baseball player's going finish out in the eighth ward?" And he said, "he's going to finish in left field." I had a platform and all. I didn't have no money. I had a platform and all that. Speaker 2: Well, what made you decide you wanted to run for alderman? Speaker 1: Because then, I began to see, you know, some of the things that when I was a child, you know, and growing up, all the, you know, the unfairness and all that. I understand the unfairness of things. I mean I know who I was. I'm a black man living in America. I knew that. But I know the unfairness and stuff, and I tried to do it, you know, in my own way of doing it when I ran for alderman--I went to, you know, all the meetings and campaigning and all that, and down to City Hall, and, you know, all the things you do. And one guy encouraged me, a business guy. And I really liked him, and I still miss him. His name was S.B. Fuller. I went to him, and I said, "hey, I want to run for alderman of the eighth ward." He said "that would be a great idea." "What do I need to do?" He said, "here's what you need to do. You've got to do this, do that, do that. Always wear a hat," you know, "always go here and there and there and there. It's a great thing." So that's when I stepped out there. So I began to kind of look at things that I wanted to kind of step out in the world and get into the big arena and see what's going on. That was my major thrust. I know that there are people that didn't like me, don't like blacks. I knew there were people that, you know, just didn't like a lot of different things about everybody else. It was always there. I mean there was a lot of hate going on. '68 [1968], that was around, you know, when there was riots and all that stuff, '69 [1969], Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr] and [activist] Roy Innis's CORE [Congress of Racial Equality, civil rights organization]. All the different organizations began to form in the United States. I was beginning to be a part of that. '64 [1964], we had the riots in Watts [Los Angeles, California]. We played in L.A. [Los Angeles]. And, you know, I've seen a lot of that around me, and I understood a lot of that. But my main thing was to rise above it, to live above and beyond all of this maze of unrest. I guess it's kind of spiritual-like, because my brother was in jail one time, and he used to read the Bible all the time. When he got out, he and I were just sitting around talking. He said, "Ernie, you know, one thing I learned about, then--I read the Bible every day--people have never gotten along going way back." You know, he'd describe all the scriptures in the Bible. "People have really always--hate and disrupt and fighting and biting and snarling and growling." You know, and I understood that in my early days, all of that. That's why I didn't talk very much. People will never--I mean it's hard for people to get along. Dr. King came along and said it. For me, he said it, you know, we had to live together or die in the street like fools. Story_ID: 2903 Speaker 1: Did people like Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] or [Rev.] Jesse Jackson, did they try to get you to, you know, join the [Civil Rights] Movement? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: They didn't. Speaker 2: I met them when I was in business. Dr. King was around. In the business Jesse was around, no. But Jesse had said this-- Speaker 1: I mean while you were still playing, though. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No one asked you to come and be a representative? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Jesse has mentioned this to other people, who told me that of all the social change that exists in this city [Chicago, Illinois], that I was the number one person. Mine was mostly by the way I lived, example. That's what I always thought of when I walked out the door. I would say to myself: "people, watch me. I will lead you,"--I feel, like, very spiritual, like my grandfather wanted me to be a minister--"I would lead you to the path of righteousness. It's okay, now. We're going to die. We're all going to die. We need to die." Some of the people, we don't need to live forever. We didn't die, so what. I mean we wouldn't want a lot of people around that did so many bad things in their early days. Speaker 1: Did you ever feel pressure to be--? I mean because you were a black person representing, you know, mainly a white world, did you feel any pressure as a role model or anything like that? Speaker 2: No. I'd just say, "watch me." I wouldn't feel like Mahatma Gandhi or anybody, just "watch me," that, you know, "this is a way to live." Story_ID: 2904 Speaker 1: What do you think--because you've had many adversities: you've had lots of money and lost it; you've had a wonderful career. What is the glue in your life, in your family background, that you can think of that's made you keep this wonderful attitude and made you so enduring, even today, to your fans, young and old? Speaker 2: I feel that everything is a miracle; I mean that my life is in divine order, just meant to be. I can't point it out. I think most people, what they do in their life, it's just meant to be, and you just have to flow with it like the river. Just flow with that. It's not being beat around, kicked around, and all that kind of stuff, but understanding and standing up for what you believe in. But it was just meant to be. It's like a miracle. I feel it's a miracle that all the things that happened in my life. I almost died in 1957, got an infected hand. And I kept going to the trainer and tell him my hand was infected. He said, "well, no. It's not. It's just a blister. Let me--" and he kept doing it every day. I said, "my hand is really bothering me." And finally, I came to the park one day, and my hand was just swollen up, I mean the infection was really moved. I walked in. He looked at it, and he said, "oh, you've got to go to the doctor." So I thought he was going to take me over there. "Go down and get a cab and go to the hospital." And that's what I did. Nobody went with me. I went to the hospital. As soon as I walked in, Dr. Braun, B-R-A-U-N, was coming out of the elevator as I was coming in. And he saw me, saw this infection that was going up to my heart, rushed me into surgery, and later on he told me it was, you know, pretty close because the infection was really moving up in my body, all over my body. He saved my life. And then, the only person who came to see me was a guy named [baseball player] Monte Irvin when I come out of surgery, and his wife, Dee. And I looked up, and he--he called me "Top," T-O-P--"Top, you're going to be all right." And I said, "okay, Monte and Dee." You know, they were the only ones that came to see me. So what I'm saying, most of my life, I felt that nobody liked me, nobody. I always felt that, nobody. And I would say, "why should they? They don't even know me?" I don't know anybody who went out of their way, very few people went out of their way to do anything for me. Do I feel bad about it? No. I just did everything. I did things that I felt "I needed to be, where I need to be. I'm going to get something out of it." Story_ID: 2905 Speaker 1: But in those five years that, you know, after--I mean before the death of Mr. [Philip K.] Wrigley but after you had been let go, were those down years for you and were you sort of trying to find your way? You had spent how many years at that point playing ball? Speaker 2: Close to twenty years. Speaker 1: Close to twenty years. Speaker 2: Actually, it was over twenty years 'cause I was coaching when I got fired. But did it bother me? No. I mean I can't explain it. CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System], [journalist] Bob Lipsyte came to Chicago [Illinois] to do an interview with me. I was in the insurance business right at 401 N Michigan [Chicago], Equitable Life Insurance Company. I got a job there. Another friend got me a job there. [Attorney, ambassador, businesswoman] Jewel Lafontant [MANkarious] got me a job. She was on the board of that crew, got me a job there. And he came and interviewed me about what you just asked me. It was always a mystery to most people in baseball, "how in the world does this guy be this way?" I didn't ask for no job. I didn't get bitter with anybody. He did an interview--I wish I could find it--about "how do you do it? What's your life like?" "It's fine. I mean I have no job. I'm just starting all over, a new career, and trying to find my way around," the usual things that happen to people when their lives are changing, divorce and kids running away. People didn't understand "how in the world you deal with it?" Most people felt that I was going to fall in the gutter or live on the viaduct someplace. Seemed like they were hoping that. And I went to see a psychologist. When I worked at a bank in Raywood [Illinois], they had a psychologist working with the executives and all. I mean she was telling us, "gosh, I don't unders--." "People were always coming around wanting me to sign different things. I don't play anymore. I want to get on with my life. What should I do?" And she told me: "Just enjoy. That's what you are. That's who you are. That's it." So I'd go point A to point B, signing autographs, meeting people to tell me about their business opportunity. I didn't even have a job myself (laughs). They're telling me to help them to get a job. And then, I went to many places to try to get jobs after people told me how much they love you, "you're the best this, you're the greatest this, you did that." I'd go to them, and I said, "I'm looking for a job. Here's my resume. I'll go into training." And they'd tell me, "okay, we'll get back to you." Never got back. And I'd go to somebody else, the same thing. I must have went to fifty different people who told me how great I was. 'How Great Thou Art' it's a song. It didn't bother me 'cause I knew that it was only pretending. I see a lot of pretending. People pretend they're something that they're really not, and it don't have to be that way. Some of them I tell, "you don't have to be that way. It's okay." Story_ID: 2906 Speaker 1: [Leroy] "Satchel" [Paige, baseball player], I spent quite a bit of time with him, you know, in barnstorming [traveling baseball team]. And then, he came to the majors. And just 'round and listen to him and his lifestyle. And Buck O'Neil [baseball player, manager] used to talk about him a lot. And he was a lot like me. We were a lot like each other. He traveled, you know, all over the United States pitching. He was actually used as a drawing card for most of the games he played. He pitched against white teams more than, you know, most pitchers. And he was the attraction. He was the star. [Olympic gold medalist] Jesse Owens--a little bit like me. Jesse just did what he had to do. And I got one of his sayings. He said this many years ago, that "one chance is all you need." And he did that in 1937 [1936] when he ran in the [Summer] Olympics and [Adolf] Hitler and all that. And what we do is--and I've seen it with them, Satchel Paige, Jesse Owen[s]--we kind of--[actor, director, writer] Ossie Davis--we're kind of labeled as "Uncle Toms," that we'll just go along with things and take whatever come our way, and we don't stand up for any specific cause. We don't seek to get into the big arena. But what all of us know, that the three people, the other two people I mentioned, we all know that the big arena is an arena that nobody sees. It's almost like a puppet on--like a puppet show. Everybody's being maneuvered by someone you can't see. The puppeteer you never see. We know and we feel and we have contact with a lot of those people that are puppeteers. So we understand and look for the big picture. If you want to kind of summarize my life. I look for the big picture, always. Who's responsible for what and why? And then, you find out through the money side of the world, who has it, where it goes, and who keeps it and what kind of money is it? Is it stolen money? Is it bank money? Is it drug money? What kind of money are we talking about when you're talking about money? So we kind of look at that and feel it and experience it, but it's beyond everybody else's thinking. And we criticized and sometimes beaten to death, don't have a lot of friends. I mean Jesse--in the '68 [1968 Summer] Olympics, I mean, you know, [Olympic gold medalist Tommie] Smith and, you know, the Black Power [medal podium protest], and they called him an "Uncle Tom," and, you know, many things he did, going up, running against horses, he couldn't make any money, and all of his speaking engagements. Same thing with Satchel. I mean you just kind of go through looking at the big picture, but you can't tell anybody, and they're not going to listen, anyway. But you understand it. You just understand the big picture, that the big picture is we're all like puppets on a string. Some of the "dot com" kids are trying to buy the strings, but they can't get it. Can't get it. I'm sorry. I've been saying this and all that. You can't get it. They won't let you buy the strings. Story_ID: 2907 Speaker 1: Now, who in Chicago [Illinois] were your friends, or who are some of your friends? Forget about Chicago, but you mentioned [attorney, ambassador, businesswoman] Jewel Lafontant [MANkarious]. I mean who were your friends? You mentioned [businessman] S.B. Fuller was, you know important in your life. Who were the people that, you know, that you sort of hung around? Speaker 2: That I admired? Speaker 1: Did you hang around Tyrone Taylor? Speaker 2: Did he say I hung around with him? Speaker 1: I mean was he a friend of yours? His son said that he, you know, hung out at your house. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Do I know Tyrone? Do I know him, yes. I knew him. He married a girl from Dallas [Texas], but she got stabbed to death. That's how they, you know, kind of tied me into that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she got stabbed to death. She's from Dallas. And he was alderman of the fourth ward [Chicago]. I knew him from that side. Speaker 1: But I mean who were the people that you, you know, considered friends that, you know, were supportive of you? But who were those people? Speaker 2: I never got connected to anyone to consider a friend. I've seen a lot of the people. I admired a lot of them. I admired [publisher] John [H.] Johnson. I called him up and, you know, I thought about having a dinner for him because I felt he did a lot of things for people and a very challenging guy. He went back to school, got his Master's at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and all that. Speaker 1: [Banks' wife] Liz [Banks], do you disagree with that answer? Speaker 2: What is she saying? Speaker 1: Maybe you can be a little bit more brief and just-- Speaker 2: No, that's okay. Speaker 1: Am I too long? Speaker 2: No, he's not. Okay, I'm not criticizing him that way. Go on. Go on. Speaker 1: I mean I don't get it 'cause Liz kind of, she-- Speaker 2: No, I think what she's trying to understand is when you were--who did you feel connected to? Did you feel connected to anybody? Speaker 1: He said no one. Speaker 2: I said no one. Did I know them? Al Johnson, you know, [attorney] Roland Burris, [businessman] Clark Burrus, and, you know, Bishop [Louis Henry] Ford to [Rev.] Jesse [Jackson]. I mean and I knew a lot of these people. Speaker 1: And some of them were very "clique-ish" Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew a lot of these people, Horace Noble, you know, he was an automobile builder. Horace Noble and you name it. Howard Medley, I served on the board of CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] for fifteen years. You know, I see a lot of people. I just--Eugene Barnes. You know, I can name them if I see them, and, you know, I never--[politician] Wilson Frost and [politician] Gene Sawyer and all these people. I didn't, you know, go to their house to have dinner. They didn't invite me to dinner. You know, we didn't do anything together. I didn't play golf. I had no social things that I did that connect with them. I think most of them in politics was not favorable when [First Lady] Hillary [Rodham] Clinton asked me to introduce her at the Democratic Convention here [Chicago]. And they saw me come up on the stage, and I kind of looked at their faces, and, "what they heck is he doing up there?" You know, naturally, people want to do that. And she asked me to introduce her and all that. Was I overwhelmed with that? No. I've been to Washington [D.C.]. I spoke to eight presidents. They asked me to come there to speak before eight presidents. And they got an escort and all the security and everything, and I did. I went there and spoke. And I wish I could get the tape of that. And, "were you overwhelmed by this?" I mean [President] Gerald Ford, I was on the flight with him in '76 [1976] at the [Baseball] All-Star game at Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. He asked me to go with him, and I was the only one on there with another writer, Jim Murray, a great writer for the Los Angeles Times. I mean it, "was you overwhelmed by any of that," and I mean they were just people like anybody else. Story_ID: 2908 Speaker 1: Well, let me ask this. Are you enjoying your life now? Speaker 2: I'm really at peace with my life because I'm--I feel I'm on the outside looking in. At sixty-nine, I feel really comfortable about it. I'm going to be teaching a class at Lake Forest School of Management [Lake Forest, Illinois], and I'm excited about that. I've been asked to do many things, many speaking engagements and appearances. I mean all kinds of things just kind of coming at me, and it's so exciting, you know, to be in this position, I mean to live like this. It's like sometimes, things come late if you're patient. And I tell [baseball player] Hank [Aaron] this, too. I mean Hank is in his sixties now, and he's got all these things happening, the foundation [Chasing the Dream Foundation] and the President [George W. Bush] coming and all these people coming and celebrating his birthday and all these things. And sometime, as we creep toward the end, as the accolades start coming your way, and what I'm doing is kind of bouncing them off of me to [Banks' wife] Liz [Banks] so she can see how real life can be. It can be real real, I mean exciting things happening. I mean [Berkshire Hathaway CEO] Warren Buffet and [Microsoft CEO] Bill Gates asked me to come to Augusta National [Golf Club, Augusta, Georgia] to play golf with them. So I played golf with half of the world's economy. And most people say, "were you scared? What was it like?" I mean I can't explain it. It was just like two people playing golf. I brought up some golf shirts that they didn't even wear with their names on them. I mean they're just normal people that enjoy what they were doing. Story_ID: 2909 Speaker 1: So what do you want to accomplish at this point in your life? You have a life partner [wife Liz Banks] who seems to be good on the business end and, you know, and you're working together. But what do you want to accomplish now? Speaker 2: I want to be the poor man philanthropist. I want to give away money. I went to Richmond, Virginia. I met a guy. He didn't know me. I called him. I called him up, I just read about him, Mr. Cannon. He's a postal worker that when he retired he would call up people and give them money. He didn't have any money himself. Remember reading about him, Mr. Cannon? Remember reading about him? But that's what he did. He didn't have a lot of money but the little money he had, he'd read in the paper that "Susan live on West 15th street; can't pay her rent; she's been put out on the street." And he would find out her phone number, call her up, and taker her $1000, $500. Poor man philanthropist, that's what I want to do. All I want to do is give money away. I don't have time to be giving a lot of things, and Liz is the person to do that. I gave money to [golfer] Tiger Woods Foundation, money to the Willie White Foundation, you know that works with kids and experienced people. Give money to [basketball player] Michael Jordan Foundation, and you would think "what is he doing all--" I did a lot of stuff with [entrepreneur, television host] Oprah [Winfrey]. "Why you do think you do things for wealthy people like that?" Wealthy people need help, too. It ain't just poor people need help. Wealthy people need a lot more help than poor people. So that's what I want to be--the poor man philanthropist. I want to be that. I want to create an image so that I can become a Nobel Laureate. I can see myself standing on the stage in Stockholm [Sweden], receiving that noble honor for just giving. That's it. Story_ID: 2910 Speaker 1: Now what, what in the whole sports, the sports--it was, I don't know what it was before--but, it was a game, a sport, and now it's become an industry. And do you have any thoughts about the direction things are taking? It's changed a lot than when you first got involved. Speaker 2: Nothing more than what [Chicago Cubs owner] Mr. [Philip K.] Wrigley said to me fifty years ago. I mean, baseball is too big of a business to be a sport, too big of a sport to be a business. It's just, it's just there. It's unpredictable with what is going to happen with any of it. If it rains for most of the beginning of the season, you not going to draw any crowds. If you don't win, you not going to draw any crowds, and when your big players get hurt, you're not going to draw no crowds. You not going to win, you not going to draw no crowds. So it's--I don't understand--I mean when I look at it, it's almost like I didn't play it. It's all they talk about is money. That's most all the conversation is about that I hear, is about money. Story_ID: 2911 Speaker 1: Is there any athlete that you admire these days? Speaker 2: A lot. Yes. Speaker 1: Like, who are they? Speaker 2: I like [baseball player] Cal Ripken [Jr.]. I like [baseball player] Ken Griffey, Jr. It's a lot of them. I like [baseball player] Sammy Sosa. I mean lot of very talented athletes. [Baseball player] Mike Piazza--and I kinda touched their lives. I see them. Some times [Banks' wife] Liz [Banks] and I go somewhere. There they are. Like we went to Las Vegas [Nevada], and we doing some things out there, and go to this restaurant. Who's sitting over here? It's Mike Piazza. I don't know him real well but I sent him an apple pie to his table and some ice cream, and he ate it. But, I they're just there. Wherever I go there it is for me, but I admire all the athletes, you know. [Basketball player] Michael [Jordan] and it's so many of them that I admire for many things, that when you at the pinnacle--[golfer] Tiger Woods--when you at the pinnacle and it is so much you have to deal with, you know [boxer] Mike Tyson, and its so much, so much. And I met a guy the other day in Las Vegas that started a bank, off-shore banking--legally, now--to deal with athletes and entertainers to insure their money, their wealth. In other words, if you have 100 million dollars you can insure that in case you're sued, because this is what happened to most of those people. They're sued a lot for everything, almost daily, but, you know the things out there. But baseball has gone to a whole different level, all the sports. And it's about money, and it's about T.V. and the media and all of that. It's a production; it's entertainment. It's pretty fun to watch some of the stuff on ESPN [cable television channel] and Fox [television network] and what they talk about and how they make it bigger than life, you know how certain people do things and different things and how they build stuff up. I mean it's really interesting to me, because it's only a sport. Sometime I think it has no social value, sometimes. Because who benefits from this? I mean is it our children? Story_ID: 2912 Speaker 1: Some of the stuff that our children see, I say, "gosh, no wonder it's tough for them to be taught in school, when they see fighting and biting and styling and growling and kicking and running and slapping and all kinds of things that's happening." I say "gosh what do our children, what do they think, inner-city kids, what do they think when they see this stuff, when somebody slaps they wife or beat up their wife or all kinds of stuff?" I say "God, almighty," this stuff these people are seen every day on television and really put in a high level. And our children see this, I mean, they can't be another way, even our movies. I mean to see this stuff, 'Boyz 'N the Hood,' they sell this stuff. "Gosh, how can they be"--what it tells me that I have so much empathy--that's what I got on my cap--empathy for children. It is such a journey. I mean if you can be in the world not of it then you have a chance, because all the stuff that is going around them, it's like, "wow. This is wow, I mean, gosh, unbelievable," you know, how it is. But to me this is the most interesting time [July 2000] to be alive--to me. This is the greatest time ever to be living. I'm just so happy I'm alive to see all this, from the outside. I'm not in it, now, as I said earlier. I'm looking at it. I mean I'm kind of looking at. It's like a movie to me, like a production. Story_ID: 2913 Speaker 1: I was in Las Vegas [Nevada] when [singer] Barbra Streisand came back to perform again. One of the things she said which I--really excited me by, she was up here singing and all that, "People, people who need," but she, you know, started talking a little pbit. She said, "gosh, things are so interesting today because on Monday could be one thing, and on Tuesday could be something else to the same thing." Example: you could have a successful business and eighteen months later, you could have nothing. You can have nothing, and in eighteen months, you can have a lot. Many of the kids in the Silicon Valley [California] are making so much money in such a short of time, it's just making them--not all of them--but it's making them (gestures hand toward ceiling). So other words, you can be this today, and tomorrow something else. It's forever, ever changing, so fast. Urban living is taking us that way because most of us suffer from--getting into medical stuff--hypertension. Most people in the urban society 'cause we're just running here, running there, running here, doing this, doing this, got to be over here, got to be over there, be over here, do this, do that. And technology has taken us that way because most of this stuff we can get on--around the world on Internet. So we kind of--hard for us to kind of settle in and hard for us to use our minds on many things. The CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] had done many studies on where are the intelligent people in the world? We're losing our intelligence plus our energy at the same time. We don't have a lot of energy, as well. It's nothing bad; it's just reality. Our intelligence are going because we can't think anymore. We don't want to think about anything because it's too much. You can get most of the stuff off the Internet. You can do a lot of things real fast today, quick, boom, boom, boom. And we want everything quick. Sometime in baseball, sometime in golf, people start out playing it, and they build up all the stuff about the clubs and the bats and the balls. Some of the young kids come in with a golf club, they think the golf club is going to hit the ball. The golf club is a machine. They're going to hit it. The thinking is a little, you know, not--is that way. "I want to do it quick. I want do it now. I don't want to wait." And that's where it's so interesting to me. You've got to move fast. We're in a race that we can't stop. You jump up and start running. We can't stop. If you do, you're going to get left behind. So I encourage kids of all the things you do, you must go to school. You must stay in school. It is vital that you go to school. You have no other way, or you're going to get left out. Story_ID: 2914 Speaker 1: There are people I see--that's a good question--people I see that I feel that just get twisted with things and need somebody to comfort them, not to preach to them, to comfort them. It's okay. It's okay to settle down. I had a nice visit with [baseball player] Sammy Sosa before the [Baseball] All-Star game, you know, "just it's okay. Just relax, do what you're doing. It's okay." And I see a lot of that. [Baseball player] Ken Griffey, Junior is another one. "Just relax. It's okay. It's okay. You strike out, it's okay." Story_ID: 2915 Speaker 1: Is there anyone that you would consider most significant in terms of the black community? Please don't say [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], but I mean is there? But I mean is he the one you consider most significant? Speaker 2: Dr. King? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. When I was just thinking about my friend I talked today, David Marmel, who went to South Africa to meet with [South African president Nelson] Mandela to honor him in November [1999], and he was telling me that, you know, some of the things that he [Marmel] gone through. Everybody likes him [Marmel] in South Africa, blacks and whites, and that he has a bad back. So when he flies, he has to have a special seat and all that. So on South African Airline, they won't let him fly for free. They don't treat him like a respected man. The people in the country like--in other words, you can be liked by many, but a few that don't--and he wanted to honor him, but he's trying to get South African Airline to fly everybody down to do his show. You know, he's got a production company, too. He does a lot of shows. His shows are, like, 'Miss America' and all those kind of shows, and 'The Victory Awards' and all that. And won the honor, but he can't get down there because they won't give him tickets. The airlines don't respect him as much as the people around in the country that--which he lives. But Dr. King to me has really been the one. I mean Mahatma Gandhi, non-violence, that's kind of the way I feel, too. Story_ID: 2916 Speaker 1: Do you have hopes for the black community? Do you have any hopes or fears? Speaker 2: Do I have hopes or fears? Speaker 1: I have hopes. I had a nice visit with Andrew Young, who is a U.S. ambassador. I just listened to him talk about, you know, the plight of our race. I mean [Banks' wife] Liz [Banks] is got me going over here. Speaker 2: Liz--five more minutes. Speaker 1: We've got to-- Speaker 2: Go? We'll wrap it up. Okay. Speaker 1: I mean there's hope. I feel that--she's looking at you, Liz. Julieanna [interviewer] is spending more time looking at you than talking to me. Speaker 2: I'm looking at you. Go on. Okay, no. No. Honestly. I--just asking the question. Speaker 1: No, I'm just saying that yes, there's hope. We are--black American--are vital to me--I'm not generalizing--are vital to the success of this country. It's always been that way. This is why you have your show. Many black Americans have done many things, haven't gotten a lot of credit for, historically, always. We are the--to me--the chosen people in this country. Most of our ideas have been stolen by other people. I've experienced this. I'll say something, and then five years later, somebody's doing it. So we are. We just have to stand fast. What's going to help us? How are we going to get through it? We're already doing it. Liz's grandmother gave me this, and I have it at my office: "pray, pray, and pray." That's it. And most of the people I'm around, they do that. They pray a lot. That's it. But we are the most important race on the planet. Story_ID: 2917 Speaker 1: What message do you have for young black Americans? Speaker 2: (Pause). Never quit. Never give up. Never give up. Don't quit. Take it to the end. Finish whatever you start. Finish it. Don't give up. It's spiritual, now. Faith. They know what the definition of faith is. Faith. You can move mountains with faith, faith the size of a mustard seed. I mean it sounds corny and everything, but it's not. I have lived it. I have been around people who lived it, I mean people older than me. Never give up. Finish it. You have all kinds of challenges and struggles and all kind of things, but it's going to make you stronger, prouder, and most of all, stay close to your parents. They're the ones that would guide you and direct you, your parents and your grandparents. That's it. Story_ID: 2918 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: To be? What do I want it to be, [Banks' wife] Liz [Banks]? Speaker 1: What is it now, Ernie? Speaker 2: When you say "legacy," what do you mean? Speaker 1: Legacy. Speaker 2: What is a legacy? Speaker 1: What do you want people to remember you for? What do you want them-- Speaker 2: On the tombstone? Speaker 1: No, he wants a living legacy. Speaker 2: Stop from the peanut gallery. Speaker 1: Don't make it a long answer, or we're out the door. Go ahead. Go ahead, though. He can be brief about this, really he can, because we've talked about this. But a legacy, I don't--what I want to be remembered. Speaker 2: What do you want to be remembered for? Speaker 1: Other than Mr. Cub and "let's play two." Speaker 2: Right, that's what I was going to say. You don't even mention, "let's play two." You didn't even mention that. Speaker 1: But this is your legacy question. Final question. Speaker 2: I don't want to be remembered. Look at her. I don't want to be remembered. Speaker 1: Oh, please. That's a horrible answer. Speaker 2: I don't. I don't want to be remembered because when you're gone, you're gone. You've got to leave the dead to the dead. Are you listening? When you're gone, you're gone. That's it. And as I said, you know, interesting time at how fast we move. I mean you can talk about--I mean like Harold Washington, mayor of this city [Chicago, Illinois]. I mean like when I go around, most people don't never talk about him. I mean a lot of people's gone. They've done so much they didn't even talk about. So when you're gone, you're gone. Story_ID: 2919 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, then. Why do you think history is important? If you're gone, you're gone, and then you don't remember, what's the importance of history, then? Speaker 2: Today? Today. Now. (Pause). I don't see any real importance of it, 'cause people-- Speaker 1: Let me ask this question. What would your father say if he could see you now? Speaker 2: What would he say? He would say, "people haven't left you alone yet? They still bugging (laughs) you about this?" "They're still bugging you?" He said, "Son, I've seen you in Chicago [Illinois] and up there and all that. Them people still bothering you? Won't they let you rest in peace, like I am now?" No (looks at ceiling). I'm not being ungrateful to you, is that the way we move and the way life is today, I mean a lot of people don't have--there's a certain number of people who have time for it, but they don't have time. My friend's a schoolteacher, and he teaches history. He talked to the kids about Marco Polo and different things. They said, "Mr. Lewis, why are you telling us about all this different stuff? What the hell is Marco Polo going to do for me now? I don't even know who he is. He's dead, and he's gone." That's kind of cynical, like, but it's--we do. And it is important to know what we done. My life is I always try to--that's why I don't talk about myself--my life has always been in--which I learned from [baseball player] Satchel Paige--"don't look back. Somebody might be gaining on you." So I try to eliminate what's gone back in my life and just try to deal with now. Story_ID: 2920 Speaker 1: Speaking of now, how do you live now? What makes you happy now? Speaker 2: I think happiness is a myth. I think tranquility and peace is greater than that. Happiness, you can be happy today and sad the next day, depending on what happened to your life. You hit the lottery, you're happy. You lose your house, you're sad. It's just peace and tranquility and balance in your life, balance. Speaker 1: Do you have that now? Speaker 2: Yes. I have balance in my life. (Whoops). I can jump up and shout! If people leave me alone, (whoops). Yes, I have balance in my life. And that balance is: exercise, it's a challenge to eat properly, too. It's a real challenge for all of us to eat properly, not a lot of saturated food, not a lot of food that--the diet of death. It's a real challenge. The challenge for me, exercise, work hard to eat properly, play golf, and sex. That's it (whoops). Story_ID: 2921 Speaker 1: Was there anything in your professional career, I mean in the first year, you know, that was there any moment that you felt the best about, and was there any moment that you felt the worst about? Speaker 2: Something I did? Speaker 1: Did or that happened to you or whatever, or, you know-- Speaker 2: I felt good about? Speaker 1: Right. Right. Speaker 2: In baseball. Speaker 1: Baseball. Speaker 2: I felt special about? There was a game I didn't play. We played Cincinnati [Reds baseball team], wanted to tie for first place, late in the season, July. And I was upstairs with the radio announcers, and 40,000 people were there. They didn't want to leave the park, they were so overjoyed about seeing the [Chicago] Cubs [baseball team] in a tie for first place that late in the season. They just stayed around and cheered, and it was like a ritual, like a spiritual moment. And I was up there looking down saying, "wow, this is really powerful how sports can make people, as [Banks' wife] Liz [Banks] just said, happy for the moment, real happy." I mean the whole city was, like, dancing in the streets. The Cubs won a tie for first place. Then, the other side of it is a championship by the [Chicago] Bulls [basketball team], and people burning cars, turning over cars, same thing happened to the [Los Angeles] Lakers [basketball team]. I mean that's like from up to down. I mean this is like, to me, I look at it and said, "who are we, and who do we think we are?" You know, the behavior pattern, you know. Do you remember this, the championship? Turning over cars, beating up stuff, throwing things? I'm just like, "where are we?" Story_ID: 2922 Speaker 1: We're looking at Ernie's children, his twin boys, Joey and Jerry Banks, and his daughter, Jan Banks. Speaker 2: [Twin Boys Joey and Jerry Banks and Daughter Jan Banks, date unknown] [Location unknown] [Photo courtesy of Ernie Banks] Story_ID: 2923 Speaker 1: That's Pele and Ernie Banks. Speaker 2: And when did they meet? What as the occasion. Speaker 1: I'm gonna have to let Ernie say because I think this was some kind of award. Speaker 2: [Ernie Banks (left) Receiving an Award with Soccer Legend Pele (right), date unknown] [Location unknown] [Photo courtesy of Ernie Banks] Story_ID: 2924 Speaker 1: [Background coversation unrelated to photo]. Speaker 2: [Ernie Banks with his Twin Boys at the Ballpark, date unknown] [Chicago, Illinois] [Photo courtesy of Ernie Banks].