 Story_ID: 659957 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Dee Dee Bridgewater, and that is spelled D-E-E, lord I can't even talk, D-E-E, D-E-E, Bridgewater is B-R-I-D-G-E-W-A-T-E-R. Speaker 1: Is there a story behind your name? Speaker 2: Yes, I married into that name, the Bridgewater, Dee Dee is my nickname, I am actually Denise Eileen Garrett, but when I was born in Memphis, Tennessee the children couldn't say Denise, so they called me Dee Dee. So, I've been Dee Dee all my life. My mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth] would call me Denise when she was angry with me, you know so, any time I heard, "Denise," I was like (makes sound). Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born on May 27, 1950 in Memphis, Tennessee. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I don't know what that is, let's see: jazz singer--first of all mother, grandmother, jazz singer, producer, actress, occasionally, goodwill ambassador [Food and Agriculture Organization Goodwill Ambassadors Programme], fighter for human causes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right and what is today's date? Speaker 2: November 8--no, it's November 10, 2014. I--did you see that, I had to think about that from last night (laughter)? Speaker 1: And, okay, and, and where are we at the present time and you don't have to give your address, but. Speaker 2: Okay, we are in Los Angeles, California in my apartment. Story_ID: 659958 Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as a warm up sort of. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the director likes these questions and they only take a short-- Speaker 2: A short answer? Speaker 1: Yeah, short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: First one is: do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite color at the moment is red. Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Ooh, I love all good food. I love great sushi--no I just, I love all good foods. I'm now in Koreatown in Los Angeles [California], so I'm discovering Korean barbecue and other Korean foods that I cannot pronounce the names of (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Christmas, so I can be with my children [Tulani Bridgewater-Kowalski, China Moses and Gabriel Durand] and my grandchildren [Marek Kowalski and Malia Kowalski]. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Any island (laughter), sun. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lots of sun, beaches, quiet, massages, yeah, spa treatments--um, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: At the moment I don't. Well yes, I do. I've started using from a commercial, and I don't know how this got in my head, but: awesome sauce (laughter). Story_ID: 659959 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. Speaker 2: Um-hm, okay. Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's-- Speaker 2: Hold on a second. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm gonna sit this there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause it was sliding out--okay. Speaker 1: All right, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Marion Hale Holliday, well I should probably say her married name is Hudspeth [Marion Holliday Hudspeth], but you want her maiden name, is that it? Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Okay, so M-A-R-I-O-N, Hale, H-A-L-E, Holliday, H-O-L-L-I-D-A-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 6, 1927, Flint, Michigan. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and are there any stories about what they were doing? Speaker 2: Well, you know Cecil Bridgewater, my first husband, was helping me to trace my genealogy and we were able to trace back to the, the late 1700s in Okolona, Mississippi but I cannot really tell you what my mother's side of the family really did because I have not gone back and then investigated, you know each individual. She had one sister whose name was Rose Campbell, well Holliday [Rose Holliday Campbell]; R-O-S-E, Campbell, C-A-M-P-B-E-L-L, and my--and we called Tootsie and my Aunt Tootsie died two years ago, so she had a large family and my Aunt Tootsie's family is, you know all of my cousins and all the Hollidays are, are like my big, big family and just about everybody is, is still in the Flint area, you know, so in the present family I have dentists, and I have educators, I have community service workers, I have a cousin [Robyn Williams] who is the wife of the new president [H. James Williams] of Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]; you know, like that. Speaker 1: Now, are there, is there any story about how the family got to Flint, or why the family moved to Flint or? Speaker 2: See, I don't know, I don't know. Speaker 1: Or when the family migrated to Flint? Speaker 2: My mother told me that she remembers, you know growing up in Flint. She had relatives in Detroit [Michigan], but she never talked about how the family got to Flint, but what I have discovered about my mother and what I'm realizing now literally in, in, in this present time is that my mother was very, she was very much a loner and kind of lived in, in her reality of, of things, and I believe always felt like the kind of proverbial stepchild. She always felt that her sister was prettier than her. Her sister always got the new clothes, she always got the hand me downs. Speaker 1: This is Tootsie? Speaker 2: Um-hm, this is my Aunt Tootsie and so she, I believe my mother was a very bitter woman, and now she has severe dementia, but I've just been finding out some very revealing things about, about my mother and my father [Matthew Garrett]. Story_ID: 659960 Speaker 1: Did you know your, your grandparents on your mother's side? Speaker 2: I knew my grandmother [Rosa Davenport Holliday], but she died when I was six. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't know, do you know what they did for a living? Speaker 2: My grandmother, she worked in, she was a, a like a, a--not a house cleaner, but she worked in offices where she would clean offices. My grandfather on my, on my mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth] and aunt--whose name was Ernest Myers Holliday [Ernest Holliday] was a barber. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she said, she always said an alcoholic, like he was an alcoholic, but, I, I really didn't know my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just saw pictures of my grandfather. So, my mother has, my mother never shared information, that's what I'm trying to get to. I've been really trying to since I'm now back in the states, once a year I go home to Flint [Michigan], and I try and get as much information from my cousins. So, I'm going home with this intention after I have a concert in December in Detroit [Michigan], I'm gonna go back to Flint and to sit down with everybody and say, "Okay, what happened, tell me," because they, my, my Aunt Tootsie's [Rose Holliday Campbell] children are very much into the history of the family (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: So, I've just found this out, so I am now going to go and try and find all this stuff out for myself. Story_ID: 659961 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth] and her sister, were, were they, were they able to go very far in school? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, my mother graduated from college. She went to West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]. Now, my Aunt Tootsie [Rose Holliday Campbell] dropped out of school and I think was married [to Clarence C. Campbell] at nineteen. She eloped. Speaker 1: So what did your mother go into? Speaker 2: My mother did secretarial work most of her life, in her late forties she was employed by General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] and did get to the level of junior executive in the service division of General Motors. Speaker 1: I thought that General Motors would show up sooner or later in this discussion, you know. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, of course. Speaker 1: I was waiting for it. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: So, but did she suffer when GM pulled out of Flint [Michigan]? Speaker 2: No, she had retired pretty much. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was in there when people had good retirement plans, you know. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, she was like one of the last, you know group that got, got decent retirement. Speaker 1: Yes, we all know the story of-- Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: --of 'Roger and Me' by-- Speaker 2: Yes, we do. Speaker 1: --Moore. Speaker 2: Michael Moore. Speaker 1: Michael Moore, right, yeah. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: True story, so well, let me, let me go to your--well, before you lea- we leave your mother's side, was there any musicians on your mother's side, singers, or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 659962 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name is Matthew Turner Garrett [Matthew Garrett], M-A-T-T-H-E-W, T-U-R-N-E-R, Garrett, G-A-R-R-E-T-T. Speaker 1: And what I his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth is November 24, 1927 and I always get confused with my daddy--Louisville. Speaker 1: Okay, Louisville, Kentucky. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, again what can you tell us about your father's side of the family, how far back (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father's side of the family was musical. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father's mother, my grandmother came from a very musical family. She was one of thirteen children and eleven of those children were, were women and one of her sisters, one of my great aunt's name was Lottie, L-O-T-T-I-E Gee, G-E-E [Lottie Gee]--my grandmother Eileen Vivian McGraw [Eileen Gee McGraw (ph.)], or Gee, told me that my great aunt Lottie, and showed me an article, was the first African American female to perform in China and I think it was in like 1933, but my, my great Aunt Lottie was, was a singer and dancer and went to Europe with 'Shuffle Along' it's (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is this the Lottie from Detroit [Michigan], from Black Bottom [Detroit, Michigan] that everybody talks about? There's a Lottie called Lottie "The Body" [Lottie "The Body" Tatum-Graves]. Speaker 2: No, that's not that Lottie. Speaker 1: That's not the Lottie? Speaker 2: No, that's not aunt, that's not my great aunt. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, but (unclear). Speaker 2: I've heard about Lottie "The Body." Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I'm just. Speaker 2: No, unh-uh my great aunt. Speaker 1: Your great, great aunt was Lottie Garrett or, did she? Speaker 2: No, it--my, she's my great aunt and her name was Lottie Gee. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Okay. Speaker 2: The maiden of my, my grandmother is Gee, so Lottie Gee was with 'Shuffle Along,' the Sissle and Blake [Eubie Blake and Noble Sissle] show that went to Europe and she was also responsible, she's, she was a big influence on Josephine Baker and she is cited in, in all (unclear), all of the biographies in Josephine's autobiographies as one of the people that influenced her and convinced her to move to France and so. Speaker 1: So, it's a family tradition of performing in France (laughter), which is something (unclear) later on that you would do (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know (unclear) I mean my grandmother always said I came by my, my career and my talent naturally, so and I, I know that my, my musical talent came from my father's side of the family. My father was a trumpet player and had a great singing voice, although he chose to play the trumpet and he just did that as, as a side gig. He could have had, I found out from Charles Lloyd recently that I did an interview with in Switzerland, that he could've been, my father could've been a really great musician, but he opted to be a provider, so he gave up his career. I just found out. Speaker 1: Now, is there a--I'm gonna get back to his story, but in terms of his side of the family do you know more about the ancestors on that side? Do you know? Speaker 2: I just know from his grandmother, you know I don't know further back than that other than you know his father was--my, my grandfather who I never knew because he did at thirty-eight, was a porter with the railroad system, but I don't know which railroad company, and died from complications of pneumonia in, in the South, because he wasn't allowed into a hospital, but you know all of my grandmother's sisters were, were dancers in vaudeville, even my grandmother played the church organ, you know the pipe organ and she played the Hammond B-3 organ and she was a dancer. Speaker 1: Now, were they based in Memphis [Tennessee] or (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they were based--no, my father's family is out of Kentucky. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And they settled around Cincinnati, they settled in Ohio. Some of them were in, in like Coving--Covington, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 2: 'Cause I remember going to Covington a lot when I was a little girl when I'd stay for the summer. Speaker 1: It's right, right across the river [Ohio River]. Speaker 2: Um-hm, so yeah, my father's side of the family was from that area, and my grandmother--I'm not quite sure where she was born. I'm not sure if she was born in Cincinnati, but she, she died in Cincinnati. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I still have a lot of relatives on my father's side in, in Cincinnati (unclear). Speaker 1: Now, was your father raised in Louisville? Speaker 2: He was raised in, he started in Louisville, and then they moved to Covington and then they moved to Cincinnati. Story_ID: 659963 Speaker 1: So is this, this is where--Cincinnati [Ohio] is where he developed his musical talent? Speaker 2: I don't know. My father [Matthew Garrett] never really talked about his music, except the only thing my father ever told me about was when we were in Memphis [Tennessee] and he taught at the famed Manassas High School. He was the musical director of their, their high school band and he had private students and is responsible for the, the formative years of a lot of jazz great musicians out of Memphis like Phineas Newborn [Phineas Newborn, Jr.], Harold Mabern, Charles Lloyd, Frank Strozier, Booker Little. Speaker 1: He was probably gone before [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes came around (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, definitely. Speaker 1: Yes, he's another Manassas grad. Speaker 2: Yes, I know. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: But see, I'm just starting to go back into research all of this stuff, and so I went back to Memphis to find the street I was born on and I went to Manassas High School and, you know tried to find places that my father spoke about. I found out that he was good friends with Willie Mitchell, who became the, you know, famed producer of most of Al Green's hits and had Royal Studios [Memphis, Tennessee]. The home I was born in is literally around the corner from Royal Studios, but what I just found out from Charles Lloyd is that my father went back to Memphis when we left in '53 [1953], he went back in '54 [1954] and I never knew this, and took another teaching position but at a junior high school called Porter Junior High School [Memphis, Tennessee], and then was working and he and Charles Lloyd were in some--same, some bands together and I had no idea about this so, I'm gonna try and speak to my father and see what he remembers. Speaker 1: So, where did your father go to college, did he? Speaker 2: He also went to West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay, that's where he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's where he and my mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth] met. Story_ID: 659964 Speaker 1: I thought that might be the case. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, your parents met at West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And is there a story behind--? Speaker 2: Their meeting? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The only story that my mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth] had shared with me was that she thought that he was very handsome. He was in the band, you know, like the marching band and, and that was West Virginia State and was very popular, very handsome and, but my father's [Matthew Garrett] very dark skinned and my grandmother, my mother's mother [Rosa Davenport Holliday] did not approve of them being together. My mother's fair skinned and she told my, my mother, my grandmother told my mother than he was gonna be a problem because he was so good looking, and, and he was (laughter). He was a ladies' man, my daddy. Speaker 1: So, did they stay married long? Speaker 2: They stayed married like fourteen years, yeah they divorced when I was fourteen. Speaker 1: So, okay. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: So, they married about 1950, and. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, were married in '64 [1964] or thereabouts? Speaker 2: Yep. Story_ID: 659965 Speaker 1: So is that when your, your mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth] went back to Flint [Michigan] after they (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother, well my mother--my parents moved to Flint-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --from, from Memphis [Tennessee] in 1953 and then my father [Matthew Garrett], like I said, I just found out went to Memphis for another year, but then he basically gave up his musical career. I know that when I was like five years old, my father took a, a job with General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] as a groundskeeper to make ends meet, and then he was able to get into the education system. I know he worked for a few years with, in special education, and then he moved into the public school system [Flint City School District] in, in Flint after that, but I can't tell you the exact year, but he retired as a principal at one of the Flint high schools. Speaker 1: In Flint, okay, all right. Okay, so he-- Speaker 2: Yep, and just was a beloved, a beloved man. My father was, he's still alive, but he was and he still is, a very charismatic man and people just gravitated to my father. I remember when I was sixteen and it was the, the, the fad was the girls wearing their boyfriend's sweaters, I wore my daddy's sweaters and all my girlfriends had their boyfriends pick 'em up from school [Southwestern High School; Southwestern Classical Academy, Flint, Michigan]. I had my daddy pick me up from school. I had a crush on my father. I wanted to have a band you know, with my father singing and playing trumpet. That was, that was a dream of mine, you know, and my father is, is really responsible for helping me to achieve you know artistic goals that I had when I was a teenager. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 659966 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, you think about their dispositions, their sense of humor, their talent, how they look, how they walk, talk, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: In terms of my, my personality, my ability to be really outgoing, that comes from my father's [Matthew Garrett] side of the family. My grandmother always said, my paternal grandmother [Eileen Gee McGraw (ph.)] always said that I reminded her of herself when she was young, and I used to be a little outrageous and she, she always when she'd come to see me perform--my kids would like slide under the seats with the some of the stuff I would say and, and do and my grandmother would say, "Oh, that's nothing. Oh, that's nothing," you know but as an individual I find that I'm a little--I can be a little introverted. I'm finding as I get older that I'm becoming a lot more like my mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth] in that sense. I just was part of a very big affair here in Los Angeles [California] with the Thelonious Monk Institute of Jazz [Washington, D.C.] and we had President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] there, and Kevin Spacey, and Goldie Hawn and Queen Latifah and Chaka Khan, you know all these, these fantastic people, and I was watching everybody like back stage and taking selfies and stuff and I was kind of just listening to the music. I had my interactions with people in their dressing rooms, so I could have a personal one on one time, but when it comes to being in crowd, I pull out. I become like a wallflower, I sit in a corner. But on stage, I'll cut loose. It's pretty interesting so I was like, "What is that?" You know, I just find it very hard to, to do that whole social thing of you know, being in the right spot. Somebody has to say, "Go be there," and then I'll go. Otherwise, I'm like, it's okay, you know. I recently participated in a fundraiser for a movie that they're doing--a documentary on [HistoryMaker] Wayne Shorter ['The Language of the Unknown: A Film About the Wayne Shorter Quartet'] and they said, "You know, Dee Dee [HistoryMaker Dee Dee Bridgewater] you have to be here at--," whatever the time was for the group photo, and I deliberately came an hour late. I don't know what this is. Maybe I should find a therapist (laughter). I, I don't have a need to, I don't know, I feel comfortable being kind of like that silent partner you know, helping people behind the scenes, but not letting other people, people don't need to know what I do. I know what I do, the people that I help know what I do and that's all that matters. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was just listening this morning to a piece on 'JazzSet' about Abbey Lincoln, and what's the song, "Keep your hand open," well, "wide open," and you know the one--'Throw It Away'? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Throw It Away.' Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Throw it Away.' Yeah, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah okay, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I loved Abbey, I had a wonderful relationship with Abbey. Speaker 1: And what you were saying reminded me of that song (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 659967 Speaker 1: Do you have siblings? Speaker 2: I have one sister. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two years younger, her name is Rhonda Michelle Whiters [Rhonda Garrett Whiters] now, she's been married I don't know how many years. Do I need to spell her name for you? Speaker 1: Is it, well, yeah. Speaker 2: R-H-O-N-D-A, Rhonda, Michelle, M-I-C-H-E-L-L-E, Whiters, W-H-I-T-E-R-S. Speaker 1: Okay, and what does she do for a living? Speaker 2: She is a, a manager with--what is that? What is that company? (Unclear)--what is that company? It's a retail company across the country that's hardware, but they also sell furniture and--Aleece [Aleece Kingsley], do you know the name of that company--is it re--? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Are you talking about Restoration Hardware? Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: What was it, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Res- Restoration Hardware. Speaker 1: Oh okay, all right. Speaker 2: Restoration Hardware, but we're not close anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right now, well, what, what happened? That's a natural question. Speaker 2: Well, she, she had--my sister had a very promising career as a designer and she graduated with second highest honors from the Fashion Institute [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] and her, she and her husband [Esjaye Whiters] were living in Rochester, New York at the time. I was living with my first husband, Cecil [Cecil Bridgewater], we were living out on Long Island [New York] in Hempstead [New York], and she was offered a job with the, a--I forget which designing house and she went back to Rochester and her husband told her, "No," and made her become a Jehovah's Witness and I, I was like, "But we were Catholics, and, and why would you wanna go into another hardcore kind of institution, you know religious institution, and then one that separates you?" She says, "Well, you know--," she wanted to do it because this is what her husband asked. So, she gave up her, her career and she's--my sister's always been very, very frustrated and has harbored a lot of resentment; has always had some jealously for me just pursuing my dreams, and kind of developed, I mean this jealously and also, she was jealous of the relationship I had with my mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth]. Our father [Matthew Garrett] remarried when we were both in, in our teens and he had a son who is younger than my, my first two daughters [Tulani Bridgewater-Kowalski and China Moses] but who's their uncle and he kind of deserted my sister and I, he just kind of tossed us off and we were both very, very hurt by that, but because I decided to--well, I always just stayed in touch, I tried to stay in touch. I tried to keep my family ties together, family's very important to me. My sister inherited my mother's side of you know like, just doing her own thing, so I was calling my mother when I moved to France. I was always in touch with my mother. I was always taking my mother on trips with me because I wanted to expose my mother to the things I was being exposed to and my sister was very jealous of that, but my mother helped my sister. My mother, you know, bought her cars, bought her furniture, you know bought the washer and dryer when they got their first place, was always giving them money, giving them the General Motors' [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] discount when they wanted to buy their own cars, and you know and my mother never gave me anything, but she's my mother, and so you know today I'm taking care of my mother and my sister doesn't do anything at all. She's never offered a dime and I--up until about two weeks ago, I was very angry with her, and I couldn't understand why she wouldn't want to help take care of the woman that took care of her and did so much for her, and her husband, and but about two weeks ago, you know I said, "That's her loss," you know? I did this of my own volition, you know because that's the kind of person I am. That's not the kind of individual, individual she is, so I've decided I'm gonna let go of the anger, but I stopped speaking to her. I told her I said, "I cannot accept your not wanting to do anything for your, your mother, you know," and her husband did not like the relationship that my sister had with my mother and I. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so, you know was very outspoken I guess with her about associating with us. Speaker 1: Okay, this-- Speaker 2: So, she cut us off. Speaker 1: You have two very different lives it seems. Speaker 2: Yeah, totally, totally she is Jehovah's Witness, she you know goes and knocks on doors. Story_ID: 659968 Speaker 1: What is your first memory in the family, your earliest memory? Speaker 2: My earliest memories are, are being in Flint, Michigan at my maternal grandmother's [Rosa Davenport Holliday] house and I mean I remember the address, 123 East Wellington [Avenue], and it was a house with a porch and you know the stairs that go up to it and I lived across the street from the, the public elementary school, Clark School [Clark Elementary School, Flint, Michigan] where I went for up to second grade and I remember the party lines and a neighbor across the street who was Ms. Elizabeth [ph.] and she loved to gossip on the phone, and I used (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Explain what a party line is, 'cause people are not gonna know, not-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --today these kids are (unclear). Speaker 2: They have no idea. Well, we had lines that were shared by neighbors. You would get-- Speaker 1: The telephone lines, right? Speaker 2: The telephone lines, and yeah, the number and so if your neighbor wanted to use the phone and they got on the phone, you had to wait until the neighbor was off the phone, but you could pick up your phone and you could hear the neighbor's conversation, and so my mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth] used to always fuss about this Elizabeth woman. I can't remember her last name, but she did love to talk on the phone. So, sometimes I would just pick up the phone and I would just eaves- eavesdrop and then I'd go tell my mother what she said. So, I remember doing that at like four or five years old. I remember Elizabeth coming over, she was a kind of heavyset woman and just fussing with my mother about the fact that little Dee Dee [HistoryMaker Dee Dee Bridgewater] was on the phone and sometimes I'd make noises and sometimes (unclear) how I knew. I also--I was a tomboy when I was a little girl. I remember that and my best girlfriend lived in, in back of my house and the wire fence that divided the lots was torn and so I could just like walk through it and go into her backyard, and I remember all the adults were, were--like, they could parent us. So, we could go out in the street and just be out in the street until the street lights came on, and if we did anything if we had, if were bad, if we did anything wrong, the neighbors were like, "I'm gonna tell your parents," you know. I mean they had the ability to, to give us a whooping or break up fights. I loved to fight, I loved to fight boys. Speaker 1: Really, this is a (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I'm telling you I was a tomboy. I thought I was a boy. I'm sure that in a former life I was a man. Speaker 1: A lot of boys don't like to fight boys, I mean that (unclear). Speaker 2: Man I know I was, I was the defender, I was like the block defender. I remember at six, I mean we have the, our local theater, a black theater, it was the Michigan Theatre [Flint, Michigan] and it was down at the end of our street on Saginaw [Street] which was the main thoroughfare that--it was, it was a like a local highway, and you could take it from Saginaw to Detroit [Michigan], Saginaw, Michigan to Detroit. Anyway, I remember one time stealing ten dollars and inviting--from my daddy's [Matthew Garrett] money that he kept on the dresser, and inviting all the kids in the neighborhood to the movie to see 'Godzilla' and it was twenty-five cents. I paid for everybody, I bought everybody candy. Those of us who wanted to stay and see it again, you gotta--had to pay another twenty-five cents. I paid it, my daddy came and he--'cause everybody saw us going to the movies. He came and dragged me out of that theater, ooh, he whooped me with a belt all the way home. That whole block, that was the longest block, you know. So, I, I liked--I always liked being the giver you know, and I always liked defending the weaklings you know against the bullies and of course the bullies were boys (laughter), so, I was always standing up to them boys, you know and, and my sister [Rhonda Garrett Whiters] was an instigator, Rhonda was an instigator when she was a little girl, I remember that. Speaker 1: Meaning she liked to-- Speaker 2: She loved to like sass and kind of instigate a fight. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And get boys to be chasing her and then I would always run and, and defend my sister, 'cause I was her big sister, so, I was always getting in fights for my sister's honor (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you're the oldest. Speaker 2: I'm the oldest, yep. I was the experimental child (laughter). Speaker 1: How much--how much younger is your sister than you? Speaker 2: Two, two years and--she was born on September 12th, so two years and what, four months? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, June, July, August, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or two, three and a half months. Story_ID: 659969 Speaker 1: Did you have an earliest membe- memory of school? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I remember going to, to Clark school [Clark Elementary School, Flint, Michigan]. I remember going to kindergarten. My mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth] was working at that time with the, the department of unemployment [Michigan Unemployment Insurance Agency] and so my mother would get us dressed and then I would--she would get my lunch ready and then I would just walk across the street to school and my mother would take my sister [Rhonda Garrett Whiters] to preschool, and then she'd go on to work. I would always double back as soon as my mother would go down the street with my sister. I'd double back and I'd always change my clothes. I loved to wear costumes (laughter), and I loved to create these wacky outfits. Speaker 1: So, for instance, what kind of costume? Speaker 2: Oh, my mother, my mother sewed us a lot of our clothes, so I remember my mother made me an ice skating skirt out of felt with little pink--it was black with little pink poodles on it and then she'd put little pom poms on it, so I'd go back home and I'd put on my, my pom pom skirt and these little frilly tops and, and cowgirl boots 'cause I had cowgirl boots. I had a cowgirl outfit that she made me with a hat. I'd go home put that on. I'd go home and put on my Sunday clothes, my Sunday dresses 'cause we have our Sunday dresses, you know to go to church and, and I remember I had this burgundy dress, a blue with a balloon skirt with how the fabric went up under. I'd wear that with my cowgirl boots. Aw, I don't know what all I would do, I was a (unclear) kid, you know. Speaker 1: Well, what the students and the teachers make of your outfits? Speaker 2: I don't remember them saying anything. I don't, I don't remember, and when but when my mother--they told, told my mother and then my mother had my daddy [Matthew Garrett], 'cause my mother wouldn't spank us, my father did the spanking, so my father gave me a spanking and told me not to do it, but I still did. I don't know, I never, I never liked conforming, I just couldn't, I couldn't stand that. Story_ID: 659970 Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you in school? Speaker 2: I was an, I was an excellent student, studying, education and learning was very easy for me so I was like a straight A student, all the way up until--well, I was--I, my mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth] took my sister [Rhonda Garrett Whiters] and I out of public school [Clark Elementary School, Flint, Michigan] when I was seven and put us in Catholic school, and there we were, were just I think like six black students in, in the whole school from K to twelve [kindergarten to twelfth grade]. Speaker 1: What was the name of the Catholic school? Speaker 2: St. Matthew's-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Catholic School [St. Matthew Catholic School, Flint, Michigan]. Speaker 1: This an all-girl school, or? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a coed school, and I don't remember what order of nuns we had, I don't know if they were like the Jesuit nuns [sic.], but I remember in the second grade I, my, our nun, who was our teacher was crazy. Her name was Sister Jolevan [ph.], and she used to lock us in our--in, in the room in the classroom and if someone had gave--someone gave a wrong answer she would throw the eraser from the blackboard at the kid. We had one kid, I'll never forget his name, David Kowalski [ph.]--ah, Kowalski that's my son-in-law's [Stephen Kowalski] last name, oh my goodness. David Kowalski, and he was chubby, he wasn't fat, but he was chubby and he wasn't really smart and she loved to pick on him and she would literally chase him around the classroom and throw erasers at him and if we gave a wrong answer, she'd stand us in the corner and make us wear the dunce, you know that dunce hat. Speaker 1: Now, this is really, she's really reaching back for-- Speaker 2: No, she. Speaker 1: --all those, archaic-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --punishments there. Speaker 2: She had this, I don't know what these nuns, how--she had a gazillion keys on a very large key ring and if she got angry with you, then she would hit you upside the head with this key ring with all these keys on it. She wouldn't let us go to the bathroom, and I remember on time I, I had to go so bad and I was just sitting in my seat, I was in the second grade and I, I pooped my pants, and the she called on me to, to, to answer a question and stood up and of course there was poop on my seat, and the girl behind me said "Oh, Sister Jolevan, you know, Denise [HistoryMaker Dee Dee Bridgewater] went potty on her seat." And she stood me in that corner and she beat me on the head and I remember I ran to the door of our classroom, and I was trying to get out and I was screaming and I started banging on the door, "Help, help," and the mother superior happened to be walking the corridor and she came and she couldn't open the door and then Sister Jolevan opened the door and I told her what had happened. So, she sent me to the bathroom and she pulled Sister Jolevan out and that was the last day we saw Sister Jolevan. Then I found out that they'd sent her to do missionary work in Africa. Speaker 1: So, she's gonna practice. Speaker 2: I'm sure she did, I'm sure she did. Catholic school was a very interesting experience. I still have a lot of the, the Catholic brainwashing to this day. Speaker 1: Well, you couldn't wear your costumes at Catholic school? Speaker 2: Oh, no I had to wear the uniform. Speaker 1: The uniform, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 659971 Speaker 1: And I remember my mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth]--from the age of seven I was ironing my own clothes. From the age of seven, I was, I was cooking food because my mother worked until five [o'clock] and my father [Matthew Garrett] worked until six, so I was putting on the, on the pots and pans. She would get on the phone with me and tell me what pot to pull out and how to cook you know, how to you know season the meat and how to cook it. So, I just did this. Speaker 2: So, you had to grow up kind of fast I guess in that situation? Speaker 1: Well, it was just what I did, you know and I was responsible for watching my sister [Rhonda Garrett Whiters]. We had house chores, we had to make our beds. I had to iron my blouses to go under my jumpers. I still have a scar from where the iron fell on my arm right here when I was seven, but I thought everybody did what I did? You know what I mean, just like I thought everybody listened to jazz music, 'cause I, my dad was always playing his albums. Speaker 2: So, is that the predominant music in the household? Speaker 1: That was the predominant music and my mother listened to singers, you know like Sarah Vaughan and Ella [Ella Fitzgerald] and you know lesser known singers like Gloria Lynne and Lorez Alexandria. I remember those singers, a singer that never had a big career named Marge Dodson. My mother liked singers, of course, [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, Nancy Wilson was my, my idol, I had--when my dad would get new Nancy Wilson albums I would he, he would give me the covers and I would tape 'em up on my wall. I collected articles, my father helped me collect articles on Nancy Wilson. I wanted to grow up and be like Nancy Wilson, but I remember my daddy bringing home (laughter) an album when I was in my teen years, and we're still in Flint, Michigan. He brought home this album by Miles Davis. I can't remember which one it was, but I loved it and I remember going over to one of my girlfriend's houses and I had started a vocal group [The Iridescents] because Motown Records [Tamla Records; Motown Records] had started in '62 [sic. 1959], so this is like '64 [1964] and 'cause we were gonna rehearse and I said, "Oh, have you guys heard that new Miles Davis album?" And they were like, "Miles Davis, who is that?" And I said, "The trumpeter, Miles Davis. He's one of the greatest trumpet players." "We don't know what you're talking about, Dee Dee [HistoryMaker Dee Dee Bridgewater]." And that's when I realized that, "Oh, I'm in another world." So, I had, I had to go to the Catholic school [St. Matthew Catholic School, Flint, Michigan], so all my friends went to public school, so my holidays were never the same. I got out of school at a different time, you know I had those friends, and then I had my neighborhood friends who were really my girlfriends, and I listened to the radio. So, I listened to black radio, R and B [rhythm and blues] but then I was hearing jazz music. I loved 'The Grand Ole Opry' the TV show when I was little. I loved 'The Lawrence Welk Show.' I loved 'The Ed Sullivan Show,' so I had a culture that I couldn't even talk about, you know what mean? Speaker 2: So you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I loved polka music. We had a large Polish community. My mother would take us to a little diner, a Polish diner so I was eating you know, the potato pancakes, and all--the goulash and all that. I was eating that stuff and then we had a German community. We had a city that was developed by Germans called Frankenmuth [Michigan], and we'd go down there for, for Thanksgiving and around Christmastime and to have our roast chicken on Sunday and with the mashed potatoes and gravy and my mother would always go to, they have this huge Christmas decorating store [Bronner's Christmas Wonderland, Frankenmuth, Michigan] and get Christmas ornaments and, and you know, so I loved polka and I--so I loved 'The Lawrence Welk Show.' I loved Loretta Lynn, I mean Loretta Lynn, Loretta Young-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --had a television show ['The Loretta Young Show'], had a variety show, oh, my god I loved her show. I used to love watching her making her grand entrance, entrances. Sometimes she'd come down the staircase or she'd come to the door, she'd have on these gorgeous gowns. I loved Judy Garland, when Judy Garland had her show ['The Judy Garland Show']. I loved how she stood there you know, with her legs slightly apart. She always wore black short dresses. Story_ID: 659972 Speaker 1: In my teen years, I was a huge fan of Elvis Presley and Ricky Nelson and but then I loved James Brown. I'd sneak out my house and go hear James Brown. I don't know how I got the tickets. I guess maybe I saved my money. Speaker 2: So, would he perform frequently in Flint [Michigan]? Speaker 1: He would perform at the Flint IMA [Industrial Mutual Association Auditorium, Flint, Michigan], it was the auditorium. I don't know what IMA stood for. Speaker 2: International--probably, you know (unclear), I don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, probably and he would have his shows, yes. I would sneak out, I'd steal my mother's [Marion Holliday Hudspeth] car. I was driving at fourteen and my mother had a stick shift, a Volkswagen Beetle. Speaker 2: It wasn't legal though right, you weren't-- Speaker 1: No (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) (unclear) to drive? Speaker 1: You're supposed to drive at sixteen, but I you know, I looked older than my age. Speaker 2: Did she teach you how to drive? Speaker 1: No, I watched her drive and taught myself, 'cause I always, I always wanted to get away (laughter). I always wanted to get out of the house. I always liked the bad side of town. I lived on the south side which is where the (air quotes) saditty Negroes--and I loved the north side of town, where you know there were always shootouts and there were gangs and--oh, child I loved that. My boyfriends were wannabe gangsters and pimps and (laughter), you know but my mother made sure, and of course, in Catholic school [St. Matthew Catholic School, Flint, Michigan] you know we had etiquette classes and all that so. I know how, I knew how to, to you know to sit at a table and which piece of silverware to use and, and how to dress and even we learned about underwear. I remember this etiquette teacher telling us, "Girls, if you are ever in an automobile accident and the only thing you have left on your body was your underwear, your bra and your panties, you want them to match, you don't want to have on some old bra and some panties that don't go with it. You want to wear good underwear and you want your underwear to match." I've always had matching underwear. It is only like in the last three years that I've, I've ventured outside of that (laughter). Isn't it funny the things you, you grow up with? Growing up in Flint, Michigan--I grew up in a period where our jewelry had to match our shoes. We would get our shoes dyed to match our dresses. I would make my clothes because we didn't have a lot of money when I was growing up. My sister [Rhonda Garrett Whiters] and I we were going to a party on the weekend, we would go and get our little--we'd always get the sample fabrics so that the little pieces left, and we'd make our little skirts, our little dresses, our little pants. You know if we knew we have some big event coming up, you know I'd save my pennies. I think my mother would buy my sister's stuff but, but I would save my pennies. I was working at fourteen, you know. Speaker 2: Where did you work? Speaker 1: I--my first job at the hospital--what's the hospital? I worked in the admissions office of Hurley hospital [Hurley Medical Center, Flint, Michigan] and I had to type up the patients being admitted on these metal discs, almost looking like a dog tag that we could then put in the machine and then stamp on all the different papers. So, I did that. I did all the filing for the all the doctors and then I became a candy striper because I loved you know visiting you know people who were sick in, in the hospital, that didn't have anybody. Story_ID: 659973 Speaker 1: Now, did you go to a Catholic high school as well? Speaker 2: I went until they kicked me out. Well, I, I went-- Speaker 1: What is the name of it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) until the ninth grade and then they kicked me out. Speaker 1: Until the ninth, well-- Speaker 2: And then in the ninth grade I-- Speaker 1: Well, that's the beginning of high school (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, so I went to junior high school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: So, this is. Speaker 2: I went to high school at Southwestern High School [Southwestern Classical Academy, Flint, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Where Michael Moore also went. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's a public high school? Speaker 2: A public high school. Speaker 1: (Unclear) high school, okay. Speaker 2: Yep, I was kicked out of Catholic school. Speaker 1: What happened in Catholic school? How did you get kicked out? Speaker 2: I was the head of the debate team. Like I said I was a straight A student, and I was the captain of the debate team for St. Matthews [St. Matthew Catholic School, Flint, Michigan] and we had a debate with the rival high school which was a bigger high school and had a bigger diocese than St. Matthews, and it was St. Michael's [St. Michael Catholic School, Flint, Michigan], and I was supposed to argue, our team was supposed to argue the, the strengths of the Protestant religion, no, the Catholic religion and St. Michael's was arguing about the Protestant religion and I had to make the introductory speech and I decided to just say what I thought and I started talking about the fact that the Catholic religion was not the only religion in the world, (unclear) now you know that it was impossible to say it was the only religion when people from other cultures around the world have other beliefs, and that there's nothing wrong with Protestantism and the next thing I knew the mother superior was flying down that middle aisle in that auditorium and her habit was flying in the air, all that fabric and she yanked my skirt which I rolled up because I didn't like to wear the skirts at the normal, below the knee length so, I would always roll up my skirt and you know keep my little vest, my jacket closed and she yanked, she said, "Denise Garrett [HistoryMaker Dee Dee Bridgewater], get down." I was in the middle of my speech, I was on a roll. She said, "Get down." I--she made me hop off of the stage in front of all the students. She grabbed my--no, it was my left ear and pulled me down that middle (laughter). All the way, got me to the front of the auditorium, opened the door to outside and she said, "You're out, get out." Oh, I'll never forget that. "Tell your mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth] you don't have to come back to this school," and I went (claps) (laughter), 'cause by then I wanted to be in school with all the kids in my neighborhood. I was the only person in this Catholic school in my neighborhood. Speaker 1: Did you anticipate that outcome when you gave the speech, or did you (unclear)? Speaker 2: I don't know I had become so enraged with the hypocrisy I felt existed in the Catholic religion and just the hypocrisy that I was experiencing of going to church [St. Matthew Catholic Church, Flint, Michigan] on Sunday and sitting, you know genuflecting and going into the, the pew my sister [Rhonda Garrett Whiters] and I and all of the parishioners would move so that these two little black girls wouldn't be sitting next to them, and I just saw the discrepancies between even though I was like one of the smartest kids in the school at that time. I was never invited on any of the afterschool programs, you know for the gifted kids. I was excluded, I was always excluded. When I was on the, the cheerleading squad for the basketball team, and we would have to go meet the other cheerleaders at, at half time, everybody would talk and interact and there I'd be, all by myself. And so, when I started seeing this I was like, you know what? And I'd go home my, my girlfriends are like, "Oh, we're doing this and we're doing that," and they had all these programs and you know because even though the schools were mixed, there was a large, black sector to their public schools, and I was like, what is this? I felt like a leper at the Catholic school. Story_ID: 659974 Speaker 1: Were your parents practicing Catholics? Speaker 2: My mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth] had been excommunicated because she married my father [Matthew Garrett] who was a Baptist, or Methodist. So, she was excommunicated (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was he a practicing Methodist, I mean did he go to church? Speaker 2: Yeah, he went to church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I would go to Methodist church, I would go to Baptist church, you know at--of course, after Mass. So, my sister [Rhonda Garrett Whiters] and I would go to early Mass and then I could do what everybody else did, but our mother made us do it and I was like, "Why? They excommunicated you, so why?" But I understand that it was the--it's that brainwashing. Catholic religion is something, it really is something. I ran away when my mother announced that she was putting us in Catholic school [St. Matthew Catholic School, Flint, Michigan]. I tried to run away. I tried to take my sister and run away. You know where we went? To, to my Aunt Tootsie's [Bridgewater's maternal aunt, Rose Holliday Campbell] house (laughter), and I got there, I'll never forget that. I dressed us up and we had been given these fake, fur big house shoes and I thought because they were fake fur that they'd be warm. So I dressed us up and we wore leggings you know that matched our little coats and we had our little fake fur bonnets and our gloves on and I said, "Okay, we're gonna wear these shoes they'll be warm and we walked like a mile and a half over to--," that's about how far my mother and my Aunt Tootsie lived from each other and we walked over there and she answered the door, and I said, "Aunt Tootsie we've run away, my mother's putting us in Catholic school. I wanna live with you Aunt Tootsie." I always loved going to my Aunt Tootsie's house because my Aunt Tootsie had six kids. Well, at the time I was young, it was just one, two, three, three kids, but there was always stuff going on. My Uncle Clarence [Clarence C. Campbell] had built their house, it was a little funky, but you know my Aunt Tootsie made all her own clothes and she was really, she was just kind outside of the box and very free I thought, and they were very free with their children in, in a lot of ways, where my mother was trying to keep my sister and I, you know in a, in--in kinds of, of disciplinary boxes. Story_ID: 659975 Speaker 1: One thing we haven't talked about is your own artistic development, I guess as a singer. Were, were you singing as a child (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I always sang. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I always sang, I thought everybody could sing. Speaker 1: Did you sing along with your father's records and? Speaker 2: Well, my father [Matthew Garrett] didn't make any--well, no, I sang along with my mother's records. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean the records they were playing? Speaker 2: The, yeah, yeah, oh yeah, yeah, oh yeah. So, and when my mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth], you know my mother was part of a bridge club and so when she'd have the bridge meetings at her house, she'd always call me out to, to sing acapella and I don't remember all the songs that I would sing. Speaker 1: I know the church is usually the place where people develop-- Speaker 2: I didn't go to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) singing talent (unclear). Speaker 2: --because I went to Catholic church [St. Matthew Catholic Church, Flint, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: I always wanted to go to a Baptist church. I don't know why Baptist church, but I always wanted to go to a Baptist church. I didn't do that until I lived, until I was living out here [Los Angeles, California] in the late '70s [1970s] and I joined the Mt. Zion Missionary Baptist Church [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was just because I wanted to sing in a choir. Story_ID: 659976 Speaker 1: So, did things change a bit when you--did you, was your mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth] still trying to have you pra- practice Catholicism even though you were in public high school [Southwestern High School; Southwestern Classical Academy, Flint, Michigan], I mean did she take (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, once I, once I got to the public school, she didn't insist, but I still would go to church. Speaker 1: To Catholic church? Speaker 2: I would go to Catholic church. Speaker 1: To Mass (unclear). Speaker 2: And I think I stopped going to Catholic church when I was like sixteen and then I decided when I was getting to marry my first husband, Cecil [Cecil Bridgewater], that I needed to go back to church and I needed to confess and I needed to marry. I married into the Catholic church. Speaker 1: And that's amazing, and so that does speak to the hold that church had on-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, but I had, I had an incident when I did my confession with the priest. I don't remember what church I went to, if it was St. Matthew's [St. Matthew Catholic Church, Flint, Michigan] or if it was St. Michael's [St. Michael Catholic Church, Flint, Michigan]--oh, it was a church, it was a Catholic church in East Lansing [Michigan], because I was at Michigan State [Michigan State University] at the time, and he wanted me to give him details. I said, "You know I have kissed and I've, I've been fondled up--," you know, because we've been told that we have to confess everything and you know of course, I had not had full blown sex, but you know I'd done everything almost, but you know and so when I was, I was saying that he said, "Well, like wow, how many times did you kiss?" I was like, "I don't know, father." "Did he touch you?" "Oh, yes father." "Did he touch your breasts?" "Oh, yes father." You know, "Well how many times?" And I started like hearing him like breath heavy and so then he asked me to, to wait for him after he finished the, you know, the confessions and then he wanted to talk to me, and I remember sitting outside, it was like in the spring. I remember sitting outside of this church on a bench and this priest coming out and I noticed he was like really sweaty and he took my hand and he was like, "My child," you know. I don't know what he said but his hands were all clammy and I was like, I mean I'm like, dude, but I was like, "Sorry, father." He says, you know, "I need to have some one on one time with you to help you to cleanse yourself." And I was like, I've been down that road. I was molested from like the age of twelve, I was molested like, four times. I was raped twice. So, I'd already--so I knew that one. I knew that story (laughter). So, I was like, "Oh, no, I'm not going." Speaker 1: This by, by a Catholic priest? Speaker 2: It was a Catholic priest. Wanted to give me some one on one sessions. So, thank--well, you know thank goodness, I'd had other incidents in that regard that I knew, but when he grabbed my hand with my hand it was oh so clammy, he was breathing hard. I don't know if I'd given him an erection or not, but I knew it was wrong. Story_ID: 659977 Speaker 1: You wanna tell that story? Speaker 2: Sure, there was a priest at St. Matthew's [St. Matthew Catholic Church, Flint, Michigan], his name was Father O'Grady [ph.]. He was--not only, he was, he was a horrible man. He was an alcoholic; at that time the church which was almost like a small cathedral, they had installed a mic [microphone] system because you couldn't hear the Mass if you were in the back of the church, and when he would receive the Blood of Christ (laughter), the altar boy would, would tip you know the little cup. I think they used to drink Mogen David wine, I don't know, and he'd, you know, pour the, the wine into the chalice and the priest would always--Father O'Grady would always hit the pitcher so that the altar boy would pour more wine in, and then he would drink it and I, I don't know why nobody ever told him that when you drink and if you, if you sigh, we're gonna hear it all over the church. He would drink that wine down and he'd go (makes sound). (Laughter) Oh lord and when he would get the, you know receive the, you know, Blood of Christ before he would give out the, the first communion, same thing, (makes sound). But I saw him on at least three occasions feeling up the novice nuns, going up under--they had these long white bibs that they wore that was part of their habit, going up under there and feeling their breasts and just having them pinned up against the wall in between the, the convent and the church rectory and there was this narrow little wall-way, hallway or walkway rather, and I saw him do this like three times and then I was told by someone that there were a lot of, of abortions, I mean a lot of aborted bodies that were buried on the grounds of the convent. Speaker 1: Yeah, I saw, (unclear) say that about (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then there, you know we would have the strange disappearances of some young nun, she'd be in school one day and then I mean and then she wouldn't be at, at the school anymore, and you wouldn't see her at the convent anymore and I suspected those were the ones that were getting pregnant. Speaker 1: Did you see anything comparable in the public school [Southwestern High School; Southwestern Classical Academy, Flint, Michigan], with teachers and students or as teachers and other teachers (unclear)? Speaker 2: I had a--I had my science teacher really, really like me and he would always allow me to come and work on my, my science projects and he would get close to me but I--like I said, I'd had all these incidents happen to me so I knew how to move away. I mean I was molested by my [paternal] step-grandfather when I was eleven in front of my sister [Rhonda Garrett Whiters]. Can you believe that? But I did have--no, but at the public school, that was the only incident that I knew about and I don't--no one ever mentioned having any issues, but I'm talking about the black children. So, I don't know what happened with the white kids. Speaker 1: So, you had, you had quite a few things that happened to you that weren't really supposed to happen to a girl your age? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Before you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: Often. Speaker 1: Hm. Speaker 2: You know I was quite well endowed by the time I was twelve. I wore, up until I was fifty, you will not see me in anything that fit because of all those problems and then when I turned fifty I felt like I could control, I knew I could control my situations and I wanted to, everybody was getting breast augmentations and here I had these natural things and so I said, "Oh, I'm--shoot everybody else is doing it," and that was when I first started wearing clothes that fit. I would never wear a dress like this before in my forties (makes sound), everything was loose, everything was loose and that, it's because of that. Story_ID: 659978 Speaker 1: Now, did you have opportunities to actually sing when you at, at South- was it South? Speaker 2: Southwestern [Southwestern High School; Southwestern Classical Academy, Flint, Michigan]? Speaker 1: Southwestern (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I put a group together, we called ourselves The Iridescents. I wrote with a girlfriend named Valerie Washington [ph.], we wrote the songs together and we did talent contests. We modeled ourselves after The Marvelettes, who were a part of Motown [Motown Records] when it first happened. They, two of the members of The Marvelettes grew up on the, on one street over from the street that I, I grew up on from my early teens and, oh yeah. When we got to sixteen, my girlfriends didn't wanna rehearse, they all were, they were both into boys you know and I you know, I hadn't--I didn't have sex until I was almost eighteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were, they were you know they had boyfriends. Speaker 1: And consensual sex you're talking about? Speaker 2: Consensual sex. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, consensual, thank you. Story_ID: 659979 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was your situation, was it shared by a lot of young ladies your, your age, did they have the same, a similar experience or was it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We didn't speak about it. Speaker 1: Okay, so it'd be hard to tell? Speaker 2: That, that was totally unspoken stuff. I have no idea if they went through what I went through. Speaker 1: I know publicly for the--well, once I guess 'The Oprah Winfrey Show,' I'll tell you was the first time I heard a lot of stories about you know the molestation of young girls in the home. Speaker 2: Um-hm and incest too. Speaker 1: You know by relatives and that that sort (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it's always by somebody you know. Speaker 1: I never really heard of, about it. I didn't--it wasn't part of what I ever heard anybody talking about or thought was going on, but after so many people started talking about it, you know I said, "Well, I think it's probably more pervasive that I thought it was." Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure, I'm sure. I mean I don't know about my girlfriends themselves, but I have a girlfriend, one of my girlfriends from Flint [Michigan] whose daughter was molested for years by my girlfriend's husband, for years and she's now in her early forties and she's just getting over it and she's now you know trying to work with you know other young women that have gone through that. And she just-- Speaker 1: Hm, it's (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, and it, like two years ago, I said to my, my girlfriend, "You've got to change your name my dear, and go back to your maiden name. You can't keep the name of the man who raped your child constantly. Hello?" And she went, "Aw Dee Dee [HistoryMaker Dee Dee Bridgewater] I never thought about it." I was like, "Hello, no." So, so I, you know I, I none of my girlfriends ever talked about that stuff happening to them, but it sure happened to me, you know. As a result of all of that happening to me, my choices in men were not good. Speaker 1: How so, I mean how did it affect (unclear)? Speaker 2: Because, well, I remember that when I had boyfriends when I was a teenager, I always had like at least two or three boyfriends, and I would juggle 'em and it was a game for me. I was a big tease, I would not, I would not go all the way, never, never, never, but I sure would flirt with them and let 'em think, you know, because they were either like the most popular or you know the cutest or you know the best singer or the you know, this you know, had the baddest in, in the good sense, you know. You know I grew up in, in the town [Flint, Michigan] with General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] so, the car was the thing. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the heyday of (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, baby you know the deuce and a quarter, you know the, you know like all the Cadillacs and the Buicks and the, you know. So, you had to have a ride you know. Everybody had their car, even if they, they were living at home with their parents (laughter). Story_ID: 659980 Speaker 1: So you're still making A's right? Are you still making good grades in school, in high school [Southwestern High School; Southwestern Classical Academy, Flint, Michigan] at (unclear)(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, when I got to high school I said, "Eh, forget it," but I did, I just, I laxed up, but I did graduate you know with like a, almost a 4.0 average [grade point average]. It was like a 3.75 average and that was also at the time when they were trying to, they had passed laws to get African American students into the college system, so I got like over a hundred scholarship offers to different colleges around the country. Speaker 1: One question I didn't ask, what was the name of your group? Speaker 2: The Iridescents. Speaker 1: The Iridescents, okay. Speaker 2: And we always made our dresses and they were always iridescent fabric. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which is the fabric that you know depending on how you looked at was one color or another. Speaker 1: So you said--now, you graduated in 1968 correct? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And when you, you got scholarship offers-- Speaker 2: I didn't accept any of them because I did not want anyone telling me what to do. I went to my bank, Citizens Bank [Citizens Commercial and Savings Bank; FirstMerit Bank, Flint, Michigan], and I asked for a student loan (laughter), because I knew I didn't want to go to college. I was sick of school. Story_ID: 659981 Speaker 1: Now, this is a year that, you know is used, is often used as a, as a milestone for people, 1968. It certainly is for black professionals, a lot them got hired in '68 [1968] simply because of the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. It made white America feel guilty and it raised contradictions in society. People got angry and they pushed wherever they were and so you're in high school [Southwestern High School; Southwestern Classical Academy, Flint, Michigan] during this period of time. What was, do you remember the outcome of King's assassination then. Were you in school? Speaker 2: There, there wasn't any rioting in Flint [Michigan] on the south side. I don't know if anything happened on the north side of the city. I don't remember anything happening. Speaker 1: Did your school commemorate the assassination in any way? Speaker 2: I don't remember that at all. I don't remember it being--I don't remember that at all. Isn't that interesting? I remember I, I was personally devastated because I thought this man was so great and had, had done so many great things. I was always conscious of my blackness and I think that's because I didn't take my blackness for, for granted because I was so often in a white situation, so I had to learn how to walk on both sides of the fence so to speak and to comport myself differently, so I never--I don't remember that at all. My political awareness really became prevalent when I went away to Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan] and then of course when I moved to New York City [New York, New York], you know. My people were the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party]. Speaker 1: Okay, so at Michigan State, now this is fall of '68 [1968] now did you work during the summer, or did you? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I think I--what did I do that summer? No, I didn't I took off that summer. Story_ID: 659982 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I always ask this question. I forgot to ask it, but what kind of counseling--did you get any kind of counseling about college? Speaker 2: You know they gave us these aptitude tests in the eleventh grade [at Southwestern High School; Southwestern Classical Academy, Flint, Michigan], and you know what I scored highest in? Mechanics, because I used to love to take apart like the radios, transistor radios, the telephones, and like really pick the stuff apart and then put it back together. I loved to when we would go for my, for our car to have repairs, I loved to go in and watch the mechanics and get up under. I--that was fascinating and I, I always had this, this desire to take apart a motor and put it back together, but so, when the counselor (laughter), when I went to see the counselor, the counselor says, "Well, I don't know that you really need to college, your highest aptitude is in mechanics. Maybe you should just look at getting a job with General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motor Company] and work in the factory. Speaker 1: Now, we have about I don't know how many hundreds if not a thousand stories like that in the archive. Yeah, this is a white counselor? Speaker 2: Of course, it's a white counselor. Speaker 1: I just wanted to make it clear for whoever's watching. Speaker 2: Yes, of course, I'm sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 1: If they ever knew what it was like to be in school in '68 [1968] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah in the '60s [1960s] it was yeah, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right. Speaker 2: You know we were supposed to be homemakers and you know menial jobs, you know. Story_ID: 659983 Speaker 1: So nineteen sixty- fall of '68 [1968] Michigan State University, East Lansing [Michigan] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Free at last, free at last! Speaker 1: Spartans, green and white all that, you know (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was free. Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, what was, what were black people doing at Michigan State then? Speaker 2: I don't know what all they were doing. I mean there were the fraternities, the black fraternities and the sororities and there were all of these you know like little intellectual clubs that were going on. There was, there was social clubs going on, there were you know the politically aware, you know there was the black studies programs that happened, you know so there was all of that stuff going on. I wasn't interested, I wanted to party. It was my first year out of high school [Southwestern High School; Southwestern Classical Academy, Flint, Michigan], I was going there on my own monies. All I wanted to do is party. I wasn't interested in, in much school. I decided I wasn't going to be disciplined, you know. I was an English major. I wanted to be a writer. Singing was just something that I did 'cause it was easy and it was a way for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, this is something I read that when you were seven years old you told your parents [Marion Holliday Hudspeth and Matthew Garrett] that you wanted to be a jazz singer. Speaker 2: I did, I told my parents that when I grew up I was gonna be a jazz singer and I was going to be internationally well known and respected. I did. Speaker 1: And so you had thrown that, cast that aside? Speaker 2: Well, I just--singing was just what I did, but it was not my objective. When I left home my objective was freedom, to be on my own. To finally be independent and to do the things that I wanted to do the way I wanted to do 'em, and that's what I did. Speaker 1: Okay, did you get involved in a sorority? Speaker 2: Yeah, I got involved with the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] but I was a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] at heart, my mother was an AKA, and so I pledged AKA, but I was a militant and when I was you know pledging, they wouldn't give me my pin when I crossed over because when they had the--what do you call it when you pledge when you know, when you're getting ready to cross over, and they take you out and they do all that stuff to you. What is that called? When the pledgees (unclear)? Speaker 1: Hazing or whatever? Speaker 2: Like hazing and I--one of the pledgees was a good girlfriend of mine from Flint, Michigan also. Her name was Wanda Hutchinson [ph.] and she was deathly afraid of worms and they, they knew that, the big sisters, and they took a coffee can, a Maxwell House coffee can and filed it with worms and they had made us take off all our clothes except our bras and panties. They had laid her down on the floor, they had tied her hands and feet and they put this coffee can of worms on her stomach and I lost it. She was freaking out. She went into a seizure. I cut the strings, I took her. I cursed them out and I said, "You all can keep your pins, you, you know." I had to take her to the emergency room. They had made us eat (makes sound), they called it having tea and crumpets and it was Ritz Crackers with toothpaste on 'em and we had to eat toothpaste, but you're not supposed to ingest. (Gesture) That part of it, I was like, oh, no. Story_ID: 659984 Speaker 1: I was already doing community work with the Black Panther Party and I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Lansing? Speaker 1: In East Lansing [Michigan]. Speaker 2: East Lansing, okay. Speaker 1: So, I was really conscious of, of being black you know and the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] were working with the, the Panther Party because in the beginning the Black Panther Party, what people don't now, is it was about just protecting the black community, and they started out--I don't know if you know about that but they had a breakfast program [Free Breakfast for School Children Program] that they started in the black community because so many of the kids were poor and they weren't going to school with breakfast, so they would set up the community centers so they could serve breakfast to the children. So, I went and I did that, and you know I, I mean I was really a, a firm believer in the Panther Party when they started. Speaker 2: Who, who was the leaders of the Panthers in East Lansing? Speaker 1: I don't remember who they were in East Lansing because I was following the national, so, I don't remember. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Isn't that interesting? Speaker 2: So, you got (unclear) level (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't know who I worked with. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I mean my heroes were of course [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis and, and Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton] and you know Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and-- Speaker 2: Did you know Dr. Robert Green [HistoryMaker Robert Green] at MSU [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan]? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: He was involved in civil rights and I think he had the African studies, American studies program or what, I don't know what they called it then. Speaker 1: Yeah, so I don't know because like I said I didn't go to school to really like--I was a kind of, I don't know what I was a misfit. I don't know, so I didn't like join all of the regular stuff. Like I said I joined the sorority thing, I did the sorority thing because my mother [Marion Holliday Hudspeth] had done it but I really had wanted to be a Delta (laughter) because the Deltas I thought were more involved in community things. The AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] were usually the lighter, the fairer skinned women and so their stuff was more like socialite, and I was not interested you know in the pink and green. And my girlfriends that I really liked most of them were, were Deltas. I recently last year did a concert in Grand Rapids [Michigan] and a lot my sorority sisters came to see me and I was stupefied. I was like, "Oh, my god," the women that I crossed over with. I had to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the AKAs? Speaker 1: The AKAs, my sorority sisters came to see me (simultaneous). Story_ID: 659985 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you singing in Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan]? Did you sing in a--? Speaker 2: Yes, I had a talent contest and, and I would sing locally with a man who was working on his doctorate who was a good friend of my father's [Matthew Garrett] who had taught at--what was the other black high school? I think it was Porter High School [ph.], well my father was at Manassas [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee] but his name was Andy Goodrich [Andrew L. Goodrich] and he was out of Chicago [Illinois] and he was an alto player and he had a quintet called The Andy Goodrich Quintet and when I went to Michigan State my father introduced me to him and he put me in his band and he called The Andy Goodrich Quintet Plus One. So, I would do stuff with, with his band. Speaker 1: Did you have any formal instruction in voice or anything-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --at Michigan State, or-- Speaker 2: Never. Speaker 1: --in high school [Southwestern High School; Southwestern Classical Academy, Flint, Michigan] even? Speaker 2: Never. Speaker 1: Never? Speaker 2: I cannot read or write music. I have good ears. Speaker 1: Okay, so but Andy Goodrich knew this, he knew that you were good and so, you're in the band performing gigs. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I guess, okay. Speaker 2: The Wayne [Wayne County, Michigan] collegiate festivals and collegiate competitions and winning every competition that we did, and if we didn't have a vocal segment, they would give me a special prize, yeah. In, as in terms of my singing career, well also when I was in Flint [Michigan] while I was in high school I sang with the band that my father was in, part time called the Sherman Mitchell--it was the Sherman Mitchell you know depending on how many members quartet, quintet, and they would let me sing with them on weekends. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I won a couple of talent contests and one of the prizes was being able to sing at the local clubs and so my father would chaperone me and I'd have to sit in the kitchen 'cause I was underage and I would come out and they called me, "Little Dee Dee Garrett [HistoryMaker Dee Dee Bridgewater]." I remember singing with George Benson, but I never told George, I never told him. Speaker 1: So you never told him that you actually sung with him? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He had come to Flint, yep it was the--what was the name of that club? I can't remember. The Motor City Jazz Club [ph.], yep I remember walking down the street and it was on Saginaw [Street] and stopping in front of it because they had put you know my little picture from wining this talent show and you know, yeah, with George Benson. I think it was--I think he was a trio. Speaker 1: That's before George Benson became George Benson-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --for everybody. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 659986 Speaker 1: Now you met Cecil Bridgewater at Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan]? Speaker 2: No, I met Cecil at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay all right, they got it (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cecil went to the University of Illinois and while I was at Michigan State I did a, a we were involved in a collegiate jazz festival at the University of Illinois and so my parents [Marion Holliday Hudspeth and Matthew Garrett] drove me down to, to sing with Andy [Andrew L. Goodrich]. Speaker 1: Okay, and that's where you met. Speaker 2: That's where you met? Speaker 1: And I saw Cecil Bridgewater getting out of a car. He had a Volkswagen, it was red and he had a big Afro and he had on a dashiki and he pulled that trumpet out and I remember when we were going past him. I didn't even know who he was and I said, "Ooh, mama, do you see that man?" 'Cause I loved to rib my mother. "Did you see that, you see that man that just got out of that car?" She says "Yes, what about him?" I said, "I'm gonna find out who he is and I'm gonna marry him." (Shakes head) So bad. Story_ID: 659987 Speaker 1: Now, something--okay, it's something I had not talked about, haven't discussed, but I don't know where it comes, where it comes up, but you had a story that's been widely publicized of an abortion when you were eighteen? Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Is that during your freshman year at Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] or? Speaker 2: That was--let me get it together, yes, yes I had the abortion and actually yeah, when I started to, to abort I was in the car on that trip, driving down to Champaign-Urbana [Illinois] to do this competition [at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] with The Andy Goodrich Quintet. Speaker 1: Now, this is--yeah, now this is a story that's resounded with a lot of people because people don't know what it's like before abortions were legal. Speaker 2: It was a trip, yeah, you know I, I mean I'll never forget it. I don't remember the motel that I had to go to but know it was a dirty motel. Dirty motel room and it was the friend of one of my best girlfriend's older sisters and she was a nurse and they took these thin--well, she did--this thin rubber tube and they would--she would put it up until it I guess pierced the uterine. Speaker 1: The amniotic sac or something (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, yeah I had to keep this tube in between my legs, hidden while I was driving from Flint, Michigan down to Champaign-Urbana and then--yep. I-- Speaker 1: So, you had. Speaker 2: --started hemorrhaging. Speaker 1: Now, this is a secret from your parents [Marion Holliday Hudspeth and Matthew Garrett] or? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know that they know that at all. Speaker 1: So, this had to be all a tremendous amount of stress and pain? Speaker 2: It was very painful I remember, it was humiliating I remember and it's hard for me to talk about it without tearing up because I have really tried to suppress this memory, but you know, I, I had to do it you know. Story_ID: 659988 Speaker 1: So, you never went back to Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] after that incident? Speaker 2: I did, I did--how did that work? I did one the first year and then one the following year I transferred to, to U of I because I had to go to the U of I [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] to sing with the Big Band [Jazz Big Band]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And part of me doing that collegiate competition was that I, the musical director of the, that band whose name is John Garvey, Professor John Garvey, came and asked me if I'd be interested in, in doing a cultural exchange trip to Russia and so I said, "Absolutely, I'd love it." And he says, "Well, you'll have to transfer here." And I was like, "That's fine." Story_ID: 659989 Speaker 1: --Garvey [John Garvey]-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) how much he loved jazz and-- Speaker 2: Yeah he was, he was well respected around the United States for his work in jazz and for that collegiate jazz band [Jazz Big Band], you know the University of Illinois jazz band and one of his most famous students that came out of that, the program and who was in that band is Jim McNeely, who's a pianist who now has, he has taken over The Thad Jones/Mel Lewis Orchestra and it's you know that's continuing on that legacy at the Village Vanguard [New York, New York], Jim McNeely, yeah, he was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --a pianist in the band when I was there. Speaker 1: All right, so the University of Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], so you're--we're talking about the trip to--now, had you met, actually had a chance to develop a relationship with Cecil Bridgewater before you went to. Speaker 2: Oh, I hunted him down, poor man. He didn't stand a chance. I did. When I, I remember we had a concert, this is after I've transferred down there [from Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] and so I've doing you know some dates but usually it was on the campus with the big band and then I'm singing around town with the band that, you know because of course I'd walked to Cecil Bridgewater and introduced him--introduced myself to him and his brother Ronnie [Ron Bridgewater] was also in the band, Ronnie Bridgewater, and when I moved down there I was going out dancing with Ronnie all the time, 'cause Ronnie was a great dancer and I loved to dance. So, we would always go places where we could dance, and Ronnie liked me but I didn't like Ronnie. I was trying to get to Cecil. Ceil was engaged to a young woman named Lydia Brown [ph.], who I've never seen since all this happened, but before we went to Russia I--she was waiting for Cecil and I was coming down a--one of the hallways of the, of the Krannert Center [Krannert Center for the Performing Arts, Urbana, Illinois] and I said, "How, how tight is your union? How tight are you and Cecil?" She says, "Oh, we're very tight." I said, "Well, you'd better be." I was so bad. I said, "Because if you're not, he's gonna be mine when we get off of this tour." And, and it happened, he called off the, their engagement by the time we got off the tour. Story_ID: 659990 Speaker 1: So this is a tour to the Soviet Union? Speaker 2: The Soviet Union. Speaker 1: This is in? Speaker 2: In 1969. Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969]. Now, about what time of year is it? Speaker 2: It is in like, like late fall. Speaker 1: Late fall. Speaker 2: Like October, November, it, it was like winter. Speaker 1: That was interesting 'cause I know that Fred Hampton, a Black Panther [Black Panther Party] in Chicago [Illinois] was killed around, in the fall, late fall of '69 [1969], so I just wondered if. Speaker 2: I remember Fred Hampton. Speaker 1: Yeah, so you were in the Soviet Union when that happened? Speaker 2: I was in the Soviet Union, but that was you know after all the, the college unrest and Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] had happened and so there was a lot of fear by the communist regime. Speaker 1: Well, (unclear) just before that, this is, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah but, that had happened so when we went over there in '69 [1969], they were like, "Oh, no, here come some American university students," and it was a mixed band, predominately white but I think we were maybe five black kids in the band [Jazz Big Band], but everywhere we went we were followed. Our rooms were bugged, we are--back then Aeroflot [PJSC Aeroflot - Russian Airlines], when you landed in Moscow [Russia], you (laughter) you went to collect your stuff in a hangar that they had converted into the baggage claim area, and you were grilled, you had to go to these long tables and they have those hefty Russian women with their babushkas on (gesture) (laughter) and they would interrogate you and you wouldn't get our bags for two to three hours and when you'd get your bags they'd have gone through everything. Everything was just like thrown back in the bag and they'd gone through everything. Speaker 1: So, they had a fear. Speaker 2: So, they thought we were gonna-- Speaker 1: That you'd be spies? Speaker 2: Yeah, or subversive for their youth. We had to be bused everywhere by the American embassy. The American embassy organized clandestine meetings for us with Russian jazz musicians. We had to turn the lights off on the bus like three or four blocks before the, the destination. We had to get down so that you couldn't see, it looked like the bus was empty. We had to get out two by two and we were taken to some alleyway where they did a special knock. It was like the old speakeasies where they had the little window and they'd open the window and they'd say something in Russian and they'd open the door and then it was a second basement, knock again, special code when you go down and you'd be in a, a subbasement where you couldn't stand up. You could stand like, like this (stands) 'cause the roof was there and I remember, very smoky because everybody smoked cigarettes back then. So, it was like walking around through a cloud of smoke and everybody had to play you know sitting and sing sitting and a lot of vodka, a lot of vodka, but it, yeah, but so (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is--yeah. Speaker 2: When I went there that time it was all of the meetings with young people were clandestine because if you were walking down the street--I thought everybody was a KGB spy (laughter) because you would have these little ladies you know with, with their brooms made of the twigs, right, and wove around and they'd be sweeping and some young kids would come toward you and next thing you'd see these women coming and snatching these kids off and taking 'em into a, a store or into an alleyway or a doorway to, to an apartment complex. So, everything was clandestine when I went in '69 [1969]. Then I went back in '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember taking a lot of blue jeans and I took a lot of bangles because in the late '60s [1960s] we wore, all those bangles were in and bracelets made with spoons and forks and knives. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Some still wear them. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I've had a couple of girlfriends that still wear them. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yep, so I took a lot of those bracelets. I remember I just did my arm up with just bracelets and when I would run into people I would give them--they'd give me something that they had (simultaneous). Story_ID: 659991 Speaker 1: Did black music or jazz represent like a kind of--I know I heard this story of there's a Russian trumpeter [Valery Ponomarev] that played with Art Blakey, plays like Clifford Brown. I forget his name, but he wears overalls all the time and then there's a movie Robin Williams played a Russian who defects to the United States on a jazz and plays the saxophone. Speaker 2: Yes, I vaguely remember that. Speaker 1: But anyway, it seems like it's in both of these incidents where I read about the trumpet player and the character that Robin Williams played [on 'Moscow on the Hudson'], that jazz represents a kind of freedom-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --for the people of the Soviet Union? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, some great musicians, really great musicians, and it's very interesting because I've, I've had a lot of, of Russians come up to me over the years who saw me in one of the cities that we performed in and wanted to tell me how liberating that whole experience had been for them and hearing me sing and the second time when I went back I was pregnant. I think I was like five and a half months pregnant and I was very pregnant, you could see it and that created quite a, a scandal to have a pregnant woman singing on stage. Story_ID: 659992 Speaker 1: Was your experience at, at University of Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] as a student primarily, or did it, did it become (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Shakes head) I, I went one semester. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Like I said, I was tired of school, and I don't know if I was lazy. I just wanted to experience life, you know. I don't regret that I didn't finish college, but I have thought about going back to school you know, recently and getting a bachelor's degree. Speaker 1: Did Cecil Bridgewater finish the University of Illinois, 'cause I know he's from Urbana [Illinois]? Speaker 2: I think he did. Speaker 1: Right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He was right from (unclear). Speaker 2: Champaign [Illinois], he's from Champaign. Speaker 1: Champaign, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yes, he did. Speaker 1: And he's a significant figure in black culture as a trumpet player and you know as an artist, so. He played on, he played with Thad Lewis--I mean Thad Jones and Mel Lewis [The Thad Jones/Mel Lewis Orchestra]. Speaker 2: And then he played with Max Roach, and he played with--when we married instead of going on a honeymoon, I went on tour with Cecil and, and the band of Horace Silver, and I have my love for Horace Silver, really. Speaker 1: Well, talk about that 'cause there a lot of people, I mean a lot of names Dizzy Gillespie, Dexter Gordon, Max Roach, Frank Foster. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Stanley Clarke. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, but Horace Silver is special in your life, right? Speaker 2: I first heard Horace Silver at a, at a Thursday dinner with my father [Matthew Garrett] 'cause every Thursday was my night to go out with my dad and he would take to like the local corner restaurant in Flint [Michigan], and, and there was a restaurant that was like a block away, it was on the other side of Clark School, Clark Elementary [Clark Elementary School, Flint, Michigan] and we were sitting in this restaurant we had a juke box and there was a juke box and all of a sudden this song came on, and I remember my father and I were talking, and I don't even remember what about, but it was 'Song for My Father' and I remember stopping and saying, "Daddy, what's that? Who's that?" He said, "Oh, that's a pianist named Horace Silver. That song is called 'Song for My Father.'" And I was like, "Aah, I like that, I like that daddy. Ooh, I really like that." And that was when Horace Silver came into my consciousness. So, that Cecil got hired by Horace was like (makes sound) for me you know and I wanted desperately to sing his songs, desperately and he had Andy Bey-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --was his fetish singer and so Andy was on this tour and I would talk to Andy, and I'd be like, "Andy--," and I would ask Horace, "Please can I sit in, please?" And he was like, "No, no, no," and I have a very famous story of that. We decided, Andy Bey and I, that he was gonna sit in without Horace knowing, because Horace always played with his head down and he kept his hair long, so it was always in his face and so there was a song that he had written called 'Love Vibrations' that I absolutely adored and so Andy and I decided, and I could sing in the same key, that I would just come out because all my family had come and they wanted to meet my new husband and I forget the club that we were in. At any rate, I come out and I told my family, "Please don't clap or anything when I come out," you know, so I started to sing, (singing) "Emptiness surrounds my lonely heart," and that's as far as I got. That head snapped up, he looked over at me and he says, "What are you doing on my stage? Get off! Get off!" And off I went like a little puppy dog with my tail tucked between my legs and my ears down and I--instead of being, I was embarrassed in the moment 'cause I knew I was wrong, 'cause I had not asked Horace if I could do this, and he had already told me no. But it made me more determined to show him I could sing his music. Speaker 1: So, this is about 1970? Speaker 2: It was 1970. Speaker 1: In New York City [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: It was in Detroit [Michigan] when it happened (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Detroit, okay when that, that incident. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The incident was in Detroit. Story_ID: 659993 Speaker 1: So, imagine his surprise when I called him in 1995 and said, "Horace [Horace Silver], I'm gonna do an album of your music ['Love and Peace: A Tribute to Horace Silver']." He was stunned, he said, "But Dee [HistoryMaker Dee Dee Bridgewater], I mean after, after I threw you off the stage all those years ago, you wanna do it with me?" I said, "I love your music, I love your music." So, when I picked the songs he, he said, "Well, then I will write all the lyrics." And some of the songs had lyrics that had been (simultaneous)-- (Simultaneous) So, you wrote the lyrics? Speaker 2: Horace wrote, (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Horace said he'd write all the lyrics. Speaker 2: --said he would write all the lyrics for the songs that I selected, and he had, had some kind of publishing conflict with Jon Hendricks who had written a lot of lyrics on his songs, and their, their agreement can--had come up so he was getting all his publishing back and so he said he would write all the lyrics for me. Speaker 1: 'Cause he had some songs that had lyrics like the "Song for My Father" and then others that didn't have any. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: As of yet. Speaker 2: He wrote-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --all the lyrics, yep for that album and then he agreed, I asked him if he would perform on the album and Horace never guested on anyone's albums. And he did, I flew him to Paris [France], I recorded the album in Paris and he came. Speaker 1: That was "Permit Me to Introduce You to Yourself" (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) "You to Yourself." Speaker 1: Did he write those lyrics-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --especially for you? Speaker 2: No, that he had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were they already-- Speaker 2: --written for--he did this trilogy called The United States of Mind' and that, that was on one of those albums. It was on the first album. So, he'd written those lyrics already. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But like "Pretty Eyes" well he rewrote the lyrics, they were famous lyrics that had been written by Jon Hendricks, so rewrote the lyrics on, on "Song for My Father" on "Doodlin'" then he wrote me the lyrics for everything else. "Saint Vitus Dance," "Soulville," "Nica's Dream," "Filthy McNasty," "The Jody Grind;" all those songs, every song on that album. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Those are all Horace Silver lyrics and as a result of that album project, if you look at Horace's CDs [compact discs] that came after, he wrote lyrics on many of the songs and put them in the, the CD sleeves. So, I'm very proud that I initiated that. Speaker 1: We are all grateful. Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to at that time give singers other material to choose from other than the 'American Songbooks' ['Great American Songbook'] and I wanted him to be able to reap the rewards while he was alive. Story_ID: 659994 Speaker 1: So, when were you--well what year I guess was it that you were sort of recognized really as a--I know you had been singing, but you know--well, you weren't recognized by Horace Silver, but what--in the early '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: I think I, I won the DownBeat poll, you know talent deserving of wider recognition, or something like that in like '74 [1974]. I started getting recognition as soon as I joined The Thad Jones/Mel Lewis Orchestra. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And I started then being taken out of the band by all of these great musicians that I worked with, from Clark Terry to Dizzy Gillespie to [HistoryMaker] Sonny Rollins to Dexter Gordon. Frank Foster had me sing on that, one of his I think most well know albums called 'The Loud Minority.' Speaker 1: A counter to the silent majority, right (laughter)? Richard Nixon's [President Richard Milhous Nixon] silent majority. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: That he claimed to represent. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Right? Speaker 2: Right, so you know Stanley Clarke was starting to have a name for himself and, and Stanley and it was you know, involved with Chick Corea and the 'Return to Forever,' and so I was hanging out with Stanley and Flora Purim and Airto [Airto Moreira] and we'd go up to Chick's apartment in, in New York [New York] up on the West Side and we'd hang out. I was also involved in you know the kind of movement of when we started what we called (air quotes) fusion music, so and that was with like T.S. Monk [HistoryMaker T.S. Monk, III] and Onaje Allan Gumbs, there's somebody else and, and I remember (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Norman Connors I guess was (unclear). Speaker 2: Um-hm? Speaker 1: I guess Norman Connors (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if he was featured in this Esquire-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --piece where they called us like the young rebels or something, but we were all trying to broaden the whole jazz spectrum and bring in other musics that we liked. Stanley's love was with rock, so he you know he started doing his thing. Speaker 1: And The Blackbyrds were popular then, and Donald Byrd (unclear). Speaker 2: Donald Byrd, yeah, oh yeah. Donald Byrd was popular, Gil Scott-Heron was starting. I remember taking the train down to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] so I could go hear Gil Scott-Heron and, and hanging out with him in the beginning of his career and you know. So, I was you know kind of on, on--I was part of the band that was on the cutting edge of changing up the jazz thing, I mean like [HistoryMaker] Jean Carne and, and-- Speaker 1: Right, Doug Carn. Speaker 2: Doug, Doug Carn you know they came out right after and, you know. Speaker 1: Did you lean towards the music that had a message, I mean? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I liked, I liked music that had messages. Speaker 1: When you mentioned Jean Carne, I mean I--when I interviewed Jean Carne, she by looking at me she had no idea I knew what she did. When I mentioned her music, she teared up, she said, "You remember that?" And she said, "That was the greatest time of my life." Speaker 2: Oh, they wrote such--you know, I did, I did 'Infant Eyes' on the first album that I did under my name in '73 [1973] on an album that I recorded in Tokyo, Japan. I love Jean, I love Jean and you know, then of course Norman Connors happened, and I was involved with Norman. There was a young Panamanian musician, Carlos Garnett. Speaker 1: Carlos Garnett, 'Cosmos Nucleus,' right. Speaker 2: Yep, yep I was in--I was up in his stuff Mtume [James Mtume] was doing his stuff. There was--what was that club in Brooklyn [New York] that, there's a beautiful club there that was always, also like a community center, the-- Speaker 1: The East [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: The East. Speaker 1: The East, yeah. Speaker 2: I was always over at the East. Speaker 1: Pharoah Sanders live at the East. Speaker 2: Yes, Pharoah Sanders, you know I worked with Pharoah. That was a beautiful time. Speaker 1: Gary Bartz. Speaker 2: Oh, child I love me some Gary Bartz. I still wanna do some of his or I wanna sing his song 'Rivers' ['I've Known Rivers and Other Bodies'] you know. I remember when I started singing on my own and I started going away from The Thad Jones\Mel Lewis Orchestra because ours became like a love/hate relationship because they felt, Thad [Thad Jones] and Mel [Mel Lewis] felt I was pulling attention from the band when I would sing and if I wouldn't show up people would leave 'cause they were coming really to hear me sing and they got really upset about that so they started featuring me less and less and less and so by the end of, of in '74 [1974] when I left the band, I was just doing two shows on the last show of the night and they did three sets (laughter). Story_ID: 659995 Speaker 1: Artistically, what were you consciously trying to do, I mean or what, how would you describe your sound or how you were trying to? Speaker 2: Well, I attribute the development of whatever my sound is to what Thad Jones taught me. When I, when I joined The Thad Jones\Mell Lewis Orchestra, the first time I sang, I sang all over the melody, you know and then I scatted and because that's what I thought you did, and Thad pulled me aside and he gave me this nickname un rein which in French means kidney, (laughter). He said, "Un rein, to be a great jazz singer you have to sing the melody, then you go and you do some improvisations so people can see how you know how to go away from the melody and improvise and then you come back to the melody, because if you don't sing the melody you are doing a disservice to the creators of the song, the composer and the author, and enunciate." And then he told how to construct a set, and I still construct my set based on what Thad Jones taught me. "Start out with a whopper that's gonna grab your audience, bring it down just a little bit for your next number 'cause you still wanna keep 'em. Then on your third number, throw in something like a waltz or a bossa nova or something, then do a ballad, then come back up and hit 'em again, and do it until the end of the set," and that's how I do my shows. That is how I do my show and because that band was so powerful, but because also I was with that band and then I had come from the University of Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] jazz band [Big Jazz Band], I was used to arrangements. So, when I went out and started doing my own thing in small groups, I had arrangements done, because if you just relied on cliche stuff, everything sounds the same and I wanted to have my music sound like instrumental groups, instrumental bands. All instrumental bands have arrangements for their songs. So, I thought of myself more as a musician than a singer, and because my husband [Bridgewater's first husband, Cecil Bridgewater] was a trumpet player and I'd seen you know, you know his struggles and stuff, it was very important for me to feature the musicians and not just let 'em have like eight bars--to allow them to solo and I thought of myself as, the group that I would put together as a, as a band, as a group and I fought for many years to have myself billed as like, The Dee Dee Bridgewater Quartet because it was a trio plus me, or quintet or sextet, not [HistoryMaker] Dee Dee Bridgewater and her trio. I hated that, so you know now singers can do that, 'cause I, I really fought for that, really fought for that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: But, yeah everything I know, how I hear my music came from the four years I was with Thad Jones, Mel Lewis; and particularly, Thad. Story_ID: 659996 Speaker 1: I have here that your first--Jerry Wexler was your first producer? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And he, you produced an album for Atlantic [Atlantic Records] but they never released it? Speaker 2: He produced this album, a beautiful album with these great arrangements by Gene Page, excuse me, and when he turned in my album, 'cause he had done all of Aretha's [Aretha Franklin] great albums, and I mean he'd done some of everybody. He was a huge producer. I was very fortunate I thought to get him to produce me and when he turned in my album he also resigned from the label, and they got so upset with him that they canned the album. That album is still in the can, and my attorney and I, like every ten years--so, we've gone to Atlantic now, we've gone three times. This, the last time I said, "Aw, forget it. They're not gonna give it to me to try and buy those masters [master recording], that master. Speaker 1: That's really you know. Speaker 2: You know. They sent me back in the studio with the producers who did the 'The Wiz' cast album, [HistoryMaker] Harold Wheeler and Stephen Scheaffer [Stephen Y. Scheaffer] because they had turned in the 'The Wiz' cast album, and so I went back and I did this other album that came out as 'Dee Dee Bridgewater.' Speaker 1: Okay, now what about 'Afro Blue' was that? Speaker 2: That was my first album that I ever recorded-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --under my name in Tokyo, Japan. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: After concert with The Thad Jones/Mel Lewis Orchestra, a man came up and proposed doing an album with me and Cecil [Bridgewater's first husband, Cecil Bridgewater] and Ronnie [Ron Bridgewater], 'cause Cecil and Ronnie were in the band and calling it The Bridgewater Family [ph.] and so we went into a studio one night after a concert and we went into the studio around eleven o'clock and we recorded this album, and Cecil had done most of the arrangements on it, and--well, Ronnie did the arrangement on "People Make the World Go Round" and--I think that was his, and that was my first album and that album won a lot of awards in Japan when it came out and so, I became like a the little darling in Japan and I had a whole following in, in Japan as a result of that album, which has now been rereleased and rereleased (laughter). Speaker 1: So, was that done before the 'Dee Dee Bridgewater' album? Speaker 2: Yes, in the states, yes. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: That album was done--'Afro Blue' was done in 1973, 'Dee Dee Bridgewater' came out in, on Atlantic, came out in 1975 [sic. 1976]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 659997 Speaker 1: Now you were married to Cecil Bridgewater for two years? Speaker 2: Four and a half. Speaker 1: Four and a half, okay, so, you're still married when you produce 'Afro Blue' and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He did that horrible contract, Cecil is a horrible negotiator for a contract. Speaker 1: So you didn't (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He gave our rights away. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: For four thousand dollars, we were paid four thousand dollars for that, and that's it. Speaker 1: So, now at some point here, as we approach 1975, now you appeared on a Norman Connors album 'Love from the Sun'? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: On Buddah Records and at some point, you auditioned for-- Speaker 2: 'The Wiz.' Speaker 1: The Broadway production of 'The Wiz,' right. Speaker 2: I auditioned for 'The Wiz'--let me get this straight 'cause we started the rehearsals in '74 [1974]. So, it was like I did a--I just went to a cattle call audition in '73 [1973], seems like it was in the summer of '73 [1973] and I got a call back and I went back and I just sang. I don't remember what I sang but it was certainly jazz. Then the band, Thad Jones/Mel Lewis [The Thad Jones/Mel Lewis Orchestra] had a tour, a summer tour and we were going to Europe and I remember we came back in August. So, this is like two months later or something and we come back and I get a call to come and audition again, and I'm like, this is weird, for the director and the director is Gilbert Moses. So, I go and, and I, I audition and then the, he called he said he wants to see me and he wants to spend some time with me. So, I go for my fourth audition and that audition he made me do some improvisational stuff. He made me run around this rehearsal room with my arms dangling and shouting at the top of my voice so I could get relaxed and I could--I don't know, release or whatever that thing was. Speaker 1: This is Free Southern Theater style (unclear) (laughter). Speaker 2: Gilbert was a genius, Gilbert was a--he really was a genius but he had demons. He had really, really, really, really major demons but I didn't know that at the time, and he did this thing called transformation where we had to improvise like a scene and I had to like create dialogue and he'd throw dialogue at me and then he'd go, "Transformation," and then I had to become another character, doing something else. That was a fun--that was fun. Gilbert was a great, great actor's director. He really, really was. So, after that audition he gave me the role of Glinda, the Good Witch of the South which was a very big role when I first got it. During the tryouts, I don't know, maybe because I was so slender and I had you know, I was so well endowed upstairs, every straight man involved in that show hit on me and I'm married to Cecil. I'm trying to get a divorce from Cecil, he won't give me a divorce. I've already tried to embarrass him by having an affair with a trumpet player, 'cause I just love my trumpets, and I started having an affair with, with Gilbert while we're doing the tryouts. Then the man who was behind 20th Century Fox [Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation] who was a liaison who had given some of the funding to Ken Harper [Kenneth Harper], the producer, decided that he wanted me to be his mistress and he would send notes. He'd come to see the show periodically and he would send notes to me by the ushers and that he wanted to meet me and so I'd go out and I'd be polite, and you know go out in my robe and my makeup half done you know, for the show and he'd be sitting in the theater and you know and he was like you know, I, I--he was very straightforward. "I want you to be my mistress," but I was like, "I'm sorry, I'm with someone and I don't do that, and you're married. I'm sorry. I'm flattered," you know, I tried everything I could think of. "So flattered, but oh, I, I, oh, no that's too scary." So, he came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and this is just before--I think this is about a month, 'cause were out six weeks, I mean six weeks, we were out six months because then we did tryouts you know where they would fix everything before you got to Broadway, and I think we were about a month out from coming back into New York [New York] and it was in Philadelphia and he came and he sent Nasha [ph.] back and so I come out and he says, "You will be my mistress," and I said, "I'm sorry, if you were the last man on this earth, I would not sleep with you. I'm in a relationship, I am not going to do it." And the next day Gilbert was fired. Story_ID: 659998 Speaker 1: And that is how [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder came in and before Geoffrey got the gig, they had asked Michael Bennett, Mike Nichols, I mean all of these great directors and they said, they all said, "The show it's, it's complete, it's done. Gilbert Moses has done a great job, we are not gonna come in and reap the benefits of what he's done. It's a brilliant show, leave it alone," but at the insistence of this man who I turned down, he decided it was gonna be changed. So, he--Geoffrey Holder was the only one that would do it. Geoffrey changed it. It was a disaster, so we had to change it back just before we came into New York [New York] to what Gilbert had directed. Speaker 2: So, it was done in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], the wrong way or was it (unclear)? Speaker 1: The firing. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Um-hm, no. Actually, it was just before we got to Philly because he came to Philly. He had, had Gilbert fired I think like two days before. So, he was and said, "You know, when I went out, I said, 'I wouldn't sleep with you if you were the last man on earth,'" and then he brought up that, "Whoa, you know, you're a free woman now. I had Gilbert Moses fired." So, then when I refused he tried to get me fired and Geoffrey said, "Oh, no darling, we need Dee Dee [HistoryMaker Dee Dee Bridgewater] as Glinda [Glinda, the Good Witch of the South]." And that's how I got my role, had my role saved but he insisted that [HistoryMaker] Andre De Shields who played The Wiz sing my song 'If You Believe' ['Believe in Yourself'] before me. He did everything he could to just have me reduced to nothing, so by the time we got to Broadway this role of mine which was really a big, meaty role, was cut down to a half a song and five lines of dialogue, and I won a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Broadway Theatre]-- Speaker 2: You certainly did, you did. Speaker 1: --for that. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: In spite of that man, yeah. Speaker 2: Do you have a--I mean 'cause I know when I think about 'The Wiz' I think most people think about, I mean the movie has been shown so many more times than anybody ever saw the show. Speaker 1: Yes, of course. Speaker 2: They, they always think of Lena Horne you know singing that part. Speaker 1: Yes, well-- Speaker 2: And I almost when I was reading it I said that's right she was the one that won the Tony Award for that part (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: I had my role for the movie. Speaker 2: I know Lena Horne was not on Broadway but I-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --for some reason I had, I forgot who was-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's me. Speaker 2: --there. Story_ID: 659999 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I had the role [Glinda, the Good Witch of the South] in the movie ['The Wiz'] for a day and Diana Ross found out because Diana Ross, she was so cruel to Stephanie Mills, so cruel. She was coming to that show so many times, so many times and spending time with Stephanie, and Stephanie thought that Diana Ross was her friend and Stephanie, I don't remember how old she was, but she was a teenager. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: A teenager and this woman did this, going, and going and just, just, just compliments and gifts and stuff and then when we found it was gonna be turned into a movie--well, Stephanie is thinking--well, we're all thinking woo, woo and then they said Diana Ross is playing Dorothy. I've never seen someone so devastated as Stephanie was, and all of a sudden there was no more Diana Ross. So, I was given, I was called and said, "They want you to play, to reprise your role in the movie," and apparently, Diana Ross found out about it and said, "No, way." She did not want another young, attractive actress in the film. So (background noise), sorry. Speaker 2: I know there was concern expressed in the press and in the community, that she was maybe perhaps too-- Speaker 1: Too old. Speaker 2: --old, yeah, there it is. Speaker 1: She was too old. Story_ID: 660000 Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about 'The Wiz.' Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And some of the intrigues around 'The Wiz' and just, and the firing of Gilbert Moses. Now who, who is this that fired him? Is this (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He, it was actually, it was this gentleman from 20th Century Fox [Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation], because they were backing the show with, with Ken Harper [Kenneth Harper] who produced the show and it was this gentleman that I refused to, to sleep with. Speaker 1: Okay, hm now this is something (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was the victim. Speaker 1: This is (unclear). Speaker 2: Couch casting was very prevalent. Speaker 1: Yeah, this isn't unusual, it's something that happened way too often. Speaker 2: Um-hm, it was very prevalent in, in the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: We interviewed another woman [HistoryMaker Lois Fisher] from Grand Rapids, Michigan who sang on the road and she was followed by a gentleman in the mafia who wanted to get with her, and she was really deathly afraid that she would be killed (unclear). Speaker 2: I was approached by the family in 1986, and I was actually wooed by a gentleman who took me to lunch and to dinner in to Zurich [Switzerland] and who confessed to me at dinner when he spilled out this little velvet pouch of diamonds and rubies and, and emeralds that he was a, a jewelry smuggler for the family. But he said you know, "We want you to be in the family." They knew all my history. They knew about all my family, not just my immediate family, but my aunt, my uncle--all the--all my cousins, everything, everything. "We'll take care of you, we like you, we like your image, you're very classy, you're beautiful, you're sexy. We'll take care of you," and I said, "I'm sorry, I'm fiercely independent. I cannot be told what to do, I just cannot, and I do not want to be beholden to anyone," and I've heard the stories, and I would say mafia and he'd say the family, la familia. Um-hm, yeah, I had that too. Speaker 1: Hm, but these stories resound. Speaker 2: But this gentleman told me people that were-- Speaker 1: That were in the situation that he was trying to get you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) they were all, they were in it. So, I will not names but I was quite shocked. He was like, "How do you think So and So has their career? How do you think they can still live like they're living and they haven't working? How," da, da, and I was like, (makes sound). So, I said, "Not me, not me." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Anyway (unclear) the mafia. Speaker 1: So, 'The Wiz'--now, when did--now, you were, you and Gilbert Moses are together at this period in time? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you eventually, you get married, right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so how did you resolve being in a show that he gets kicked out of because--? Speaker 2: Well, because he had a very good agent and a very good attorney, so he was getting the directing royalties. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so that's-- Speaker 2: That's how that got resolved. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, of course it was, it was an uncomfortable situation, me going to work every day to do the show that he had been fired off of, but then he just, he got very busy doing other productions right away. So, and he--what's that--I know he did a, a show immediately after called the 'Taking of Miss Janie.' That was a--oh, my god, Ed Bullins, the playwright, it was one of his plays and he received you know countless awards for, for that show. It was a great show. It was really, really a great show. So, like I said I, I believe--I mean Gilbert was, he was brilliant you know, he had done 'Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death' ['Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death: Tunes From Blackness,' Melvin Van Peebles]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Which was a huge hit on Broadway with Melvin Van Peebles and the Free Southern Theater, he you know and. Speaker 1: They appeared on 'The Ed Sullivan Show.' Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: For doing 'Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death.' Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's pretty huge. Speaker 1: It is. Speaker 2: That's pretty huge. So, but I, I know that it, he was, you know and then he was asked to do a show about D.C. [Washington, D.C.], called '1600 Pennsylvania Avenue' [Leonard Bernstein] and George Faison [HistoryMaker George W. Faison] was asked to choreograph and that directly off of you know 'The Wiz.' That show died a miserable death, you know but Leonard Bernstein did the music for that. Story_ID: 660001 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was in, I was in that world in, in, in the early '70s [1970s] you know after I left Cecil [Bridgewater's first husband, Cecil Bridgewater] and then I kind of left jazz you know and then I was trying to do more pop oriented stuff and that's when I got you know the album that I did on Atlantic that [HistoryMaker] Harold Wheeler and Stephen Scheaffer [Stephen Y. Scheaffer] did, the 'Dee Dee,' the first 'Dee Dee Bridgewater' album on Atlantic. When that album was released, they had hired a new president and vice president at Atlantic Records and the president and it was they were brothers, Allan Greenberg [sic. Jerry L. Greenberg] and, and Robert Greenberg [Bob Greenberg], I think. Robert Greenberg was heading up the office out here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and once again, I was called in to meet the vice president of Atlantic Records. The album has come out, it's getting (background noise)--oh, yeah. Speaker 2: That's just too loud. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's way up. (Pause) Sorry, about that. Speaker 2: Okay, we can--we can resume. Speaker 1: The album had come out, it was getting great reviews although I was slaughtered by the jazz community, oh, my goodness. I had some-- Speaker 2: What was the critique? Speaker 1: Of the jazz? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: That I had left jazz. How dare I, the new darling of jazz. I remember one review in, in particular. It was like, it became like a, a whole piece in The Village Voice by a journalist by the name of Gary Giddins, a two page piece in the huge Village Voice. I mean two full pages. He just, he slaughtered me. He said if, you know, since I left he, I would never be welcomed back in jazz again, and I mean he took it as like a personal offense. Speaker 2: He's the guardian of jazz, is that what he's supposed to be (laughter)? Speaker 1: So, when that happened that was well--at any rate, well so but I wasn't interested anymore 'cause I'd done Broadway ['The Wiz'] and then I'd done you know a couple of pilots for you know out here, for you know some episodic TV shows, comedy shows. Story_ID: 660002 Speaker 1: Back to 'The Wiz' for a minute, now this, this is the Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Broadway Theatre]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: It's not just for singing, it's for acting? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's supposed to be. Speaker 1: So, here you're something, you try something new-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --brand new. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you receive the highest Broadway award for it. Speaker 2: Yeah, first thing I ever did. Speaker 1: So, this is the Tony, this is the Tony Award for the Best Featured Actress in a Musical? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I just wanted to say that so that whoever's watching this know that this is special. This is important and not everybody gets this, people in (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not everyone gets one. Speaker 1: They may spend their whole career doing Broadway shows-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and never get this. Speaker 2: There are. Speaker 1: Your first show, you win the whole thing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then the album, you're part of the Grammy Award winning album ['The Wiz: Original Soundtrack']-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --that wins best musical show album [Grammy Award for Best Musical Theater Album]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And also on this show are people like Stephanie Mills, Theresa Merritt, you know this, this is big, this is huge (unclear). Speaker 2: It's huge. Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wanted to (unclear). Speaker 2: I won a Tony Award over Stephanie. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Huge, but I'm in a different category. Stephanie was nominated--no, I don't know if Stephanie got a nomination. Did she get a nomination? Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: I know she was considered a (unclear) (background noise), you know. Speaker 2: They're back. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right, I've never heard dogs do skid marks across the (unclear), but they--yeah, she was considered by many as a phenomenal you know, new talent and all that but. Speaker 2: Yeah. She was. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I was ostracized by the black community over my nomination--you gotta move out of the--in fact, go to the foyer, go to the foyer, 'cause Gaga's doing an interview. Just walk Mimi [Bridgewater's granddaughter, Malia Kowalski], just walk baby. Yeah, I was ostracized by the black community, they did papers on me and like the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] and Jet you now intimating that I'd slept around with people to get my nomination, that when I won, I should give my Tony to Stephanie, it was very, it was a very painful thing. Yeah, it was like a double edged sword, you know. It was a bittersweet. Story_ID: 660003 Speaker 1: So the, 'The Wiz' runs, runs on Broadway, how many years did you perform (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I stayed in it for two years. Speaker 1: Two years, okay. Speaker 2: And then I had to go. I opened it, I agreed to open it in Los Angeles [California] at the Ahmanson Theatre and I did it for I think three months and then we moved to San Francisco [California] and I did the first week in San Francisco, and then I said, "I got to go, I can't do this anymore." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was the only person in the show who did not wear a body mic [microphone], because I had worked with Thad Jones/Mel Lewis [The Thad Jones/Mel Lewis Orchestra] in such horrific sound conditions, I had, and I had worked with a woman, an amazing woman who taught me how to breath, how to project my voice and so I didn't need a mic, and they had floor mics that would pick me up so, my voice had a totally different sound than everybody else that was doing the show when we were on Broadway. Mine, it had a very warm sound--the level of our mics back then gave you a very thin, tinny-trebley kind of sound, so and also, I improvised that song. I never sing that song the same way, to the point that Ken Harper [Kenneth Harper] and 20th Century [Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation] said please, can you sing this song straight, because everybody started to try to do like me. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And they were, it was terrible, the results and so they said, "Listen, you're setting a bad example, please sing the song straight." And I said, "I can't, I will go crazy. I cannot." Speaker 1: Was it a--did you find the show enjoyable? Speaker 2: I loved it. I loved being another character, I loved putting on the costumes, I love--what I love about theater is working in an ensemble situation, with you know the cast and the crew. I love the, the watching, the building of the sets and the costumes and the fittings and you know learning how to put the make-up on. That show is amazing. We had a make-up artist that worked with us every day on that show, because we were all, most of us neophytes, you know and, you know they allowed us to create a nursery on the weekends when we'd have our, our matinee shows, I mean it was one of the most, it was the most beautiful, theatrical experience I've ever had. Speaker 1: 'Cause you had a little girl at the time, right? Speaker 2: I had my, my oldest daughter, Tulani [Tulani Bridgewater-Kowalski], yeah. Speaker 1: Tulani, and okay. Speaker 2: So Sanaa Lathan was one of the daughters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, her mother was a dancer in the show, Eleanor McCoy. We were, yeah, there were a lot of kids, a lot of kids and we'd do potluck you know dinners, when we were doing the matinees and the evening shows and it was a beautiful experience for me, beautiful, but when I left I didn't hear from anybody. The day I left, it was like, "Sayonara." That really hurt, that was hard to get over, 'cause you build a family and you think it's a real family but, it's just connected to the show. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's when I learned that everybody's for himself, every man for himself. I would do things like, [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad was my understudy for Glinda [Glinda, the Good Witch of the South]. I would deliberately call in sick so Phylicia could do the show. Speaker 1: It's a little different from the other stories we just heard about competition and cut throat competition. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So. Speaker 2: Yep. Story_ID: 660004 Speaker 1: Now in '77 [1977], this is after you--now, you got married in '76 [1976]? Was it '76 [1976]? Speaker 2: To Gilbert [Bridgewater's second husband, Gilbert Moses], yes, I think it was (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, okay, in '77 [1977] the, the album 'Just Family' came out, right? Speaker 2: Yes, that Stan [Stanley Clarke] produced. Speaker 1: Now, is that you on the cover? Speaker 2: Yes, with my second daughter. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: China Moses. Speaker 1: Now, this is provocative cover in the sense that you're pregnant on the cover. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And it's just, it's you (laughter), this isn't about anything else (laughter). Speaker 2: The picture that's on the back is the picture that I had picked out to be the cover photo, and Gilbert had asked this photographer to shoot some pictures of me at the end of the photo shoot 'cause we were out on this dry lake bed and it was just the three of us for miles, miles and I had no problem. I have no problem with nudity, well now I do, now that I'm older and gravity has taken hold, but back then I had no problems with nudity, and so I took my clothes off and you know he says okay, "Pose like that, let me do a profile picture," and he sent the pictures in. Speaker 1: Yeah, it is (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The personal pictures when he sent in the pictures for the album cover. He sent those pictures in also to Elektra Records, and they fell in love with the picture, and then they turned it into a day for night shoot, and so they made me dark and it looked like a statute, and so. Speaker 1: Right, it's an artistic you know silhouette on--you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I think it won an album cover award. Speaker 1: Right, it's iconic. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, now some--what were the song like on this--now? Speaker 2: Ah, well you know, Gilbert wrote "Just Family." Gilbert wrote "Maybe Today" which was I would say if there was to be a hit, it was that. There were a lot of babies born and lot of break-ups that people used that song or they listened to it to, to soothe themselves. I was in love with Elton John at the time so there was a song of his on there "Sorry Seems to be the Hardest Word." Chick Corea wrote this beautiful lullaby that I did on it with Chick and--oh no, Gilbert also did "I Thank the Day You Walked into My Life" ["Thank The Day (You Walked Into My Life)"]. It was all original stuff you know that I picked. Not necessarily songs that had been written for me, "Sweet Rain"--did I write something on that album? I think I did write lyrics on something on that album. No, maybe it wasn't that album. Sorry, wrong one (laughter). But, you know it was, it was, this was at that time the, so fusion movement and Stanley and I were like, we were, we were really very close back then and we were like, "Doggonit we're gonna, we're changing this stuff, we're changing it." So, as a result because of the way some of the songs were, oh, night--"Night Moves" Michael Franks' song is on that album. It was hard to categorize it. So, they put me in the jazz sections but it wasn't a jazz album, but it wasn't pop enough to be pop. It wasn't R and B [rhythm and blues] enough to be R and B, it was--this hybrid. Speaker 1: You were kind of caught in a fusion limbo I guess in (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, you know, but also at that time I had done 'The Wiz' but I'm married to Gilbert and I am terrified to tour. I, and the label wanted me to tour that album, and China was a baby. I was breastfeeding her and Tulani [Tulani Bridgewater-Kowalski] was in school. I mean it was a mess, it was just a mess, it was a mess. So, I, I ended up going out on tour and I did a couple of dates with Stanley where I opened for Stanley and I was terrified. That was a period in my life where I, I moved into another medium and this I know about myself now. When I move outside of my comfort zone, I'm a basket case. I, I just, I--something happens to me and I kind of shut down. So, that was a--kind of painful experience, and I'd hired Michael Peters, the choreographer who was like my brother, to choreograph me 'cause I figured with this album I needed to have stage stuff and I had costumes made by a pretty famous up and coming black designer who of course died from AIDS, [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] so but he does, he did costumes for Earth, Wind and Fire and I was friends with some of the guys out of Earth, Wind and Fire at that time. Story_ID: 660005 Speaker 1: This was a lovely period in my life where I'm in my, my mid, late twenties in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] in Hollyweird [Hollywood, California], and my husband's a successful, you know, director. Speaker 2: He's, he's doing TV shows. Speaker 1: He's doing TV and, yeah, yeah, yeah-- Speaker 2: Movies. Speaker 1: I mean we can do--honey, I can tell you stories. Speaker 2: Well, that's what we're here for (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My acting career was burgeoning and you know, I, I was, I was getting roles, film roles, lead roles, serial television roles, where I was doing one episode of 'It Happened' [ph.] and then they decided from the ideas that I gave them that they were gonna make me a recurring character and that was on 'Hill Street Blues' and unbeknownst to me, Gilbert [Bridgewater's second husband, Gilbert Moses] was going behind my back every time I would get these roles and threatening the directors and the producers then so I ended up losing all of these roles. I would have 'em and then they'd be gone. Speaker 2: So, you mentioned, you said--you mentioned that Gilbert had, had some demons. What were his problems? Speaker 1: He was a manic depressive, he was schizophrenic..