 Story_ID: 475336 Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson, as you know. Speaker 2: Hello. Speaker 1: Hello, with The HistoryMakers, the interviewer, and this is Scott Stearns the videographer. Speaker 2: Good. Speaker 1: We always work as a team. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I will just start by having you to state your name and spelling it out for us? Speaker 2: Okay, I'm June that's J-U-N-E, I was born with the middle name of Selna S-E-L-N-A, and my maiden name was Dobbs D-O-B-B-S, and then I married a man [Hugh F. Butts] whose name was Butts B-U-T-T-S. And even though we're divorced I still use [HistoryMaker] June Dobbs Butts, 'cause it's so short. Speaker 1: Your date of birth? Speaker 2: I was born June the 11th, 1928. Speaker 1: Your place of birth? Speaker 2: Here in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? Sounds like something on a psychiatry quiz, it's April 20, I'm sorry April 13th, 19, see there, April 13th, 2006. Speaker 1: The location of this interview? Speaker 2: We're in Atlanta, Georgia, actually this is Decatur, Decatur, Georgia, I forget I live in Decatur. And you want the address? Speaker 1: Yes please? Speaker 2: 1861 Clairmont Road, my apartment is 507, and this is Decatur, Georgia. Story_ID: 475337 Speaker 1: I will start with five simple questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Simple answers, your favorite food? Speaker 2: Chocolate. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Vacation? Speaker 1: Destination? Speaker 2: Singapore. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Something endearing, hello darling, something like that. Story_ID: 475338 Speaker 1: So, we'll start with your family tree, and we will start with your mother's side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So what was your mother's name and her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mom was born the third child in a family, named Thompson, her father was Kelly Thompson. Her mother had the two names Mattie Wilda [Mattie Wilda Sykes Thompson], she was born Sykes S-Y-K-E-S. And my mom was the third child as I said and they were in Mississippi, in a little town called Columbus, Mississippi. She was born on April 28th, 1886. And she had an older sister [Mattie C. Thompson] and an older brother [William Thompson]. Speaker 1: What was your mother's name though? Speaker 2: Her name was Irene, I'm sorry, Irene Ophelia Thompson [Irene Thompson Dobbs] and then she married Dobbs [John Wesley Dobbs]. And she was born as I said April 28th, 1886. Speaker 1: Now what do you know about your mother's childhood in Mississippi? Speaker 2: I had heard a lot about her dad, because he was a barber. And he catered to white men, cutting their hair. And then on Thursday afternoons he would close his shop around four o'clock and he would take black men up 'til past midnight. And they came from all over the county. Speaker 1: So he actually was a white barber, for the most part? Speaker 2: Oh that's the way a lot of black men were back in those days, yes. He came from a most interesting couple, whom he used to have an invitation for their wedding. And it's now passed down to some of my nieces and nephews. Because when my mother died at one sister's house, all of her scrapbooks and things got collected there. But may I just go a minute into her grandparents? Speaker 1: To your mother's grandparents. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, on her father's side. Speaker 1: Yes, just starting, give me their names. Speaker 2: Oh all right, her grandmother was named Lenore [ph.], she was an Irish woman who worked here in Atlanta [Georgia], at the Kimball House, which is a big hotel. Her grandfather was a free man, I've seen his picture, very handsome; he looked Italian. And the two of them, well he was free and she was white and they got married legally. But things were getting very tough interracially so they went to Mississippi. I used to always wonder why didn't they go north. But they went to Mississippi where things were a little bit better, for a short time, then they got worse than Georgia. Mississippi passed a lot of rules that they called the blue codes and they were against interracial marriage and so forth. They, they took away the power of Reconstruction they nullified it and so all of the accomplishments that had been given to blacks or freedoms or rights that came with emancipation got vitiated you know. These two went to Mississippi and had four children. And as I understand Kelly was the only one who remained a Negro. The other three passed, and that's my understanding. And so my mother came--Kelly was her father--and I don't know beyond that. She has talked about her mother side, her mother was the child of a teenager, whose parents were very distraught because I guess she got raped by a white man. And they brought up the child and the teenage daughter died and that was my mother's mother. So when Mattiwilda [HistoryMaker Mattiwilda Dobbs Janzon] was born, my mother put the two words together Mattiwilda, you know. Speaker 1: So that's your, your mother's side of the family? Speaker 2: Oh may I say one more thing about my mama (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 2: She had an aunt, who was a maiden woman who never married and she was the highest educated person, woman, black woman in Mississippi, my mother adored her. Speaker 1: And what was her name? Speaker 2: Caroline [ph.] and I don't know the last name. Don't know her last name (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So was your mother ever able to go to school, did she ever? Speaker 2: Yes, she finished high school which is called an academy. And she wanted to be a teacher like her Aunt Caroline. One of her sister's, her oldest sister been named for Caroline, and they both loved her. And my mother went back down to Mississippi took several children with her and stayed for almost a year to nurse Aunt Caroline, 'til she died. But she, she was told by her father, he did not want her to go out in the rural part and teach, he said because she'd get lost. And I used to think as a child, when she told the story that she had no sense of direction, she'd get lost literally. He meant you'd have no protection against white men. And so he wanted her to come to Atlanta where her oldest sister was married and was beginning to have a family. And help her with her children, which today is what we'd call an au pair girl. So she did that when she was a teenager, like eighteen or nineteen, having finished high school, which in those days was quite an accomplishment. She couldn't teach but she came to Atlanta to help be a nurse maid. And that's where she met my dad. Story_ID: 475339 Speaker 1: Now let's talk about your father's side of the family? Your father's name and then we'll talk about his (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. My dad was born John Wesley Dobbs and he was the younger of two children. He had an older sister, four years older, named Willie [Willie Dobbs]. She was named after his dad whose name was Will [Will Dobbs]. And okay so they were born to parents who were most interesting. Will Dobbs was the oldest of twelve children and I knew--I never knew him--but I knew the youngest child and he was my dad's uncle. And his name was Jess [Jesse Dobbs], Jesse and we called him Uncle Jess. And I never understood until I got very big that he was Daddy's uncle, 'cause they seemed like brothers. And indeed they grew up like brothers, because his parents separated, his dad and took off and left. And his mom went away when he was two, two years old. And he and his sister were left there on the farm with their grandmother [Judie Dobbs]. And finally his mother would come and visit occasionally, sometimes at Christmas. And he said it was the most painful part of his childhood. When his mother would like get them to play hide and seek and when they were hiding she'd slip away. And she always promised to come and get them. So when he was nine and his sister Willie was thirteen, she came and got them. And took them to Savannah [Georgia] with her to help her work. Speaker 1: What kind of work? Speaker 2: Well he lit fires for people in their homes. He would come in about three o'clock in the morning, clean up and set the fireplace all over the house. And then he did neighborhoods, whole big neighborhoods for whites. And then he'd come back in the evening around six and prepare for dinner and for the night and all. And one lady told my grandmother, "He's so smart why don't you let him go to school? He doesn't have to spend the whole day, they have split shifts for the colored. Let him just spend an hour or two, 'cause he so smart." So she let him start going to school, and then he started skipping grades. And by the time he was eleven, he just got there when he was nine, couldn't read or write or anything. And when he was eleven, he said no one ever bought him anything, any pair of shoes or whatever, and soon he was supporting his mother. But his mother is another whole story, because she was born-- Speaker 1: What was his mother's name? Speaker 2: His mother's real name, we have trouble with, I think 'cause she used nicknames. And that was so true of slavery, you didn't really know people's full real names, you know. And they might have very impressive names, like I know a part of her name was Millie, she was called Minnie, her nickname was Minnie. And her name was I think Millie Minerva Hendricks [Minnie Hendricks Banks]. And then she was married three times. But Dobbs was the first marriage, then she married a man named Scott. And then she married a man named Banks, I knew Mr. Banks, and she called him Mr. Banks. But her father was the plantation owner and she was born during the Civil War. And I don't know whether you know the book, 'Where Peachtree Meets Sweet Auburn' ['Where Peachtree Meets Sweet Auburn: A Saga of Race and Family,' Gary M. Pomerantz]. Okay there's a very interesting book, written by Gary Pomerantz called 'Where Peachtree Meets Sweet Auburn,' that's a phrase my daddy started Sweet Auburn Avenue. So this traces two Atlanta [Georgia] mayors, Maynard Jackson, who's my nephew and Ivan Allen [Ivan Allen, Jr.], who had a long and interesting past. And he, and the author traces their contribution to Atlanta, some of the trials and sorrows, in their family, some of their triumphs and joys in their and the similarity, although they were very different. And Atlanta is still not an integrated city, but their help in making it an international city. So it's an interesting book, if you can get a chance to look at it. Story_ID: 475340 Speaker 1: But what did I start to say, the-- Speaker 2: You were going to tell (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, he [Gary Pomerantz] did some research yeah and he found where my dad's [John Wesley Dobbs] grandparents are buried up in, in it's called Kennesaw Mountain near Marietta [Georgia]. And we had a family reunion a few years ago where we all drove up there and looked at the graves and, and you know it was very touching, very touching. But his grandmother was named Julie [ph.] and she was called Judie, so that's a confusion you know, but she was Ms., he called her, his grandma, Judie Dobbs. And she was given her freedom when she was twelve and she was told if she had any children they would be free. So she had twelve, the person she married, she wanted to marry a light skinned slave, and they said no two light people couldn't married, she had to marry a dark man. So there was this fantastic, enormously expensive slave named Wesley Dobbs and they married her to him. And they seemed to have gotten along, who knows people got along, they didn't even contemplate breaking up, you know. It was an embarrassment to the family if the marriage broke. So at any rate she and Wesley brought up not only their twelve children, many of them died as babies. But they brought up grandchildren, and my aunt [Willie Dobbs] and father would were just some of the grandchildren. But he credited his grandma Judie Dobbs as being one of the most moral people he ever heard of, ever met. He didn't say that about his mother [Minnie Hendricks Banks], he said it about his grandmother. And he had a very bitter feeling toward his father [Will Dobbs], 'cause I've never seen the father's picture and I don't think he ever knew him. The father left when he was a baby and his mother left when he was two. So he had a very sad upbringing. Story_ID: 475341 Speaker 1: And family meant a lot to him [Butts' father, John Wesley Dobbs]. He didn't believe my mother [Irene Thompson Dobbs] should work. He worked two and three jobs all his life. And he believed that she shouldn't do any work in the home that brought in money, you know. He really didn't want her to have any source of independence, that was considered good, in those days. That was considered manly, you know. So she wanted to have a beauty parlor at one point, but he said no, he didn't want all those gossipy women coming in and out of the house. We used laugh about that, but laughed about him in some many way. He was, he wanted to be full of bluster and, and revora [ph.] you know but we, we found him so vulnerable and so dear. And we would playfully argue with him all the time. But he was, he was strict when he wanted to be and if he said no, he said you know the expression, which part of no, don't you understand, he was saying that years ago. No don't you understand no, N-O (laughter), and he was a very kind man, he was a very good man. He wanted us to go to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] and he liked it because it was girls school. And he worked on the railroad. Should I go on with his life? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. He grew up, as I said not knowing how to read and write until he was nine, then he was taken to Savannah [Georgia] to work. And he adored his mother [Butts' great-grandmother, Judie Dobbs], he would not let us criticize her. If we came home and told him, "Nanny was cursing on the front porch (laughter)," she and her neighbor across the street. I laugh about it now but when we were children, we'd be walking over there, the street kind of curved just before we came to Nanny's house and we could hear their voices. (Makes sound) You know, I never heard my mother or my father curse, that was forbidden in our house. But Nanny was on her front porch and she'd tell her, "Why don't you move you old black bitch," and the woman would yell back, "No you move you old yellow bitch." 'Cause I didn't know what bitch meant. But we would come home and tell Mama and she was so embarrassed. And if he told daddy he'd say, "Don't criticism my mother, she's a product of slavery, something you could never understand." And so he had a tolerance for her that was beautiful. And I didn't know men could cry, I was nine years old when she died and at her funeral my daddy just collapsed into tears and sobbing. And I thought crying was akin to nursing a baby, like only women could nurse you know. And I just thought to make tears was similar to making milk, you know. And so when I saw him crying at her funeral, I couldn't, I couldn't understand it, I didn't know men cried. But he loved her, he loved her very, very much. And she was impossible to get along with her husband [Wesley Dobbs]. When she married him, she was fourteen and he was twenty-eight, and he was a mama's boy, the head of all these twelve children after his father died, he was the main worker. As he was a farmer and was well as an artisan. And he did a lot of mechanical stuff and he wasn't used to a spoiled brat. And that's who she was. Story_ID: 475342 Speaker 1: Now you said your father [John Wesley Dobbs] had worked on the railroad? Speaker 2: Yeah, when Daddy came from Savannah [Georgia], he was about fifteen, his mother [Minnie Hendricks Banks] moved with him and his sister [Willie Dobbs]. She was four years older, nineteen and they lived here in Atlanta [Georgia]. And he started going to school and he finished high school and all of that. And he-- Speaker 1: Where did he go to high school? Speaker 2: I don't know the name, but he went to two years at Morehouse [Atlanta Baptist College; Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], it had a different name then, but it became Morehouse. And he couldn't afford to be a full time student you know, so he went as far as he could in part time. But he worked on the railroad that's what I was going to say, he was a postal clerk. And he worked until he was ready for retirement and I was four years old when he retired. And that's an interesting little story about that, if you'd like. He was very friendly with a man who was the valet to President Roosevelt, Franklin D. Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt]. And this friend Mr. McDuffie [Irvin McDuffie] worked in the White House [Washington, D.C.], he was the person who put the president to bed every night. And his wife was the maid there, Mrs. Lizzie McDuffie [Elizabeth Stanfield McDuffie] and they had a home in our neighborhood, in Atlanta. But they lived in Washington [D.C.], most of the time. And then they went to Warm Springs, Georgia, with the president when he started going there for his polio and all. So Mr. McDuffie told the president that my dad was trying to retire and was having some difficulty. 'Cause he had put in the time, but there was some technicality they wanted him to be a certain age or something. And he asked if my dad could have a few minutes, take ten, fifteen minutes to talk with him. The president granted him that interview, and so he got fired--I mean got, got released--his pension came through and all that. And he was retired not fired, he was retired, by Jim Farley [James Farley], who was the postmaster at that time. And it was a very big event, I mean I didn't understand it. Story_ID: 475343 Speaker 1: But that was also the summer he became the grand master of the Masons. Now that was the turning point in his life, because that's, that became his life's work. He had worked for the Masons before he became grand master. Grand master meant head of the whole state. And the Prince Hall Masons [Prince Hall Freemasonry], a black group, Prince Hall, was a man who was born in the West Indies and he went to England and he became a Mason. And the king gave him a charter to set up Masonry wherever he went. They have the spirit of brotherhood but they didn't try to push it into practice. So he set up his own order of Masons, so just to say Prince Hall Masonic order that means black. And my daddy [John Wesley Dobbs] was the grand master for twenty-nine years. So he became grand master when I was four, my birthday came right at time they had their annual meeting. And they had a, the Masons of Georgia had a, a track of land that they bought in the middle of the state and it was an orphan home [Masonic Orphans Home, Americus, Georgia] and a farm. And is this going into too much detail? Speaker 2: Not at all (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so they would go there every summer for their met, annual meeting which they called the grand lodge. Story_ID: 475344 Speaker 1: And that summer that I was four, my mother [Irene Thompson Dobbs] suggested why not let's give a party for the orphans. So my birthday became the party, it was thrilling (laughter). 'Cause I didn't know what it was about it was, it wasn't about me but I was a part of it. And I was a pivotal part and it was wonderful. Food went on all day, we had food outdoors. And then as evening came on which was real, really late in the evening, my mother had lanterns, Japanese lanterns up in the trees. And the girls had been doing all kinds of things for entertainment different little presentations and songs and ring games, go in a circle ring games. And the boys did sports activities and competitions and the Masons loved it. There were at least two hundred men there, Masons. And they would always close their activities by singing outdoors and that music I had never heard before. They use the words for songs we sang in church, but the melodies and the harmonies came from Africa. And it's called short meter and long meter. And either the words go on at long rhythm or they have a short rhythm and they could fit them in them into these two main melodies. And so all the hymns we sang in church, they would sing but with this different rhythmic beautiful, beautiful powerful blend of voices outdoors. And then they'd hum it, hum the song. Like 'What A Friend We Have in Jesus,' and it was not the melody I had learned in church (singing) "What a friend we have in Jesus, all our sins and grieves to bear you should never be discouraged take it to the Lord in prayer," okay that's very straight. They way the sang it was (singing) "What a friend we have in Jesus, all our sins and grieves to bear, you should never be discouraged, take it to the Lord in prayer," and then they would hum it and then when their voices just kind of floated, I couldn't breathe. I would always stand there and it made me cry, you know. It was just so beautiful to hear about two hundred men singing outdoor. It was a joyous occasion, I didn't know anything about the Masons, but I like their spirit. And that was my dad's [John Wesley Dobbs] main life work. He went into business and did a lot of other things as he got older. But he never had a greater love. Oh, and, and then the Masons he required all the black Masons to be members of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and to pay their poll tax so they could vote. And they were urged to build Masonic temples, especially in south Georgia, and very often they'd get burned down. And he would go down there and fight the cases with two white lawyers from Atlanta [Georgia]. And he said most times they would have to try to get out, drive out before sun down. But they were successful in, in that kind of endeavor. The Masonic Orphans Home [Americus, Georgia] got burned down, mysteriously, the sheriff could never understand how. Story_ID: 475345 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where were you living at this time? Speaker 2: We lived in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: But where like what street did you live on? Speaker 2: Oh on Houston Street [John Wesley Dobbs Avenue], yeah, 540 Houston Street, which my family now owns again. A niece and her brother, nephew, have bought it. Speaker 1: Can you describe for me what the neighborhood was like then? Speaker 2: The neighborhood was very middle class, very respectable but we lived in segregation during the days of segregation, blacks had to live together. So you had rich and poor, reputable, disreputable, whatever, in two parts of town. Blacks lived in just two parts of Atlanta when I was growing up. And somehow the schools where mainly on the Westside and then some schools that had been like Northeast and all, moved over there to be together. And so from first grade on through college I always to spend a lot time in transportation getting to school. Speaker 1: Where did you go to school first grade? Speaker 2: I went first grade to Oglethorpe [Oglethorpe Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], which was part of Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: And what was first grade like for you? Speaker 2: I was very glad to be in school because I had been bored, being at home. And I used to go with Mattiwilda [HistoryMaker Mattiwilda Dobbs Janzon] to her public school across the street from us, which was named for a black man, and they would let little children sit in the chair with an older sibling until lunch time and then we had to scoot home. But it was, I wanted to do something and you know I wanted to learn how to read and write. Speaker 1: And at that time as, as a little girl in first grade did you, did you have any desire to be something when you grew up? Speaker 2: I did, yeah, you know who I wanted to be, it wasn't what I wanted to be, it was who. I wanted to be Amelia Earhart. Amelia Earhart was my idol and when she got lost, you know who she was, when she got lost and, and it kind of just dissolved, she was never heard of, never found, I used to pray for her. And I wanted to be an aviatrix we didn't say aviator. I lost all that brava- bravado and courage, I didn't learn to drive until I was thirty-one and then I learned in New York City [New York, New York], so I had to drive. Speaker 1: So let's talk about your, your early school years? Speaker 2: I went to a private school which was part of Atlanta University. And I went from you know, elementary school, junior high school, that junior high school was part of a high school that was called the Atlanta University Laboratory High School [Atlanta, Georgia]. Because they were patterning it, patterning it, after University of Chicago's Laboratory School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. And my sister my sister Mattiwilda was the last class to finish, and then they closed down the high school. Because the president of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] wanted that building back, we'd been using a building on her campus, and she wanted it for Spelman College so. When it disbanded I had to go to public school which was Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia], I didn't finish, I skipped twelfth grade and went to college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Why did you skip twelfth grade? Speaker 2: Well the, the high school was so overcrowded it was, and impossible place to get an education. And it was dangerous, people would be in fights and people would get mauled. It was a very lamentable place to try to get an education. And it as the only high school for blacks at that time in Atlanta and in the county. So we had thousands of students and I couldn't wait to get out. Story_ID: 475346 Speaker 1: Now your mother [Irene Thompson Dobbs] and father [John Wesley Dobbs] had seven children? Speaker 2: Well six, we were six daughters, I'm the sixth one (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Six, okay six daughters (unclear). Can you list them in the order in which they were born. Speaker 2: Sure, my oldest sister was born, to give you the dates of her birth I really don't know, I can't I'd have to figure it out. Oh I it just came to me, 1908. They got married in 1906 and she was born in 1908, and then the next one was born her name was Willie Juliet [Willie Dobbs Blackburn], she was named for her grandfather [Will Dobbs]. My first sister did I say was Irene [Irene Dobbs Jackson], okay, and then that's named for my mother. Then came Willie who's still living, she's ninety-six and she was born in 1910. And then came Millie [Millicent Dobbs Jordan], who's named for my grandmother [Minnie Hendricks Banks], my dad's mother who was just a hellion. And she changed her name legally to Millicent. My father hated it, he said, "That name was good enough for my sister [Willie Dobbs]," she said, "But they rhyme, Willie and Millie, you know, we're not twins." He said, "That was my mother's name." And she changed it to Millicent, she said, "You can call me Millie but my name is gonna be Millicent." And they, then those to how argue all the time. She could press his buttons, you know. Because she was the most like him really. And she was number three, then there was a big gab and then there was number four who was Josephine [Josephine Dobbs Clement]. And she was named for my dad's nephew. And then she was born I guess in 1918. Then let's see Renie in 1908, Willie in 1910, Millie in 1912, Josie six years later 1918, all right. Then came Mattiwilda [HistoryMaker Mattiwilda Dobbs Janzon], 1925, I think my mother thought she was through, and then came Mattiwilda the fifth one. And that was her mother's [Mattie Wilda Sykes Thompson] two names put together. She just dropped the E and made it Mattiwilda. And then I was born when she was forty-three and my dad was forty-six. I was born in '28 [1928]. Story_ID: 475347 Speaker 1: Okay we're starting again, we were, you were finishing up with the siblings, but I, I had asked you about during the Depression [Great Depression] in the '20s [1920s], you were born in (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was born in 1928. Speaker 1: So how did the family make ends meet during that time. Speaker 2: Well my dad [John Wesley Dobbs] didn't change, he still wanted Mama [Irene Thompson Dobbs] just to be at home. He said when you have children somebody has to be at home. And he worked two and three jobs. He was on the road going to Nashville, Tennessee as much as he was here. So his train went from Atlanta [Georgia] to Nashville and we were used to him being away a lot. He took us down to see the railroads and to go up into his car. He would lift us up and it was so exciting. I didn't realize he was in peril, because the white men that he was in charge of on his, he was clerk in charge and he had to carry a gun. 'Cause trains would often get robbed. And they used to tell him sometimes they were gonna throw him off the train, and they meant it. Because he never got thrown off the train, but he was afraid he might. And they wouldn't eat with him and you know, all in one big car. But they sorted the mail, they had to be on the road for hours you know through the night, and that kind of thing. But there was a lot of racial anger and hatred. Story_ID: 475348 Speaker 1: Did your father [John Wesley Dobbs]--and then we'll continue to talk about your school years--but I was just reminded you talking about your father. Did he ever talk to you about the riots in Atlanta [Georgia], the 1906 riots (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, well listen let me put it in perspective, he never got over it. He always talked about it as part of a horror, he called it the horror. And he and, and my mother [Irene Thompson Dobbs] were just married in June and the Atlanta riot took place in September. He'd been working on the railroad so I truly don't know, whether he was staying at home, or whether he was away. But I think he was at home, he lived with his sister-in-law [Mattie C. Thompson] and her husband, his brother-in-law, and their little children. And he had the gun and, and my mother and he lived there, 'til after their first child [Irene Dobbs Jackson] was born, two years later. So during the riot which was their honeymoon, a few months after they married, he was very furious with what was happening. And he had to get from where the trains came in to where they lived which was like twelve miles. I don't know how he did, that's why I don't for sure. Now okay I come along when they're in the forties, they weren't still talking about the riot, but they put it in perspective and he let us know there had been a riot and it had been covered up. That's what he hated that the city fathers, the sheriff, the mayor all these people were part of the Klan, Ku Klux Klan [KKK] and that they would have the temerity to try to cover their tracks. And pretend like they didn't have anything to do with the Klan. And as the Klan stays in secrecy it stays powerful. It isn't dead yet you know. I think that should be said, and if black people quote brave like you hear so many black kids saying, "I wouldn't have stood for that." Okay, don't stand for this, there's so many hate groups they're proliferating, what makes us hate let's study that. So I hope that this coalition that's to remember the 1906 riots, I'm a member of it, I'm on the steering committee. And you know what, several people have asked me, "Would you read this paper I'm going to be giving to you know. It's gonna be in the annual, or rather the centenary workshops and all like that," which comes up in September. And they don't even mention the Klan. And I just wrote to a man who's head of a department at Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] and he's head of a big program at a, a seminary and he's a refined lovely minister. And I asked him, "When are you gonna mention the Klan?" What else can I say, if you shroud them in mystery and secrecy and oblivion, you protect them. And now that can't be hooded anymore, they must have their faces open to the public. But they still exist and they exert venomous pressure to hate. I think it's time we looked at 2006 and said, how do we conserve water? How we stop the greenhouse gases? How do we protect little children from being born into poverty? Not how do I get Viagra? Please, this would take another hour, you gotta move me on. Story_ID: 475349 Speaker 1: When you were as, as a child and you were, you were in the public schools? Speaker 2: No, I went to private schools [Oglethorpe Elementary School and Atlanta University Laboratory High School, Atlanta, Georgia], from first grade through ninth (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You went to private schools but first through ninth, (unclear). Speaker 2: And then for those last like, tenth and eleventh grade I went to this public school which was Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: So during your private school years, who were some of the teachers that were (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh we had white teachers they were all part of Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Were they role, did you look up to any of them? Speaker 2: Oh I loved them, yes I had many teachers I was afraid of, but mainly I loved them. They were imaginative it was a progressive school. And I didn't realize how imaginative they were, there so much more, I can't really dwell on the early part, maybe that's an important part. But to say who was an important teacher, I was acquainted with the whole Atl-, I, I got the picture of Atlanta University in my mind, from way before first grade. 'Cause my sisters were finishing college and we'd got out there for Christmas carol concerts and different things like that. So I was alw-, always aware but I thought they were old people. I thought the old people went to college and like in the best part of life you went to high school, that's what I thought growing up. Story_ID: 475350 Speaker 1: So were you as a, as a child were you traveling? Speaker 2: Was I what (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you traveling were you going to, I mean I know as a young adult you traveled a lot, did the family take family vacations? Speaker 2: Well no we went by car trips down to south Georgia, middle part of Georgia, to this Masonic Orphans Home [Americus, Georgia], we'd make car trips down to Savannah [Georgia], and my dad [John Wesley Dobbs] always had a sharp new car. And when he would pass the chain gang the men would rise up and wave to him. I thought they knew him. And he's lean out the window roll his window down and say, "Hey boys," that kind of thing and then I would say, "Hey," and carry on. And thought oh he knows them. And but I was afraid of them, I was afraid of the men on the chain gang. 'Cause they had, things manacles around their legs and their arms and all. And there was always a white overseer, beefy and sweaty on a horse, with a whip. And they just looked vicious to me. I didn't know white people except those teachers at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. And we even had a few members of our church. And then there were so many people who were light skinned that looked white, I just thought the good guys are Negroes. And people like street car conductors who you never meet and you don't get to know them, they're the white people. But my world was full color difference because my mom [Irene Thompson Dobbs] was very much lighter than my dad and I was used to different colors and complexion. It was something that my mother had great qualms about saying, she never wanted to say dark, she would say dark she didn't say black. But as I told you my [paternal] grandmother [Minnie Hendricks Banks] would curse the lady across the street and call her a black so and so. And once she put one of my sisters in the closet when she was babysitting. And the child cried herself to sleep, this was before I was born. And when my mother came home from shopping, she told my mother, her mother-in-law, my grandmother, "I don't ever want you to sit with these children again." My mother was light skinned and as I told you her father's [Kelly Thompson] people passed, you know. But my mother was very conscious of color prejudice and color consciousness. We used to say that word, "Oh she's color conscious," meaning that, that they thought light was right, if you, if you're white you're right, if you're yellow you're mellow, if you're brown you could stick around but if you're black get back, you know. There was such a vicious self-hatred little slogan, but we learned it. We all knew it, you know. Story_ID: 475351 Speaker 1: So when you were a senior in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia], you, you had to (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I didn't get to be senior, I skipped twelfth grade. Speaker 1: Well I mean, I mean I guess when you were in, when you were in high school? Speaker 2: Yes? Speaker 1: What were you thinking about college at the time, and what were you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I knew I'd go to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], I just was told that you must go to Spelman. Speaker 1: Did you think you'd be an aviatress--aviatrix? Speaker 2: Oh no I'd given that up (laughter) I settled into my shell by this time, I didn't have any great ambitions to excel or do that kind of thing. I, I really didn't know what I was gonna do. I thought I'd probably be a teacher, but I wanted to be a social worker more, as I got into college. And all my sisters were teachers, but when we would dream and daydream and fantasize about what we wanted to do Mattiwilda [HistoryMaker Mattiwilda Dobbs Janzon] wanted to be a singer. And she had heard a black woman who was a singer in Europe perform for her little elementary school and she was so impressed where as some of the children laughed she thought it was beautiful. She loved the little trills and scales and all, the coloratura. And I wanted to be a drummer for a while, I had crazy ambitions, but I guess I knew I'd be a teacher, you know. Story_ID: 475352 Speaker 1: So you went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] you graduated, you, you grad- you skipped the senior, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I went to, let me just talk about this transition, skipping twelfth grade. This was during the Second World War [World War II, WWII] and they had test where you could skip twelfth grade and go onto college. They were trying to get boys into the [U.S.] Army quicker and they just opened it up for girls. 'Cause soon women had military privileges too, the WACs [Women's Army Corps] and the WAVES [Women Accepted for Voluntary Emergency Service] and all. And where I didn't want to become part of the Army, I didn't get into college at sixteen, so I was glad of that. But mainly the high school was so intolerable, I didn't want to stay there a minute longer than I had to. And I think that built in some, without our knowing it some snobbishness, sure for class, for black kids who never had the chance. Because they were part of the problem we felt, you know. We couldn't fair it out the causes. Some of the teachers were inspiring, some of them were horrible, many of them were horrible. Speaker 1: Who were your (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pardon me, a lot of kids got sent away to boarding schools up north, and my parents [Irene Thompson Dobbs and John Wesley Dobbs] couldn't afford that. So I knew I was in Washington High School [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia] for as long as it would take and by skipping the twelfth grade I just got into college one year sooner. But I knew would be Spelman, he [Butts' father, John Wesley Dobbs] had said he wanted us all to go there set a record. And sure enough that record has never been met or passed because very few people have six girls. Speaker 1: So all six of his girls went to Spelman? Speaker 2: Yeah, three of us, three of them were valedictorian. I was not a valedictorian, but I was an honor graduate. And I was president of my class and in my junior year, I was the football queen at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. That was a nice (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Miss Maroon and White? Speaker 2: I was Miss Maroon and White, yeah. Speaker 1: So during that time you seriously considered becoming and teacher or social worker? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I thought that was what I would do, I had wanted to go to grad school afterwards. And I thought first of going to where my middle two sisters [Millicent Dobbs Jordan and Josephine Dobbs Clement] had been and where Mattiwilda [HistoryMaker Mattiwilda Dobbs Janzon] went, which was Teachers College Columbia [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York], and that's what I did. My second oldest sister [Willie Dobbs Blackburn] had gone University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and then she came back to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and got her master's [degree]. And the first sister [Irene Dobbs Jackson] got scholarships and went to France. Story_ID: 475353 Speaker 1: So in 1948 you graduated from Spelman University (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], um-hm. Speaker 1: Spelman College, and what did you do after that? Speaker 2: That summer I worked with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], he was my dear friend. We had a lot of sociology classes together. I called him M.L. as everybody did in Atlanta [Georgia], who knew him. His brother, younger brother was A.D. Williams King [Alfred Daniel Williams King], named for his grandfather [Adam Daniel Williams]. And so we called him A.D., and we called Martin Luther King, M.L. And his sister Christine [HistoryMaker Christine King Farris] is still my friend today. And they became neighbors when I was thirteen. And once, a couple of summers we'd just played Monopoly all the time, a couple of girls who were cousins, the King children, and Mattiwilda [HistoryMaker Mattiwilda Dobbs Janzon] and myself. And we would rotate and whoever was the hostess or host would be serving lunch. We'd do our little chores in the morning and then we'd play Monopoly in the afternoon. And A.D. started cheating. He had an extra Monopoly set and so we would pass me hundred dollar bills and I'd become monopolist you know. When M.L. found out about it he was just so outraged he cuffed his brother he hit him across the face you know and I was really afraid he was going to hit me but he didn't. And Mattwilda was furious you know. And I thought I was funny at first, but then I, I saw that they were really angry. Christine wasn't angry, and the two girls, who were cousins, were annoyed. They thought it was stupid, but they weren't angry. But Mattiwilda and M.L. were put out with us for cheating. Speaker 1: Now what was M.L. like during, because this is 1949 or '48 [1948], he's a child (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was, he was such a darling, he was very sincere, he was very honest and he was trying to find where he was, in his own self. Speaker 1: Would, did you, at this time because all of you were young adults, did you talk about race relations, racial issues? Speaker 2: Oh all the time. Speaker 1: What were your conversations? Speaker 2: Well we were trying to understand, how such hatreds got perpetuated, why people couldn't get passed some of the biases of their ancestors or their relatives and, and, and we were trying to do something within our lives to, to, my father [John Wesley Dobbs] used to put it like this, he said, "Strike a blow for the race," that was his little slogan. Well I used to think, I don't want to strike a blow. I'd like to create something, or to do something that brings the kind of harmony or happiness or release something you know. But the idea to strike a blow for the race. Well he had such a rough time working with people who would, would tell him, "We're gonna throw you off this train," you know. He never got thrown off but he met with brutality. And he had all kinds of trouble getting loans and that kind of thing, thing from businesses. Like when they were building the Masonic Temple [Prince Hall Masonic Temple and Tabor Building, Atlanta, Georgia], which is still standing on Auburn Avenue now. They-- Speaker 1: Well as a group of teenagers did you have any concept that you, did you all decide together that we are going to do something to improve? Speaker 2: Oh we were, we were all possessed of that. When I finished college, M.L. and I finished in 1948, Christine was in the same class, even though she was a year older. He had skipped several grades and I had skipped the twelfth grade. And our class of '48 [1948], at Spelman and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] we did more to get education, than any other class before or since. He was just a leading light among us. But there were more people who were turned on, to go as far as you could. Whether was law, medicine, journalism whatever, get a terminal degree and then do what you wanted to do. And his goal was to finish his degrees, get his ministerial degree, his doctorate, and marry someone whom he really loved and go wherever the first church called him. And my best friend was engaged to him, and she said, "I can't do that, I'll go crazy. I can't live in any little hick town, let's go back to Atlanta [Georgia]." And he said no, "I've got to do this 'cause God wants me to do this," so he knew exactly what he wanted to do. And it's annoying to me when I read, white authors who say--and they've never had an interview with anybody in the King family--and they say oh he wanted to do this, or he was very depressed, or these were his suicidal tendencies. Speaker 1: What was your best friend's name, that he? Speaker 2: Juanita [Juanita Sellers Stone], Juanita Sellers, she's now Stone. Yeah and, and she couldn't marry him. But the weekend they broke up his, his one of his good friends that, who was a doctorial stu-, who was a ministerial student with him at Crozer [Crozer Theological Seminary, Upland, Pennsylvania], sent him a telegram, "Have I got a girl for you," come to Boston [Massachusetts]. And he met Coretta [Coretta Scott King] and she was made for him, they were wonderful. Story_ID: 475354 Speaker 1: So did you, at that time, decide then that I should further my education, and continue and get to New York [New York] to Columbia [Teachers College, Columbia University]? Speaker 2: Well it was more or less decided, it was something my daddy [John Wesley Dobbs] wanted us to do and he was willing to pay for. It was part of a promise that we would do for the next generation, he didn't ask for any recompense, you know. He did ask for my middle two sisters [Millicent Dobbs Jordan and Josephine Dobbs Clement] to pay him back, because he had me and Mattiwilda [HistoryMaker Mattiwilda Dobbs Janzon]. But for the first two [Dr. Irene Dobbs Jackson and Willie Dobbs Blackburn] they got scholarships. The next two went to grad school and paid him back. And then Mattiwilda and I didn't have to pay him back. He was tremendously generous. Speaker 1: So you arrive in New York in 1940- (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) eight [1948]. Speaker 1: Eight [1948]. Speaker 2: In the fall of '48 [1948], and studied at Teachers College, Columbia. And stayed there passed my master's [degree]. After I got my master's in about a year I got a job that was not self-supporting but almost. And he was glad I had that. And I was taking classes, that I could get credit for once I got into a doctoral program. But then my mother [Irene Thompson Dobbs] asked me to come back home, her sister [Mattie C. Thompson] died, and it shook her up terribly. Her older sister, with whom she had as a young woman. And she asked me to come back and be with her, because I think it was the first realistic conviction she had that she had that she was finite, and that death was inevitable. And she asked me to come back and be with her just a short time, so I did. And I then decided, I'd better work. You know this idea of staying in New York and taking courses and to trying to get into my doctoral program, if I ever got to it later fine, but for right now I needed to teach. Story_ID: 475355 Speaker 1: I started teaching, my first job was at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], and that was a growing up experience (laughter). Speaker 2: What did you teach? Speaker 1: I taught in the psychology department, although I had studied vocational guidance and counseling. But I taught psychology and then I went out Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and then I did a small time research project at Meharry College [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], so I talk at the three black schools there. Speaker 2: So let's put some dates to those and then you can tell me (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Early '50s (1950s). Speaker 2: The significance of each place? Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So you wanted significance and that is what I caught go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so, so we are continuing. So you'll give me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The dates or when I first taught? Speaker 1: With the dates and then significance of each place, so you're at Fisk University, nineteen (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In 1950, that was so momentous for me. You know half way through the century. And Mattiwilda [HistoryMaker Mattiwilda Dobbs Janzon] was going off to Europe on a scholarship. And I just felt like we were both launching out to the world. And she had a Whitney scholarship [John Hay Whitney Opportunity Fellowship] to go and some of her best friends were, had Fulbrights [Fulbright Scholarships]. Speaker 1: Is that when you traveled with her, when you went to, to? Speaker 2: Oh no that would came later, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So my, my going to Fisk to teach was exciting you know and I didn't, I mean I knew the schools here in Atlanta [Georgia] but I didn't know Fisk and that's its own little world. The medical school was Meharry, where I met the guy [Hugh F. Butts] I married. Speaker 1: And what year was that? Speaker 2: Oh I got married in '53 [1953]. Speaker 1: But what year did you get to Meharry? Speaker 2: In '50 [1950], 1950, I went there, for the first time. Speaker 1: What did you teach at Meharry Medical College? Speaker 2: I did work on a research project. I was doing psychological test of babies, the head of pediatrics was trying to establish norms. You know normative data is being judged by your peers and the data that they used were established in England. And so they really did not fit black children, and there were so many black babies that we born below weight, what you call preemie [premature]. They could be nine months with gestation, but they were under weight and that still goes on, black babies are usually underweight. And so they were trying to establish black norms, normative data and part of that. Well you know you can't, they're not verbal, so you can't give a regular intelligence test, but that did was like response eye movements and there were tests for babies. And the pediatrician head of that department knew me and asked me if I would do the testing for the babies. And, and it was a joy, I loved it. And years later, when I went back and taught there in the department of psychiatry, I got chance to see this old pediatrician and he was a joy to know, Dr. Crump, E. Perry Crump and his wife [Delores Crump]. And in fact I had them come and speak in my class, about companionship and respect for each other. 'Cause they had a happy marriage, not that they sounded that happy (laughter), but they had a good respect, and give and take. And not a possessiveness and they both fit into the same values, and that to me was just beautiful. Story_ID: 475356 Speaker 1: So how did you meet, your, your husband in nineteen (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I met the guy I married because he was a student at Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee]. And the year I went there they opened up Fisk's quarters. Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] was trying to make a little money, so they expanded the faculty dining hall. And faculty had a chance to eat in a very nice new dining hall. And they opened it for Meharry people to come over and eat too. And I got to meet him there through food (laughter). And on his birthday, one guy who had been dating me asked if I would come to Hugh's [Hugh F. Butts] birthday. And I'd been looking at him and I wanted to meet him. And so he said, "I'm making him a cake," and I thought that's great, I'll be there, (laughter), so I did, we met and we started dating and then we broke up and then we went back together, we got married. Speaker 1: So you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had a great marriage, terrible divorce. Speaker 1: But let's, we're gonna do it chronologically. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So you, you got married in 1953? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you-- Speaker 2: We got married here in Atlanta [Georgia] at my home. And then we. Speaker 1: Was it a big wedding? Speaker 2: Big for me, I, I see people didn't get married automatically in churches, we got married at home, at least all my sisters did. Two of them however got married in Europe. Irene [Irene Dobbs Jackson] the oldest one, was going way on scholarship to finish her master's [degree]. And the guy she married Maynard Sr., Maynard Jackson, Sr., was a minister. And as her scholarship was over, just about over, he went over and met her and they married and then they honeymooned. They were there three months and by the time she came home she was pregnant. My mother [Irene Thompson Dobbs] had them marry again, or blessed or something like that. I don't even remember her until years later after she was married and started having children. But my second oldest sister [Willie Dobbs Blackburn] lived with us (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's pause for a moment. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: So we were just talking about your wedding and it was a small wedding, it was at your mother's house. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was crowded. My, the guy I married his parents [Edith Butts and Lucius Butts] came from Guiana. Used to be British [British Guiana; Guyana] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was your, wait I'm sorry we should get your husband's name and then we'll talk about--? Speaker 2: His name was Hugh F. Butts, H-U-G-H, and he was born in New York City [New York, New York]. But his parents met on the boat coming from Guiana, they used to call it B.G. And then it became independent, became Guyana. And I've never been there but I always wanted to go. And his parents were immigrants and tremendously lovely people, interesting people. Speaker 1: So this is 1953? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then you decide together to move to New York? Speaker 2: No we went there immediately, we drove up on our honeymoon, was driving up to New York. And he started his internship, he had just finished med school. We wanted to get married, after we broke up and went back, we wanted to get married just quietly then. But people didn't live together then, it was scandal. So his parents told him--he was an only child--and they told him we can come down for your graduation, why don't you move the marriage over 'til then. So my birthday was three days after his graduation, my birthday's been pivotal to me. So he had his graduation from Meharry, in Nashville [Tennessee], where I was teaching, I had just resigned. Then we came to Atlanta and three days later we had the wedding. And then they fly back to New York and we drove up later. And that was our honeymoon, he started internship immediately. Story_ID: 475357 Speaker 1: So you, it's 1950, in the 1950s (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started teaching in 1950, right Speaker 1: I mean it's 1953, I'm talking about when you're in New York [New York] now. So you're in New York (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, right I got married in '53 [1953], on my birthday. And my mother [Irene Thompson Dobbs] made sure that there was still room for my birthday, twenty-fifth birthday, and not just the wedding. I just thought that was just so brilliant of her. Because she said, "You gotta have some you in here." And that's the concept that I wanna emphasize, because my mother's story gets scuttled with my dad's [John Wesley Dobbs] big voluminous a story. And she had some really good points she used to say, "Take care of number one." That startled me at first 'cause I thought number one, you mean which child, my husband [Hugh F. Butts], who's number one, she meant me. And that's a big lesson, and in a quiet little way she would say that over and over. And she would, she had a way of coming right to the point, like an archer, you know. When I started learning intelligence tests I would practice on my nieces and nephews and I'd practice on my parents. And my dad would ramble and give an answer that went all over the place without that succinct definition. And it would take too much time and it didn't come out as in- intelligent. My mother would go right, zing, her arrow went right to the point, quiet not fussy. And, and I that's when I realized my mother was intelligent. I didn't think so growing up, I thought she was a doormat and she didn't emphasize herself enough, and all like that. But when I gave her that intelligence test, I had new respect for her. Story_ID: 475358 Speaker 1: So your husband [Hugh F. Butts], you said became ill once you arrived in New York [New York] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, right after we, well before we got married, we knew he had had a tuberculoma something that had healed. It flared up and so, my mother [Irene Thompson Dobbs] told me she said, "I wouldn't marry him." We were writing the invitations and I, and I cried and I said, "No you can't tell me that, I'm gonna get married that's all I want to do." And so she said, "Well I wouldn't have done it." I said, "Mama, Daddy [John Wesley Dobbs] had TB [tuberculosis], between, you always said between your first and second child." She said, "You don't have any children, I'm telling you before," she said, "I wouldn't walk into it." I thought I'd faint, but I decided to write the wedding invitations. And I said, "Well this is my decision." And sure enough he did flare up with TV--TB and he came through it, he had an operation and he recuperated at home. Up one hour a day the first month and then when he got up to eight hours a day he went back to his internship and then his residency. Went into psychiatry and finally became an analyst and training analyst at Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York]. And that was his career. Story_ID: 475359 Speaker 1: Well how did you get back to Columbia [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York], to work on your doctorate degree? Speaker 2: Well he had wanted me to go to school, this was over many years. And he had encouraged me, to, to study, pick it up either at Columbia or wherever. If found it was easier to get back in Columbia. So I had wanted to be a clinical psychologist, but I could not do the math, the statistics and all like that. I tried and I even repeated one course, but then someone told me, "Look at something new. You want to go into counseling you don't want to be a statistician, so that's not what you're looking for. Look for another route to get where you wanna go," and that's valuable too. So, I looked and found another program called Family Life Education [Family and Community Education]. I'd always been interested in families and babies and where do babies come from? Which is really human sexuality I just didn't know what to call it. And so I started studying that Family Life Education. And most of the people there were either social workers or religious counselors like rabbis and, and ministers, we had a lot people who had been priests and nuns, you had come out of the Catholic order and were now counselors and even married. And it was an interesting group of people and an interesting route, and I, I discovered the whole big unexplored area of human sexuality, which was fascinating to me. And then I met, met, I met Virginia Johnson [Virginia E. Johnson], who was married to William Masters [William H. Masters], they were Masters and Johnson, who, oh yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before you talk about the Masters and Johnson, you'd met Ruth Westheimer, now? Speaker 2: Ruth Westheimer, was one of my colleagues in school getting a doctorate. Speaker 1: At Columbia? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh, she became Dr. Ruth, after she got her doctorate. And her path was similar to mine, I wouldn't say we were dovetail and she was not chum but I knew her. She was a live wire and it was hard to overlook her. She was funny, she was humorous and insightful. And there were two little ladies, not quite five feet tall, she was one and a woman named Esther Spitzer [ph.] was the other. And they were live wires for all of our colleagues together and very witty, very witty. Story_ID: 475360 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you get to Masters and Johnson's [William H. Masters and Virginia E. Johnson]? Speaker 2: Well I was just gonna say, back to when I was becoming professional, I was asked by someone I knew who worked for Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] and both Dr. Ruth [Ruth Westheimer] and I had worked for Planned Parenthood. I had met a woman who was putting one a conference and she'd gotten the money from Spyros Skouras [Spyros P. Skouras], if you know that name, he was a big money movie magnate. And he financed her, she was fundraiser at Planned Parenthood, her name was Martha Stuart, not, not spelled the way Martha Stewart, S-T-U-A-R-T. And she was the fund, the chief fundraiser at Planned Parenthood. And I'd admired her work very much, I finally became on the board of Planned Parenthood, national board. But at that point I was just an advocate. And Martha asked me if I would, if she could put on this conference would I come. She wanted doctoral students, she wanted professional people like physicians and researchers. And she wanted their spouses to come with her and talk for like three days about our contraceptive culture. And was held at Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana]. They were just going co-ed. So we thought all of this was going to be breakthroughs, and all like that. And Martha was my friend, personal friend. When I got there, oh and as I said, spouses were invited. And that's the first time my husband didn't want to go with me. I'd been with him on many conventions and places where he was speaking. And he didn't want to come, I said, "But Hugh [Hugh F. Butts] this is a chance, we can get the babysitter to stay with the children. This is our chance to go as a couple, and I'm paying for it." He said, "No, you do your own thing that will be nice, I'll see you when you get back, we'll have Thanksgiving." So I figured my marriage is breaking up, I didn't see it any other way. I mean if he didn't honor this, if he didn't see it as my moving up, not against him, but with him. Then we weren't together. So I went to that conference, and one day we were on the elevator like the first day I got there, and Masters and Johnson go on. And Martha introduced me to them, and I like them both immediately. And from that three day acquaintance, their book had just come out, their first book and 'Human Sexuality' and 'Human Sexual Response' [Virginia E. Johnson and William H. Masters], that was the name. The second book was 'Human Sexual Inadequacy' [Virginia E. Johnson and William H. Masters] and that's when they got known as therapist. 'Cause when they became famous, people said it was the most widely bought, unread book (laughter). 'Cause it was so scientific in such language, they were trying so hard to be dignified and not prurient that it was boring. But it was a great statement that was not biased. It was based on research and it was the first research that had ever been done on the human body-- Speaker 1: Has-- Speaker 2: --on human beings. Story_ID: 475361 Speaker 1: Had Kinsey's Report ['Sexual Behavior in the Human Male' and 'Sexual Behavior in the Human Female'] come out before that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His was more verbal, he had interviewed people. He'd interviewed people in prison, he'd interviewed people that he could get to, college campuses. He was criticized for his sampling, because, it wasn't that he tried to be selective, he couldn't get to people at first. And he thought if he just got to, whomever he could get to, that would be great. But then people started saying, maybe people who'd been in prison act like that, but my wife wouldn't do that. Or my daughter wouldn't do that, and that kind of thing. So Masters [William H. Masters] wanted to study with as much scientific equipment as he could. What happens to the brain, what happens to your breathing, what happens to the heart, what happens to your respiration, during orgasm, during excitement, during the calming down period? And so he wanted a little laboratory and he talked first to his people in medicine, where he was at Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]. He was an OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology] doctor. And they told him, "Yes he could get permission, but where was he gone get the people," they weren't sure, they didn't know that anybody would come into a lab, get hooked up with electros and masturbate. Or have intercourse or something like that. So he, they said, "Ask the police permission first if you're gonna get maybe prostitutes." So they had red light district in St. Louis [Missouri] in those days, this was in the '50s [1950s]. He was inspired by Kinsey's [Alfred C. Kinsey] work. And he got permission from the police to set up a lab where he could do sexual experiments. And he decided after he interviewed one or two prostitutes, he said there was one woman who was very intelligent. And she asked him, "Shall I fake it," he said, "I don't understand what do you mean?" She said, "Well in my business we try to get the man, happy and satisfied, as quickly as possible to get paid. I don't allow myself to enjoy it." And he didn't know that, she said, "I fake it," he said oh (laughter), she said, "You need an interpreter, of women." 'Cause there are differences you see. So, I mean a male orgasm is kind of hard to miss, you know when that's happening, and it's coupled with ejaculation, usually, not always, but usually. And so because sometimes the ejaculate can go retrograde, go back into the bladder. And there some men who know how to do this. It's taught to younger guys, this is a way of contraception, that make the ejaculate go back into the bladder. Our Western men don't know how to do it, but urologist don't want them to try learn, 'cause it weakens the bladder, it's not good for the bladder. But it is contraceptive. So at any rate, the human sexuality has never been studied and it's so broad it's, it's, such a landscape. And if you try to be moralistic and say those who are married, those who are Christian, you know what I'm saying, isn't it ridiculous. We're talking about human sexuality. Speaker 1: So (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And we're saying you gotta be heterosexual. So it's much bigger than that. And Masters was trying to study something, and he wasn't saying people have to be heterosexual. He was studying who people were and what they did and had they ever had an orgasm. And how would they define it, what did they think about it? And if they were with a partner, how did they feel? And if they were by themselves how did they feel, so how they felt was a big part. And they had electros all over the body, that would register whether they achieved orgasm or not. But then they'd ask them how they felt. What they found with women, women were much more variable, all over the place than men. Men were pretty much alike, a bank president, a sharecropper, whoever they were male first. And they were pretty much alike. But women came in about three varieties, and all that's interesting research. Masters wanted to come back and do more research with electronic equipment. It would have been so beautiful, it's never been done, the government never gave him any money for research. Story_ID: 475362 Speaker 1: So when you met him [William H. Masters] on the elevator, he invite you, he invited you to become, no okay, okay (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that day. Not that day about a year or so later. Speaker 1: But you met him then and a year or so later (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, and we all liked each other. Speaker 1: And he invites you to come and participate in the research? Speaker 2: Not at that point, I got to know Virginia [Virginia E. Johnson], because she and I served on the board of a big organization. Speaker 1: Which one? Speaker 2: It was called SIECUS S-I-E-C-U-S, Sex Information Education Council of the United States [Sexuality Information and Education Council of the United States], headed by Mary Calderone, M.D. Speaker 1: Well I would image you were probably one of the only African American women in this arena? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. One of the first and there had been a couple of physicians, who with their wives might have been a social worker or a nurse were therapist, they became therapist. They studied with Masters and Johnson, had written about and they didn't work with them, they weren't trained by them, but that had happened. One women from such a marriage, worked and wrote a column for Essences [sic. Ebony] magazine, and I've forgotten their name, oh that's a shame. But then I took over the column and I met them I didn't get to know them well. But I wrote the column called Sexual Health [ph.] for about two and half years and it won several awards. Speaker 1: Which years did you write the column? Speaker 2: Early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: From '80 [1980] to '82 [1982] and half. Story_ID: 475363 Speaker 1: I have two questions for you, or maybe three but I wanna get them in you can talk about them all. I wanna know what were you planning to do, with, with this, all of the knowledge you were, you were gaining with, in, with sexology (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah that's the term you're correct, sexology. Speaker 1: What did you father [John Wesley Dobbs] think about it? What your mom [Irene Thompson Dobbs] thought about it, and what your husband [Hugh F. Butts] thought about it? Speaker 2: Okay my parents were dead. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I've had good friends tell me, "Your daddy never would have approved of this." And I said, "Maybe not right away, but he would have loved it later." It would not have fit into his anything, his upbringing, his outlook on life. We don't know. It's a landscape that's still being charted. And when we talk about human's sexuality, the gigantic work that Kinsey [Alfred C. Kinsey] did, the gigantic work that Masters and Johnson [William H. Masters and Virginia E. Johnson] did. That doesn't tell you about the great land masses, what about Africa, what about India, what about Latin America? Not just this handful of people here in America, that's not the great land masses. Now probably what we're finding, is, you see human sexuality had never been taught in a med school, until Masters taught it. William Masters taught the first course. Kinsey taught the first course at Indiana State Univ-, Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], as a college course. And it was like tests and measurements, how to interview, how do you code it, but he had never had any human beings that he had worked with. Kinsey had studied wasps, not even warm blooded animals. But his science helped him, it helped him to be objective, and it helped him to learn. The greatest thing I got out of the movie 'Kinsey,' was that he said every wasp he had ever understood and studied and photographed and measured in all, was unique, was different. And that's true for human beings. And yet we try to categorize we try to predict, we try to say do homosexuals to this or do lesbians do that, isn't that naive? When I first started counseling, I, one of my first, well okay I'd been teaching and I had taught a, a group of people who worked with me on some city sponsored things in Washington, D.C. for youth to help (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay so-- Story_ID: 475364 Speaker 1: So you left, let me I'm just trying to get the chronology (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I'll stick with you, okay yeah. Speaker 1: So the Masters and Johnson [William H. Masters and Virginia E. Johnson] you went off to do your research with them, then you go back to Columbia [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York] to get your doctorate degree? Speaker 2: No, no I got my doctorate before (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before, okay so now we're in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Okay well don't rush so fast, 'cause I just wanted one more thing about the Masters and Johnson. Speaker 1: No okay, okay. Speaker 2: I liked them, hated the constriction of the job, okay. 'Cause they were very regimented they did not wanna be seen as superficial or exploitative or anything like that. Everybody we very much regimented, they did not want me to talk about any other authors, only them. And when we would be interviewing or doing the therapy every office had a telephone. And Dr. Masters could listen to your session and he was call in on that phone. And say, "Get off that don't mention other books, talk about mine." And I had to do it, I was shocked. And then at lunch we had to eat there and he would go over sessions. "I listen to your recording, last week you were on such and such and now you bring this up." They only had two weeks to work with people so he want us to move along, mention his work, do what we had to do to understand them. And get them started his course of sensate focus and then turn them out within two weeks. And he said that most of the sexual functions he was able to reverse. But he only counted the errors, he didn't count, he counted the cases that didn't get reversed. So but they had a startling success, in helping people who had had unsuccessful sexual experiences, become functional again. So he studied sexual dysfunction. Speaker 1: Were you planning to bring this all, and I'm just asking (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't know where I was gonna go with this. Speaker 1: 'Cause I mean, okay, you didn't know where you-- Speaker 2: I didn't know where I was gonna go-- Speaker 1: But do you have any plans to bring it back to the black community of the African American community. Speaker 2: Wherever I could get a job, wherever I could get a job. I was an educator not an M.D., he had worked mainly with M.D.'s, as he was. But he gave Ginny, 70 percent, he said she has almost 80 percent of the credit. She deserves it for the therapy, because she was so insightful. Just like the woman who told him, "You need an interpreter." In other words a man couldn't look at human sexuality and understand all of it. A woman could not look at human sexuality, he thought the male female combination made the best co-therapist. And he insisted that everybody had to be co-therapists male and female. They even tried two men co-therapist, with gay couples. And they found the people didn't like it, they said, "We want Ginny back here," you know. And so he tried one male himself with gay couples. And that didn't seem to go well. When he had a male and female they got the best results. Like you had a mom and dad, most people not everybody, but most people. And so what became a restriction for him, became more than I could take. I had to work every day, on Sundays I had to go there listen to tapes. And I worked half day Saturday, all day Monday through Friday. And I was not used to that as a college teacher I have a lot of free time. So it kept me from my two children [Lucia Butts and Florence Butts Johnson], my third child [Eric Butts] stayed in Amherst, Mass [Amherst, Massachusetts]. And then I decided I gotta get out of here, let me go back to teaching. I loved it, it was challenging, but it wasn't like they say this is our shop, you know. We, we as therapist had to wear white coat and yet during therapy I loved it, I loved working with Dr. Masters as my co-therapist. He was charming, he was wonderful, witty and all that. But he could do what he wanted, but as co-therapist if I was with one of the physicians, or even a minister they had on their staff, he would phone in in a minute, "Nope get off that." Story_ID: 475365 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what happens when you leave him? When you, when you leave this, when you leave Masters and Johnson [William H. Masters and Virginia E. Johnson] you come back to Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: I went to the first job I could get, which happened to be Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: And you were-- Speaker 2: I wasn't aiming to come back to, I didn't want to live in Atlanta, I didn't want to live in a segregated state. Speaker 1: So when you go to D.C., you are working at? Speaker 2: Howard. Speaker 1: Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. What, what was your job at Howard University? Speaker 2: Well I helped to bring in a research grant and I was working part-time until I got that. And then when we got the research grant, it was not renewed when Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] came in. But we wanted to follow a group of pre-teens, black children, middle class, and lower or income, lower income and follow them into their adolescence. And just see what variables were going on. Which kinds of kids impregnated, or got pregnant, which kids were able to avoid that. But we weren't able to follow them to age seventeen. We started at nine and we wanted to go and we had it all set up like that, and we got funded just for a little bit, like two years. And we weren't able to continue it. They weren't interested, you know what they were interested in, they had an office of adolescent, I've forgotten the exact name, but it was like, preventing adolescent pregnancy, they were interested in abstinence based prevention courses period. Speaker 1: So is this (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which is insane, may I scream it, insane, okay. Speaker 1: Is this the point that you, you meet Joycelyn Elders, is when you were in D.C. at this time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know when I met her first, I heard her speak way before she was, surgeon general, I heard her speak because she was writing, she did many wonderful things, I think in Illinois or Indiana. Somewhere where she was nearer to where she got her medical training. And she was an endocrinologist, specializing in pediatrics. And she was still that farm girl, who grew up with her basic values, wonderful woman. About the only thing we disagree on, comes down to addiction, which I--what I wanna get into. Because she believes that drugs should be legalized right now, and, and I don't see that, I think abstinence helps here, in drug addiction. Story_ID: 475366 Speaker 1: Now did you do your drug work when you were at the CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia] or you did that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no I didn't do my drug work until after I'd left Masters and Johnson [William H. Masters and Virginia E. Johnson]. When I finally realized that I was an alcoholic. And I had to face that because it was inescapable, my son [Eric Butts] was becoming alcoholic. Speaker 1: When did you did you realize that? Speaker 2: This was in the '80s [1980s], 1988 took me, I'm a slow learner, took me 'til '88 [1988] before I could really give it up. Speaker 1: Where were you in your professional career when you found out that you were? Speaker 2: Oh way passed, I got my doctorate in '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: Yeah, but where were you working? Speaker 2: In D.C. [Washington, D.C.], I stayed in D.C. seventeen years. So in the '80s [1980s] I discovered that I really could not handle alcohol. It grows on you and incapacitates you in so many ways. And the remnants stay in your brain, you don't excrete it all, you know. So that's why staying sober, is so important you can't really, start recovering 'til you stopped. Stopping isn't like Mark Twain said, "Stopping smoking is easy, I've stopped hundreds of times." Well maybe you need to stop drugs hundreds of times, don't count how many times you in rehab or whatever. Just say now today, twenty-four hours I don't want to do anything today. That gets you through that twenty-four hour a day concept. And I have studied, I paid for it, going to night classes and that kind of thing, addiction, or chemical dependency, that kind of thing for counseling and now my certification is called preventionist in Georgia, sounds so British. But it's a heartbreaking area, one of the hardest things I've ever had to try to learn is tough love. Nobody teach you tough love. And when people tell you somebody has to hit bottom that is exactly clearly what they mean. You can't help them, you didn't cause it, you can't control it, you can't cure it. They have a god, and it's not you. A man told me that once and an AA [Alcoholics Anonymous] meeting I asked him would he be a sponsor for my son. He said, "Lady your son got a high power and it ain't you." I cried for about a year, but you gotta stop crying. And you gotta realize there are others who would love to work with you, young people, old people, people in retirement, who suddenly say, "You know I can't take this stuff anymore." And if they can, it means changing everything in their lives. Their playmates, their playground, gotta get new ideas. One of the hardest things I had to learn was how to cook, 'cause I used to put wine in everything, unless it was brandy. Wine or brandy in everything I cooked, except deserts; no many deserts had wine. God, I don't know it, it took me a while to learn that spaghetti sauce tasted great without wine. And a longer while to learn from Italians that's the way they always did it. But the way I thought people in New York [New York] put wine in everything. So I don't know it's, it's, it's learning, but it accepting today where you are. And saying I want to start with today, you can't go back into yesterday and you can't borrow from tomorrow, all you got is today. So if you just say for this twenty-four hours I'm not gone drink, maybe you can make it through twenty-four hours at a time. And so what did I want with all this what I realized, Shawn [Shawn Wilson] is that addiction, doesn't have those neat little fences like this is a food addiction, this is a work addition, this is a sexual addition, you see what I'm saying. The brain is like the ocean, it's even got some land in it, it's called the shore, but by the time you get out into the ocean, it's water, but there's shore up under the bottom, right. Our whole globe is not water, only three fourths but when you get down past that crust that's the outer part of the world we get down into fire, right. And even the ancients knew that. What we've got to go toward is so kind of harmonizing, unifying, spiritual plan, that lets us not use religion and other man made things like that to hit each other and hurt each other. And vilify each other and snub each other. And when we can do that, I think we'll learn how to live. Speaker 1: I want to talk about in 1988, when you were invited to Sweden. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: To, to do some work with them and-- Speaker 2: All right, well I was invited in '97 [1997]--'87 [1987]. Story_ID: 475367 Speaker 1: So 1988, you, how did you get the job with (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen eighty-eight [1988] I got sober-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) '87 [1987]. Speaker 2: --eighty-seven [1987], I went to Europe. Speaker 1: How did, how did you get the (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually my sister Mattiwilda [HistoryMaker Mattiwilda Dobbs Janzon] had married a Swedish gentlemen [Bengt Janzon] and he had worked in the government. And in their government just like if you looked at our cabinets, they have a, an area that's for family and sex education, sponsored by the government. 'Cause they feel it's a legitimate part of government. They put out sex education, literature its right up there as it should be. We don't even having anything that mentions family. Think about it, we have war, that's a pretty big department right? Secretary of state carries a big stick. We have Commerce [U.S. Department of Commerce], we have Interior [U.S. Department of the Interior] and I forgotten the other departments, nothing mentions family. So, okay, so where am I? Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My brother-in-law was Swedish, and worked not high up, not heading up a thing, but in the government. He'd been a newspaper man, then he was in the government. And at one point he became the publicity director at the opera. And that's where he met Mattiwilda, she had been there to give concerts, but when she sang at the opera, he was just starting his PR [public relations], job. But he put me in touch with some people and the Swedes are interesting, they don't ask for the head of a department to come in, but they'll get like third in command, or someone second in command. Come in and look at their way of doing commerce or art, or whatever. And then see what you think of it and write a report for them. 'Cause they like to get feedback, we don't ever do anything like that, you know. So this lady who was their cultural attache met me and liked me and asked if I'd come over and look at their HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] program. And I was astounded they had the lowest rate the lowest incidences of HIV in Europe, at that time. I don't know what it is, since then, but in '87 [1987], they were, had the lowest, they said, "We wanna stay right there. We don't want anymore, what little we have, we never wanna increase, want to get rid of it." And so for two weeks, I was wined and dined and had a great time. And I stayed in Stockholm [Sweden] for the two weeks, they flew me over. And I had a mentor who took me to meet people in business and education, in social work, in medicine and I had to write a report. And it was wonderful, I had a great time. Story_ID: 475368 Speaker 1: I brought literature, printed in English, back to the United States. And I worked at the Commission of Public Health in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. And I tried to get our commissioner to use some of my literature. Speaker 2: What did the literature say? Speaker 1: It was talking about how do you talk to your children? How do you talk to each other? It was, how do you make a poster? How do you get to the gay community? How do you get to youngsters? How do you get to people who, how do you get to people? It was it was marvelous, multifaceted marketing. And, and I especially liked the human side of it. Some of the posters, let me just describe one, there was this nice looking man, sitting holding his little, like about eight year old daughter and it said, "Lars, what really happened in Bangkok [Thailand] four years ago?" You could say, "Jimmy, what happened in Las Vegas [Nevada] last year," you know. Or what about your college reunion or what about your fraternity whatever you know? Remember when you were, out of it, that's what it's getting to. That's the only what you're gonna stop it. It had a housewife with her apron and all, and she had a teenage son with his hair spiked, and he's peeping round behind her. And it said, oh I've forgotten what her name was, let say Lillie, "Can you really get down with your son?" It was a like get down, you know, language, not can you talk, can you get down with your son, with his spiked hair. That's for her to answer. It had little videos, we had little drama things, that people could put on in school, provocative things to help people to talk. Speaker 2: What was his reaction, when you came back with these pamphlets to? Speaker 1: He was afraid to death, I said D.C. is not big in population, it's limited in size, we can't be but so populous, and it has the fifth incidence of HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] in the country. When are we gonna start, when if not now, who if not you. And so he said, "No we can't handle this," I said, "Well listen what about just for your staff, can we have some brown bag lunches and I'll bring my literature and share with your staff." "No," I wanted to hit him with the literature. I brought back books, now these were written in Swedish, but they did have other things in English. Like a joke book for boys, I didn't understand the jokes, they had some poems and some of 'em were stupid, some of 'em were silly, some of 'em were passionate, some of 'em were gay, some of 'em were straight, but, but they were like boys. I'm not a boy, you know but it was helpful to see what these boys wrote in Sweden. I was thinking we could put up a book, of boys from the United States, some from the country, some from the big cities, some from gangs and let them talk to each other. It could be on Internet, instead of saying, no my genitals are twelve inches long, can they get on Internet and say, that they learned how to use a condom? And, and I mean I'm not telling people use your real name, although I think it would be nicer, but if you don't want to use your real name, at least use a condom, you know. We're not that honest, we're not there, we're not there, and we have so many organizations with money, that are keeping us back. Well-organized groups, you see, it's, it's, the human sexuality, it's like a frontier and it's very powerful emotionally. And governments know, or groups know that they can strangle hold people, through this route. Story_ID: 475369 Speaker 1: Why do you think sex has meant, or sexology has meant so much to you, why has it lured you in (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I guess I'm the sixth daughter, I saw my sisters having babies, you know. And when my little nephews came along, my mother [Irene Thompson Dobbs] would throw a diaper over their genitals, she didn't want me to see them. I didn't see a man's genitals 'til I was at least twelve years old, pictures. I thought it was the fig leaf, that's what I'd seen in pictures the fig leaf, that's stupid. So I believe education should be lifelong, lifelong and, and there are things to learn. I believe this was what Joycelyn Elders said that was so appropriate when a, when an interviewer asked her, "Should we talk about masturbation in school, in sex education?" She said, "Yes, in an age appropriate way. When you talk to kindergarteners you talking about using the bathroom and respect and all like that. When you're talking about high school students, they don't use the same bathroom, they having sex, but you need respect." And so she said age appropriate and that's what she got put out for. You gonna outlaw masturbation, it was outlawed from the time of the pilgrims. And in many of the New England states, it just got taken off the books within the past fifty years. Story_ID: 475370 Speaker 1: Well having grown up in such a prominent Atlanta [Georgia] family, Dobbs and everyone knows who you are throughout, I mean was it a scandal that the, that you had become, no, okay (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I never got teased about my name being Butts, my children may have? Speaker 1: No not even Butts, but, but I mean about what you doing? Like the job, the sex education, like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah okay before, oh I didn't, I didn't even find that, my parents were not alive. And as I said, I think my dad [John Wesley Dobbs] would have understood it and been proud of had he gotten to know what this was all about. But I've had many people, chide me and say, "Oh your dad never would have understood how you got into that." Mr. Johnson, John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], head of Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois], met me. And we and we, we liked each other and he was extremely sympathetic and he had me write the first article on human sexuality that appeared in Essence, (unclear) Ebony. Speaker 1: Ebony. Speaker 2: Back in '77 [1977], and so then he was an article on me that came along later. And he wanted it entitled, "How did a nice girl like her get to be a sexologist," or something, I've forgotten, it, it embarrassed the hell out of me (laughter). The title, because I said I'm still a nice girl, what's wrong with you, you know. What could I say? I like to think that back in Roman times, in Roman antiquity, thousands of years ago, had I been born there, my name would have been Sexima [ph.], it meant sixth girl (laughter). Story_ID: 475371 Speaker 1: So how did you end up getting to the ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] from I mean, or even back to Atlanta [Georgia], from D.C. [Washington, D.C.], yeah (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, I, I was working at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], [HistoryMaker] Dr. David Satcher, was appointed director of CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia], and he only took me from Meharry as a faculty member to come here. I asked him, I said, "I really wanna go home, is there any way I could work for you." And so he made me visiting professor, of visiting scientist and I worked there for seven years. Speaker 1: What was your job at the CDC, what was your job at the CDC? Speaker 2: Actually I did a couple of things. Speaker 1: What is a visiting scientist (laughter)? Speaker 2: A visiting scientist gets plugged into different areas. And my job was to help him try to get other facets to CDC, to look at violence as a part of public health. Violence I think is a part of public health. You have morbidity, you have mortality and we can trace it, we can measure it. He was ridiculed for this The Wall Street Journal took him to task. And said, "That's not a public health issue, the doctor should stay with his medical thing." And of course I'm interested in human sexuality and pregnancy, and pregnancy prevention and HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and, and the stop of HIV, as well as all the sexually transmitted diseases. They haven't gone away, you know. So, but sex related things includes rape, that hasn't gone away okay. So I had a kind of free ranging area, I was in the director's office and I worked in an area, a subdivision for a few years, looking at public health programs. And then I asked if I could come and teach over at the Atlanta University system [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia], and they paid my way there. So for two years I was a Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], then I went to the med school [Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia] for two years. Then I went to the divinity school [Morehouse School of Religion, Atlanta, Georgia], which is ITC, that's when I had a heart attack. But I introduced two courses at ITC, which I loved. Speaker 1: Which two (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One was called Spirituality and Sexuality and this was interesting because I kept telling them the seminarian, I can't tell you what kind of sexual person you are. You know what you dream about, you know what you daydream about. You have some control over the daydreams, but you don't have control over they nocturnal dreams, or wet dreams, or whatever. It's more biological, but human sexuality is biology and culture. In some cultures if a young boy has a wet dream, he's embarrassed. Like in our culture, he hides his sheets and you know that kind of thing. He's embarrassed to let anybody know. And in Scandinavia, they feel, I'm a man now, you know, it's so warm, it's so accepting. Nobody has no rules, every, every group of people have rules. You can urinate there, but not there, you use this hand to shake hands, you don't use that hand. You wipe yourself with the hand, okay. Speaker 1: What, what was the second class you introduced the first one was Sex and Spirituality? Speaker 2: Oh yeah the other one was Addiction and Recovery. Many of the seminarians had been on drugs, many of the seminarians had sexual problems, but they were gonna go to the church that called them, and get married. Speaker 1: We're gonna start talking about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I pray, (laughter), I pray. Story_ID: 475372 Speaker 1: We've talked a lot about you know the programs and thing, but one other program I just want you to touch on, is, is just being a sexologist, like? Speaker 2: Effects on my children? Speaker 1: Kind of the effects in aging, like? Speaker 2: Oh god yeah, I've very interested in that. Oh lord, I thought I was gonna get married a few years ago and I went with a guy on a little trip. And then first time I've ever you know, well I've been with a man once a trip and then, this guy died five months later. And when I finally stop crying, I had to say I didn't wanna be his nurse maid you know. I had to get over my heart attack, and I had to really find a reason for living. I'm writing my autobiography now, and I think that'll be some kind of contribution. Speaker 1: Did, will your autobiography include a lot of your work? Speaker 2: Include from my earliest introduction to seeing P-U, I thought it was P-U-Z-Z-Y, the guy was not writing he was carving with a knife on the sliding board. And I was watching him for days and when he finished he wrote P-U-S-S-Y, is good. And then later on I saw in church, God is love and I was struck, I didn't know what is was, it was just a line down and then this wavy line. And I was sitting there wondering, what I see God and good, I thought that were about the same. But it was in the same, and I didn't know what it was and of course I did know P-U, I was trying to write when I got home P-U-Z-Z-Y. And my mother [Irene Thompson Dobbs] slapped the pencil out of my hand, I'm gonna start with all that. Story_ID: 475373 Speaker 1: So when you look back over your career as a sexologist, what stands out most for you? Speaker 2: Well children warm my heart because I think that they can say some of the most, their questions are brilliant and unanswerable. Did God have parents? Not is there a God, or what happens after death. Now I don't know, I don't even worry about that anymore. I hope I don't get too bitter and too alienating, because I find that I work better with, with young people. Who are distant from me, not my granddaughter [June Johnson (ph.)] you know. And of course I want to be close, I wanna be a cuddly grandmother, but I don't know how. And she's her own person, you know, she's a lovely young woman, she's twenty-two. But, she's on her own trajectory, she is embarrassed, she didn't want me to meet her boyfriends, for a while. 'Cause she said, "Grandma you'll embarrass me if you bring up sex." I said, "I'm not gone begin up sex, we're just gone talk, you know. I don't think I bring up sex." But, my older daughter [Lucia Dobbs], hated for me to speak at her schools. She would cry, "Please don't have my mother," and so she told me one time, "If you taught French or something it would be different." I said, "How phony." My second daughter [Florence Dobbs Johnson] would tell her home ec [home economics] teacher, "My mother has students from the university," and they'll bring films, talk about family and so forth. And my son [Eric Dobbs] could take it or leave it. There was sometimes he was proud of me, and sometimes he wanted to keep his distance. Speaker 1: Well (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sexual addictions I haven't even gotten into, why do we have such a big porn focus, pornography. People, I (unclear) have on their iPods, but now you can get pornography on your little handheld whatever. Do you need it? People rather watch that than masturbate. Something is cold and crazy in our culture. Story_ID: 475374 Speaker 1: So is there any way that you can, I mean, is there any, I mean are you one of a kind, are there other sexologists in the black community I'm talking about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't even know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't even know, in the black community, I don't know, I don't belong to organizations (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Have you, who were your peers, okay? Speaker 2: You see, I heard that there was a conference in India, couple of years, on orgasm I wanted to go. Oh yes, to me is such a big landscape, I mean I've had students who said I've never had, I've had many clients when I had a small private practice they'd say, "How do I get to an orgasm," but my feeling would start with you. What do you like, who are you, have you ever looked at yourself, have you ever touched yourself, "Touch myself? No." And gay women this is what I started to say earlier, I've had some young women tell me, "You're not really liberal because you're not bisexual." I said, "Not yet, I may, I'm not dead yet, I haven't felt it so far, if I feel an interest in a woman that way erotically, I hope to God I can act on it." But so far I haven't (laughter), that doesn't mean I don't like me. But, why should I have to be everything, you know. I'm not short, my mother [Irene Thompson Dobbs] was about five feet tall, her sister [Hattie C. Thompson] was less than five feet tall. My mother used to tell me, "Reach up there and get that," you know whatever, I was the tallest in my family. Should I not like myself? Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: I've worked with transsexuals, that's another, oh I've learned so much from transsexuals because they illuminate for me that line, where women get so phony. And that's what they go after, that image, that the way you dress, the way you walk, the way you try to get a man, you know. God save me from that (laughter). And yet I was very able to get along with them, but I respected them, you know. We had a counseling group, see they have to have two years psychiatric counseling, before they can get the sex operation. With most of the black ones it's getting the money. And so we had a group in the department of psychiatry and I would meet with them and they, they got that counted. But, Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] would never do the operation, as one of my nephews, I mean he was married to my niece, as he said, "Howard is not gonna cut off black men's dicks," okay, don't put that on the thing (laughter). But they'll do the patch up work if somebody out west, does the operation. Very often things go bad and they'll do the patch up. But it takes some of those transsexuals--I have a tape where I talked with this person and I call her, she, I can't think of her name right now. She was married and she was so happy and she was saying, "I got my ring I'm married now and all." And I said, "Well listen do you have any fears, like, you're happy now, do you--?" She said they're gonna adopt a baby. I said, "Do you want a boy or a girl," she said, "Well I think we both want a boy." I said, "That's great." So then I said, "Do you want to," I said, "Suppose the baby grows up to be gay, could you be happy with that." She said, "Oh Dr. Butts [HistoryMaker June Dobbs Butts] don't say, I don't want my child to be gay." I said, "Why," I was so amazed, and she said, "Well it's just too hard a road to go. I mean I would like for my child to just be normal." I said, "Well most parents say that, you know. Good luck whatever let your child find out." Speaker 1: Excellent. Speaker 2: You know the whole thing is being normal. We have to value and, and care for the range of normal. It's not just one thing. Story_ID: 475375 Speaker 1: Well it's a fascinating conversation. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: You are absolutely wonderful to talk to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you. Speaker 1: --and thank you for being-- Speaker 2: You can see when I said I love my field. Speaker 1: You love your field. Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: It's excellent. Speaker 2: I feel there's so much to be done, it makes me wants to cry sometimes. Because who do I know, who do I correspond with? I don't know, but when I meet somebody, like Joycelyn Elder. I just want to hug her and say honey stay in there, hang in there. What I was gonna say what we disagree about is drugs and that's about her son [Kevin Elder] and my son [Eric Butts]. I say get sober, go with the twelve step programs they help people. There are twelve step programs in sex and love anonymous, and stuff like that. 'Cause so many people are into torture, before they can get to pleasure. If you, you know like in Monopoly you go, do not pass go or whatever you know, go directly to go, or something like that. Speaker 1: Jail (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, go to jail, do not pass go (laughter), do not collect two hundred dollars. Well why go through torture to get to pleasure. But look at S&M [sadomasochism] is big business now, porn and hurtful things and choking things and-- Speaker 1: Well we are going to close on this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You have to just leave me, say June [HistoryMaker June Dobbs Butts] do your own thing, good luck. Speaker 1: (Laughter) But, I would love to come back on my own June. Speaker 2: Will you keep in touch with me? Speaker 1: Yes I will, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Write to me, and I appreciate it, if there's anything that I could. Oh, we didn't look at the pictures. Speaker 1: We're gonna do that now. You and I will change sets. Speaker 2: Oh I must tell you this, I gotta take my middle child who lives here in Atlanta [Georgia], when she was college I taught at her University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]. And her roommate took my course Human Sexuality, and Florie [Florence Butts Johnson] didn't even take it. She said, "I've heard all that." So she said, "Oh Florie, I wish I could just talk with my mother, I mean I can't talk with my mother about sex." Florie said, "Uh-huh," she said, "My biggest problem is getting her to shut up (laughter)." And I say that because, I don't know how to shut up (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well thank you very much. Speaker 2: It's so big. Speaker 1: It is so vast. Speaker 2: It's so big. Speaker 1: It is so vast. Speaker 2: And, and. Speaker 1: There's so-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: There's so much territory to cover, so little has been done. Speaker 2: I must say this, see there's a lot people say forget about the education, you're never, (unclear) get, get seminarians to open up and so forth. I had a friend who was director of a museum, he's a minister. And he opened up this museum in San Francisco [California] called The Museum of Erotic Art [sic. International Museum of Erotic Art, San Francisco, California] or the International Museum something like that. Anyway it's closed now. But he got beautiful--it was like several stories. And on the top floor they had rooms full of Asian art. They had scrolls that opened up under glass tables, that depicted the emperor going with his five wives and what he did on the island and his boat ride back, you know, it was charming. And then they came down to the educational levels and then in the basement they had like the smut of Europe today and the United States. And I asked him, I said, "Why do you have to have the smut?" He said, "It part of the landscape," it was scary, it was basement was scary (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Thank you very much, scary. Speaker 2: And when I walked in there was one part that had like a screen you couldn't see, like there was like a foot of air, and you could see a man's legs there. I got scared, nobody else was down there. And I thought why go and look for the rapist, get out of here, you know, (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 475376 Speaker 1: This is s picture of my second oldest sister's wedding, which took place at our home. Right after Christmas, and it think the year might have been like '33 [1933], 1933 or it could have been '34 [1934]. But beginning on the left is Mattiwilda [HistoryMaker Mattiwilda Dobbs Janzon], then there's my mother standing behind her, then going across the back is my father. You want the names? Speaker 2: Please. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yep. Speaker 2: Okay my mother was named Irene Thompson Dobbs, my father's John Wesley Dobbs. On his left is his mother who was born a slave that's Minnie Millie Minerva [Minnie Hendricks Banks], Minnie was a nickname, Hendricks Scott, no Hendricks Dobbs Scott Banks. Then there's me and I was about seven. Then coming in the center there's the bride and groom, the bride is my sister Willie, Willie Dobbs Blackburn and the guy she married Ben Allan Blackburn, Benjamin Allan Blackburn. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Stupendous, very good. Speaker 2: Was it too long? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next photo, no that was perfect. Okay now this one. Speaker 2: These are my three children, during a very happy Christmas, when my son was about three. So he was born in '63 [1963], so this would be 1966. My next child was at that point, seven and that's Florie, her real name is Florence [Florence Butts Johnson], we call her Florie. And then my oldest child is Lucia [Lucia Butts], and so she was ten, on this Christmas photo in New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next one please, Mr. Wilson [Shawn Wilson]. Speaker 2: This is myself and Mattiwilda in Australia. We were in Sidney and went to the zoo where they wanted her to hold the koala and the koalas have sharp fingernails and dig into you. They're very gentle little animals but they do clutch and she didn't want to hold it, so I held it and as you can see his face, or her face was big as mine and they're marsupials and interesting. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Cool. Speaker 2: That was 1955. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Perfect, okay. Speaker 2: This must have been '32, [1932], 1932, I'm the child holding on to my boyfriend's hand, whose name was Frank Adair and he had told me he was coming to see me. My sister's in the middle, that's Josephine [Josephine Dobbs Clement], who didn't want me on the picture, next to her is Johnson Hubert [G. Johnson Hubert], who finally became the minister of music in my church. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: My parents in Hot Springs, Arkansas, might have been, in the '40s [1940s], maybe early '50s [1950s], but somewhere along then. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, one moment please. Mr. Shawn, got it, okay next. Speaker 2: That's me and Mattiwilda on a trip to Australia in 1955. I'm on the left, Mattiwilda's on the inside in front of the Taj Mahal, in Agra, India. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Speaker 2: See I have to do this, in two shots maybe? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Uh-huh, why don't you flip it the other way, so that the wide part will be, yeah great. We'll start with the upper photo please. Speaker 2: My mother, about the time of her marriage. Her name was Irene Thompson and she got married to my father pictured there, John Wesley Dobbs, the year might have been round 1906, they got married June 1906, June the 6th. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Thank you next. Speaker 2: My father referred to this lady, as Grandma Judie Dobbs, this was his grandmother, so you know the generation that would take me, whether she's great, great or whatever. But her, she was born a slave and given her freedom, when she was twelve, and she was told that any children had would be free. So that meant the first child she had w-, became the father [Will Dobbs] of my father. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Wow, good-- Speaker 2: She brought up my father. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good photo, good description, thank you. Speaker 2: This is a family portrait of the Butts' in 1963. My mother-in-law [Edith Butts] is first lady on the left and then comes my husband, former husband Hugh F. Butts, then I'm standing at the top. Then coming down, is my first child Lucia, then in the center is my father-in-law, Lucius Butts who was a lawyer, who's holding my son Eric [Eric Dobbs], who's two months old. And then there's Florie, kind of tilting her head like what fools these mortals be. Speaker 1: Okay the last one. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, okay last photo, coming up. Speaker 1: This is my granddaughter, she now uses her middle name, which is June, so she's June Johnson [ph.], and this was just before she finished college. She's now a graduate of University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]. I only have the one grandchild (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): When would this have been taken? Speaker 1: This was done two summers ago, so it was 1904, 2004..