 Story_ID: 358375 Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: I'm interviewer today. And this is Neculai Burghelea, the videographer today. Speaker 2: Okay, welcome, thank you. Speaker 1: And we will have you slate your full name and spell it out for us. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Camille Billops. C-A-M-I-L-L-E, B-I-L-L-O-P-S, Billops. Speaker 1: Billops. And your date of birth? Speaker 2: August 12, 1933. Speaker 1: Your place of birth? Speaker 2: Los Angeles, California. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: December 14, 2006. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: The location is Hatch-Billops Collection [Camille Billops and James V. Hatch Archives], archives of African American cultural history. Speaker 1: In New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: In New York City. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a visual artist, with sculpture and printmaking and ceramics. And I am an archivist, and I am a filmmaker. Speaker 1: In that order? Speaker 2: Well, it's according to who's got the money (laughter). The archives get the money when the endowment [National Endowment for the Humanities] gives it to us. And the New York State Council [New York State Council on the Arts] makes this place absolutely possible, for thirty years, thirty of funding from the State Council. It's not a lot, but it's steady. Speaker 1: Steady. Speaker 2: And the endowment is on and off, but mostly on. And then the other money comes from, for film, comes from selling art. So, I guess my occupation is a dealer. That's what I've become, an art dealer. Before that, in '87 [1987], I taught fourteen years at Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey]. I taught ceramics and drawing. And then in the '70s [1970s], I taught at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York]. I taught ceramics for five years there, where I got my M.F.A. And I realized that I needed to have an M.F.A. in order to escape teaching in the public school system here. Story_ID: 358376 Speaker 1: So, we're going to start. I'm going to ask you five pop culture type questions about yourself. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: I think I wear a lot of black. Speaker 1: Your favorite food? Speaker 2: I like spaghetti. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, we wanted to go to the Galapagos [Galapagos Islands], but I don't know if we'll ever get there. We've been places where we never planned. We just ended up there in somebody else's culture. Like Armenia, we were in Armenia and wandering the face of the earth with the Armenian Americans. Speaker 1: And what's your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, I don't know. But I have one that just came to mind, and I don't know if I should say it or not. Speaker 1: Say it. Speaker 2: Sometimes when I want Jimmy [James V. Hatch] to do something, I say, "Listen, Negro." (Laughter) And sometimes his white friends are there, and they give us a look of complete--like, you know. So, we're always living these funny edges. You know the funny edges, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But ultimately, it's just two elderly people living in a loft (laughter). Story_ID: 358377 Speaker 1: So, we're going to talk about your family history first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Your mother's name, and your mother's date of birth, and place of birth? Speaker 2: Okay. Do you want her married name, or her--? Speaker 1: Well, I'll take both. Speaker 2: Okay. Her name was Alma Gilmore [Alma Gilmore Dotson]. And then she became Alma Gilmore Billops. Then my father [Lucius Billops] passed away, and then she became Alma Dotson, D-O-T-S-O-N. And my father's name (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, we'll stick with your mother's. Speaker 2: My mother, she was born in, I think she was born in Birmingham, Alabama. But when they were children, they were removed, because the mother [Marion Adams Gilmore] died in her thirties of tuberculosis. And that was, and her father [John Gilmore, Sr.] died of tuberculosis. It was like having AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] at that time. And so they died, so they went to live with the grandmother. And the grandmother they went to live with was, her name was Adams [Louise Weston Adams]. And she was, you know, her name had been Weston, and her name became Adams. And we called her Da Ma which was short for darling mother. And that is part of the folklore in my family, they told me that. Speaker 1: So, I just missed a bit of that. Who died of tuberculosis? Speaker 2: My mother's mother. Speaker 1: Your mother's mother? Speaker 2: Marion Gilmore died of tuberculosis, and so did her husband. Speaker 1: And so they went to live with--and then her grandmother raised her? Speaker 2: They went to live with her, that's right, her grandmother raised her. Speaker 1: And what was her grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Her grandmother's name was--God, I just know her as Da Ma. Speaker 1: Da Ma, okay. So, they-- Speaker 2: She was an Adams. You see, the group, everybody's coming down as Weston. That's the Irish business, or English slave masters--Weston. The eight children come down from that union, Westons. So, formerly she had been a Weston. And there are three now main roots of the Westons that went on past a certain age--the Westons, the Adams, and the Goodsons--oh, and the Hollys. The Hollys, the Adams, and the Goodsons, they come down from the Westons. Speaker 1: Okay. So, being raised by her grandparents-- Speaker 2: And grandmother. Speaker 1: And grandmother. Was she still in Alabama? Was this in Birmingham? Speaker 2: No, the grandmother was in Congaree, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Congaree? Speaker 2: Congaree. Speaker 1: And Congaree is close to what major city? Speaker 2: About fifty miles [sic.] from Columbia [South Carolina]. Speaker 1: And what did grandmother do, Da Ma, what did she do for a living? Speaker 2: She was a farmer. Because her father had been Moultrie Weston [William Moultrie Weston], that white slave owner. And he gave them all land, so they never worked for any white people. Speaker 1: So, she was one of the children of-- Speaker 2: Moultrie Weston. Speaker 1: --Moultrie Weston? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Who is the picture we'll see later on. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 358378 Speaker 1: So, you tell him--let's talk about the grandmother's mother, your great-great-grandmother. Speaker 2: Well, she was, I guess she was a maid or something in the house. Speaker 1: And what was her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Phoebe Ward, Grandma Phoebe. And we knew all about her, because my mother [Alma Gilmore Dotson] was raised by her daughter. We knew what her house looked like, and I have it all on tape for my mother. And her sister talked to me about that. Speaker 1: So, what did they say about, let's talk about Ward, Mrs. Ward. What did she do for a living? Did she work? Speaker 2: She was a maid, she was a servant girl. And I asked mama, I said what--she said she was half African and half Cherokee. And I said, "Well, what African?" She said, "I don't know." We couldn't get past that. And they said she had a very nice house. And then they say Grandma Phoebe had a--Grandma Adams [Louise Weston Adams] had a very nice house, Da Ma. I don't know if the picture of the house I have now is Grandma Adams' house, one of the shotgun houses, you know, in South Carolina. Speaker 1: So, she worked for a plantation owner? Or she-- Speaker 2: Grandma Phoebe, yes. Speaker 1: Yes. And, and-- Speaker 2: But she was a slave. Speaker 1: So, she was a slave? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But she had a relationship with the slave master's son? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Or the slave master himself? Speaker 2: Well, the son. Speaker 1: The son. Speaker 2: But he was a slave master, too. Speaker 1: Right, but it was still the son? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. And of that relationship, they had eight children together? Speaker 2: Yes, and seven went to Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina], which was in South Carolina. Speaker 1: Well, tell me the story. You said that they, that he had to buy the children. Speaker 2: That's what my mother said, that he bought them. In fact, I'm not sure if it's my mother who said it or my Cousin Ruth [ph.] who said it--who demands the space of the elderly now, ninety-something--but that he bought them so that they wouldn't be born in slavery. And then they went to school. Only Da Ma did not go to school. Speaker 1: But they all went, seven of the eight went to Benedict? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And do you know what happened to them, what became of those seven? Speaker 2: Well, some of them got through, and married one of these people that I'm telling you about. Like Da Ma had been a Weston, but she married an Adams, who was a white man; she married a white man. And somebody from the Westons married a Goodson. And then somebody in the Westons married a Holly. And the Holly was the one I showed you, this is my cousin from South Carolina. So, they all came out sort of fair. You know, fair people get together--they're black but they marry other fair people. (Laughter) But some of those chromosomes caught up though, you know. Uncle Willie [William Adams] and them, they had two little fair children. But that third one, the hip baby--you can run but you can't hide (laughter). Anyway, and that's the woman who I'm telling you is ninety years old, who's telling all these stories. That's Uncle Willie's daughter, and she's about my color. Story_ID: 358379 Speaker 1: What did they do? Did they, you said that he'd [Billops' great-great-grandfather, William Moultrie Weston] given them land. So, they owned the land? Speaker 2: They had their own land. Speaker 1: And they were farmers? Speaker 2: That's right, they were farmers. And Mama [Alma Gilmore Dotson] and Aunt Phine [Josephine Gilmore Harvey] and her brother Harold [Harold Gilmore] went there and stayed with Da Ma [Louise Weston Adams], only Harold came later, and Aunt Phine had to go get him. I don't know where she got him from, but she got him and she carried him two miles on her back. And that's the story. And then Grandmother said, "Who's going to feed him?" She said, "You give him--." And every time I say this, it makes me tearful. She said, "You give him half my food." And from that distance, it does that to me. Now, I loved these people, man. You know, they gave us all these stories. And so I've documented them, you know, all the folklore. So what I've done now is--because this family, the Gilmores and the Adams, we meet every year in Red Bank, New Jersey. Well, really in the ocean or something, but right down there. We meet every year. And I have eight first cousins, and that one there from my mother's brother. He stayed in Birmingham [Alabama], he didn't come. He stayed with Aunt Ora [Ora Adams], he stayed with her. And he suffered because he didn't go to Congaree [South Carolina]. And so, he never knew the stories, and his children didn't know the stories. So, we had to tell them all the stories. And then I gave them copies of--well, I took--one cousin, Ruth [ph.], she was the youngest one. And I said, "Okay, you're going to hold all the pictures for all your brothers and sisters and all those grandchildren y'all got." Because they had eight, their mother had eight children. And you know, then everybody had eight times eight. So, and everybody looks like a thousand different faces, but they're still black. I said to my cousin, I said, "Are they still black?" She said, "So far." (Laughter) Because some look Filipino because they've been marrying all kinds of other people, you know. But I do have pictures of everybody who claims to be my first cousin, if they held up one finger. Second cousin, two fingers. Third cousin, three little babies in the water with three fingers--so that I would know who they were. So we, the pictures they have they let me make master photos--and the pictures I had--so that that family would know all those stories of Congaree. Because only Carol [ph.] and I knew this, and Alma [Alma Harvey]. Because they weren't told the stories, because they didn't see John [John Gilmore, Jr.] for a long time. And then finally they were all in Red Bank, and they got John to come. Story_ID: 358380 Speaker 1: What were some of the other stories that you hold, that they told you about folklore? Speaker 2: Well, I have some, I know. When I went down to Congaree [South Carolina]--because I was giving a talk at the museum in Columbia [South Carolina], and I went out to Congaree. Somebody took me out there. They said, "You know, the Westons are still here, they're still here, and they have that plantation out there in Congaree." And my Cousin Ruth [ph.] said, "Is that little train station still there?" I said, "Yeah." She said they had nerve enough to be segregated. And I took pictures of that house. And I stepped inside the gate, but I didn't go too far, because there was an outer yard with lots and lots of trees. But then there was an inner part, where it was right around the house. And I didn't know if there were animals. And where would I go, because I couldn't climb the tree. You know, what I mean? I didn't know how they'd feel. But someone gave me a listing of all of those Westons who were related to me in the phonebook. And the doctor of the one of the Westons owned that plantation that Ruth's father, Uncle Willie [William Adams], used to deliver dry cleaning to them. And I said, "Well, how did Uncle Willie do the dry cleaning?" She said, "With gasoline. And he'd hang them out to air and press them." And that's, so that little place is still there, I shot pictures of it. My parents [Alma Gilmore Dotson and Lucius Billops] had 16 millimeter cameras when there were no video cameras. I had thirty-four cans of film of them running around and everything. But they have pictures of the river that my mother was baptized in. And they have pictures of that little thing. I never approached them, but Jim [James V. Hatch] and I said we were going to go down there, because they're all in the archives down there in the library. I wanted a picture of Moultrie Weston [William Moultrie Weston]. I don't, I'm not interested in him; I want to know where he died. They said he died--that group says he lived with Da Ma [Louise Weston Adams], and that's why they disinherited him. They said that when he died, the white people came and got him. They wouldn't let him be buried with the black people. So, we don't know. There are no pictures that we know of Moultrie, because we haven't--. So we thought if we got resistance, Jim could pass and be, "I think he's an old cousin of mine," or something like that, you know, because we wanted to, we wanted to know him. He was our great-great-great-great-grandfather. And but people told me that he was not--he had been, he was from Dublin, Ireland. But they said he had, he couldn't be Irish. He said the Irish were too poor to own slaves. And also, they were Protestant. So, that's all I know about them. Now, my cousin, the Hollys, sitting there right in South Carolina, he didn't seem to know any of those stories, but I know them. And his mother, her mother's name was Baby [ph.]; I knew Baby. My mother told me all these stories, and I had photographs and stuff. And she did the right thing, telling me. Speaker 1: And you became the archivist. Speaker 2: I did. I mean, just so casually. It just slipped upon us. And it came out of, it came out of a resistance and anger that these things didn't exist. And when we looked, Jim and I said, "Ain't nobody coming for us. Nobody's coming. Look in the mirror. Who's coming? Nobody." Nobody's coming for me, and nobody's coming for Jim. And my friend said, "Yeah, but he's right." I said, "It ain't no paradise, you know." (Laughter) You think it's paradise. Maybe it's something else, but it's not. I said, "Ain't nobody coming for everybody's poems." He said, "Well, I guess we'll do it ourselves." So, we had that loft, and we started doing poetry sessions and exhibitions, and collecting things, and collecting people. And that's how we did that part. Speaker 1: Back to the family's history. You spoke to me about an aunt who worked for, was a domestic. Speaker 2: Yes, in Inglewood, California. Speaker 1: Now, okay. Now, so that's later on. Speaker 2: Glendale, California. Speaker 1: Glendale. So, you know her from your childhood? Speaker 2: That's right, Aunt Vicky, Victoria [Victoria Adams Rhodes]. Speaker 1: We'll talk about her later then. Are there any other stories about the Westons or that part of the family that you'd like to share? Speaker 2: No. And I know very little about the Gilmores, who-- Speaker 1: The Gilmores. Speaker 2: --my mother's father. I just knew, I think his name was Jack Gilmore [John Gilmore, Sr.]. But what I didn't know is that in the family, both sides of the family, the women were all seamstresses, which means they were in business. And the men all worked on the railroad, which means they were close to the food. And my father worked on the railroad, and Uncle Willie, I think Uncle Willie got my father work on the railroad-- Story_ID: 358381 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was your father's name? Speaker 2: His name was Lucius Billops. Speaker 1: And his date of birth? Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: Or place of birth? Speaker 2: I think 1900. My mother [Alma Gilmore Dotson] was I think two years older than Daddy, and she was born in 1898. Speaker 1: Okay. And his place of birth? Speaker 2: Ennis, Texas. Speaker 1: Where did they meet? Speaker 2: They met in Los Angeles [California] at a dance. And Daddy said, "I told her to look into my loving eyes (laughter)." Speaker 1: What is your dad's history? Do you know anything about his side of the family? Speaker 2: I knew he had about five or six brothers and one sister. Speaker 1: All in Texas? Speaker 2: No. They eventually, well, most of them migrated to California on freight trains. That's how they moved; they didn't money to ride and pay. So, they would find out what trains were going places. And Daddy brought Edgar [ph.], his sister's son. And Daddy was working in Beverly Hills [California]. And so, Edgar appeared at the back door with his tennis shoes on. That's what--the older always brings the younger. That's how my mother came to California, and Aunt Vicky [Victoria Adams Rhodes] got her a job. Speaker 1: But she, your mother, came all the way from the South to California? Speaker 2: No, she came from Red Bank, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: People came-- Speaker 1: So, how did she get to New Jersey? Speaker 2: They came up from the South. Speaker 1: They came up from the South from New Jersey (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and then they brought Da Ma [Louise Weston Adams]. Because Da Ma lost the farm through bad debt, you know, borrowing money to try to stay alive. And so, she lost the farm. But that was the farm that her father [William Moultrie Weston] had given her. And I don't know anything about her relationship with the father after they grew up. That, I don't know. I would be curious to find out. I don't know if we can find out. The white people would know; all the black people are dead. Well, maybe they might know. Or maybe it was just a white man messing with a black woman [Phoebe Ward] and who cares? I mean, I don't know how important it was in that family. But they said they disinherited him. But he was a primogeniture, so they could not, he was the first. So they could not disinherit him, they couldn't take his land. And he gave the land to his children, so they say (laughter). Speaker 1: So, your mother moves to New Jersey. Speaker 2: Red Bank, New Jersey. Speaker 1: And then what did she do? Did she talk about her childhood in Red Bank? Speaker 2: No, they were grown. Speaker 1: They were grown by the time she moved there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were grown. Aunt Phine went first. Her sister, Marion Harvey [sic. Josephine Gilmore Harvey]--Marion Gilmore--she married a Harvey. And they came, and then Mama came up. And then I think the aunt, Aunt Ora [Ora Adams] came up. She was the one that kept John [John Gilmore, Jr.] in Alabama, she came up. Speaker 1: Were there any-- Story_ID: 358382 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were there any creatives in the family? Any artists or painters or actors? Who's the most creative person in the family? Speaker 2: Well, you know, they--it's sort of disguised, because we say a dressmaker is not necessarily a designer. But you don't know what's running under that river; that that was the only outlet to that. My Aunt Phine [Josephine Gilmore Harvey] and all of them said that Aunt Ora [Ora Adams] had a very beautiful voice. And I put her in the film ['Take Your Bags'] we did about the Middle Passage, where we showed her picture. Because I was talking about mulatto-ism (laughter). And I said, "Here's Aunt Ora." And she had, Mama [Alma Gilmore Dotson] said she had long brown straight hair and green eyes, and she used to love to sing, 'Drink to Me Only with Thine Eyes.' And so, we put that little--and I have a nice voice. So, I sang a little bit in that song. My Uncle Willie [William Adams] was a poet. And I have, I'm a rogue, I've got them. (Laughter) My cousin doesn't know that I have his whole book on poetry. And we published them in our journal, Artist and Influence [Artist and Influence: The Journal of Black American Cultural History]. And he was talking about the trials and tribulation of a black man, even though he looked like a little white man--the trials and tribulations of a black Pullman porter. So we published--we sort of--in the style of the greeting cards, you know. And his daughter, Ruth [ph.], writes poetry in the style of the greeting cards. But-- Speaker 1: He was a Pullman porter? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So he was pretty middle class then? I mean, that was considered-- Speaker 2: Well, they were able to buy a house. That was a good job. And you could eat. Speaker 1: Did he know A. Philip Randolph? Speaker 2: Well, he would have to have known about him. But I don't think, you know, not any kind of personal thing. Story_ID: 358383 Speaker 1: I have pictures of Uncle Willie [William Adams] when I was seventeen when we had one of those family picnics; I have those pictures. My father, they used to somehow ride on the same line sometimes, and they would go down to Mexico. And wherever they had been, they came back with those accents, Mexican accents. And they would, they introduced me to--I never drank that--but it was tequila, with the worm in it and all this kind of stuff. My father told me about a time and an incident on the train--that you take care of somebody on the train--white people, you take care of them. You dust them off and get their things, you know. And at the end of the journey, the man gave Daddy a dime. And Daddy opened up the window and threw it out, in front of him. And he reported my father, and my father was grounded for a month. So, those things happened to him. Of course, when we were traveling between the West Coast and the East Coast coming to visit Aunt Phine [Josephine Gilmore Harvey], we got to ride, because my daddy worked for the thing. But we could not eat in the dining car, because it was segregated. But what they did, this underground, they just told everybody on the train, the workers, that Bill Billops' [Lucius Billops] family was on the train. And so they'd come, when it was time to eat, they'd come get us and we'd go in the kitchen and eat. We'd have steak (laughter). The underground, you know, when you couldn't stay in the motel. My stepfather told me, I said, "Mr. Dotson [Walter Dotson], why don't you get the big cars like y'all used to have?" He said, "Oh, because you can stay in the hotels now." And then it was safe to park on the side of a highway. So, they had Nashes and later Cadillacs, and then the last big car they had was a Benz [Mercedes-Benz], you know that. But that was their way of surviving, because they knew where to stay. You know, the fact that I hadn't been in the South in a very long time--I had still have those memories like people have of the Nazis, you know. And I went into a toilet, a filling station toilet. And it was no event, but I thought just this simple act--you could not, you couldn't go, because you were black. It was so irrational. But you could not go in there and pee. And now we can, now we can pee. Maybe that's a good title, huh? (Laughter) Maybe we can pee, I don't know. But I kept looking for all these things, like people were going to come out of the bushes, the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], you know, and all of that stuff, come out of the bushes. Story_ID: 358384 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What other stories do you know about the underground that you can share with me? I like that, the underground, you know, the family's going to, you know, them coming to get you to eat in the kitchen; that's the underground. Or, you know, a place to stay. You stayed at someone else's house when you were on the road. You had to-- Speaker 2: Well, by that time I was only four. I remember we had, one time we went back east on the bus. I remember that the other price started at five. At five years old, you've got to pay another fee. And I remember saying, my mother [Alma Gilmore Dotson] had told me to say, "I'm four on the bus, but I'm five here." (Laughter) You know, and I was about four or five. I've got pictures of my Aunt Phine [Josephine Gilmore Harvey] when we'd come to Red Bank [New Jersey]. And they were stylish, these women, because they had seen it. Their parents had made lovely clothes, you see, these early Gibson Girl clothes. Those women, they really looked like white women, because they had white hair, you know, and the hair piled up on the top. But they married black men. They married-- Speaker 1: Dark-skinned men. Speaker 2: That's right. My father [Lucius Billops] was dark, my father was dark. My mother was never so light as when she was with that dark man. I remember my mother said after she married Mr. Dotson [Walter Dotson], she said, "If I had been of child-bearing age, I wouldn't have married him." I said, "Mama, you're lying. You ought to ashamed of yourself." I said, "Daddy was black. Did you forget?" She said, "Your daddy was a dog, he was something." All my work is about those stories of my mother and my father. That drawing up there (gesture) really represents the attitude my mother had when she looked at my father, because he was a dandy. And she would look at him askance, which is distrustful. It was like, "You dog, you devil." And that's in a series called the Kaoshiung series. It's really called 'Remember Vienna,' when it's the sculpture. But the Kaoshiung series, I did in Taiwan. That's why it has little Chinese stuff. So these series, it's ten of these drawings. It's about a fight. Speaker 1: We're going to pause to change the tape. Speaker 2: Okay. So that whole attitude comes through the work. Story_ID: 358293 Speaker 1: What they want, these women with her friends, and they had these coats that were wrap-arounds at that time. And it was always a big fur and a little close hat, you know. And so they, they displayed themselves. They displayed their class, or the class that they wanted to be--with the right shoes. And they took formal pictures. I have my mother's [Alma Gilmore Dotson] formal pictures. And that was a formal picture of my father [Lucius Billops] posing with a ring on the little finger, which is a power trip, you know, and that hat. He might have been around twenty, but he died at forty-seven. He died of cancer and cirrhosis of the liver, and living while black. And my brother-in-law was dead at forty-two, and my god-brother was dead at forty. My god-brother was the first black animator to work for Warner Brothers [Warner Bros. Cartoons, Inc.]. Speaker 2: What was his name? Speaker 1: His name was Frank Braxton. And we did a, he had died by the time we did the Artist and Influence [Artist and Influence: The Journal of Black American Cultural History]. So, these two white animators, I taped them about their getting Frank that job. Because they said to the boss, they said, "Well, I hear you don't hire black animators." They said, "Oh, if they were any good ones we would hire them." We said, "Good, because we got one." And he worked on a lot of the cartoons and things like that. But he died of Hodgkin's [Hodgkin's lymphoma] disease, yeah. Story_ID: 358294 Speaker 1: So, how old were you--you were born when your mother [Alma Gilmore Dotson] and father [Lucius Billops] were in California? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, what are your earliest memories of growing up in California at the time? What was the city? Were you in Los Angeles [California]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was the city like? What was Los Angeles like? Speaker 2: Well, we lived on what was called the Eastside [Los Angeles, California]. Not East L.A. [Los Angeles, California], the Eastside. And the city was divided west and east. So Main Street, that's where we lived. Well, we lived on Griffith [Avenue], and we lived on Adams [Boulevard] at one time; I have pictures of that. Then we lived on Santa Barbara [Santa Barbara Avenue; Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard], and that was about the time that our neighbors, who were Japanese, disappeared. And so we lived there, and then we moved around the corner to Griffith--I mean to 38th Street, and-- Speaker 1: What were your thoughts when your Japanese neighbors disappeared? Speaker 2: I don't think I had any, because I was six. I just know that they were gone. I didn't know where they went. But that's where we were living. And then we, the war [World War II, WWII] came. And my mother had gotten out of service by that time. She had gotten out of just working for individual white people. She, I think they did day work, or worked in hotels. And then they had the war effort, and Mama got a job out there with her friend Tina [Fanny Christina Hill] at North American Aviation company, and that made a difference. My mother's in the oral history part of Rosie the Riveter [Rosie the Riveter Revisited: Women and the World War II Work Experience]. These two black women are the only ones in there. And they're in the oral history. So, I have the published oral history, and then I also have the disk they gave me, that I said I might want to use my mother's voice in the film. So, and she's talking about that. And what they were interested in was the additional money, and what affect did it would have on the children of the Rosies. And it had one on me, because it allowed her to put me in private school. Story_ID: 358295 Speaker 1: She [Billop's mother, Alma Gilmore Dotson] sent me to Catholic school, private school. It was a religious school, but those were the good schools. And when I left the public school, I think I was in third grade. And I was supposed to go to the fourth grade, and they wouldn't pass me because I couldn't read. When you get reading families, you get reading children. My mother read; they read even though they weren't great readers. Like in Jim's [James V. Hatch] house they had books, a lot of books, and they read. My father [Lucius Billops] read the comic books, the funny papers, funny papers, they called them, you know. And my mother, I think they read. I mean they were literate, but they didn't really, they were not great readers. And I wasn't either, but what I was, was a doer. You know, I made things and I--she gave me dolls until I washed their hair so much that I had to make them nuns. You know, I'd straighten their hair and I would make puppets. I would go, she'd let me go downtown and go to puppet shows on the train. She gave me some books, but I don't really remember reading them. She gave me an oil painting set, and I took them and I didn't paint a picture. I painted my shoes, and I painted my bow and arrow set. I got pictures of me and Bonnie [ph.] and Maureen [ph.] in the backyard with our bow and arrows. I, I, I, did that. I made name plates, and I earned my money selling nameplates with the spaghetti alphabet. I cut lawns, chased little boys. That's how I probably ruined my legs, jumping off garages chasing little boys. And I really designed. I told my mother what kind of clothes I wanted, because she was a dressmaker. She taught me about fabric. She told me how to test for wool at ten. I didn't know how to test for wool. Speaker 2: How do you test for wool? Speaker 1: With a match. Wool won't burn. It cooks, you know. And I knew what silk taffeta was versus rayon. I knew all those things that dressmakers knew. And so, I would tell her what I wanted. And I had beautiful clothes. I mean we were broke, but I had beautiful clothes, and clothes that had hats that matched the coat and matched the little dress that was silk taffeta. My mother knew how to make lace. So she was really a craftsperson, really, in another sense. Story_ID: 358296 Speaker 1: And my father was a master cook. I have his book where he worked as a merchant seaman on how to cook for two hundred people and how make bread for two hundred people. And when we didn't have any money, or any money for any meat, Daddy would whip something up in the kitchen, beans or something, and then he'd put a blob of jelly or jam in the middle to make it look pretty. And he would cook some little shortbreads for us. And then when he drank, (laughter) he would--Daddy was hiding out from the National Guard because he deserted the National Guard or something. So, the shades were always down. And when he drank, the shades were always up (laughter). And he'd be out there cooking for everybody in the neighborhood, and cooking bread for people, and coffee cake, and making mayonnaise and all these things, and getting drunk. My mother [Alma Gilmore Dotson] used to say my father could get drunk with a can of beer. He was an alcoholic; I think he was an alcoholic. And they used to battle and fight, but I don't think he intentionally ever hit my mother. I think she hit him first, because he would take the rent money. And she would keep the money under her part of the mattress in the bed under the mattress, and he knew where it was. He'd go to the Elks club, you know, Bill Billops [Lucius Billops] would go to the Elks club. And he'd need some more of that money, so he'd walk about three or four blocks home and then (laughter) grab that mattress. And my mother would go rolling out the other side. And he'd take that money and he'd go back to the Elks (laughter). And she'd jump up and slap him, and then he'd slap her. Then my mother would call, "Billie [Billie Billops], come help me." That's my oldest sister, she was eight years older, seven and a half years older. And they'd both jump on him. And at that time if you called the police, you'd have to call the operator, and the operator would call the police. The operator did it. Speaker 2: Did they ever call the police? Speaker 1: Yes, they called the police on him. And then he, he'd call them back, "Operator, that party has left now. Cancel it," (laughter). My father, my father was gone a lot with either the railroad or the merchant seamen. He'd been across the seas, you know. But so, his money added to ours, and we were able to buy a house on the Westside [Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How many siblings? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: How many siblings? Was it just you and your older sister? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Well, then later my mother married Mr. Dotson [Walter Dotson] after my father passed, and his daughter by his first wife came to live with us. And that was the mentor of George Wolfe [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe], Josie Mae Dotson. Story_ID: 358297 Speaker 1: We'll get back to her. I just wanted to--before you forget, we'll get back to Josie Mae Dotson. You said they had enough money to buy a house? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: On the Westside [Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: On the Westside. Speaker 1: Which means you moved to the fancier part of-- Speaker 2: Yes, you did. You did, and there were a lot of--and then that's when, the time when all the gardeners for your lawns and stuff were Japanese. You know, that was what they did. Like, people, you know, certain classes of people would do certain things. And so, we got there. And then I went to, got to go to Catholic Girls' High [Catholic Girls' High School, Los Angeles, California]. And mainly, I think, I got to take the Adams bus. And they were still living on the Eastside [Los Angeles, California], see. Prestige, right (laughter)? And I have these pictures of, you know, my mother [Alma Gilmore Dotson], who sewed for me for way into maybe my twenties. And then I learned to sew a little bit, but I didn't really like it. My sister was a fabulous dress designer, too. So, I have all of their pictures where they're always having fashion shows, you know. And so, Billie [Billie Billops] sort of took after Mama. She did what Mama did. She had the family and did what Mama did, and stayed where Mama was. But you know, I finished school and went to college, and left. Speaker 1: So, your father [Lucius Billops] died before you finished high school? Speaker 2: He died when I was fourteen. Speaker 1: Fourteen. Speaker 2: Fourteen or fifteen, one of them. Speaker 1: And how did that affect the family? Money? Speaker 2: Well, I think money, money. When we moved, he died shortly after we moved into the new house. And then my brother-in-law and my sister came to live with us. And my brother-in-law was--I don't know what happened to him when he was a child, but he was a person who counted his things that he owned. He counted his canned goods, and his things that he contributed. My stepfather [Walter Dotson] did it too, only he didn't drink. He would fix his radio so that Josie and I couldn't play it. He'd booby-trap it, and he'd find out if we had been playing his record player. Story_ID: 358298 Speaker 1: What music were you listening to at the time? What records did you have? Speaker 2: Oh, I think popular stuff. Speaker 1: What records did you have (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I remember one in my teens, 'Earth Angel.' Because that's, we used to do that skating. You know, black people were skating like they were dancing. So, we would do these backwards trios. And I remember that. And we'd sing, "Earth angel, earth angel," and then you'd do that long dip with that skating and stuff. I loved skating. I loved it, loved it, so much so that when I made a ceramic lamp--my means of exiting places was this long skater, you know, trying to escape. When my father [Lucius Billops] died, I wanted to go to the skating rink. And my mother [Alma Gilmore Dotson] said, "You can't go, your father just died." So Brownie [ph.], my brother-in-law, said, "We're supposed to rejoice when people die." She said, "I don't care what you're supposed to do. She ain't going." So, Jimmy [James V. Hatch] saw the skating as my means of getting out of things that I didn't want to necessarily do. So, that--and I just heard 'Earth Angel' on the radio. You know how they play the old music? And it threw me right back into that little skating rink, which was segregated at that time. You didn't go to the skating rink when white people were there. There were black people there, the Skatium [Los Angeles, California]. And we'd go up there and get those skates, and I'd skate my butt off. I was skating up until I was three months' pregnant. I was skating, and I loved it. And of course, you can never get that back. I think my bike is like that now for me, my bike. I ride that bike all over the city [New York, New York], it's a wonderful bike. But that's what--so I was trying to do those steps without skates on in my studio, at age seventy-three. (Singing) "Earth angel, earth angel." Real wide ones, you know. Story_ID: 358299 Speaker 1: And my sister, Josie [Josie Mae Dotson], when she came to live with us, at first I didn't like her, and then I just adored her. And we joined together so we could hate her father (laughter). Speaker 2: Now, your mother [Alma Gilmore Dotson] remarried? Speaker 1: Yes, she married Mr. Walter Dotson. He had been in the choir. And he said he'd seen her in the choir. He said she was a pretty lady, light (laughter). And he said, "I knew your father [Lucius Billops]." And I said, "Did you know Daddy? And he said yeah. Daddy was a--I said, "Mama, why wasn't Daddy working at North American Aviation company anymore?" She said, "They fired him." I said, "Why?" She said, "For fighting." And I said see, that's where I'm getting that temperament. I used to jump up in somebody's face. Or if I see the police arresting some black person, I'd run right up on it. And Jim [James V. Hatch] would say, "What are you doing? Don't do that." I wouldn't do it now, but I used to get right up in there. You know, during the 'Fly Blackbird' days, George Takei and I would sit in front of the theater. It's about integration and the Freedom Riders at that time. And I'm a little drunk. George ain't drunk, but I'm a little drunk. And he's very conservative, Japanese. The white cops--we were double parked. And the white cops said we couldn't double park. I said, "Miss Miles [ph.] said you can't tell me. Why don't you go out to Beverly Hills [California] and be with the white people? This is the black people's neighborhood. And you can't tell me--." And George said, "Shut up, shut up, shut up." And I'm saying, "I don't have to shut up." And I'm--(laughter) and, you know, those cops got in the car and left; they left. See, it's that kind of--sometimes that serves me very well, but I don't do that anymore. I'm a lot sneakier. Story_ID: 358300 Speaker 1: When you were in high school and at the Catholic school [Catholic Girls' High School, Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: What were you dreaming of becoming? What did you think your education would provide (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We wanted to be nuns. Speaker 1: You wanted to be a nun? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it was romantic. You look at those medieval costumes, and they were just fabulous. You know, you see, you admired this. You admired walking in a white veil, and the First Holy Communion. And you know, it was very seductive. It was very, very theatrical. Anyway, so we wanted to--we weren't serious. It was just something--me and Francis [ph.] and Mary Ann [ph.]. But then we discovered that there's only certain orders you can get in as a black person. You could get in the Dominican Orders, but you couldn't get in St. Joseph's [Sisters of St. Joseph], or Immaculate Heart [Sisters of the Immaculate Heart of Mary], or none of those, Sisters of Charity. And I was four years on the waiting list to be in the choir, and I had a very beautiful voice. Of course, Joan [ph.] was in it, and she was black, she was light. She was the only black person there. I never got in. I graduated, never. And then-- Speaker 1: Did you understand what was going on? Speaker 2: Yeah. And then when we--Mary Ann and I got caught reading pornography (laughter). And they swooped down, you know, those big old costumes. And we ran into the chapel praying, "Oh, please Virgin Mary, don't let them throw us out of school." Blah, blah, blah. So fast forward forty, fifty years, and we're still friends. Mary Ann and Francis, she went off and got married, and had five thousand children. And she was always in the church. So, now we're at the era where all the priests have been caught putting their genitals in inappropriate places with inappropriate children. I said, "So, Francis, what do you think of these nasty ass priests now?" She said, "Well, I still love my church." I said, "But, girl, isn't this something?" I said, "Remember when we got caught with the pornography?" I said, "How dare they even breathe. How dare they do that to us, make us feel dirty because we ate meat on Friday. These people." I said, "Hieronymus Bosch was right," that 14th century [sic. 15th century] painter that had everybody slicing and dicing the popes and putting them in hell. I said, "He was right. We should make him saint, he was right." And I didn't ride her anymore, because I knew it hurt her to the core. And then I graduated and went to City College [Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California]. And the nuns said, "Well, you're going to City College? The Communists are up there." I said, "Well, so what? As long as they don't bother me." And then many, many years later, this alumni group said, "Oh, we finally found you. We want you to--," like forty years later. I said, "No. I'm going to tell you the story why I don't ever want to hear from you again." And they said, "You've carried that all that time?" I said, "Absolutely." Speaker 1: And what was the story? Speaker 2: That we couldn't get in the orders because we were black, and I couldn't get in the choir. And I said, "And I don't care about this anymore. And I don't care about you calling me. So, please never call me again." I wasn't interested. I said, "Now, I'm dangerous. You shouldn't do this. Don't stir this up. Because now you all need to be burned in hell. You need to drag that pope out, drag his ass out and get a day job, dear. Stop encouraging the poor people to fuck and have inappropriate births, because they don't have money. They won't send you a quarter." No, no, no, no. Story_ID: 358301 Speaker 1: But now I hate all religions, so. I think they're the worst things you can ever dream of doing. I can't even believe we're embroiled in war now because of religion, you know. One young sister called me up here, now that I'm so old. She said, "Sister, how do I go?" I said, "Well, first, you'd better determine who God is." I said, "Because if you going to get in that line where God's an all-white male, baby, I say wrong line." And I said, "It's going to color everything you do." I said, "You'd better look out there and find God in those galaxies." I said, "Because you don't have to send that quarter out there." I said, "Think about it. If you want to free yourself, you have to start with that. Because these people who quote God really mean that; they really mean that, the old man upstairs. Who did the things--it was some man with some hairy-ass legs running down the side of a damn mountain with some stones. Okay, so we got that. Then we get some other hairy-ass old man running down, but ain't no hairy-ass old women running down there with no stones. It's three men getting together--the Muslims, the Catholics, the Christians, and the Jews, all running that nonsense. But it's always about the old man upstairs, see. It's not about any of these bleeding bitches (laughter) who are kept at the other end of the village during when they are bleeding. You know, see, because they can't have any relationship, and were left to clear the deal for eight days, isn't that right? It was eight days. I bet you those women are walking around with little kits. Go to the meatpacking area and get some little bull's blood and little eyedroppers, and show it to them. Oh, free for another eight days (laughter). I bet you, I bet you there's a little fakery around there to keep that one from leaping on all the time. Story_ID: 358302 Speaker 1: So, who were your influences at the time when you were, when you were in California, when you were in high school [Catholic Girls' High School, Los Angeles, California] and thinking about going to college? Who was influencing you, and who was helping you make decisions about where you were going to go and what you were going to do? Speaker 2: Well, I think if I had just finished high school, my mother [Alma Gilmore Dotson] would have been happy with that. But we went to City College [Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California]. Everybody went to City College. And-- Speaker 1: Is that, what city? Speaker 2: City College in L.A [Los Angeles, California]. And like everybody when they were in public school, Jeff [sic. David Starr Jordan High School, Los Angeles, California], went to Jeff. That's where Charles Mingus and a lot of the bassists and musicians went, to Jeff. I thought it was part of my socialization, you know, just going to City College, to junior college. My grades weren't good enough to go straight into university. They were C, C+. You know, I wasn't extraordinary or anything like that. They didn't touch that part of me, you know, they didn't bring that part out. That part came later when I had this opportunity to do something that I really love. We went to City College, and you know, you major in general stuff. Who wants to know American history? I didn't--we were on the lawn playing cards, going to the races. My stepfather [Walter Dotson] was up there spying on me and Josie Mae [Josie Mae Dotson] and coming back telling my mother, "Josie Mae and Bootsie [HistoryMaker Camille Billops]," that's my nickname, "Bootsie's up there playing," you know. And I think he was jealous because he didn't get to go to college. Anyway, but then we were, it was forgiving, that system. If you graduated from the junior college with a straight C, you could go into senior college on a junior level. It was so forgiving. And Josie went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and got into the theater arts department, and that's really where she belonged, although they didn't have any roles for her because she was black. And I got into USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] school of occupational therapy, and that is where I found art. Speaker 1: How did you find art there? Speaker 2: Because an occupational therapist versus a physical therapist--I'm a physical therapist, so I have something with a machine or something that makes you move that part of that body that you want to repair. But an occupational therapist may give you weaving, or something that makes your arm go this way--sorry this is making a--go in the direction that will improve that muscle. So I had sculpture, I had weaving, I had drawing, I had ceramics, plus I had anatomy. There were six of us on a cadaver. I had kinesiology, the study of movement; I had orthopedics. Speaker 1: What pushed you in that direction? Speaker 2: Because my cousin, Alma [Alma Harvey], was a nurse. My mother's sister's [Josephine Gilmore Harvey] daughter was a nurse. And I wanted to be a nurse like Alma. But I went into occupational therapy, and that's where I was lassoed into art. Story_ID: 358303 Speaker 1: I got pregnant in school there [at University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], and so I couldn't afford to stay, so I went to L.A. State [Los Angeles State College of Applied Arts and Sciences; California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and then finished. I only missed school two weeks. And I finished in education for physically handicapped children, which I taught for a year. And I met Jim [James V. Hatch] and we ran off (laughter). Speaker 2: With your daughter [Christa Liebig] or without your daughter? Speaker 1: Without my daughter. I had given her up for adoption at that point. So meeting Josie [Josie Mae Dotson], Josie was Jim's student at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and she introduced me to him. I told my stepfather [Walter Dotson]--we used to battle, we used to really battle. I mean, you know, I was seventeen or nineteen or whatever, and I was, I remember when I was pregnant. And he's--I said, "Put your hands on me, and you'll be in the jail tonight. Touch me." You know, we had a real problem. We needed to be gone. (Laughter) My mother [Alma Gilmore Dotson] needed a chance to settle down with her new husband, and not have these banshees over in the corner threatening. And so when I came home from skating one time, Josie--and she was a little bitty thing, and she had a very bad mama. Her mama was dangerous. She had a bar in Texas, and the sheriff had shot at her car. She's a bad lady. She carried a gun, Dorothy [ph.]. She got mad at her husband one time and threw lye in his face. (Laughter) Well. Anyway, Josie--Mr. Dotson didn't believe that we had not had a party when they went to South Carolina. You know, we'd take all the covers off the couch and enjoy it, you know. But we hadn't a party. And he didn't believe her, and he touched her, he slung her. He should have never done that. You don't do that to Josie Mae Dotson. You do not do that. I was praying. I said, "You didn't tell your mother, did you?" She said, "No." I said, "Please don't tell Dorothy. Don't tell Dorothy Dotson." I said, "She will come over and shoot Mr. Dotson. Don't do it." So when I came in the door, she said, "Bootsie [HistoryMaker Camille Billops], come in here." I said, "What's the matter, what's the matter?" She said, "Let me tell you about that black motherfucker." And I said, "Do you know what you just said?" And she said, "Fuck him." So, he could hear it. She was nineteen. And at the end of that week, she was gone. She left. She went to live with Johnnie Cochran's first wife, Barbara Cochran [Barbara Berry Cochran] (laughter). And she never came back there. But she was always at a distance with him, you know. They had problems, you know. Story_ID: 358304 Speaker 1: But she was my dear sister, and man, I just loved, I loved her as much as I loved my sister, my blood sister [Billie Billops]. I just loved Josie [Josie Mae Dotson]. She was so old. She was younger than we were, but she was old. She knew things that we'd never dreamed of. Speaker 2: Was she helpful for you when you got pregnant and you were going through your own troubles? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: What did she say when you decided to give up your daughter [Christa Liebig] for adoption? Speaker 1: Well, she was for it. She was for it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was on your side? Speaker 1: Yes, even Art Jackson [ph.] was for it. Jim [James V. Hatch] was for it, everybody was for it. They said, "You're not a good mother." And when I did it, I told Jack [C. Bernard Jackson], and he said, "Good." He was, his picture is back there. He was in charge of Inner City Cultural Center [Los Angeles, California] where George [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] was giving some of his plays down there. He, he was really smart. He's in one of our films, 'KKK Boutique' ['The KKK Boutique Ain't Just Rednecks']. He was, he saw things in special ways, too, about politics and people and where they were. He had a chorus that was an interracial chorus in Echo Park [Los Angeles, California]. And it had Russian Jews in it, black people, white people, and some Mexicans. And doing the McCarthy [Joseph McCarthy] era we are singing Prokofiev's [Sergei Prokofiev], Alexander Nevsky's, "Rise up, you Russian People" in Russian, in Russian. And we were singing "Rise up." The Russian Jews taught us all the words. And we were thrown out of the Bureau of Music [Los Angeles Bureau of Music], out, out. We were very radical people, and I learned a lot from Jackson, and I learned a lot from Jim. And all of a sudden, I stepped into the world of art and theater. I stepped out of this other world and stepped into this world. And that was the beginning of my artistic growth, of looking at very large worlds, a different kind of world, and people who were, knew a lot more than I did, and shared that information with me. Speaker 2: Is that where you met George Wolfe? Speaker 1: No, I met George-- Speaker 2: Much later? Speaker 1: Oh, much later. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, so let's stay with this part here (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He came in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Okay. So, this is-- Speaker 1: This is the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Sixties [1960s], yeah. And so, you decide to immerse yourself in the theater world? Speaker 1: Well, yeah-- Speaker 2: And this is-- Speaker 1: Jimmy and them wanted me to try out for the league. But, you know, my voice wasn't strong enough, and I was too shy, too nervous. You know, because I had had singing lessons all the time as a child. And one of the lessons we had a recital, and I couldn't sing. And my singing teacher said, "Well, she's been sick," (laughter). But I, I do have my record, my tape, of me singing 'The Lost Court' [ph.]. I was about thirteen singing it. And that's why I know that voice was a beautiful voice, and they wouldn't let me in. I'll never forgive those people, those assholes, you know that. How dare they do that to me? Story_ID: 358305 Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you're graduating from-- Speaker 2: L.A. State College [Los Angeles State College of Applied Arts and Sciences; California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: L.A. State College. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, where I majored in education for physically handicapped children. I also returned at that time to art school. I went to Chouinard's [Chouinard Art Institute; California Institute of the Arts, Los Angeles, California] and studied more ceramics with the teachers I had met at SC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]. And I was on my way to becoming a schoolteacher, you know, a grammar school teacher, but of handicapped children, and I had met Jim [James V. Hatch]. I was in the play 'Fly Blackbird.' I had also-- Speaker 1: How did you get the role in 'Fly Blackbird?' Speaker 2: They cast me as in the chorus, Jackson [C. Bernard Jackson] and, and I had already been in Jackson's chorus. He knew I could sing, he just didn't, they thought I could be a lead, but it wasn't possible. Because as I said, I was scared of that. But that was my first piece of theater. Well, actually it was my second, because I was in the (unclear) under the choir of Jester Hairston. And that's how I got in the 'Carmen Jones' movie, because they asked for black chorus people to come, and then they chose all these women who looked like white people. That's what the casting director, black casting director did. And then Preminger [Otto Preminger] came out and put them all back, because they all looked like white people. And he picked us, and I was so shocked. I said, "Me? You want me?" And we got it, honey. Me and my friend Joan [ph.], we got it. And we made twenty-five dollars a day, and we got to take a picture with Harry [HistoryMaker Harry Belafonte] (laughter). Speaker 1: Harry Belafonte. Did you meet Dorothy [Dorothy Dandridge]? Speaker 2: Oh, you know, you just saw them; you didn't meet them. You know, we were over in the corner making ourselves up as if somebody else was making us up. We had to wear the same clothes every day. So that's how I knew myself, because we were really sort of out of focus. They saw the skirt, this flowered skirt. And I'd pretend we'd be going up these steps and talking to somebody. Well, that was it. And Preminger thought we were all sort of stupid Negroes, anyway. He said, "Don't look at the camera. If you look at it, it'll stop." (Laughter) Oh, God. But, you know-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, did you see [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade during that time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I knew her in California. Yeah, but that's, I used to see her, because they were dancing. But I mean, I don't think I knew her personally. We just knew the De Lavallades, you know. Speaker 1: And she--okay, did you ever enter the same world, as far as-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Because she was dancing, because you were both in sort of the performing arts. Speaker 2: No, I was in the performing arts by accident (laughter). I was really a person that did drawing and stuff. I wasn't, I was only there because of George [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe]--I mean Jim and Jackson, you know. I could sort of dance, but I really wasn't, I wasn't a dancer like Thelma Oliver [Krishna Kaur Khalsa] or those people at that time. They were real dancers. I was in the chorus, and I was connected (laughter). Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And I could sing. Speaker 1: And you could sing. Story_ID: 358306 Speaker 1: What other roles, I mean, you--wasn't [HistoryMaker] Micki Grant in 'Fly Blackbird' (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Blackbird,' yeah. And when it came to New York [New York], well, I didn't try out 'cause I knew I wouldn't get it. But Micki didn't get her role, because the role was called Camille. And little influence there, huh? But anyway, she, that was, who was that? Mary Louise something? I don't know, I don't--I forgot who was the lead. We can look it up on the record album. But, and Bob Guillaume [HistoryMaker Robert Guillaume] was in it. And then they had a nice Jewish boy playing George, a Jewish boy with Max Factor and Japanese makeup playing George. But eventually, he did get in; he got in the New York production, you know, later. But that was, that was it. You know, but once--see, once I discovered or began to associate with theater people, then I saw what--I made, I could do a cover, I could do a drawing, I could draw a costume. You know, these things, and then later I began to do these things. In '68 [1968], when we, Jim [James V. Hatch] was on a Fulbright [Fulbright Scholarship] to go to India to do theater, and we did it for about seven or eight, nine months, or I don't remember how many, but we did theater all up in Bombay [India] and Delhi [India] and all those places--Bangalore [India]. And I did the masks. You see, I did the masks and we designed the costumes. And then when we went back to India, they needed a theater specialist. And Jim's buddy was working for USIA [U.S. Information Agency], and he put in a request for a theater person, and we were the only ones who applied. So, when we appeared we say, "Our flight, too." And I did, we did parts of Jean-Claude van Itallie's play, 'America Hurrah.' And I did the costumes and masks. Then I was really sort of clear that I was designing things and so I had an opportunity to do things. That's how you develop, you have an opportunity. You know, you have an opportunity to learn how to write a book when you have the opportunity. And that demystified it, I mean in retrospect. It demystified it for me that how many people never have the opportunity, the access, but this energy is right there. I was just lucky. I was very, very lucky. Story_ID: 358307 Speaker 1: What brought you here, how did you get to New York [New York] from, how did you get to the East Coast from the West Coast to live? Speaker 2: Oh, we came back. Jim [James V. Hatch] stayed in Cairo [Egypt]. He went in '62 [1962]. I went and stayed seven months or so and came back, and then I went back in seven or eight months. And then we decided that--he got a job at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] and so we decided that we were, had it hooked up--and so we came to New York. Speaker 1: Now, were you in California or New York during the Watts riots [Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: I think, I think I was in California. Because I remember my stepfather [Walter Dotson] talking about the National Guard guarding certain streets, I think so. How long I was in it, I don't remember. I'd have to--when was the date? Speaker 1: It was I think in '66 [sic. 1965] maybe. Speaker 2: Well, in '66 [1966], we were here. Speaker 1: I'll have to, I mean it escapes me, the date, at the moment. Speaker 2: We came here in '65 [1965]. And we were only here a year or something and then we moved back to India. And then back to New York and got a loft. And we said, "Well, let's start doing things," and that's what we did. And then I designed masks, and I always did those things. And even this last play that he did about child molestation, I did all the drawings that they blew up and made these sets, you know. So, that's really where I was, a visual artist designing many things. Speaker 1: And doing sculptures? Speaker 2: Yeah, sculpture, and also when we did the films, I designed all the costumes and the sets whatever they were (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But the films will come later somewhat. Speaker 2: Well, the first film was in 1979, when we did 'Suzanne, Suzanne.' Story_ID: 358308 Speaker 1: But during the '60s [1960s]--let's say '68 [1968] is when you started doing the oral histories and started collecting the archival stuff? Or did-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, no, we didn't start collecting the archival stuff until the '70s [1970s]. We came back from India in '68 [1968] or '69 [1969], around in there. And we got that loft maybe around in that time. It was on 11th Street [New York, New York]. And you know that actor, Vin Diesel? He and his mother lived at 58 East 11th Street, and we were 54. And his twin, they lived right there with Irving [Irving H. Vincent] in the loft. Yeah, he was this little bitty, little twin with a little Afro, and they called him Boo-Boo. It was Spanky and Boo-Boo. And many, many, many years later, after we'd grown up and he'd become Vin Diesel, his stepfather, Vincent, invited us over to sort of a party where all of the family got together. And then he said, "There's Boo-Boo." And I said, "Boo-Boo, whatever happened to you?" They said, "He's Vin Diesel now." I said, "Well, who's that?" (Laughter) They said, "He's Vin Diesel." I said, "Who's Vin Diesel." And he said, "I am." I said, "Oh, Boo-Boo, how you get to be--?" I didn't know anything about the greatness of this person. And he was, by this time he was trying to figure out how to keep people out of his business of whether he was black or not. And he did a pretty good job confusing them. Because people are wicked, you know, and I don't think it was necessary. You know, but he was this little bitty, little roly-poly--and his brother looked like a little Dutch boy. Paul [Paul Vincent], his name was Paul. So we sat up there, and everybody was--and he is so--he has a company [One Race Films], I understand. And his brothers and sisters run it, and he takes care of Vincent and his stepfather and his mother. He's very generous with them, that's what I understand. I don't know for sure, but I think he does. Speaker 1: Very nice. Speaker 2: That's very, very nice. Speaker 1: Very nice. Speaker 2: Yes, it is. Story_ID: 358309 Speaker 1: What made you decide, you said you decided to get an M.F.A. because you didn't want to become a public school teacher. Speaker 2: Yeah. I had become one in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: What made you decide to teach, once you-- Speaker 2: Well, I had to have a job. Speaker 1: So, you came back from India and you needed a job? Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: And Jim [James V. Hatch] was up at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] working? Speaker 2: That's right, that's correct. Speaker 1: And you wanted to work? Speaker 2: Yes. Well, he suggested that I go get a job. Because you know, I had some fantasy well, "I'll just stay home and give you a martini at the door when you come home." He said, "No, no, no, that ain't going to work," (laughter). I went back into the hell hole. And the first day I went to substitute teach, somebody called me a whore in Spanish, puta. And they, I just lost it. I said, "Your mother is a puta." I lost it, I lost it. I had never had anybody talk to me like that in the school. And then one little child ran out the door. I said, "Come back." He said, "Fuck you." I said, "Well, fuck you too." And I turned to the kids, and I said, "And fuck you too." I said, "If you think you're going to talk to me like I'm a god-damn dog, you're out of your god-damn mind." And then we called the roll, you know. And I said these ain't schools, these are holding pens. This is not a school, this is a holding pen; this is pretend. I would negotiate going there, just to keep order. I said, "How many people in the class don't want to hear what I have to say?" They raised their hands. I said, "Y'all sit on this side and be quiet, and the other ones sit over here." That's how you controlled it. What's in school? Children who learn sit in chairs. They sit in chairs, and they've been trained to sit in chairs, and they listen. You can't run to get somebody out the hall, that's not possible. The only school I really had success with was when I was teaching handicapped children, sort of slow learning children, in the school where the principal had been my student at a community house. You know, I taught ceramics there. And she said, "You just do your thing." And I did. And I taught those kids ceramics, and they made play houses. I brought them all to my house and fired them. And some of the kids who were throwing chairs, she said, "Go teach them how to draw." I said, "Okay." And I said, "I understand you throw chairs in this room?" They said, "Yeah." I said, "Well, how am I going to teach you to draw if you do that?" He said, "We won't do it." I said, "Okay." And we did it. And one teacher was so angry. She said, "Why are you showing these children?" And then Gil Noble came, Channel 7 [WABC-TV, New York, New York] came to see these kids. And the kids weren't in their clay robes. They were all dressed to the nines because their parents, and their hair, and their little black faces were greased. They were there, you know. And they said, "Why are you showing these children?" I said, "Well, they need a little happiness, too." And we had those clay houses. And then I went and got this job, because black people were misbehaving in Harlem [New York, New York] (laughter). So, they gave me a job at City College teaching ceramics. And that was the first time I taught ceramics, and I liked being on that level. I was an adjunct. I thought that meant something, but it didn't mean anything, because when we all lost our jobs. We were hired in the hall and fired in the hall (laughter). Then you learn that lesson, and I said I need to get my master's degree to stay here. So I requested to have--in the art department that I was teaching in--oh, they just had a fit. "Why do you want a master's?" And I said, "Because I want a stamp." And I said, "You have one, you've got a Ph.D." I mean, they really didn't want me--Jim said, "Don't let them push you around." I said, "I'm not." They said, "Well, you don't have enough credit to get into the M.F.A. program." Because you know, I was hired as some black teaching ceramics, and there was nothing else required, like art history. I didn't have enough art history because they said, I said, "Well, I'll take extra ones, I'll do that." And they were slowing down, and I went to the ombudsman on them. I said, "I don't want to think they're doing this to me because I'm black, or because I'm a woman." And that letter of acceptance came through like, boom. And I said, "All right." Story_ID: 358310 Speaker 1: And a couple of my co-workers became my mentors. So, I wasn't working on a document, I was working on a project. So, he'd just came on down to my studio. And one other one, a well-known artist named Jay Milder, he was teaching drawing classes. I said, "Jay, I don't want to take another drawing class." I said, "I want to go to Bob Blackburn's [Robert Blackburn] and learn printmaking." He said, "Okay, I'll mentor you, provided you give me one of the prints." I said, "Okay." And I went to Bob's and stepped into that world, Bob Blackburn and the printmaking world, and met all these fabulous people. Speaker 2: Who were some of those people (unclear)? Speaker 1: Krishna Reddy, and Bob Blackburn, and Mohammed Khalil [Mohammed Omar Khalil], Vincent Smith. So, he got, Bob got some money for the black artists. You know, at that time they were giving all that funding. And although Bob complained that the black people were making too noise. We are noisy, we tend to be noisy. And Bob, you know, was used to riding the other little ledge (laughter). And we were noisy, because he was a senior, you know. All of us, Mel Edwards [Melvin Edwards] was in that group, and Vincent Smith was in that group, and Vivian Browne [Vivian E. Browne]. I don't know if Emma [Emma Amos] was, but she was over there. I just met all these other people. I kept getting this wave of fabulous people to meet, you know, that would enrich me, would help me with my work. And I was evolving, and I'm forever grateful for everybody I ever met. Speaker 2: Romare Bearden was having, you know, those weekend--those sessions, like those Saturday or Sunday sessions where he'd have artists come to his house and talk about art. Speaker 1: That's right. Those were the abstract artists. Speaker 2: Abstract, okay. Speaker 1: Jackie Whitten [HistoryMaker Jack Whitten], Bill Rivers [Haywood Rivers], I don't know if Ed Clark [HistoryMaker Edward Clark] came. But they were all the abstract ones. And the figurative artists were talking to--I don't know if they were talking to Norman [Norman Lewis]. I don't know who they were talking to, but it was sort of that group, too. Speaker 2: And what group were you in? Speaker 1: I was in the Benny Andrews group, because I was new. And Benny--you see, it was those who made it at the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York]--the abstract artists, some of the ones that--the big Whitney show. Some did not do it, or whatever. And then there were the cultural nationalists who had the (unclear) group, you know. And they were Afro-centric, and you know, what's her name? Oh, God. I will think of it, and you'll die when you--Faith Ringgold was part of the (unclear) group. And Benny Andrews, and then there was Benny. And Benny had the Black Emergency Culture Coalition, and Benny invited me to be in shows. The rest of them didn't know me or care or whatever. But Benny invited me to be in shows. And he did this famous exhibition called 'Blacks: USA' ['Blacks: USA: 1973'] which was at the old Huntington Hartford museum [Huntington Hartford Gallery of Modern Art; Museum of Arts and Design] in Columbus Circle [New York, New York]. And I was, by that time, starting shooting. I started shooting openings, I started photographing openings. And I shot that show in--oh, man, '73 [1973]. And there is Benny and Alverine [ph.], and we were young. And now we're so old, everybody is dying. But there it was. So, once I started documenting, I really started entering into other artistic opportunities. You know, I met Vivian Browne at Huntington Hartford. And then when I came to New York [New York], she invited me into her world, and that's how I did that. So, it was that group, it was that group. And then you had the elder artists, who was Romi [Romare Bearden]. Hale [Hale Woodruff] was here, Norman. Ronald Joseph from the '50s [1950s] had left, but he had been part of the Harlem Artists Guild. That's a Ronald Joseph, by the way, behind you, 1948, '50 [1950]. I sold it to a friend of mine, and I bought it back for $4,000. Those are the things; I love collecting that stuff. That's, that's, you don't find that stuff, you know. So, that is where--so I in a sense placed myself as--, "Well, she's with that camera again or with that tape recorder." I was over there taping people. Story_ID: 358311 Speaker 1: And at that time some of the critics were having, "Was there a black aesthetic?" That, you know, they even wouldn't do it now, but they were having those discussions at that museum. Speaker 2: Which museum? Speaker 1: The Huntington Hartford [Huntington Hartford Gallery of Modern Art; Museum of Arts and Design, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Huntington Hartford. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And the discussions were, "Is there a black aesthetic?" Speaker 1: Oh, is there a black aesthetic, you know. That was-- Speaker 2: And what was your opinion on it? Speaker 1: Well, I thought--I got broader by saying, well, it's what black people do, no matter what it is they do. But the other ones were, the abstract ones were really trying to get away from that. They said, "Oh, we don't, you know, I don't do black art. I don't do--." They were trying to separate themselves from that. But I just always thought that black stuff was done by black people. It wasn't white, it wasn't Chinese. Well, what was it, you know? So, they were trying to get more currency in the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] group. And everybody was trying to get in the Whitney. There were only certain ones who were going to get in it. And those who, the people who really had success in being in the early Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] and the Cinque Gallery [New York, New York] were able to go from there to either a mainstream gallery or to the Whitney. And some of those artists are just gone, or went crazy or something. Malcolm Bailey went crazy. Speaker 2: When you say went crazy? Speaker 1: Crazy, literally (laughter). In fact he's in some nut house, I don't where he is. But he'd come. And he said, "I understand you photographed my work at the Whitney." I said, "Yeah." He said, "Well, I don't do black art." I said, "Well, that black art and the white people you love so much told me I could shoot your work, so go talk to them." He says, "Well, I don't want it in that collection." And I said, "Well, it's not left up to you. You're black, you're black, you are forever black." So, he's gone. Story_ID: 358312 Speaker 1: See, I got things in very strange ways. I also belonged to Faith Ringgold's little group, The (unclear); Women Against Sexism [ph.]. And that was Faith and her daughters, Barbara [Barbara Wallace] and Michele [Michele Wallace], and sometimes me; that was it. And they would go and harass some of the artists that they didn't consider black enough. I think somebody--the legend tells it that Faith and all of them appeared at a thing where Howardena [HistoryMaker Howardena Pindell] was. She also made it too, because she was at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] at that time. She and [HistoryMaker] William T. Williams were at Yale, so they hopped over into the galleries and the shows. That first flush, you know, they really did it. And so, there was at least three women out in the thing. And why are there no black women up on that panel? There was hardly any. They were wicked (laughter). Then Faith harangued and joined a lot of the white feminists, and got what she needed from them. You know, I left, because I couldn't, I didn't--I left and we went and started Artist and Influence [Artist and Influence: The Journal of Black American Cultural History]. And I couldn't believe that these women were saying that they were race-less. They were as bad as the brothers and the uncles, I thought. And I said, "Well, wait a minute, where do I stand? So, it means that for me to give something as a black woman, I've got to be standing under a black male and you, and then the white male." I said, "Wow, so why would I do that? I'll just go on and do it with a white male, if that's who got the power." You know, we were trying to figure out, well, where do we fit? And I was right. Those people worked, a lot of the women would come and wanted to work with heresies and all of that. Well, heresies was putting out a magazine on race, that's why they were interested. I thought they were really interested in having a real discourse. Really talking about how does it happen, how does it work? So, they felt they were going to get me to do this project with them on this issue on racism. And were sitting in a meeting--me, and Judy Blum [Judy Blum Reddy], and (unclear) mother, Corrine Jennings. And the woman turned it over to me. And I said, "We're not having a discussion." "Well, no, we're--." I said, "Oh, no, no, no, unh-uh, not me." I got up and walked out. And when I walked out, I walked out psychologically. I walked out. And I remember waking up in the middle of the night, and I was so angry with him. I started to kill him. I was so mad at him. And something said, "No, no, no, no. You're going to have a stroke, you're too angry. Do your own book." We're on volume twenty-five. I took all that negative energy and made something with it. And they'd periodically call me and say, "Well, we'd like to put your work in the magazine." I said, "That's so lovely of you to ask." I said, "But no, thank you." Once I arrived at it, I didn't need them. I didn't even need them, I knew how to do it. I unlatched the door, and I saw all this in there, like, "Ooooh." Jim [James V. Hatch] writes books, he writes history books-- Story_ID: 358313 Speaker 1: I watched the authors; I watched biographers, how they collect material. Then I began to collect material almost for them. Like when Linda [ph.] was writing about D.H. Lawrence--no, not D.H. Lawrence--that was the other one. No, no, no, no, I'll think of it. We were in (unclear) and was looking for him, and we couldn't find the house where he had been. So we went to the post office and found out the old house. And I, I, was shooting detail. I said, "In case--Linda, I'm going to shoot the bushes, in case you want to make a reference to this outgrowth of things around this house that this man has not been in for twenty-five years," I said, "you'll have a picture." I shot the bathtub that was now in the yard. I was shooting details, and I collected things like that--little notes, little pieces of things. I said somebody writing may like to look at this and say, "Oh," and may establish a place, a time. And that's how I thought of collecting small little insignificant pieces of things. Now, those women who were so busy--Emma [Emma Amos] was helping me, Vivian [Vivian E. Browne] was helping me, the Indian girl Serena [ph.]. And then they did this huge book on feminism, and they left them all out. They put a memorial to Vivian, as that woman was copying her work, May Stevens. She got the review in the Voice [Village Voice], and she admitted that she was influenced, but not on paper. And she said, "Did you see what we put in there about Vivian?" I said, "Where's her work?" I said, I told her, I said, "I told you they were never going to help you." I said, "Remember when her son jumped off the bridge and killed himself, and you went around the corner and did rock-a-bye-baby with that bitch?" I said, "Look at this." Emma too, she stuck with them. I came over here and did Hatch-Billops [Camille Billops and James V. Hatch Archives]. Of course, they would never put me in any books after that, because I was just bad news. Faith [Faith Ringgold] was bad news too, but she was able to manipulate those women (laughter). They had a big--all the women artists--and Faith was sitting right up in the middle of ARTnews, on the cover, absorbing all the energy. (Laughter) They said, "Oh, she's so selfish." I said, "No, she's cool." Because she wasn't being helped by the male artists, so she took to the road with her puppets. And that's how she built an audience for herself. She did it through her own, as we say with her own long dreams. So it was Faith, it was Benny [Benny Andrews], it was other artists, and it was cultural nationalists. And I wasn't into cultural nationalists, because I was married to a white male. Speaker 2: You were--say it again. Speaker 1: I was married to a white male. But they didn't treat the black males who were with white women the same. You know, I thought they would, so what a surprise. Black women belonged to black men. Black men had captured whitey's old lady. He was the warrior. (Laughter) And I was Jezebel, and Eve, and Pandora. No. Story_ID: 358314 Speaker 1: Back to those black men with those white women. I was talking to [HistoryMaker] Jeff Donaldson one time, from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. And I had our brochure, and there was Jim's [James V. Hatch] picture on there. And he said, "Is this Hatch?" I said, "Yes." He threw it on the ground. Yes, he did. Charles Harris did it too. And the last time I saw Charles Harris, he was walking with the blondest thing. Her head was so, it was like corn silk. And I said, "Vivian [Vivian E. Browne], is that our Charles? Look at him, she's so fair." See, that's why the white men don't want the black men with the women; they're his. They belong to him, and the black women belong to the black women, black men. Story_ID: 358315 Speaker 1: So, what were you telling me about the museum, the power? They were never going to, the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], once the grant money was gone (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they really weren't, they really weren't. We didn't think that then; we thought we had power. But in hindsight what we did not do, is at that time you could have bought those buildings for ten dollars, those cheap buildings. Corrine [Corrine Jennings] and Joe [Joe Overstreet] over there Kenkeleba House [New York, New York], they said, "If we had a hundred thousand dollars, we could have had the whole block." And now it meant that any organization if it was going to survive had to own their space because the rents became ridiculous. And you couldn't afford that with not-for-profit status. And you didn't buy it, so you're gone. The Negro Ensemble Company, gone. They didn't have any place to put their archives. They asked us if we could take it. And somebody called [HistoryMaker] Mary Schmidt Campbell, and they put them in the basement of Tisch Hall [at New York University, New York, New York] for a while. I don't know if they're at the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] now or not. Bob Blackburn [Robert Blackburn] lost his printmaking workshop. Rent six thousand dollars a month. Cinque Gallery, New York, New York lost theirs, four thousand dollars a month. They had a chance to buy these lofts, these lofts are eleven thousand [dollars]. So, those who didn't do it were out. If we had--look what these buildings cost now. These were a bunch of fluxus artists that did these fluxus houses. And we would clean names. So, we used to talk to Richard Foreman. And we said, "Do you know where we can get a loft?" They said, "What floor do you want?" We said, "We'll take seven." And we didn't see, we hadn't ever seen it. We owned it for two years and never could get on the floor, because the people who ran the factory here wouldn't let us up. They were moving, so we had to look at it, you know. But you have to have the concept. You had--because Harold Feinstein was co-oping lofts on Bond Street, five thousand square feet lofts for five thousand dollars. And we said, "Oh, no, we don't want no loft." Then the oracle came and said, "Hey, assholes, you ignorant people, (laughter) you want a loft. You need to find Richard Shatner [ph.] to talk to Richard Foreman." That's what the oracle said to us, and we did. And that was why you could operate. And Hatch-Billops [Camille Billops and James V. Hatch Archives] doesn't pay administrative salaries, it doesn't have the money. It pays rent, but we give it the money to--we give it the rent so it can pay rent, you see. Couldn't do that if you had to pay six thousand dollars a month rent. The art maintenance is eleven thousand, eleven hundred dollars a month or a thousand [dollars] or something-- Story_ID: 358316 Speaker 1: But you said that you should not have been out there picketing the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York]. You said that was the mistake. Speaker 2: We thought that we were going to arrive in paradise that way. Speaker 1: And you were picketing with signs saying what? Talk to me about who organized it, who-- Speaker 2: Well, one, Faith [Faith Ringgold] I think organized one. She has this wonderful memoir. And she is as important as Porter's [James A. Porter] book on modern Negro art ['Modern Negro Art']. Because she indexes it, and she talks about that line that we were all in. And I said, "Vivian [Vivian E. Browne], can I get--," and I was just here from Egypt. And I said, "Can I be--." "Oh, yeah." I said, "What kind of sign can I have?" She said, "Anything you want." I said, "Because we don't like them, do we?" She said, "No." And so I came up there with a big sign saying, "Whitey's Whitney sucks." Yes, I did (laughter). I did. And Henri Gaunt [ph.], who was our fearless leader, that son of a bitch, eventually they all go to Brooklyn [New York] (laughter). I always had faith that these people who ride on you eventually go to Brooklyn, and they're gone, they're out. He saw that sign, and he came flying at me. "Don't you bring that filth up here. How dare you?" And Vivian said, "Well, I guess you have to put the sign in the car," (laughter). So that's how--we started Faith's book about that period is wonderful. Because I think it was called 'I Flew Over the Bridge' [sic. 'We Flew Over the Bridge: The Memoirs of Faith Ringgold,' Faith Ringgold] or something like that. It's really good. Story_ID: 358317 Speaker 1: And then we had been in India, and I came back and saw her [Faith Ringgold] show ['Where We At: Black Women Artists, 1971'] at Acts of Art [Acts of Art Gallery, New York, New York] and she was doing these fabric things, and putting paintings in them. I said, "Oh, those are thangkas," because I saw the Tibetan ones. So, she made me thangkas. And she wrote that in her memoir ['We Flew Over the Bridge: The Memoirs of Faith Ringgold,' Faith Ringgold], that I named those things. And then by the time this other woman is writing about her, then that influenced my mind that those thangkas had been sort of dropped. I said, "Oh, we dropped the thangkas, haven't we?" And I checked the index (laughter). But no, if we had--because Corrine [Corrine Jennings], you could just get these lofts if you had a little cash. Corrine bought the big--the city used to own it. It was a five-story building, and she got two city buildings across the street where the dope dealers are dealing in and out of the home. She got two, she got two city lots, all during that time, from the city for a dollar here or for whatever. That was a revolution. Because that's what proved if you didn't have it, you were done. The last loft in this building sold for two million dollars. That was Jonas Mekas, he was one of the founders of the flux people [Wooster Fluxhouse Coop II], and he had, I knew his part was probably four thousand [dollars] maybe. I don't know, exactly, but I know ours was eleven [hundred dollars]. And the people who were locked in this building as artists had to pay twenty [thousand dollars]. You know, because they were making money. Now, you can't touch it. So you see, you could have stayed where you were. It wasn't SoHo [New York, New York] and it was just this area, and you could still do your programs, you could still have your exhibitions, you could still do it. I don't think people who have access to being superior to other people will ever give it up. Why would they? People who have homes don't put the homeless in there, do they? Would you go and get somebody and put them in your front bedroom? No, you want to give them a couple of dollars and go on home and eat your dinner. And that involves all of us, black and white. But they'll never call us home to people. We're not called home, we're just people with houses. So, white people are never called really white people, or access, people with access. But this way, if we're home people, we have this, but we don't share. No, we don't. We're not so good. So, I don't ever think people who have things are ever going to share. You have to change the laws and be fair. You have to make it so that homeless people can have a place to stay, those who want to have a home. But that I would give something up? I don't think that's human nature. And those people in charge of those boards and all that stuff, they wouldn't even let Peter Norton in. Because he was, his money was way too new (laughter). This is old, old, art--old people. So, if you know that, then you don't hang around that door and sit there begging. Because you know they're not going to do it. Why? But if we had bought--Norman [Norman Lewis] bought a loft, and Danny Johnson bought the corner, the northwest corner of Mercer [Street] and Spring [Street], three buildings together just like over here, he bought that. Jackie Whitten [HistoryMaker Jack Whitten] bought his building. Vivian Browne [Vivian E. Browne] bought hers. We all had lofts, and we were all here. We had a meeting here called the artists meeting, to invite all these artists that I have mentioned here, to buy our little building that was next door. We wanted to sell it, the co-op wanted to sell it. And we met for about three different times. And we, a lot of people didn't like Danny, because of whatever Danny does. But he knew how to buy that building. Story_ID: 358318 Speaker 1: Anyway, so we were trying to share experiences so they would buy this and make a co-op, a black artist co-op. And then the bell rings. And I'm not sure--I have the tape. But I'm not sure who comes in that has influence with the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] people--the artists who got in the Whitney, those people. Not the, and there were cultural nationalists here, too. And somebody said, "Oh, well, some people's work ain't shit." I said, "Oh, now we're going to have class. Now we're going to do this." And then the desire to buy the building just dropped, because some people's work ain't shit? I said, "Well, look here. All the people from the Whitney, y'all take the second floor. Let the women be on the top floor, or down here or wherever, and the cultural nationalists get the other floor. And then y'all don't have to look at each other." And it was a hundred and seventy thousand dollars, a five story building. And they couldn't get it together, so I canceled the meetings. And I stamped it for "No value." And William T. [HistoryMaker William T. Williams] was part of it, and he said, "Why did you do that?" I said, "Because nobody cared. The last meeting was me, and Vivian [Vivian E. Browne], and Danny [Danny Johnson] sitting up there, because y'all didn't come anymore." And none of them had any lofts. But they got caught in, "Whose work ain't shit," I tell them, I say, "Remember when y'all did that?" Now they're old, you know. I said, "Remember when y'all did that because somebody's work wasn't shit?" (Laughter) "No, we didn't do that." I said, "Yes, you did, yes, you did." I told William T. one time, I said, "Who are you waiting for? Are you waiting for another one of those white men to come over the horizon and do something for you again?" I said, "But you wouldn't believe me. I could be your oracle, and you wouldn't even believe me. I could be telling you some truth, and you would never believe me." I said, "Because you don't believe my face. Other faces, you do, but not mine." You don't know who's coming for you to tell you something. I didn't know my stepfather [Walter Dotson] was coming, the vehicle, that I would meet his daughter [Josie Mae Dotson]. This would not be here. I would not have been here. I'd probably be home with five more nasty ass little children, with those stupid people (laughter). You're welcome to come and listen to that tape. And I'm going to transcribe that tape, and I'm going to leave the names out. I'll just say, "These people were present." But that's a good piece of history, to see how people couldn't get together and get something. And they're always begging for power, "I want to be in this, I want to be in that," but didn't know how to build a nest. Jackie [HistoryMaker Jack Whitten] sold his building. I don't, I have an idea of what he sold it for. It was probably outrageous, outrageous. I think, I know he paid sixty thousand dollars for the whole building, because it had partially burned. But he went out and bought himself a co-op and bought himself a firehouse, because he bought that space. Story_ID: 358319 Speaker 1: So, when you found this space, when you said you had, you know, unlocked the latch and opened the door, and you came here to do your own thing. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: In your mind's eye, what was your, what did you consider your own thing? Hatch-Billops [Camille Billops and James V. Hatch Archives] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What we had been doing on 11th Street [New York, New York], doing theater. We did five, four or five plays. Speaker 1: What were those plays? Speaker 2: One was about the Black Panther Party. One was about the city. And I don't know if that was the one called 'If It Do Not Die, It Do Not Die.' Speaker 1: So, who then-- Speaker 2: Oh, and we did the 'Son of Zen.' Speaker 1: 'Son of Zen.' Speaker 2: The 'Son of Zen,' an Chinese Malasian, we met in (unclear) coming back from India, who leaks to the press that Dr. Hatch [James V. Hatch] was going to do his play on Broadway. We were like, "What, on Broadway?" But he leaked it to the press, and the king and queen of that country came to the play, and the Americans gave him a travel grant to come to New York [New York] so he could see his play on Broadway. But his play was done at our loft. He said, "Call in the press." We said, "No, Jou For [Lee Jou For], you don't call in the press here." I said, "You go around the corner and get you some little fliers and send that back to K.L. [ph.]." So, that was the first play we did. It was called 'Son of Zen.' And I did costumes, and people came and sat on the floor. And we painted that area black, and then, you know, we did it. Story_ID: 358320 Speaker 1: And then we did poetry readings. Owen Dodson came and read poems. Speaker 2: Who were some of the other poets? Did anyone from The Last Poets--did you know any of the guys from The Last Poets? Speaker 1: No, but we knew a woman who was married to one of The Last Poets, that she finally divorced. He was an awful, awful person. But I didn't know them personally. We had--but Owen did come, and he was--this girl didn't know Owen was gay. And she was down on the floor, writhing on the floor, doing like modern dance, you know, the writhing, and the tights. And Owen is really looking across the room at Don [ph.]. Don (unclear) was the most out gay person we ever met in our life. He wrote poetry like that. And he came and read his poems. And I only remember one. I think we still have the book. It's 'Do You mind if I Suck while you Fuck?' [ph.]. And everybody's like this, "Oh." And Owen, being in the closet--because those older men, they were in tunnels. You know, they just, they said it was too much being black and gay. (Laughter) Just no. And he was looking at Don. And Owen forgot he had a pencil in his hand. And the pencil was in his mouth, and it was shooting out like a penis, looking at Don. I said, "Oh, Jim [James V. Hatch], look at that. Look at Owen look at Don." And Don was up there in satin overalls with a top hat. And he was always who he was, always who he was. And Don, I think he died of TB [tuberculosis], or something happened to Don. But he became a critic for jazz, you know, after Lou [ph.] broke up and he didn't do the plays he wanted to do. When he was in Spain, he did a lot of that, and he always kept in touch. And when we needed a little money for Hatch-Billops [Camille Billops and James V. Hatch Archives], he'd send us money. He would buy the book; he'd buy a lot of the books and mail them to his friends. When he died, his partner--we had his memorial at one of those jazz places on 7th Avenue [New York, New York] that had some kind of vegetation as a part of the name of it--something that people would go to. And we all got to stand up and talk about him. But he was part of that. But, he, you know, he wasn't running scared from nobody. And people weren't saying those things, not quite, you know. And then we, I think we had somebody from the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] who was there. Because Jim thinks he went and told--you know, I mean people were sensitive then about Communism and left wing, and you're doing things about the Black Panther Party and all that kind of stuff. Speaker 2: How involved were you with any of the Black Panther Party? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: None. Speaker 1: No, we just admired them from afar, because we were all quote revolutionaries, you know. We were, what was it, was the revolution going to be publicized? Speaker 2: Televised. Speaker 1: Televised. And down the street from us, where one of the weather women [Weather Underground Organization] worked, that's the department that blew up on 11th Street in bombs. Speaker 2: Right, they were trying to make a bomb or something. Speaker 1: Yeah, they made bombs. I mean, this whole brownstone blew up with this girl in it. She ran out, she was stark naked. I remember that. But you know, what was happening at the time, you know, it was the '70s [1970s], the early '70s [1970s]. And we were all militant, you know, that was our point of view, you know. And we all had protested about the Vietnam War in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and all of those things. And Jackson [C. Bernard Jackson] and the choir, and all of those things. They were fabulous people. I'm very happy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, was it this very loft? Or was it 11th Street? Speaker 1: This loft here? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: No, 11th Street. Speaker 2: It was 11th Street, where you did the plays and the poetry meets? Speaker 1: Yeah, where we did it, yeah. We have photographs and stuff for some of the plays-- Story_ID: 358321 Speaker 1: Who else was in the 11th Street [New York, New York] scene with you? Speaker 2: Oh, it was a guy named Larry Garvin, who used to work for the archives. He later married an editor, Paula Heredia, who was the editor for our film, 'Finding Christa.' There were friends from the old days at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], Stan Meyers [Stanley Meyer]. Jim's son [Dion Hatch] was living with us, you know, because he was going to City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] at that time. And so, there were just sort of local New York [New York] people that we had met that had come, and musicians. And we rented the floor up above us in the same building. And Dion, I don't know why he thought he could do this, but he was going to--you know, we were power to the people, you know. And he was going to teach plumbing to the people. I said, "You don't know nothing about plumbing," (laughter). But we have photographs from that time. And then there was one Puerto Rican artist, a poet. And he was a fabulous poet, but he was, he had AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], it was the early days of AIDS. And his wife later died. But he did this poem to Miles Davis called 'Sketches of Spain.' That's why you can never do anything with a copyright, you know. It was really beautiful. His name was Nelson [ph.], and he just loved Victoria [ph.], who was a white girl. He just loved Vicky, but Vicky didn't like him (laughter). But that was, those people--artists and playwrights--and young, youngish. We were what, thirties? No, late thirties, forties, around in there. Speaker 1: So, once the era of 11th Street, how did that era end? Speaker 2: We had to move, because the landlord sold the building. And it was good that we didn't try to buy it, because we didn't know how to buy it. And two, later the back wall separated from the building, and they had to bring it in five feet. So, it's nice that we didn't have it. But we moved into an eight-room loft, and that's where Hatch-Billops [Camille Billops and James V. Hatch Archives] was. We weren't going to do anymore theater and stuff. So we, Hatch-Billops became, took the energy, and we incorporated it in 1975 and became, started this library. And then the people who had our floor here-- Speaker 1: Moved out? Speaker 2: Moved out. So we came by here to see it, and so we--it was not a tunnel loft like the other one. And we said, "Oh, God, we're going to have to move again." So, we moved fifteen months later into this space, and then this happened. So that's like thirty years; we moved in thirty years (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then-- Story_ID: 358322 Speaker 1: Hatch-Billops [Camille Billops and James V. Hatch Archives], how do you describe it to people? You say it is a library that contains what? Speaker 2: It's an archives of African American material in the arts, and it is on all of the arts of African American people. But there are exceptions. We have done Artist and Influence [Artist and Influence: The Journal of Black American Cultural History] with people who are not African American, but have had significant relationships with black people. So there was one Jewish woman, she had danced with Dunham [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] for years. So, we had her. We had Sam Rayfling [ph.] who wrote music for Langston [Langston Hughes]. We had Kelly, not Kelly, Hettie Jones, who had been married to Amiri Baraka. And so that, we've done that. And Krishna Reddy, Judy's [Judy Blum Reddy] husband, he did Krischner [ph.]. And we did Talley Beatty, and we did [HistoryMaker] Micki Grant earlier. And we tried to do Charles Mingus, but he wouldn't do it, but we got pictures of him. He was like Bacchus, you know, he was so fat. Speaker 1: Did you shoot them on 16 millimeter, or you shot them on-- Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: When you said that you did them, it was an oral history? Speaker 2: Yeah, we shot stills. Speaker 1: You shot stills? Speaker 2: A lot of stills. Speaker 1: A lot of stills, okay. Speaker 2: We didn't start shooting video until here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I shot Charles. You know, he loved food. And he would, when the bowl was empty--it was sitting--the woman who did that painting of us. (Unclear) he would put his hand in there, and get all the lining out of the bowl and eat it (laughter). And so that's where we met his current wife, Susan, Susan Ungaro Mingus [Sue Graham Mingus]. Story_ID: 358323 Speaker 1: So, the '80s [1980s] roll around, and you decide to try your hand at filmmaking. Whose idea was, or was it just a natural evolution that you would make film? Speaker 2: See, I don't know. You know, see, I always saw my parents [Alma Gilmore Dotson and Lucius Billops] with their Bell and Howell. And I mean, I was eighteen years old. Christa's [Christa Liebig], Christa's baby shower is in 16 [16 millimeter], when was pregnant. So I saw it, you know. So Suzanne, my niece who had been addicted to heroin, she got herself together. And she was always calling us at the wrong time of night with jokes and stuff, and I'm sitting up listening to this crazy woman. And I said, "Jim [James V. Hatch], we ought to do a film about Suzanne." He said, "Yeah, we ought to do it." And that's what we did. We went out there and surprised her. And she said, "What's y'all doing out here?" And I said, "We want to do a film." She said, "Oh yeah? Who?" I said, "You." And it took her out there, it really did. And she, people at her house, where everybody else on welfare lived, said, "Suzanne, what's happening, what's happening?" "They're doing a film about me." But she couldn't own it. She couldn't, she never could own the film ['Suzanne, Suzanne']. She didn't, in her great heart of hearts, she didn't like the reference to being, having been a junkie. If she were really more educated, she would have been able to take that and lecture. But she couldn't, she couldn't, she couldn't do it. She could not do it. And my sister, Cornelia [sic. Billie Billops], she's in it talking about Brownie [ph.] abusing Suzanne, hitting her. And Suzanne said, "Mom, why didn't you protect me?" And we, were trying to keep her from saying anything that would upset her, because that's where she first confronted her mother. And Billie talked about Brownie beating her up, and went into sobbing right in front of the camera. And we're like, no, no, no (gesture). And Suzanne just does it. She said, "Did he beat you, too?" And she does, she does it. But neither one can own the film. Now, Billie did come for a lecture up there at Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], we were up at Wellesley. And the kids loved her. And she could talk about wife abuse, but she would not be able to go around the corner to some kind of community center and say, "I know all about wife abuse, and I have a film." She could not, she could not do it. So, the other films are all about family, too. And they don't, they don't--they look at the films--they look at it like they look at me. And all the children who are eleven years old, ten years old, in 'Suzanne, Suzanne' I did a film about them, they're now thirty, to find out how they're doing. And they talk to me like I'm in T.V., you know, they're bullshitting me. Telling me, they have children and ain't nobody married to nobody. And they say, "Well, Bootsie [HistoryMaker Camille Billops], I'm going to get a college fund for my daughter." I said, "But you don't even see your daughter." "I'm going to buy a home." I said, "How you going to do that?" So, Damon [ph.] is in it, but Damon didn't run around messing with, screwing anybody and getting no babies, you know. But Peter [ph.]--and then what we did was we put these young men that were in danger--because we said it's like walking across a volcano. If you have a lot of access to education and other things, your crust is maybe a little bit deeper. But if you're poorly educated, and you have children and you won't take care of, and you don't know how to interpret the world, then your crust is a little bit thinner. You can fall through, in the form of police harassment, all kinds of things, gangs, all of those things. So, what we did is we got two doctors. One was George Jackson [George Jackson, Sr.] who worked at Martin Luther King Hospital [Martin Luther King Jr./Drew Medical Center; Martin Luther King Jr. Outpatient Center, Los Angeles, California], and the other one was a Chicano doctor that worked at general hospital. And so they were talking about what happens in the ER room--that you come in and if you're shot in the cerebellum, you are not dead, but you can't speak, neither can you breathe, all these things. And so we cut it in between their dialogue. So, Peter's talking about, "Well, I'm going to do so and so." He says, "If you're shot in the cerebellum, then so and so." So, he fed into their--to say, yeah, they're saying this, but this is, you know, this is what a gang thing is, and this is what so and so did, and all that. And we, so that was the film had that kind of weaving to it. And it wasn't the happy film that they wanted. One of my nieces did use it as a teaching film for her son. She said, "Do you see this?" She said, "You're going to be just like that motherfucker." So, she used it as a teaching film. She said, "If you're not careful." But they didn't like that film, because it wasn't MTV [Music Television; MTV]. Story_ID: 358324 Speaker 1: What about 'Older Women and Love'? Speaker 2: That was a sleeper film, that's a sleeper. George [ph.] is in that, and I'm getting ready to tell George--I said it in the film, but the editor said, "Did you really want to hear that every time that film comes on?" It was one part where Ann Yu [ph.] was talking about her boyfriend, and he's forty years younger than she is. And she's saying to us how he makes her--she doesn't have her bursitis anymore. And she says, "You know what, baby? His dick don't never go down." So she's telling me and Clara [ph.]. So, I told that to George, and George falls up against the wall. He was so shocked that I would say that to him. Bam, he falls. So, you see him fall, but you don't know why he's falling, we cut it. He said, "You don't want to hear that all the time." I said, "Okay, okay, okay." So, we had, she was singing 'Danny Boy.' So that was our theme song, 'Oh, Danny Boy.' Speaker 1: We've got to pause here, we're ran out of tape. We have to change the tape. Speaker 2: All right. So that's, that's--I will loan you those films, and you can see. But you know, people--we had my Aunt Phine [Josephine Gilmore Harvey] in it, and she likes tigers. And we had her just flouncing around. But the young women liked it, the older women liked it. And the young men who liked older women liked it. But the other men hated it. Story_ID: 358325 Speaker 1: So, you were just talking about the films, the film career. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And you used all your family members. But the one that was probably the most personal for you is 'Finding Christina.' Speaker 2: 'Christa' ['Finding Christa']. Speaker 1: 'Christa'? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Yeah, Jim's [James V. Hatch] in that one. We're all in it, telling. But it's the nice part we're telling. We're telling, after 'Finding Christa,' then the reality of our relationship really showed itself, and the things that she expected from me were not possible. And so, we had about fifteen good years of really guilt slinging. And then towards the end of that, it was very unpleasant. Speaker 1: For you, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --for the both of you? Speaker 2: Yes. I don't know how unpleasant it was for her. And then I got a letter, a seven page letter, single spaced, of how horrible I was--selfish, mean, vindictive, jealous, all these things. Speaker 1: What made you do that film? Speaker 2: Well, the same thing that made us do 'Suzanne, Suzanne.' It was celebratory, celebratory, that's all. You know, it wasn't any, like we would find the truth. We were celebrating finding Christa [Christa Liebig]. And I heard the voice of my mother [Alma Gilmore Dotson], you know, me and the ghost, right. And my mother said, "I didn't bring you up to be abused." And so, Christa called me up to give me a birthday present, and I said, "You keep it." I said, "Let's be clear here. You don't like me, and I'm not too fond of you." I said, "This Mommy thing didn't work, I'm done. I'm very done. I mean it, I mean it. If I never see you again, I don't care." I had had that much. I had had it up to here. But what I did say was that: "I would, however, be interested in an adult relationship with you." And she said, "I would like to work towards that too." And all the letters stopped, all the phone slamming stopped. It all stopped. And she grew up. Because they said that about these children, that they tend to be immature. She grew up, but we've not done that part of the film. Speaker 1: You have not? Speaker 2: No, that would be, maybe a little bit of that might be in the film with me and Jim. I don't know. We'd have to make a decision as to what it was--you know, what part of the story are we telling now? I mean, because Jim--and that's talking about where Jim said, "Don't give Christa up for me." You see, so then we go on, you know. But that other one was celebratory. Her mother was in it, her adopted mother, Margaret [Margaret Liebig], a jazz singer. I said, "Margaret, you were the little white ship that helped me sail the dangerous night." Now, I'm very fond of Margaret, you know, and I met her sister and brothers, you know. So, it, it was a growing up thing for me, I guess, you know; I don't know. It was very unpleasant (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It won the Grand Jury Prize, though. Story_ID: 358326 Speaker 1: The film ['Finding Christa'] also received also a lot of critical acclaim. It won the Grand Jury Prize at Sundance [Sundance Film Festival]. Speaker 2: Well, they, that was that part of the story. The other part had to happen, it hadn't happened. It was, that was friendly. I mean, that was sincere, except when she [Christa Liebig] came back here and wanted to live back here. And then of a sudden I felt she was going to put pressure on me to be mommy, and it made my skin crawl. Everybody ain't mommy. They need to really get that clear. Everybody ain't mommy. Why they got to--every man ain't no daddy. They don't do that to men. They let men just go hi de hi, hi de ho, silver and go anyplace they want to. They walk away from the family, walk away from the dead mama, walk away from anything they want to, and they don't necessarily bear the responsibility of it. But when mommy walks away, ooh. Now, who put those rules down, God the father (laughter)? They believe it, they believe those things. The old man upstairs, God the father, "Talk to my Savior." Those people believe that, and that makes me frightened, because they do believe it. They ain't no different than those people committing suicide and going to have five thousand vestal virgins. I mean, this is the same crap-ola. Only one is going to get one, be up there with my savior and all the beautiful blah blah blah. They gonna be up there. I remember the [U.S.] Navy did this, or somebody did a film, and it was about the first rocket or something that went up. And these were the outtakes of the first rocket that went up. And so, you could see where the rocket passed all the clouds and kept going, you know. And we had just done a tape with Baby Elvera, Baby Sanchez Davis [Elvera Sanchez Davis]. That's Sammy Davis' [Sammy Davis, Jr.] mother. You know, she was Cuban. And we called her Baby. I said, "Baby, we saw that thing where those rockets went all up there past those clouds, and I didn't see Jesus on the clouds. Wasn't nobody else up there, either." She said, "Well, I just won't see that movie," (laughter). Oh, God, she was a great lady. She said, "Listen, don't ask me about these historical people. Ask me about the showgirls and the people in the clubs. Don't ask me about Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois]," (laughter). Story_ID: 358327 Speaker 1: 'The KKK Boutique Ain't Just for Rednecks.' Speaker 2: 'Ain't Just Rednecks' ['The KKK Boutique Ain't Just Rednecks']. Speaker 1: 'Ain't Just Rednecks.' Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. It's about everybody's racism, so we try to get people to come talk about it. Because we thought maybe that way we could really have some insight into solving it, because we all have it. And we can't excuse it by slavery, or the camps, or whatever sufferings. I felt that suffering did not immune you from being very much like the person who did it to you. I thought that that was another step, that you can easily be the camp keeper, too, and that cowboy movies are really films about annihilation. If the cowboys were the Germans, and the Jews were the Indians [Native Americans], what would you call that? (Laughter) You know, so that's what we were doing, and a lot of people backed out. I said, "You don't want to talk about your own, huh? Well, I'm going to talk about mine." And Jim [James V. Hatch] and I started talking about ours. And I said, "I don't like nothing with an accent." It's according to what day it is. But it's not always operating. That's what we're saying. It's not, white people are not always sitting there thinking about how to kill black people. They do it under certain conditions that we all do when we are threatened with something we perceive of as our right, mine. Jews were perceived of as people who took something away from the Germans, especially during that economic time. They were the cause. If the Germans had had enough money, I don't think those things would have happened. But they were a scapegoat, you see. They kill black people because they're not human. So, that's the cause. Or, and I always tell anecdotes. I said I was in a cab with an Indian cabdriver. And the door was not quite shut, and so I opened it. He was moving, and I closed it again. And he gave me a lecture on closing the car door, whereupon in my mind, I wanted to say, "You dirty little brown motherfucker." I said this to myself, and I tell the people, I said, "You're coming from some nasty ass village in India. I was driving in a car before your ass even dreamed of it." And at the end of the trip, I gave him a tip. I said, now why did I do that to him? Because he threatened my position in America as having been here before he was, and that he was lesser than I was. It's true, it's true. So I always say, "Well, I have a racism thing today. I had a fit today." I had a fit in the Grand Union [sic. Grand Central Terminal, New York, New York]. This Italian woman over in the area near Bleecker [Bleecker Street]--you know, where the old Italians used to live over there, when they used to chase black men. And this woman was talking to me. But I went back to that period, see. And I said to this old Italian bitch. Now, we're in the grocery store, trying to get the lettuce and stuff. So I'm over near the rice, by this time. And she's standing over there, too. She begins to talk about her daughter, who is terrible, and so and so. By the time we got to the cash register, we were just as friendly. See that, she was so transient. Just for that moment I went back to that old time, to a historical point that I thought she was a part of. So, I hated her. But after I knew about her daughter and how terrible her daughter was, I liked her. So, if we look at it that way, can we discuss that? And that's hard, because people who want to prove everything is goodness-- Story_ID: 358328 Speaker 1: This one woman, we showed it at the Philadelphia Academy of Art [sic. Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. She says, "Well, my son is not racist." I say, "Yes, he is." She says, "Oh, no, he's not." I said, "Yes, he is." We got in a shout out. I said, "Yes, he is, we all are. We all are." Black people will fight you. "Oh, we can't be racist because we have no power." I said, "You mean, we don't have any power, huh? Well, self-hatred can send you early to the hospital." Hatred of somebody, the stress of that. No wonder we have so much going on high blood pressure. We're not such healthy people, you know. You can't sit up there and spend that kind of energy hating somebody. It will eat you up. You can't be racing your motor like that, fight or flight. And, and, and then people who want to hate you think they're going to get something. Like the Germans thought they were going to--that was when they would solve it, when they killed all the Jews. Or we killed all the Japanese during World War II [WWII] and take their property. That will, we'll be all right. It doesn't solve it. None of it, it doesn't work, it doesn't do its job. So, what can we do? Can we have a discussion on that level? Can we talk about how racism works? Can we admit that we have it? And people will say, "Oh, you and Jim [James V. Hatch] couldn't be racists." I said, "Don't you fool yourself." I said, "You're not going to drive me back in the closet." I said, "I don't like anybody sometimes." I said, "And we just sit around and wait and make sure that person's not in the room, and then we talk about them like a dog." I said, "You think we don't?" I said, "You do, too. And don't lie, you do." And he go, "Hee, hee." I said, "Hee, hee, my ass. You know you do." We let go. If they ain't in the room, well, let's talk about their ass. Tell these jokes. You know that. Speaker 2: Well, okay. Speaker 1: You've done it. You've done it. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Everybody's done it. Speaker 1: Of course. Speaker 2: But I-- Speaker 1: You'll tell a Polish joke in a minute; tell Polish jokes, tell faggot jokes, tell black jokes, tell white jokes. And then one time me and my girlfriends, a lot of them were black women--we all talk about white people, because black people talk about white people, because white people have a great effect on black people's lives. So, we are concerned. And we're back in the back of the loft talking, and then it dawns on them that Jim is in the loft. And they stop cold, "Where is Jim, where's Jim? Can he hear us?" I said, "Maybe. Why?" All this whispering. I said, "But you know, he's heard that; he's heard that." Speaker 2: But I will say that what you're saying is true, that we all are a little (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, loaded. Speaker 2: Well, I don't know how loaded, but we all are. Speaker 1: Oh, no. Ripe, ripe. Speaker 2: Okay, well, ripe. Speaker 1: Ripe with it. Speaker 2: But I'll tell you what, and-- Speaker 1: And color and class. Speaker 2: And color and class, but-- Speaker 1: And color and class. No, we can't-- Speaker 2: But what makes me angry with myself is when I don't, is when I'm around people and they do it and I don't call them out on it. And I wonder if that should be a part of it? Because you know, I was out with people and they told some Mexican jokes, and it severely offended me. And it made me so angry, that these people I love and respect and enjoy their company are telling these Mexican jokes. I'm like, you know, when I'm not in the room, that's the black joke. Speaker 1: Yeah. But have you ever told Mexican jokes? Speaker 2: No. Well, you know what? Yes, maybe I have (laughter). Speaker 1: See, yeah. See-- Speaker 2: Okay, the point is made. Speaker 1: See, that's the deal. Speaker 2: The point is made. Speaker 1: And you have to admit it, because, you know you're lying. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know you're lying. Speaker 1: You know you're lying. Speaker 2: But it still offended me. And so, the point, all right. Moving on, yeah. Speaker 1: No, it doesn't mean that that wasn't the right thing to do, though. That doesn't mean that you maybe shouldn't have. But many of us, how many of us let that slide? We do let it slide because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's when I get angry with myself, yeah. Speaker 1: We're out having a good time, and they're good people, so: "Oh, let it go this time." Because you don't want to always be calling people. You know, always--you know, because you wear out. Or somebody's laughing at something. Well, you know, I heard my stepfather one time--we would all go to the beach. And I always tell Mr. Dotson [Walter Dotson] this joke. We were at the beach, and there were all these black people. And some big fat woman was in this bathing suit that was maybe not too proper for her lower body. And big old fat, thick, you know, big old booty and all that. And Mr. Dotson would look at me, and say, "Good God, look at the jaws on that sucker." (Laughter) So, what should I have said? "That is not right to talk about women like that?" (Laughter) I fell out laughing. And then when we would all be at the beach and we'd see that, I said, "Good, God, look at the jaws on that sucker," (laughter). We're are human, we're human (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, yeah, we are human. Story_ID: 358329 Speaker 1: You've made several films. Which of, if you had to pick one, which one did you think provided you, let's say with the most growth, personal growth? Speaker 2: Well, probably personal growth--well, publicity was 'Finding Christa.' But that gave us the revenue to go on to 'KKK Boutique' ['The KKK Boutique Ain't Just Rednecks']. Also, that year I got a Rockefeller [Rockefeller Foundation] grant, I got a NEA [National Education Association] grant, and I had commissioned to do three ceramic murals for the City of New York [New York] center for art, and it was a one hundred thousand dollar commission. And somebody spoke up for me on the panel. They said, "Oh, she's not, she's doing film now. She's not doing clay anymore." Oh, all those people are always there getting ready to help you not get something. And she spoke up, this Mexican girl. She said, "No, she's still working." And she voted for me, and I got that commission. And I was the fabricator, so I only used forty thousand dollars of that, and I had sixty thousand. So, I put that in 'KKK Boutique.' So, 'KKK Boutique' came up to two hundred and eight thousand dollars. And I was able, I came out on a budget of two hundred dollars more, I had extra. And then I--but I loved doing the little film for the Atlanta black arts [National Black Arts Festival] called 'Take Your Bags.' And that was telling the story of the Middle Passage to my little cousin, who was three and a half at the time, and I was adlibbing. It was only, the discipline was one roll of film and four thousand dollars, and I finished the film, finished it. And I begged Louis Massiah because he was in charge. I said, "Man, I need two rolls, one for titles, and I kept (unclear) too long." He said, "Okay." And I am telling the story of slavery to Kata [ph.]. And I said, "When I talk to you, don't you babble." He seemed to know everything I was doing. And it was about how the European artists and Picasso [Pablo Picasso] took our shit, took the African stuff and made it into modern art and did so and so and so. So, I started it out, it was called 'Take Your Bags.' And I said when the slaves boarded the ship bound for the Americas, they were greeted by the welcoming officer. And he said, "Take your bags, Miss, I'll hold your baby." And in those bags was the memory of (unclear) and the Ashanti kingdom, and all the languages and civilizations African people have. At the end of the journey, the bags were switched. And in those bags were nigger, coon, minstrelsy, darkness, ape, animal. And we didn't want to be like that. Then we cut back to the Africans speaking good morning in this language and that language. And I said, "See, this is how we looked when we left. We weren't like these other things." And then we cut to the book that we have called 'The Negro a Beast' [Charles Carroll], turn of the century book. And Adam, of course, is not a beast. But we are, and we're over there with the beast, the dark things, and Adam is glowing. And I said, but we weren't that. And so we stole some Russian church music, and put that over Adam looking at the beasts. And we said, "Now, let's find out where the missing bag went." And I said, "Oh, look." We didn't have copyright release, but this kid was looking at it in the studio. I said, "Look, there's the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York], and look at all that African art." I said, "That was in our bags." And I said, "And look, oh there's (unclear). Did you know a painter named Picasso?" And he's like, "Uh-huh, uh-huh." And I said, "Well he did 'Les Demoiselles d'Avignon.'" And I says, "You know that's an influence for, I don't remember, it was the (unclear) mask or so and so--," so, we went through a whole bunch of African art. And I said--and we went through minstrelsy. And then, and I said, "Now--," and the part towards the end, I said, after we got through reading the list of these things, I said, "Let's, let's." I said, "One day I asked the Africans, 'Did anyone miss us?'" And then we started singing the song, 'Itsy Bitsy Spider,' and he sings that with me, and he's three. And he's got his little car, and he was singing, "Up the water sprout, down came the--." He's doing it, and I'm singing this with him. And then that's when I asked them, one day I asked the Africans, "Does anyone miss us?" And the Africans started speaking good morning in these languages. And we would read off the different languages--Duala, Twi. And we'd read all these things off. And that little film went to Sundance [Sundance Film Festival], too. It didn't get an award, but it went to Sundance. It went to the Toronto Film Festival [Toronto International Film Festival]. It traveled, because you know what it is? They fell in love with this little boy. I said, "He is my dramatic element. Don't try to nurse him, you black women with these big titties. Stop it." You know, because they were like, "I want to do rock-a-bye baby with that," (laughter). I said, "No, no, no, no, no." Do you know Louis Massiah, not Louis Massiah--Lewis Erskine? He's an editor. And anyway, he, that's this child's daddy. But people, they're still playing. Because I hear people say, "I saw you with that little boy." Story_ID: 358330 Speaker 1: Who influences your work? Other filmmakers, I'm talking about? Do you have any other filmmakers you look up to, any other filmmakers that you like to watch their stuff (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Work that has beautiful composition. Chinese cinema--the way things are arranged in the frame, where you want to buy that. You say, "Ooh, I understand composition." You know, you look at it, and you go "Oh, shit. Look how beautiful it is." So, it may be not necessarily so much a name. I mean, the other ones that everybody likes, those French filmmakers and all of that. But I'm not that kind. I don't go and see film like, say, filmmakers go to see this one, and they know this one's signature. Because I don't think I even see that much film. But I see, I saw Sergei Parajanov, who is Armenian, and all the French Communists know him. We saw him at the Yerevan--not Yerevan--Tbilisi, in Georgia. And I got to visit with him because Leo [ph.] is Armenian, and he's Armenian, you know. So, we got to spend a whole day with this man, who was under house arrest for supposedly gold smuggling and pederasty, that's what they say he had done. And so, you know, he sent us away. There were two men in the room, and we didn't know who they were. We didn't know what the fuck was going on around there. This is during all kinds of funny time. So he sent us away to see some other artists. And then we came back and he started making all these sandwiches with all this stuff. It was eggs, you know, caviar and stuff. But I saw a few of his films, and I couldn't believe the form, how beautiful they were. You just, just--and from one frame to the next, the placement of things, almost like painters place things. And that is what I look at. And the tone, color, and all that, I look at that. So, I think that influenced me, but it was not as some tradition. Jim's [James V. Hatch] seen more film and stuff than I have. But I see form. And so that's my influence. The paintings would be also an influence, but not necessarily my history of filmmakers that I can name off. I like Bill Greaves [HistoryMaker William Greaves] films. That film ['The First World Festival of Negro Arts'] he did on Dakar [Senegal], the first--have you ever seen that? It's all in sepia, and it's so elegant. Because the women at the time, there were white people in this film, were dressed like Chanel [Coco Chanel]. I mean, people were dressed. Haile Selassie came prancing in on a white horse. And the women were at the thing with veils and these dresses. I mean, this was something. And I'm like, wow, what a beautiful film. What a beautiful, beautiful film. And Langston [Langston Hughes] was on the sand, talking about, "I've known rivers." I mean it was something, it was something. I thought that that was very beautiful to look at. So, I think in terms of maybe trying to consciously--it would probably take a lot of time just to frame (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, let's talk-- Story_ID: 358331 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your work as a writer, the book you put together, the Van Der Zee [James Van Der Zee] book. Speaker 2: You know, I really am a sculptor, using different material. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think that's how I treat film. I build things in it. I don't write it out, I just, I make the costumes because I see them. I see the sets. But I don't do the dramatic continuity, Jim [James V. Hatch] does it. He, he sees that. I see what it looks like, I just see it. And that's what I build, I build all the costumes. I say, "Do this, do this, do this. This is what this looks like, this right here. Do it." From me to you, you know. But I just think of the different materials, you know. I think--sometimes people say, "Well, your sets do look like a sculpture." Sculptors can have a different touch than somebody who's maybe a painter or something else. Do you want to see 'The Book of the Dead' ['The Harlem Book of the Dead' James Van Der Zee]? Speaker 1: We'll see it before you leave. But I want you to talk about it now. Speaker 2: Well, I had been helping Mr. Van Der Zee, because his friends, the friends of Van Der Zee, asked me for $6.25 to help him with his storage bill. They, you know, they, how they divided it. And so, I gave them the money. And they were called the Friends, and they were the only people trying to help him. And so, I went to the state council [New York State Council on the Arts] because I started getting a little funding. And I talked to this man who was head of special services. And I said, "Can you give this group, the Friends of Van Der Zee, can you give them some money to help him get his stuff out of storage?" And they said yes. So, we gave him five thousand dollars, and Mr. Van Der Zee got his stuff out of storage. And he started, that's when he started selling it, you know. We said, "No, you keep it for history." He said, "Screw that. I'm going to sell this shit." You know, he said, "This is good, you know, selling something for fifty dollars that cost five," (laughter). So that was his means of entertainment, you know, people coming up there--young people, young women, coming up there buying something from Van. And I brought my pieces, too. And then when I was talking to Leo [ph.] at one of our cocktail events, he said--I told him about the death photographs and insurance photographs. And he said, "Well, why don't you do a book about those photographs?" And I bowed out and said, "I don't know how to do a book." And he said, "Oh, sure, you do." And I got Owen [Owen Dodson], and Owen said, "Oh, child, I know all about death." And I got these two artists too, and I was a coordinator because it was my book, you know. And I had a long discussion with Mr. Van Der Zee about women and God. It was like an outline, women and God. And he gave his own opinion about God is the head of everything good on earth. And he also gave me the title of the book. But I didn't like it, so I wouldn't use it. And so we, I showed it to other galleries, photo galleries, and finally people said, "This is what you need to do." Because Mr. Van der Zee's description of the picture got all over Owens' poems, and was messing up the book. So, they said, "Put it as a contact sheet in the back of the book and put little inscriptions under it. And then, you'll get it." And that's when Morgan and Morgan [Morgan and Morgan Publishing Company] said, "We'll do it." And then I came back with a contract, and Mr. Van Der Zee had hooked up with Donna [Donna Mussenden Van Der Zee]. You know, forty-five year olds don't look so bad in short skirts when they're around ninety year old men. You know, but don't let them die (laughter). I said, "You need to put them skirts back--." She said--because she was becoming very proprietary over the photographs we got out. And at one point she told me, "No one is--." He said, "Well, my dealer doesn't want anybody to touch the photographs." I said, "Mr. Van Der Zee, remember I got them out for you." So he cooled that, you know-- Story_ID: 358332 Speaker 1: --Going to pick it up with Van Der Zee [James Van Der Zee]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Donna [Donna Mussenden Van Der Zee] says, he says to you, "My gallery owner says--." Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And you said, "Well, remember I helped you--." Speaker 2: Then I said, "Mr. Van Der Zee, are you going to sign this?" He said, "Yes." He said, "She doesn't understand some things." And after that, she would never let him promote the book, never. So, when Mr. Van Der Zee, after he had died and everything, the books got remaindered, and Owen [Owen Dodson] and I were the ones that got them; I never called her. Now, there's a book ['The Harlem Book of the Dead' James Van Der Zee] that we signed, sixty of them. Me and Owen and Van Der Zee signed sixty, and numbered them. They tell me that that book is on the web for seven hundred dollars, that book. Then the one that's not signed is four [four hundred dollars]. And the one that is just a paperback, is, I sell it for two [two hundred dollars], when I was selling it for seven hundred ninety-five [dollars]. Things ratcheted up. But we got the idea and everything by talking to Mr. Van Der Zee. And I still have his notes, "Passing over," or "This will--," something, whatever it is, you know. And then we took those wonderful pictures of him and Owen outside. I said, "Put your canes over there. Don't show the canes." So, you were saying how do you put a book together? You put a book together the way you put anything together. You start building a little piece here and a piece there, and you start seeing something. You start seeing the form. Something starts coming at you, giving you visual information. And that's, that's how we, you know, that's how we did it. Story_ID: 358333 Speaker 1: You've won lots of awards for different work. Speaker 2: I don't know if I have. Well-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we got a few little things. We also got other things from other theater groups that are gone, and we don't remember their names. Like, what was this for? And we got the Governors' Award for Skowhegan [Skowhegan School of Painting and Sculpture, Skowhegan, Maine], where we got up there and mentored these kids for six weeks, these people, these children that say said, "You don't even know how to draw," (laughter). I asked her one girl, I asked her, "What is this you have here?" It looked like some kind of rubber thing. She said, "Those are castings." I said, "What are they castings of?" She said, "My pussy." And I said, "Oh, I see." (Laughter) I didn't make any comment. I said, "Do you know if that stuff is toxic?" She said, "I don't know. It's all good, it's all right." I said, "I see." I mean, people were showing me some stuff, and I was like, "What in the world?" One kid was, he could draw. And the next time I saw him he made some conceptual nonsense--four or five boxes, with candy wrappers in all of them. And over in the corner is a tripod, and I don't know if that's part of the piece. You don't know what's part of the piece and what ain't. And I said, "So, what is this?" And he started in this art speech, art blah, blah, blah. I said, "Do you know what you're doing?" He said, "What?" I said, "You are bullshitting me." I said, "Do you know what my Daddy [Lucius Billops] said?" He said, "What did your daddy say?" I said, "My daddy said that bullshit wasn't nothing but chewed up grass." I said, "And that's what you're doing to me. So, let's start again. Once upon a time, there were five boxes with some candy wrappers in them. Can you finish that?" The third time I was to see him, I saw him running across the yard. Somebody said, "Do you want me to go get him for you?" I said, "No, let him run. He'll find someplace he won't be able to run to. Let him learn that. He wasn't hiding from me, he's hiding from yourself. You're the one doing the bad art," (laughter). But the Asian kids knew how to draw. They had discipline, and they could draw their butts off. You know, because drawing helps you get your form, get your ideas, get your stuff going, you know, to see the picture. What does it look like? What is it built on? You always draw. You don't say--because of some nonsense in school, they say drawing is out--passe, it's passe. Like black people are passe, frogs (laughter). Those kids were something. They were something, they were something. And what I really got a kick out of was one of the instructors, she was Chinese. She was a lesbian, and her girlfriend was very butch. And they were going to drive this car in the stock car races. And this car was pink. They painted this sucker pink, and I don't know how they got it together. But when they first were ready to start, the car went bloop. And yet, they had some time to be tearing through the road (unclear) in this raggedy ass car. I'm like, "Oh, Lord, who are these people?" And then she was doing a piece, like an 18th century, where they had these big flouncy dresses on. And then she had done a film of shaving her pussy. And I said, "What the fuck is this about? What is this about?" And it was a razor glass, cleaning the razor in the glass with this, looking at the camera, (gesture) scratch, scratch, scratch. I was just speechless. It's not that I was offended, I was just like, well what is, what? I wanted them to tell me something about this. What was this about? Why are you doing this? Not that I'd be ashamed, because we could be shocked with anything--but that they would think that that would even be interesting, rather than self-indulgent. Of course, you can startle somebody by doing that. You know, so she sits down and pretends she's this 17th century person, you know, with the big flouncy little thing in the back. And then she pulls it up for the camera, and starts shaving the box. I said, "Well, ain't that something, her coochie got shaved," (laughter). Story_ID: 358334 Speaker 1: We're going to talk about your, briefly talk about you as a collector (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I wanted to end that thing with Skowhegan [Skowhegan School of Painting and Sculpture, Skowhegan, Maine]. It's just that I don't know if, you know, the contemporary young artists are learning this in college and universities, like NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and all kinds of places--Maryland institute of the art [Maryland Institute College of Art, Baltimore, Maryland]. And I thought that they were being short-changed under the guise of being hip. But it had, it was hollow, because they couldn't tell me why. And one girl was busy, they were doing erotica for the sake of it. And she was showing, busy showing me a big painting where she's driving down the road masturbating as she's driving the car. Okay, I say, okay, cool, we're looking at it. I said, "But look here. Where is your foot, since you are so literal? Where is your foot? You can't, your foot is not on the gas. How are you doing that? Show me the position that you can get in with your hand up your pussy, and your other foot is where?" She was so angry with us. I said, "No, no, you're going to, you're going to draw every little hair, and every little piece; you want me to see all. This is a big ass painting, huge painting. And this girl looks just like you, and you're going down and your hand is jammed up the box. And you're driving and feeling, whatever. Driving and coming, whatever. But how can your foot--the gas pedal is over on this side. And this is, something else is over here. Why is that foot crossed over to this? It's anatomically impossible." It was like, "Oh, that's not fair." Like, "Oh, you're so dated." I felt like saying, "Oh, you're so full of shit. You're going to fade out of here so fast. Because this is ridiculous. You're so busy trying to influence me on bullshit. And you don't know, you haven't done your work. You haven't put your stuff together right. I don't mind looking at it, but do, do it right, since you insist upon realism." Driving and feeling. We both jumped on her. She was so sick of us, because I was old, see, and I was looking at that stuff like, "No, why don't we just talk?" Because this was a young-ism. When you get that old, you better know a little bit more about your inner self before you do it. Otherwise, it just looks like a bad, nasty drawing. So, it's like people who want to draw huge dicks. Story_ID: 358335 Speaker 1: My friend, Bruce Nugent [Richard Bruce Nugent]. Did you ever hear of Bruce Nugent? Bruce Nugent was the only artist from the Harlem Renaissance, and was just out, out, never in--never, never, never in. But he got married to somebody. I said, "Why did you get married?" He said, "I was going to try--," whatever it was. He wrote the book, 'Fire!!' [Richard Bruce Nugent]. And he, it was an erotica book from the '30s [1930s]. And we did an interview with him when he was about, maybe in his middle seventies. And he was just wonderful, walking around with his hair sort of hanging down, and these tennis shoes, red tennis shoes. But there's a gallery around over here on Wooster [Wooster Street, New York, New York]. It's called the Gay Gallery [Leslie-Lohman Museum of Gay and Lesbian Art, New York, New York] over on Wooster between Grand [Street] and Canal [Street] on the west side of the street. And its opening is in this building that's on the southeast corner. And their opening is right next to that. And these are people who lived in SoHo [New York, New York] a long time. And they have all of Bruce's homosexual art, all of it--oh there's people being crucified, people being fucked, dicks the size you'll never dream of--dicks going in orifices that would not be possible, all kind. And then the women's little coochies are so strange. They look like two hearts, and they're transparent, two hearts crossing. But all of that art was all about penises. And I'm saying, "Is this the only thing that gay art is about, showing the size of the penis? Or is there something else that I could see?" You know, because he was really, he was really working it. You know, I mean, and everybody was clear. They wanted to call it the Gay Gallery, so you didn't stumble in and didn't know what you were stumbling into (laughter). You know, we were just looking at--I said, "Look at Bruce, look at Bruce." I said, "There's no subtlety here." And all the positions that people are in, I said, "Damn, are they, their back is broken trying to get in this position. What is this?" And then there were other things that were a little more quiet, and stuff like that. I just wondered if you had seen that. It's still on. You should go down there and see it. Speaker 2: I'll check it out. Speaker 1: They had to put that thing on there, because if they got one of those tours, you know, those tours that go around, I don't think they could have brought any children in there. And he didn't want to be bothered with it. You know, it says it very clearly on the outside, you know. But it's all his art. But see, I never saw it until he died. So I didn't have a chance to-- Speaker 2: To talk to him about it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to talk to him. Story_ID: 358336 Speaker 1: I took George Wolfe [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] out there to meet him, because George was still working here, and George was not clear. Because my sister told me he wasn't clear. Speaker 2: Is he clear now? Speaker 1: Hell, yes, he's clear, but he wasn't clear then. And I decided I'd work on him. I said, "Are you gay?" He said, "No, I'm bi [bisexual]." I said, "You're a lie. You're a lie, lie, lie. You ain't no bi, you're gay." "I'm not." I said, "Yes, you are." And so we had that, and I said I'm going to take him out there to meet Bruce [Richard Bruce Nugent] because Bruce was clear. So, we all went to lunch with Bruce and he met George and shook his hand. And I don't think that rubbed off on George. I think Tony Kushner got George. He got, he came out of the closet when he did 'Angels in America' ['Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes,' Tony Kushner], because I don't think his parents [Anna Lindsey Wolfe and Costello Wolfe] knew, I don't think so. But he came out to them, and they managed, you know. But I felt it was my responsibility, because Josie [Jose Mae Dotson] said, "You need to talk to him," (laughter). Speaker 2: Josie was his mentor, right? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. She adored him. She said, "You be nice to him." I said, "We'll be nice." And I just loved him. He was my kind of person. Speaker 2: Which is? Speaker 1: Like he was--creative, mad, although we did have a little falling out there. We had one that broke my heart. I came home and sobbed, I sobbed. He got lost. I had invited some people to his party, but it was all cleared with his secretary and everybody. And he didn't know that. So I gave him my gift, and I said, "Thanks for inviting these people." And he said, "You got out of line." I said, "What?" "You got out of line." I was trying to figure out if that was the person I knew. It broke my heart. I came home and just cried. He never apologized, but he apologized another way. Jim [James V. Hatch] said, "That's as close as you're going to get to it." "I love you guys, you know, I love you, you know." I couldn't believe he was doing that, because it was somebody that he knew very, very well. They don't know. That's why I'm careful about saying it; they don't know. I took, I took the heat for it. There was no reason why he--you know, because he's known us all these years, and he knew these people. So, I mean those were some of the times when I thought he had really, he had gone someplace else. And he was with different people and things, but then when he came over and said hello, and we were getting ready to leave his party, he said, "Don't go." We said, "Okay," and sat back down. Then I said, "Wow, look at this." (Unclear) came and she was getting ready to leave, and he said, "Don't leave (unclear)." Funny, isn't it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I was happy for him, because I felt that that was the person that I really missed and really loved. You know, because Josie had, she really thought he was just really a special person, and he was. Story_ID: 358337 Speaker 1: He [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] was living with those big old fat girls up there at 95th Street [New York, New York]. I said, "You better stay with those people, because you ain't got no money to be out by yourself. Stay there and write that play." He put us in the play. I'm in it, and [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade is in it, 'The Colored Museum' [George C. Wolfe] and my sculpture, that he later bought. He bought that sculpture. He said, "I couldn't afford it when I lived over with at you guys' house, but now I can." I said, "Thank you, because we're trying to finish a film," (laughter). Yeah, he was-- Speaker 2: 'The Colored Museum' is a masterpiece, though. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: I think 'The Colored Museum' is a masterpiece. Speaker 1: Yes, it is. And that guy that played, was it Miss Roj? Speaker 2: Miss Roj. Speaker 1: He always said--one time I remember when we were all coming back from a play. And he was, he said, "I never got my ticker-tape parade." That's how he felt, that he never got the recognition for playing that role that he felt he should have gotten, you know. Reggie [Reggie Montgomery], was it Reggie? Reggie something. Speaker 2: Reggie, I knew him too. I can't remember his last name. But he did, well he did a lot of stuff with the public theater, too. Speaker 1: But it was wonderful. I just, I just, and what I loved was to see how his parents [Anna Lindsey Wolfe and Costello Wolfe] were involved, he involved them. They had to come to every play, and you know, his sister [Elayne Wolfe McNeil]. And then when he needed that kidney, his brother [William Wolfe] gave him a kidney. And I said, "Thank you so much for doing that for him." And he says, "My mother would have expected it," so he got it. So, that was what I wanted to finish about that business, about the, you know, to see him come back all around. And he answers the phone sometimes. You know, sometimes I see sightings of people. "Well, I saw in London [England]. I saw him he was in so and so." I should call him up, though and invite him to egg nog. Speaker 2: You should help us get him. You should help, you should work on him for becoming a HistoryMaker. Speaker 1: He might do it. Speaker 2: I want to talk, yeah, I want to-- Speaker 1: He might do it. Speaker 2: Yeah. I look up to him. Speaker 1: If he wanted to do it. You know, like we always wanted him to help us get a play on, and he wouldn't do it. We could not get him to do that. Speaker 2: But it's the history of theater, and his work at The Public Theater [New York, New York]. I'd love to have him tell me that in his own words. So, work on him for us (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's told a lot of people that story. Speaker 2: I know, but he hasn't told--well, I want the other stories that will come underneath that, that perhaps he-- Speaker 1: Well, you know, you can write him. Speaker 2: But it's nothing like you picking up the phone and calling him and saying, "You know, George"-- Speaker 1: But he may like it, he may like that. But it may not influence him. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because he's got quirky areas. Like if I mention anything about theater, I say he's not going to help you, he's not going to do that. Story_ID: 358338 Speaker 1: Well, we should probably talk about your art, your collection. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The artists you like. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because you have a large collection. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well, these are all mirror frames. And then they don't really have any kind of social content. It's always the drawings. See, that's Mom [Alma Gilmore Dotson] up there, the one I showed you in the back, that's Mom and Bony. This is really my sister driving in Hawaii. And then the drawing came from that sculpture there. Speaker 1: But the one of your mother up there-- Speaker 2: Where is Mother? Speaker 1: You said that's Mom? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'The Story of Mom.' Speaker 1: 'The Story of Mom.' Speaker 2: My godmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My godmother. And this is me and Jim [James V. Hatch] having this fight. And then it starts with 'Dance with me, Bela Mae' [ph.]. That's a Chinese name. And we dance in the Tai Tai Mountains, that's white mountains and then we go and we dance the tango. And then the dancers fall up in the air and the cards are playing, and it says, "The deck was stacked, the tango lost." And then we go--and Jim was trying to figure out how to fight, and he said, "What's that?" And I said, "They're in the land of shattered glass." Speaker 1: So, what other artists do you like? Speaker 2: Do I like? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, I like Norman Lewis' work very much. And I like Norman's work because he likes me. He, we traded work. He was a good mentor and a young artist at the time I was young. I like the work of [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett, and I like some of the historical work of Annie Walker and those 19th century people. I like Emma Amos' work. I love Vivian Browne's [Vivian E. Browne] work, because I sell her work. And everything that's on the wall, I like it. I love Elizabeth Catlett's work. And who else? I like some of Hale's [Hale Woodruff] work. Speaker 1: Did you meet Elizabeth Catlett? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. We did Artist and Influence [Artist and Influence: The Journal of Black American Cultural History] with her, and Pancho [Francisco Mora]. And I've known her since the '70s [1970s]. And who else's work do I like? I like Coreen Simpson's photography. I like Tony Barboza [Anthony Barboza], and some of Agger's [Knud Agger] work. And then I like some of the older artists, James Wells [James Lesesne Wells]. I like his linocuts. And Mr. Huie [Albert Huie], Mr. Huie is the father of Jamaican painting, and he is also a master linocut artist. And I've never seen anybody do linocut, cutting with linoleum, and his work is just breathtaking. I would say sitting in my studio at evening just before dinner, drinking a martini, listening to Aretha [Aretha Franklin] singing, 'I'll Take You There,' and looking at Mr. Huie's work, I say it don't get no better than this--just looking at the form, looking at it, studying it, saying look at how he turned that stuff. And his space works because of that. So you know, I don't know. And I love Palmer Hayden's work. That's a beautiful one, 'The Blue Nile.' I was able to sell some of his widow's work, because she needed money for her teeth. I had twenty-six pieces, and that piece was normally three thousand dollars at that time. And I got it for eighteen hundred [dollars], because I got a 40 percent discount. That piece right now might be worth maybe seventy-five to eighty thousand [dollars]. That's how things have changed. That's how it's changed, it's changed. Story_ID: 358339 Speaker 1: What are your future hopes for the library, Hatch-Billops [Camille Billops and James V. Hatch Archives]? What are your hopes for the library? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I mean it's fairly clear what we're going to do--one day you'll drop dead, although I'd like to forever be filing in that great sky. I know that it's going to go to Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia], and it'll be saved. Because we are not an organization, we are artist-driven. And when it's artist-driven, it doesn't last past the life of the artists. So, it has to go to an institution that has money. So, that will be something that possibly we will have nothing to do with, because we'll be dead or something. But right now, but in the meantime, we're having a ball with this thing. Because we're inviting people to do these programs. We have ten a year. And Quincy Troupe is going to come and talk about the poetry, all kinds of people that I've never had a chance to meet. And we just, who was that that we just did? It was a campground meeting. It was like we were hunkering down in some weeds talking about how the revolution finally did get televised. (Laughter) And who was that? That was, oh, Michael Dinwiddie. And he is a playwright, and works at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] in the Gallatin institute [Gallatin School of Individualized Study]. And everybody was sitting here bearing witness, like sitting in church. He was fabulous. And also we did Diane Weathers, who used to be around a lot in the '70s [1970s], and she worked for Newsweek. And we did--and she was interviewed by [HistoryMaker] Stanley Crouch. And we did--and Stanley Crouch one time, we were at the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], and we were all drunk at Bob Thompson's show. "I ain't going upstairs." I said, "I'm going to sit down here and eat the white people's food, and I'll see the show later." And Stanley was there, and I said, "Stanley, do you want to do Artist and Influence [Artist and Influence: The Journal of Black American Cultural History]?" He said, "Yeah." That's how we did it. We didn't write letters. We'd just call them out on the street, and say, "Do you want to do it?" "Yeah, I want to do it, I'll do it." And he was very professional. And he turned in his transcript like he was supposed to. Other people, you have to beat them and threaten them and all that to get the corrected transcript. But it's all of that at that watering hole with those artists, going all the way back to '81 [1981]. And we've done George [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] twice, when he was young, when his hair was--and he was busy saying, "I'm not running for office, I've already been elected." That old smart ass shit, you know. But we just, we've done him twice. And we were doing to do Tony Kushner. Is it Kushner? But we couldn't, he never had any time. And then we'd run after you for a while, and then we'd just say, "If you can't do it, that's all right." And we do listen to people who have other ideas about people like you should get this--and they don't have to be famous. They have to be interesting, like something that no one would ever know about. Like we found the first lithographer in Harlem [New York, New York]. And he was a commercial lithographer. But he was the first one in Harlem. So a friend of mine found him, and we said okay. So we did it. And we did a Vietnamese architect that someone said that--and we only had four people here, but it was very interesting. And then we did this Chinese novelist, but none of the Chinese people would come, because she didn't write about Chinese people. She was sort of like a Frankie Irving [ph.]. I don't know if you remember that, but he wrote only about Tara, and the old South, and what the white people were doing. And so, none of the Chinese people came, none. They said, "Oh, no, we ain't going to support her." And so we just squished in so it looked like we had a little audience, and we did it. You know, so, but that's what we've done. So, we collect art and we collect stories about people. And I will give you the-- Speaker 1: Not yet, because you're not-- Speaker 2: No, I got the thing, I wanted to give you a copy. Speaker 1: But you'll give it to me, and we're going to wrap this up. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 358340 Speaker 1: And I'm going to ask you, just what is it that you want to be remembered for? Speaker 2: I want to be remembered for being a good artist. That's what I want, and for Jim [James V. Hatch] to be a good artist. He's a very good artist, and a wonderful poet. It's wonderful, living with a poet. (Unclear) and so he writes notes, or he'll write me a poem and hang it on something. And then when I get depressed, I go read it (laughter). I don't know, magic people. I just, long live the magic artist, I love them. That's the immortality, is the art. How else will you live, except through art? It's all about dead people, you know. Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Well, thank you, thank you very much..