 Story_ID: 663364 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Margot, M-A-R-G-O-T, James, J-A-M-E-S, Copeland, C-O-P-E-L-A-N-D [HistoryMaker Margot Copeland] (cough). Speaker 1: And ma'am what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Do I have to tell you that? December 4th, 1951. And I was born in Richmond, Virginia, it's a little history around that, we can get to that. Speaker 1: Yeah, well you may as well tell it now I guess. Speaker 2: Okay. I was--I grew up--I was raised in Petersburg, Virginia which is about thirty miles south of Richmond. But in those days black babies did not have a medical institution in Petersburg, so expectant mothers couldn't, you know, give birth at the general hospital in Petersburg [Petersburg General Hospital; Southside Regional Medical Center, Petersburg Virginia]. There was one black hospital in Richmond--community hospital, Richmond Community Hospital [Richmond, Virginia] and that's why I was delivered there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And, all right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was--I think when you think about it, however, that's very fortunate. My parents [Thelma Taylor James and William James] had the means to take me to Richmond and get the kind of care that we needed, but you think of the number of families that didn't have that type of access in those days. Thirty miles doesn't seem like a lot in today's days but in those days I can imagine that would be very challenging without the assets that one would one need and have to seek medical care. Speaker 1: Okay. And ma'am what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am executive vice president and chair and CEO of the KeyBank Foundation. Speaker 1: Okay, all right and what is today's date? Speaker 2: February 10th, 19 (laughter)--February 10th, 2014. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. But we're, we're in the KeyBank building. Speaker 2: Oh yeah--yes, yes, we're in the KeyBank Center in Cleveland, Ohio, 800 Superior Avenue. Story_ID: 663365 Speaker 1: Now b- before we go into depth. There are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up and they only require a short answer. The first one is: do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: I am--I have a favorite food, I'm reluctant to talk about it because my doctor doesn't want me to eat that, but I love fried chicken. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the best favorite food is seafood and I--okay--my most favorite food in the whole wide world that I would choose over fried chicken, would be crabs, blue crabs that you would get from Maryland and the Washington, D.C. area, steamed and, you know, Old Bay seasoning, that's, that's the best. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes I do. I'm wearing it. My favorite color is blue. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I'm the type of person that really finds joy in every season, so I would say certainly when the winters are brutal. Winter is my least favorite time of the year, but I would say summer is probably my favorite time of the year. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is any place with sun, sand and surf. If I can be by a body of water and just looking out at the ocean, I am very, very happy. So the Caribbean, Florida, those places like that. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, I do. My favorite phrase comes from my mother [Thelma Taylor James] and she would tell me to cry out of one eye. And I can explain what that means if it doesn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well go ahead explain. Speaker 2: Okay. Cry out of one eye means that in life you--there are gonna be a lot of ups and downs and twist and turns and disappointments and setbacks. Always be prepared she would say to be able to weather those storms, but if you're gonna cry, cry out of one eye. In other words, leave that other and clear so you can see your way outta the situation or outta the problem that you're in. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a good one. Speaker 2: Peti- pretty profound isn't it? Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 663366 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Can I drink while we're going along? Speaker 1: Sure yeah. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [William James] side. We'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's (cough) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my god. I forgot the family tree. Speaker 1: Oh well--just, you know, give us what you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah well okay, I just, I just meant--that could've been a nice graph that's--oh can't believe I forgot that. Speaker 1: We could include that in the file. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But just, just tell us what you know about your mother's side of the family. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: 'Bout how far back can you trace 'em and what are the stories about what they were doing? Speaker 2: My. Speaker 1: Oh first, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: My mother was Thelma Taylor James, and she was born in Petersburg, Virginia. She was one of seven children to Matthew and Mary Jane Taylor. Their mom was a homemaker, I believe she took in laundry from time to time, but primarily she was home raising seven kids. My grandfather, Matthew Taylor, and they called him Mack, was a brake man on the railroad. He apparently made a lot of money doing that and so they were well situated. Matthew had a second grade education and Mary Jane only had a fourth grade education. But of the seven children that they raised. Five of them graduated from college. All--excuse me, all of them went to college, but five completed college and three of them--four of them, excuse me went on for advanced degrees, including my uncle who was the first to pass the bar. He went Howard University law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and he was the first in Petersburg, Virginia to pass the Virginia state bar, African American. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: You were just--it's gonna come, it's gonna come back, I'll come back to him (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well that's okay, that's okay. The first, okay-- Speaker 2: Just left my brain, his daughter Joyce [ph.], his father was--what was his name? I can't believe it, his name just left my brain. Speaker 1: Well that's all right-- Speaker 2: He was seventeen years old when my mother was born. And there were four boys that were born-- Speaker 1: So that's--put it in perspective, your mother was born in the '20s [1920s] I take it-- Speaker 2: Something teens [1910s], I think, she was--my mother was-- Speaker 1: She was born in the teens [1910s]? Speaker 2: Yeah. She was seventy-five when she passed. She passed in '87 [1987] so that puts it in the teens [1910s] so-- Speaker 1: Yeah 1912. Speaker 2: But she wasn't, I'm sorry, excuse me, I'm getting my history mixed up. Her--there were four boys born first. He was the first of the four boys. My mother was the first of three girls born, so course she very much favored by her father 'cause they'd wanted a girl. My--her youngest sister [Mary Taylor Evins] was seventeen years between he and her. My mother was twelve years, but her mother was five years older than her younger sister so it would've been twelve years between my uncle and my mother. Speaker 1: So he was born around 1900. Speaker 2: Yeah, would've been yes. He would be located in the Petersburg, Virginia hall of fame where he was inducted posthumously. He died at thirty-two. I never knew him. He died at thirty-two of a rare but curable illness, strep throat. Just suddenly taken away from them. Both parents were still living at that time. Ted--not Ted nor that's not an uncle. Oh god, I can't think of--I can think of Uncle Bump, Uncle Ted [Theodore Taylor]. My other Uncle Herman [Herman Taylor], they called him hogbear, played football at Lincoln University. He was a star running back during that time. And my uncle Clint [Clinton Taylor] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Called hogbear. Speaker 2: Hogbear, that's what they called him hogbear. Uncle Clint went on to become principal of one of the local schools in Petersburg. He went to Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] I believe. My mom was a math teacher at her own high school. She had her--got--received her master's degree from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and returned to Petersburg to teach and was a great educator very prominent educator. In fact when my mother retired in--at the retirement event that they held in Petersburg, there were probably four or five hundred people in the audience and they had they list of retired teachers come up to the stage and receive their plaques and awards and what have you. They--none of them were asked to speak be- you could imagine, would've made the program too long. But of course, my mother being my mother she did ask for a minute to say one thing. And instead of speaking she asked that--she says I want everyone who I've taught in this room to stand. And over half that room stood up. Principals, teachers, the superintendent--the first African American superintendent of the school district, she taught him and it was just such a powerful demonstration of the lives that she touched. So I was so very, very proud of her that night. Story_ID: 663367 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is, is there a story about--the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] is a prestigious place and she's in Virginia--so I take it she got her master's there in math? Speaker 2: She got her master's degree there, I think--it may have been in education. Speaker 1: Educa- okay. Speaker 2: But the connection, the connection, her younger sister Mary Mack [Mary Taylor Evins] Aunt M and her, her husband Charles, attorney Charles B. Evins, E-V-I-N-S. They lived in Chicago [Illinois] and Chicago ended up being a summer place where I was frequently there as a young child. At the time I thought we were there on vacation. But--during those summers she was doing her graduate work. Speaker 1: She was married to the attorney. Speaker 2: Yeah attorney Charles B. Evins, E-V-I-N-S (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Charles B. Evins, okay. Speaker 2: If you remember Judge Pincham [HistoryMaker R. Eugene Pincham] in Chicago. Speaker 1: Yes, yes very much so. Speaker 2: Judge Pincham was one of my uncle's mentees and they had a practice together, Uncle Charles was like the dean of black attorneys in Chicago during that time and Judge Pincham was a part of the firm. I didn't--I got to meet Judge Pincham years later, but he was very, very close to my aunt and uncle and, and in turn to my own mother [Thelma Taylor James] and father [William James]. Speaker 1: Is, is Judge Evans in Chicago related to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh he's a--he was, he was not a judge, he was an attorney. Speaker 1: No I mean the current judge was Tim Evans [Timothy C. Evans]-- Speaker 2: No, no, he probably V-A-N-S. We were V-I-N-S. Speaker 1: I-N-S. That's interesting okay, okay so Evans, E-V-I-N-S. Speaker 2: Now I just named all my uncles except the one who--I can't think--of course he's the one I never met. He was long gone before I came on the scene. It's coming. Now when you do this, will they--can you get back and put his--insert his name in or? Speaker 1: Well we put it in a file, you know, if you give us the paper with it all--it does the family tree. Speaker 2: I'm so sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But that's, that's okay. So you're telling us what you remember of your family-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and that's fine for this interview. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 663368 Speaker 1: So that's quite a story, your mother's family was really accomplished and all coming from Grandfather Mack Taylor [Matthew Taylor] the brake man for the railroad? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They said Mack Taylor was the sharpest man in Petersburg [Virginia]. He wou--he loved to dress. He loved to dress and you could see him coming down the street. Speaker 1: Now I noticed that--well your mother's sister's name is Merrimack [Mary Taylor Evins] right? Speaker 2: Mary Mack, yes. Speaker 1: And this is a--I mean there was a boat called the Merrimack [USS Merrimack] in the Civil War. Was she, was she named after the boat? Speaker 2: No it was a combination between her parent's name, Mary Jane [Mary Jane Taylor] and Matthew, Mack, and they called him Mack, M-A-C-K, so that's where Mary Mack came from. Speaker 1: Okay. I went to the Civil War because of Petersburg, Petersburg's dramatic position in Civil War history being the last place that the Confederacy held out. Speaker 2: Yes. That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: And when the line broke, you know, there, you, it was over. Speaker 2: Battle of the Crater. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And it was there, and then the surrender of Appomattox's [Appomattox Court House, Virginia] just down the highway from there, where Lee [Robert E. Lee] surrendered to the Union troops. Speaker 1: Yeah that was just a formality, but the battles (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The battle, yeah that was the big one. Yes. Speaker 1: So it's a historic place. Speaker 2: Very historic place. It's a lovely quaint place. And my parents [Thelma Taylor James and William James] are both gone and don't have any--I didn't--I don't have any siblings. But I do have but I do have a close--now if you want a interview I'll put their name down, Mildred [Mildred Hayes] and Burton Hayes [Burton Hayes, Jr.] and they're like parents to me, they're in their late eighties now and they can tell you everything about anybody (laughter) in Petersburg at this juncture so I'm still very close with them and in touch with them. Story_ID: 663369 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Thelma Taylor James] have any stories about growing up in Petersburg [Virginia] that she shared with you there? Speaker 2: She--certainly I would say--I mean she had plenty, she had plenty of stories about growing up in Petersburg and what it was like in that time. It's interesting, they were, they were not wealthy people by any stretch of the imagination, but they were comfortable, as a family, part in partial with the fact that my grandfather made a good living. They also had parents [Mary Jane Taylor and Matthew Taylor] who were very, not only inspirational but their parents were aspirational, in other words, they had aspirations for their children to achieve and do well. So where they lived in the community where you may have had people who weren't doing so well, they always--the Taylors they were really prominent. The Taylors were known as an accomplished family. They were members of Zion Baptist Church [Petersburg, Virginia] where my mother was raised and grew up. And they worshiped there frequently. My mother taught her father how to read. I told you he only had a second grade education but taught her father how to read. My mother finished Virginia State College [Virginia State College for Negroes, Petersburg, Virginia]. It's called Virginia State University now, but she's graduate of Virginia State College. And she has a--her degree was in business--her undergraduate degree was in business. But in those days they were not hiring women, let alone African American women in business coming out of college. So the ver- the only thing for a black woman to do in those days that were degree was to teach school or maybe become a nurse. So she couldn't initially get a job in the Petersburg school district [Petersburg City Public Schools]. It was typical that they went down, what they call (air quotes) down the country and taught in one of the rural areas. I don't remember, it was either Surry County [Virginia] or Sussex County [Virginia]. I forget which--but she did do a stint there. And what I--one story I remember her telling me about. Obviously, she taught a lot of sharecroppers' children. And she taught them--the first thing she taught them when she saw some of the injustices of how their parents were being cheated on--when it was time to be paid. So she taught her children how to count money so that they, in turn, could go home and teach their parents how to make sure. So let's say the sharecropper was due twenty-five dollars at the end of the week, well they very easily could have been given fifteen dollars, so she really taught the children to discern the difference and educate them. It was not very popular for her to do that, and quite frankly it wasn't really safe for her to do that. Then there were some concerns--and about the time the concerns began to be too great, she relocated back to Petersburg, her hometown and was able to get a position at one of the local black elementary schools. I think the school was Henry G. Williams School [Henry Williams School, Petersburg, Virginia] and that's a prominent name. There was a lot of black physicians I believe. But Henry G. Williams, I believe was the name of the school. Speaker 1: Now that's--that's interesting because we--one of the first interviews I did was with [HistoryMaker] Waverly Person who was raised in rural Virginia, he now--he's the PR [public relations] person for the U.S. Geological Survey. I think he's retired now. But, but he told the story of going to meet with the man who owned the land to, you know, tally up, you know, how much his father owed and he'd been to school and could count and he, he corrected the white man, he said no my father doesn't owe that, see-- Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: And the man turned red (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: And his father said when they left--I don't think he got what he was supposed to get anyway. But he told his son, he says "Whatever I have to do to keep you in school boy, I'mma do." Speaker 2: That's powerful. Speaker 1: That's the yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's powerful. Speaker 1: --powerful thing so. Speaker 2: So she taught her father to read and--her own father to read, and she taught her children how to count money so that could, in turn, teach theirs. And I'm sure she inspired some future teachers, you know, from that effort. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's quite a story (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So those are som- couple of stories that, you know, stick out a lot--I mean there are lots of stories about my mom. Story_ID: 663370 Speaker 1: My mom [Thelma Taylor James] was a first lady of Bethany Baptist Church [Petersburg, Virginia]. Well, when we talk about my, my dad [William James] we'll get to that. But watching her in her role as first lady of Bethany. And we had a very diverse congregation. By diverse, I mean that the congregation was African American but you had all socioeconomic levels in the church. So she worked very well, engaged so many people, she created a fundraising group of the church, organized by probably people who didn't understand what that meant during that day and time. So it was one of the leading auxiliaries of the church, but it fu- it was always fun to see her, you know, in that movement. She was active in the social side of Petersburg [Virginia]. She was first a member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority. And I'm a member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, as is now my daughter [Kimberley Copeland], her granddaughter. So my daughter is a third generation legacy for Delta, but my mom was active there in the sorority. And then a few years after that in 1960, she was inducted into the Petersburg chapter of The Links, Incorporated which speaks a little bit of probably why I've been asked to do this interview. I'm currently the national president of The Links, but my legacy and roots in Links goes back to Petersburg and that's where I really began to see my mom's work in the community, I was one of a group of the first black or African American candy stripers at Petersburg General Hospital [Southside Regional Medical Center, Petersburg, Virginia]. The same hospital that would not allow me or any of my cohort to be--or have to be born there, by the time I'm thirteen or fourteen years old we now can actively volunteer and we were candy striper and doing all the things that, you know, little future nurses or wanna be nurse do and The Links in Petersburg organized that, so organizing the, the opportunity for us was one thing, but can you imagine what it was like to take a concept to an institution that was not known for inclusion, that only had one or two black physicians on staff at that time, and say we wanna bring in--you have a program now where you have fifty to sixty, eighty. I don't know how many girls in this candy striper program and not one is African American. And The Links that year brought fifteen of us into it. So they were really breaking down barriers, and it was a powerful demonstration of believing in what we are, who we are, and then really opening opportunities up. And a couple of my cohorts from there went on into fields in healthcare and medicine, so you can never tell the influence that those kinds of experiences can have. Story_ID: 663371 Speaker 1: Let me go on to your father's side of the family then we'll put 'em together. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Lloyd, L-L-O-Y-D, Garrison, G-A-R-R-I-S-O-N, James, J-A-M-E-S, William Lloyd Garrison James [William James]. Yes, the abolitionist. Speaker 1: Right. Name for the abolitionist, William Lloyd Garrison. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: Yes Speaker 1: Now, yeah-- Speaker 2: But he was known by W. Lloyd James. That was--what people would know him. Reverend James or W. Lloyd James. Speaker 1: So this speaks to the intention of his parents that, you know, to name him for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --the founder of the American Anti-Slavery Society. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, any rate--well, well what's his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born on July 20th, 1904 and he was born in Fluvanna County, Virginia. I've been to Fluvanna once. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: F-L-U-V-A-N-A [sic.]. Speaker 1: Fluvanna County Virginia, Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. It is in the middle of nowhere. I've been there one time (laughter). But he was raised in Richmond [Virginia]. But his early days in Fluvanna. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your father's si- side of the family, your James side. Speaker 2: Very interesting side of the family. Where my mother's [Thelma Taylor James] side we trace our roots directly back to slavery. My father's side is a bit more interesting, on his father's side, the genealogy indicates that they--we retraced directly back to slavery. But his mother as my father would say was whiter than any white woman that you'd ever see. She had hair that you could--'cause she could sit on and it was not a curl in her hair. Now that's how my father would talk about his mother. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is all your father's mother or, or-- Speaker 2: My father's mother. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: My father--so he would say her hair was long enough for her to sit on and it was not a curl in her hair. And so again he would say she was whiter than any white woman that you ever meet. Her husband, my grandfather William Henry James [William James], was very dark complected which obviously gave birth to my uncles. My father was the second of four boys in the family. But back to my grandmother, it really wasn't until years later--I was a college student at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] when my father's younger brother Uncle Hilton, Hilton James--he was pastor of Berean Baptist Church in Brooklyn, New York. They're a prominent congregation in New York [New York]. Anyway, Uncle Hilton was at Hampton--Uncle Hilton attended Hampton and was very proud of the fact that I was matriculating at Hampton at that time. And he was visiting and we were--he was telling me about his mother--and because I said daddy said that--that--gave--talked about her attributes being so fair skinned and he said, "Our mother wasn't fair skinned. Our mother was white." And I said well what's going on with that. He said that back in--I would assume Fluvanna County, because that's where she was born, my grandmother. They were three little white girls and they were raised by a woman that was very, very dark complected, Grandma Johnson [ph.] was their mother. But there was really no way that--and I'm using Uncle Hilton's words now that she--Grandma Johnson could've given birth to those three little white looking girls. So--but Grandma Johnson worked for a family in Virginia and she lived out in the back, and apparently this--someone in the family--a woman in the family or it could've been a couple of them had babies out of wedlock, had white babies--this is not miscegenation, this is not, you know, rape or incest, this is just someone who had babies out of--white babies out of wedlock. And in those days you lived up to the country like they lived. Every time this woman had a baby or one of these--it could've been sisters, it could've been just one whatever it wasn't clear. But every time there was--yeah at that time say illegitimate baby born, they would really in what essence toss the baby to the back yard to Grandma Johnson to raise. So, in essence, my grand- great-grandmother was raising these three little white girls for this family until circumstances occurred and Grandma Johnson relocated to Richmond with these three little girls. And one of those girls was my grandmother, Annie Carlisle [ph.] her--it was pronounced (pronunciation) Carlisle but it was Carlisle, is how you would spell it, Johnson James [Annie James] and Aunt Edna [ph.], who I did meet. I never met my grandmother but I did meet Aunt Edna. So I--if those kinds of stories are painful especially for people at that time--my father was very upset that my uncle shared that with me because I think he was more upset because of the fact that she'd be viewed as an illegitimate. I mean those days oh my god it was like--it was just such an insult. And he preferred to really think about my mother [sic.]--my father did, just during the time that she was, you know, married to his father and then raising them. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Yeah. We have a lot of stories that are not told (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sure. Speaker 1: But when they're told things make a whole lot more sense. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 663372 Speaker 1: So your father [William James]--now what about his father? Speaker 2: William Henry James [William James]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Don't know a lot about him. He was an educated man. He had his degree, he left the family--literally left. They divorced when my father was pretty much hitting preteen to early--to young teens. His brother--his youngest brother Edwin [ph.] was a baby. I know my, my father would say that--he was--my dad was about fourteen years older than Uncle Edwin. And their dad left around that time. He moved up into the Delaware area and my father told me that he was on faculty or part of the administration of Delaware State College [Delaware State University, Dover, Delaware], William Henry James. But he was a professional man degreed and left them in Richmond [Virginia] and went on and started another life if you will in, in Delaware. Speaker 1: Okay. So does your father remember what he was a professor of? Speaker 2: He didn't--if--I'm sure he may have. I will tell you--I remember him referring to him as dean of men, you know, those days they had those titles in that time. I don't have that validated. These are stories I know that we're--you were listening to but that's the recollection I have of him. But what I do know he was college trained and he did go to Delaware State College at that time too, to work there either, you know, in the administrat- I think it was probably more the administration. So in--it's somewhere in that, in that vein. My father did stay in touch with his father through the balance of his life. Story_ID: 663373 Speaker 1: Now what did your father [William James] say about growing up? Speaker 2: He--my father seemed to always have a job when he was growing up. He would always talk about being a short pants boy. He had all sorts of escapades that he was in during the time. So when I see some of those period movies which, you know, boy in those short pants and stockings running around. I think about my dad doing some of those very kinds of things. He shined shoes. He sold newspapers, you know all those odd jobs that they would take on. As--while growing up to he became a ball player. He--that's where I have to really do some digging now. He referenced that he played in the Negro Leagues and he was a pitcher. I never knew which team and--but I'd like to be able to find out if I could get a source to help me do some research. I do believe the team was on the East Coast somewhere between New Jersey and Virginia (laughter) because as a young man, he left and began to make a living in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area and in New Jersey. And at one point I forget--I think it was New Jersey, wherever Frank Sinatra lived at that time. He actually would clean houses down the street from where Frank Sinatra grew up. So it was a very interesting era. All that was done in preparation for my father being able to send money back to his mother [Annie James] because she was still raising my, my uncle Hilton [Hilton James]--excuse me--well Hilton too. He wasn't quite as young, but Uncle Edwin [ph.] was fourteen years younger than my dad. My dad finally did return to the Richmond [Virginia] area and then went on to Payne Divinity [Bishop Payne Divinity School] where he received his bachelor's degree in ministerial science. Payne Divinity was a small school, in fact, I think that Payne at that time was located in Petersburg [Virginia], but it's now--had been--it's been incorporated by the Virginia Seminary [Virginia Theological Seminary, Alexandria, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Named after Daniel Payne I guess right [sic. James Payne]? I guess Payne Seminary, okay. Story_ID: 663374 Speaker 1: Now did your father [William James]--was your father--now there are a couple of, probably more well known theologians from that area, Petersburg [Virginia], Richmond [Virginia]. Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] and his mentor, the famous one who founded the Richmond Improvement Association--you know what I'm talking about? Speaker 2: Well Wyatt Tee Walker, knew very well. In fact, his children and I were the same age. His oldest child Patti [Patrice Walker Powell] and I were in nursing school together. And our parents would car pool to school before they left and moved to Atlanta [Georgia]. I have been indirectly in touch with his wife of late. She's in the Washington [D.C.] area. He's--I believe they're in the Washington-Richmond area somewhere in there. Reverend Walker still, you know, with us. But he was very, very fond of my parents. Reverend Walker came to Cleveland [Ohio] several years ago and--to preach at my church Olivet Institutional Baptist Church. And when I told him who I was, 'cause I don't believe we had seen each other since I was a little girl. Then he gave me the biggest hug and he, he knew my dad had passed away, he'd asked about my mom [Thelma Taylor James] and--so that was quite a nice reunion. But I don't know the other person that you're thinking about. Speaker 1: It was the mentor to Wyatt Tee Walker and I don't know, he's, he's a well known theo- he has three names, like-- Speaker 2: Proctor? Speaker 1: Yeah, Pro- yeah. Speaker 2: Oh Dr. Proctor, yeah, yes Dr. Proctor, yes, yes, very, very prominent. Speaker 1: Yeah. What's his name--a Pro-- Speaker 2: 'Cause he was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] wasn't he? I know he was in Richmond-- Speaker 1: I think so. He, he was, yeah, he was well, well known. Speaker 2: I know exactly, yeah he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Samuel DeWitt Proctor. Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Proctor. Speaker 1: Samuel DeWitt Proctor. Speaker 2: Dr. Proctor--I don't--certainly I know the, the reputation and the legend of Dr. Proctor, and certainly someone that my father and my uncle knew quite well, but I've met Dr. Proctor here in Cleveland because he spoke several years ago again at my church, Olivet Institutional Baptist Church. They're historic church here in Cleveland and does--so you had the giants of the pulpit, you know, have been here. And I met Dr. Proctor at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So your father finished Payne [Bishop Payne Divinity School; Virginia Theological Seminary]--he, he started practicing ministry? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes and you typically start in the rural areas, you know, with the little churches and what have you and you grow to a larger congregation and he subsequently was called to pastor at Bethany Baptist Church in Petersburg, which is located--at that time was located right on Wythe, Wythe Street and Crater Road and Crater Road, you know, if you take Crater Road out, that's where you really get to the historic parts of the battlefield of the Civil War. Speaker 1: You know the historic Battle of the Crater, where black soldiers build a tunnel through underneath Confederate line and blew it up forming this big crater, in which it, it didn't work out too well for the soldiers. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But, but it was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, it was a very powerful history--so that's--daddy's church was there and it's still standing there. And my daughter [Kimberley Copeland] who's now in the ministry, she preached at her grandfather's church about three years ago. Story_ID: 663375 Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: (Laughter) That I don't remember, it just seems like it just always was. Let's see, daddy [William James] was already in--daddy was from Richmond [Virginia], but he was already living in Petersburg [Virginia] because he was pastoring Bethany [Bethany Baptist Church, Petersburg, Virginia] before he married my mother [Thelma Taylor James]. I know my mother--the story I remember my mother telling was she was engaged to this man--this gentleman in Petersburg for like seven or eight years and marriage didn't seem to be happening or coming, you know, he never quite said let's get married on X date and--so I think daddy kind of just came up in the middle of that and made her an offer quickly and she, you know, decided to get married to my father--but I really don't know exactly how. Petersburg wasn't that big so it wouldn't have been hard for them to run into each other. At that time she was a very (air quotes) prominent school teacher and he was a pastor of the church. I will say they were older when they met and married. My fa- mother it's--well it's never clear how old she really was, but I do know my father was forty-eight when I was born. And I was born two years after they married, so he married--and so she was probably forty-one and--at that time, so they were in their forties. They had me what peoples would say late in life, you know, all of their friends and their peers had children who are well into their teens and twenties when I came along, that's why I got so much attention when I came along to--everyone was just stunned that my mother got pregnant and had this baby and so I was just lavished with a lot of attention and gifts and showered and that continued through all of my formative years, all the way through 'til I finished college and (laughter) into getting married. So I had, I had sixteen sets, sixteen count them, sixteen sets of godparents, it--my mother and father just had their circle of friends as godparents. Every time I looked, there was another godmother or godfather. Now, of course, I had about four or five that I was very close to that I knew quite well, but apparently, the day that I was christened at Bethany. My mother had sixteen sets of folks as godparents for me (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now, you're the only child too right? You're the only child? Speaker 2: Yes, I am the only child. Speaker 1: And by the time they have you, they're mature? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: They know what they wanna do. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: They're settled. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And sixteen fri- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Friends. Speaker 1: Sets of friends, they can make godparents. Speaker 2: That's right, exactly. It was, it was very special, it was very special. Story_ID: 663376 Speaker 1: This is a question, we, we, ask everybody and when you consider your parents' personalities, their dispositions, how they look, how they walk, talk, how they act, what they think about, their talents. Who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I'm a blend of both of my parents. My mother [Thelma Taylor James] was a person who spoke with a great deal of clarity and you always knew where she stood, she was no nonsense and to the point that she could be very strict. She was in fact as I was growing up very, very strict with me. I didn't get all the privileges that I thought I was entitled to and I get--didn't get to go all the places that some of my counterparts got to go. Now of course we know in hindsight those are good decisions but, you now, growing up in that situation was, was pretty, pretty difficult. However, that never allowed her--that was never a barrier for us and what she was so good at was she was always open to--she talked to me, she talked to me and she listened to me. So we had a great rapport. And even when I'm in and I can't go to a party or dance because my mother didn't like where it was or who was giving it. She didn't just have me stuck in my room or, you know, in the corner feeling brooding no, that would be the time when we'd talk and she would talk about life and what to expect. And she would always say, "I know what's out there. And you don't know what's out there." And she would begin to paint great illustrations of stories of what can happen, and what can happen and what have you, and she would always say make us proud, make us proud--always that was just her constant drumbeat, make us proud, make us proud. My father [William James], on the other hand, was far more lenient with me. My father was very outgoing and gregarious and I take that from him. Nobody was too big or too small to be a friend of my dad's. In fact, my father had a party at our house every year and it was men only. There probably could've been thirty to fifty, I don't know, but a lot, a lot--just men in town and he would have the president of Virginia State College [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] as one of his guests and also Cabbage Green [ph.]. Cabbage Green was just a local--well, you know, he looked like he sound. I think he had about five teeth in his head. But all of those men, no matter what station from doctors to dentists, attorneys to lay workers and laborers, Cabbage Green all--he would have this party and they had a ball and that coming together would never have occurred for, for those people to come together like that if it weren't for my dad. So I'm like that. I'm very, very outgoing gregarious and I, I enjoy meeting all sorts of people at, you know, at all sorts of stations, you know, in, in life. Story_ID: 663377 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Pause) Well I have little--I have little flashes of memory--I'm trying to think what kind of memory are you looking for? Speaker 1: Well what's the first thing you think you remember? Speaker 2: I can remember, I can remember going to nursery school and I couldn't have been more than three years old. My mom [Thelma Taylor James] said when I went to nursery school--and I went to the nursery school at Virginia State College [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]. It was part of the department of education and many of the students--it was a laboratory school so the college students would observe the kids and observe us. And one of the things that--now I don't remember this but my mother told me about this. She said that for the first year in nursery school I didn't talk. I would play with the kids and do all the activities, go outside, run, jump, skip, you know, Ring Around the Rosie, whatever they were doing, but I never but I never opened my mouth. Now I would come home and I could verbalize--of course, you know, they were thinking something was wrong with me. My mother assured them that I could communicate. But I just had--didn't have anything to say that first year. I remember being in nursery school. And I remember what it was like to car pool. I remember riding in carpools with Patti Walker [Patrice Walker Powell], Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker]. I remember her dad, her dad driving sometimes, my father [William James] or mother or whoever was in charge of taking us back and forth. I remember running in the yard after I get dropped off from--at home, and we had a dog named Mr. Tibbs. I called him Tibby and as I would run the length of the yard to go the back door, he would just jump on me and jump on me as we were--as I'd be coming--so I have those kinds of the memories. I remember being stung by a wasp or bee and crying and laying in my mother's lap I remember that, times like that. I remember sitting next to her at church [Bethany Baptist Church, Petersburg, Virginia] and she just smelled so good and she always had on a fur coat and I would just cuddle up and hug up against it because I would sleep during the service and I just, just was always so comfortable being snuggled up next to her because she was just--she always looked great and she smelled so good. She was always stylish. I just knew how put--she just took time putting herself together and as well as putting me together as well so I do have memories of that. Story_ID: 663378 Speaker 1: Describe the neighborhood you grew up in and the house. Speaker 2: I grew up in two neighborhoods when I was first born we lived at 665 Pegram Street and that was the house that my mother [Thelma Taylor James] was born in. And she ended up of the seven children inheriting the home because everybody moved away and my aunts and uncles move to New York [New York] or New Jersey or Chicago [Illinois] or wherever and she was one who stayed, so she stayed as a--she called it the home place. But she in essence--the house was titled to her. And when she and my father met then he moved with her it was--in those days a large house in standards of those time--of that time. I don't remember how many bedrooms, but there were multiple bedrooms, everybody had a room. I never know---I know that we had guest it was never a problem. Everybody had somewhere to stay. It wasn't a fan- it was not a fancy house, but it was certainly ample, you know, living room, dining room, full kitchen, all of that so and it was--I do remember also it was larger than most of the homes on Pegram Street at that point. But when I was about seven or eight years old which would've been about 1960 in--John F. Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was running for president of the United States and I wrote him a letter just letting him know that I was for him and I was gonna encourage all of my parents and her--my parents and their friends to vote for him. He wrote me a lovely letter back and--he wrote me a lovely letter back thanking me for his support. And when that letter was received we had moved to 20107 Oakland Avenue. Now Oakland Avenue was just outside of Petersburg [Virginia], in a community called a Colonial Heights, Virginia. And that's interesting history in and of itself. Colonial Heights was located immediately land wise back behind Virginia State College [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and as they--during those times when it was a great deal of land development and subsequent residential development, obviously the college was expanding. The black community--the black middle class community was just burgeoning. It was burgeoning and so Oakland Avenue, Roosevelt Avenue, Sheffield Place--I mean there's Loyal Avenue--just tons of street--not tons but a number streets I should say, a number of streets began to develop a lot of new homes, brand new homes from the ground up and African Americans were buying all of them. So my neighborhood on Oakland Avenue was all African American. But it was professional. Our next door neighbor was the head of the chemistry department Virginia State. And across the street was a construction person who built homes, you know, he owned his own construction firm. Across the street professors or down the street pharmacist. The head of the commerce department, dentist. I mean I could just go on, an architect was down the street. That's the neighborhood that I grew up in so everybody's father was a professional. And everybody's father had a title in front of them. My daddy was Reverend James [William James] but it was doctor so and so, and attorney so and so, professor so and so. And everybody's mother with the exception of two worked every day. And our moms were all teachers, school teachers at different schools. So we grew up in a very, very unusual environment. Unusual for what you look at with the landscape of how many African American children are raised, but it's not an unusual environment as it relates to historically black colleges and university [HBCUs]. You could go to those communities where there's Hampton [Virginia] or Raleigh [North Carolina] or, you know, Atlanta [Georgia] in those days and find similar types of communities because those black schools spawned those--the professional class, African American professional class and the allied professions that supported that class, so it was very, very rich. In addition, in those times, because our parents were all upwardly mobile and all doing well and, and really just in place, you know, in place to be the springboard for this generation of African Americans, my generation that would walk through, walk through the doors that had been opened. They really tore down the barriers. That generation they broke down the barriers. They paved the way and we were able to walk through and take advantage of that--of those efforts. Story_ID: 663379 Speaker 1: I would say probably my--who I am as a person was solidly formed and, and put in place in those days growing up in--on Oakland Avenue and in that community. And with the richness of the environment and the individuals that I was able to get to know in that extended family. My godparents, Marietta [Marietta Hall Cephas] and Jimmy Cephas [James Cephas]. Uncle Jimmy and my mom [Thelma Taylor James] were college classmates at Virginia State. He went on to become the comptroller and CFO of Virginia State College [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]. She was on the faculty at--Aunt Marietta from Chicago [Illinois] was on the faculty of the music school at Virginia State and she was a concert pianist. I, I grudgingly took piano lessons from my godmother. From the time I was six until I was fifteen. Other than that I loved her dearly. But I had all of these wonderful people who were around me who allowed me to believe that I could be and do anything I wanted to be, because when I saw them, the images. I mean it was just an incredible, incredible environment and I'm and I'm very happy to say that I took advantage of that. I appreciated that--I guess as you know, young teen I probably took a bit for granted. I can remember one cute story when there were some boys in town, D.C. and Ray- Raymond Valentine [Raymond J. Valentine, Jr.] and their dad [Raymond J. Valentine, Sr.] was a real prominent lawyer so these kids seemed to be the richest in Petersburg [Virginia] and they always had the latest or whatever the latest thing to have. So a group of us were--it was a Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] event. I was a member of Jack and Jill as a child and we were just kind of all standing outside of someone's home, kind of just all doing nothing, nothing bad, we just--a mix of kids just standing outside. I was thirteen years old and D.C. Valentine [William Valentine] had a motorbike and nobody had a motorbike, but he had a motorbike. And he was buzzing up and down the street, now I wasn't on my street, I was about three or four blocks away from where Oakland Avenue is. But anyway we were, we were all standing around and so he's--buzzing up and down the street on this bike and of course he swings by and he says--he looks at the girl he said, "Anybody wanna ride?" Well of course--now D.C. was probably sixteen to seventeen, so much older than me. And I said, "Of course, I wanna ride." And I hopped on the back of that bike and spun down the street on the bike with him, and came back and he dropped me off. I just thought I was just so much doing that. Well, all of sudden a window opened and Mrs. Queen Brown [ph.] looked me dead in the eye and she said, "Margot [HistoryMaker Margot Copeland] you know your mother would not approve of that." And she closed the window--she put the fear of god in me. Mrs. Brown never told my mother about that. She didn't have to, I mean that's what our--that relationship--those families did for each other--that you could say that--I have never been on the back of a motorbike or motorcycle or anything remotely like that since (laughter). But the fact that you could have someone say that and it just hit me, and I'm sure that it don't just hit me, it probably kept the second girl from hopping on because all of us were stunned silent. The kids didn't laugh and joke and tease me, we were all stunned silent that she would say that and then she closed that window. That's all it took, that's all it took at that time. So I was clearly raised by a village. I was raised by people who cared for me, cared about my wellbeing, cared about me advancing in life. Another great story that I can think of when I was, I was--I went to undergraduate school at Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] in those days. But I was applying to graduate schools and one of my choices was the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina]. I ended up going to The Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio], but in the process I was applying to Chapel Hill. Well one of my dad's fraternity brothers and dear friends was one of the first African Americans on the, on the faculty at UNC Chapel Hill and he was home, and he wrote a letter of recommendation for me. And it was two or three pages just glowing about me, and who I was, and all this and, and how I would be successful, you know, at Chapel Hill, and of course--everything he wrote--I felt was true and I--but I was appreciative so I said to--his name was Harry Blanton [ph.]. And said, "Dr. Blanton thank you so very, very much." I said, "If there's ever anything I can do for you please don't hesitate to ask." And Dr. Blanton he--we were at my mother's kitchen table, he looked over his glasses at me and he said, "Honey, there's absolutely nothing that you can do for me. But I want you to know that when you get in position, I want you to do for others." I have never forgotten that, never forgotten it. Here I was twenty, twenty-one years old gonna say whatever I can do for you when this man was well into a career, he was probably late fifties, early sixties, accomplished and I'm gonna say I'll do for you, no he said no pay it forward. You, you do for others I've never forgotten that and I often reflect on that as well as speak about that when speaking to young people in audiences, because that is true, we do have to begin to just pay it forward and invest in the future as the investment was made for, for me. Story_ID: 663380 Speaker 1: Your father was the pastor at Bethany (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Baptist Church. Speaker 1: --Baptist Church [Bethany Baptist Church, Petersburg, Virginia] and your mother [Thelma Taylor James] was the first lady of the church. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Which is--explain that role--well explain the relationship to the church and what was church like growing up? Speaker 2: It was interesting. My father [William James] and mother never made me feel like church was mandatory, which is interesting, because you have a lot of, of church families or, you know, the pastor and family where the kids are just there, you know, 24/7. I was certainly there a lot and I participated, I sang in the children's choir and I, you know, baptized there, and, and did that. But I never felt it was like the centerpiece of my life. It was the centerpiece of my father's life and certainly my mother's. But there were so many other things that I did, the exposure, my mother would always say the exposure, that I had that the--Bethany was a complement to my upbringing. And a very important one and very foundational to my upbringing. But it was a complement to that. So I didn't grow up as a preacher's kid in a traditional sense if you will. I know when my parents built our home on Oakland Avenue, a large split level house and it had a beautiful finished basement. And when some of the pastors from out of town would come and visit and stay--and my father would say that's Margot's [HistoryMaker Margot Copeland]--he would call it Margot's rumpus room. And they couldn't believe that my father let me play music. I mean I had The Temptations and Four Tops and Motown [Motown Records] going as much as anybody else did. And we had parties there. Very well supervise parties, but I didn't grow up, you know, in a pious way. I could wear mini skirts and go-go boots and I got sent home one day because--my skirt was too short. But it was--but I grew up like a normal teenager so I've never felt that, you know, it was something that, you know, was burdensome from that standpoint. But with all of that said, Sunday was a special day. A very privileged day and I remember--the best part of Sunday to me was coming home when my mother was cooking. My mother could really throw down. But what was interesting, my father did a lot of cooking as well. So sometimes during the week he would always start a pot of something that--he just loved stuff that was in pots. I think that's why I like fried chicken so much 'cause that was my mama's thing. I never remember my daddy frying chicken. My mom's thing was, you know, do that. But, but it was, it was a very, you know, it was a very balanced experience growing up between the church and the balance of what, what I do. Something important also happened, I went to high school Matoaca High School, M-A-T-O-A-C-A. It was way up in the sticks of Chesterfield County, Virginia and the school was built and opened for integration. When I was in elementary school, the schools were all pretty segregated. But by the time I got to sixth, seventh, eighth grade is when integration was, was coming about in Virginia. And by the time I was in the eighth grade going to Matoaca High School, that's where I began to experience going to school with white children. Now I mentioned earlier that I grew up in Colonial Heights, Virginia. Now Colonial Heights had its own high school, but they chose to keep--but Colonial High School [Colonial Heights High School, Colonial Heights, Virginia] would've only been a few blocks for me walk to get to school. But they gerrymandered Oakland Avenue and all that section outside of Virginia State College [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] where our parents lived and bought homes, the gerrymandered that out and put that in the Chesterfield County school district [Chesterfield County Public Schools] instead of in Colonial Heights. So all of us went to school in the county and we literally as I've said to you all the kids--we--I mean we would get off the school bus with clarinets, and violins and end up going to school with the sons and daughters of Ku Klux Klan [KKK] members. I mean it was deliberately done to put these middle class black children in school with underprivileged white students, that's the best word I can come up with. Story_ID: 663381 Speaker 1: What I will say about my high school experience--the--that was--it was a--that was an experiment, it really was and our group was experimented with if you will, to see how these middle class African American students would do in a school with white students whose parents had not achieved what our parents had achieved. I mean collectively. I mean when I think, think about my entire cohort of black friends, grade by grade, grade by grade and what their parents did versus what the, the counterparts were doing. There was just no comparison, no comparison. We were all enrolled in college prep. We were--every single one. We were expected to go to college and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So was there a college prep program at Matoaca High School [Chesterfield County, Virginia]? Speaker 1: There was, oh yes, the college prep program and that obviously is the richness of the math and the sciences and what have you. I took, you know, chemistry and physics and all the advance levels of math, you know, in high school. So there was a college prep program and I didn't think anything of it then, but those classes were, at least half black every year, but our percentage in the school. We were probably less than 10 percent of the enrollment of the school. So that we would have--we would make up that much of the college prep, you know, 'cause that was the expectation for us. There was a great deal of jealousy and a great deal of not understanding who we were, great deal of curiosity certainly. When Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated--we used to as black students because we all lived in the same community. We all bused together and we congregated in the cafeteria in the morning before homeroom, until the homeroom bell rang, we're just in the ca,--you know, everybody just there. And the morning that he--after he was assassinated of course then we are there and then and it's just quite, we were just all very quiet. Well, when the homeroom bell rang, they had locked the door, they had locked us inside the cafeteria that we couldn't get into the building. We had to go through the fire exit and walk outside back through the front making all of us--and I'm talking a couple of hundred people now, late for our respective homeroom classes. So those kind of menacing kinds of things occurred. I remember one of the boys, black boys had his teeth knocked out for no reason at all by a white boy, was just in class together. I wasn't in the class but, you know, we heard about it. And he just punched him in the mouth and knocked out his front teeth, unprovoked, no understanding, and I can't remember ever seeing that boy, the black boy back at school again. He may have returned but I don't remember him returning. I remember they had they had a sit in the white kids had a sit in and they just boycotted classes for some reason. They were really trying to imitate what was going on in the Civil Rights Movement. And they had a sit-in up and down the hallway and if one of us walk through their sit-in, they booed us and if one of the white kids walked through they cheered them, just those menacing things, you know, it's--so what I--there were no African American teachers there, we did by the time I was a senior have a black guidance counselor that came. It was a tough environment to go to school in, not nearly as tough as what some people experience, but mentally it was tough and it wasn't until much later I was well into my thirties, you know, visiting with some of my high school friends and hearing that some of my friends who never kind of bounced outta the situation psychologically my--some of my black classmates were damaged by that, didn't make great choices in college and some didn't even finish, and I can really tie that to kind of a dismantling of esteem and ego and that erosion of one's ability and perception of themselves, so those things were done, I pride and credit my father [William James] and my mother [Thelma Taylor James] for keeping me together, during that time 'cause it was, it was tough and even though you say well how can you prove it that anything was done deliberately, probably can't but you certainly know what you feel, and you know what you experience and you know what you share, how others interpreted the same thing. And some of us, you know, survived it better than others and I'm fortunate but, you know, it makes really think what can happen and what could go wrong in a classroom, with young students in the formative mind and, and what have you. So it was a difficult time. It also led to my decision to go to a black college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] because my high school experience was so--I would just say for reflects on me, I would just say disappointing, it wasn't the richness of the high school experiences that my children--my own children have experienced so it was very different (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did they have--like for instance, like separate proms or something or did they have the same prom? Speaker 1: Oh we had the same everything. Story_ID: 663382 Speaker 1: We had the same ring dance and proms and even the sock hops, you know all of that, none of that sort of thing. It was really more the sublimial, the subliminal things--the subliminal things that happen, you know, in the classroom [at Matoaca High School, Chesterfield County, Virginia], meaning we had one chemistry teacher that I didn't remember this, but one of my classmates said she always--that teacher always wore black the day of an exam and that which is frightened this child--this girl at this, at that time, and it--so you just never can tell how people, you know, interpret things. And she always looked like a witch to her and very intimidating and that particular chemistry teacher really took great pride in--if you got out of her class with a C, you may as well--I mean that's like getting an A. She really worked hard it seemed to not encourage students to achieve and do their best. So my mother [Thelma Taylor James] had a tutor for me. In fact, I told you my next door neighbor was the head of the chemistry department (laughter) at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]. So Dr. Meister [ph.] helped with that initially, I think he got tired of tutoring me, so he got one the, his undergraduate chemistry majors to tutor me and so I did fine. But, but, but still the tone was always something, you know, less than, less than it should've been in, in that environment. Story_ID: 663383 Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit maybe summarize your grade--we didn't, talk, talk about grade school. Now where did you start in grade school and what were you interested in when you were a little kid goin- going forward? Speaker 2: Okay, grade school I was in transition, and it seems--it was kind of choppy but I think that's because of how the schools were structured. I started out in elementary school at a school called Giles B. Cooke School [Giles B. Cooke Elementary School, Petersburg, Virginia]. Speaker 1: How that, I'm, I'm sorry, how do you spell that? Speaker 2: Giles, G-I-L-E-L--G-I-L-E-S. Speaker 1: Giles B. Cooke? Speaker 2: Yes, school. And that was, I think it was a school for first and second grade. And I had my first teacher was Mrs. Ruth B. Royal [Ruth Royal] and she was as regal as that name implies. You're talking about foundational teachers, I will say today if you would've asked me today who were the teachers that had the biggest imprint on me through my life, I would always start with her at first grade. This foundational. And I don't know how educators teach a little kid how to read and, and calculate and, and in position. That whole process whole process is a mystery to me, but she, she was just excellent. My mother [Thelma Taylor James] being a teacher in the school district, mother taught at the higher level. She taught eighth graders but she handpicked, she literally hand selected the teachers that I was gonna have, so I had--went from Miss Royal to Ms. Dar- Daughtry, Grace Daughtry [ph.]in the third grade, and then Miss Ethel Cain in the fourth grade at Westview School [Westview Elementary School; Westview Early Childhood Education Center, Petersburg, Virginia]. And I remember that's the year that John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was elected, and that was my last year in the Petersburg school district [Petersburg City Public Schools]. And during that time my parents built the home in Colonial Heights, Virginia which moved me to, to a different school district. But while I was in the Petersburg school ta- a district my mother handpicked the teachers I had along the way and all were excellent. So you know as a colleague she would know who were the best. They weren't always the friendliest but (laughter) but they were excellent teachers. By the time I get to the fifth grade I found myself in a different school environment from Petersburg [Virginia]. And I went to six and seventh grade on the campus of Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]. Ms. Hermione Carter is someone else--another one of my mother's colleagues and was also her Link sister [The Links, Incorporated]. Mrs. Hermione Carter was my teacher for fifth and six grade. And Ms. Carter, my god, you're talking about a gorgeous woman just--she was just beautiful, the little boys were just mesmerized by her and--but she was just a superb teacher and, and, and also just believed in exposures. So being there on the campus of Virginia State there was richness to--and the resources that were there for little children to be involved and be embedded there was, was quite good, so you weren't just relegated to a classroom or school building and a playground. I mean the entire college campus was at our disposal and we did do a lot of things, you know, off site, of site of the basic grounds of our elementary school and Mrs. Carter, led that. We used to also go over to Richmond [Virginia] quite a bit to the Richmond Symphony [Richmond Symphony Orchestra]. And we'd get dressed up and then get on the buses and, you know, go over. So it was those kinds of exposures. I remember the first opera that I saw was 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] and I saw it at Virginia State College where it was produced there and it was--it just blew me away, I mean with that big production like that, and so it--those--that time in elementary school where you beginning, you know, put all the pieces together so you can really see a world larger than your own. As I mentioned earlier, my life pretty much revolved around Petersburg and gone--Petersburg, Richmond and then going to Chicago [Illinois]. So, we would venture to New York [New York] periodically 'cause another one of my mother's sisters was there, but that was pretty much the world that I saw at that juncture, so having a complement of those other experiences, was in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], which is a parent organization for children, so that we could come together with peers and expand our horizons together, and being in the segregated South during those earlier years, those kinds of experiences had to really be put together carefully by our parents and--but they were also very, very well done. By the time I got into my young teens twelve, thirteen, fourteen years old, the access, the barriers if you will. Barriers had been removed and the access was far more opened. So--but having that time to march along with a, you know, a cohort group when we were in all in our thi- and our parents are all going after the same thing, it was, it was a very, very rich and wonderful experience. Story_ID: 663384 Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: (Pause) That varied. It--I don't know if I had a favorite subject, it was always my favorite teacher at the time, but I did have a strong liking for the sciences. I ended up being a physics major in undergrad [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], so I always had a strong liking for the sciences and biology. I was very good at that and then a lot of them--then the sciences within physics, you know I loved astrophysics was one of my best subjects in, in undergrad so those, those classes. Speaker 1: Now I'm not talking 'bout undergraduate school yet but, but in--so when you're on the verge of graduating from high school [Matoaca High School, Chesterfield County, Virginia], what was your aspiration? What did you wanna be? Speaker 2: I pause when I say that because for me it was unclear. I wanna go back to that part when my mother [Thelma Taylor James] kept saying, "Make us proud, make us proud," and my mother having the firm hand and clarity, it was pretty much--I did what she wanted me to do vs. what I wanted to do. And so I pursued the sciences because she wanted me to be the first black woman in physics doing whatever first black woman in physics would end up doing. And that was her dream and vision, so her dream for me became what I wanted for me. And that really wasn't where my heart was, but I did it because I wanted to make her happy and to please her. Now this is not a blame or upset--or being upset about that because had--coming out of high school going into the hard sciences I got a lot of exposure for that. I got to do things--I was a National Science Foundation scholar, I went to--did an internship at Argonne National Laboratory [Lemont, Illinois] an atomic energy facility outside Chicago [Illinois]. So, so that positioning and that encouragement and push from her was very important during that time. But it wasn't really where my passion was, so it took me awhile quite frankly to get to what I am doing now, to really understand what it is that I put--drove my interest and, and, and what drove me being the student that I was to become but I will say that early on in junior high school and high school, I really enjoyed community service. I enjoyed that external engagement I enjoyed being involved with something greater than me and something where I thought that I could have an impact on a situation through my involvement with organizations that were focused on improving communities. So that was a very special and it's interesting that the here and now living it and, and doing that for, for my profession. Story_ID: 663385 Speaker 1: How did you choose Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], I mean, you know, 'cause Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] is right there but I don't know what, what was it? Speaker 2: I smiled with that. Hampton, Hampton chose me. I only applied to two colleges, Virginia State that's always a safety school and I literally believed my application went in on a Friday and the following Friday I had an acceptance so that was a slam dunk. The other school that I applied two was the university--excuse me North Carolina Central University, NCCU, in Durham [North Carolina]. And because at that time they had a very, very strong physics department and so I was being directed to go into physics and, and, and to go away from home. It had never been my intention to stay in Petersburg [Virginia] and go to school. I did wanna go away to school and most of my friends who went off to college, we all went away. We didn't go far but we went away to school. And in, in Petersburg you could get to, you know, a great concentration of black schools [HBCUs] from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], all the way down to the Carolinas, you know, and a few hours car, car ride. So I was looking in NCCU--in fact, most of my friends went to Howard. But down in NCCU--went down there and selected a dorm room, had a roommate. Dr. Helen Edmonds [Helen G. Edmonds] who was, you know, looming large, and Durham at that time, at the university--she knew my parents [Thelma Taylor James and William James], the red carpet was rolled out. It was all a good thing the dorm I was gonna be in was built brand new. It was like only gonna be the second year it was gone be--it was just all set. My mother recognizing that I'm an only child, I've led this sheltered life, she said, "I need you to get accustomed to being away from home." I'd really never been away from for any periods of time. You can't count sleepovers. I never went off to camp like some people did and I never went on long trips without her. At best, I would be away a week and then I'd be with one her sisters, either Chicago [Illinois] or New York [New York] (laughter) so sick I was never really too far out her sight. And--but this time she knew it was time to get me ready, I was far more ready than she thought I was, but in her mind--so she decided that she wanted me to enroll in a pre-college experience and Hampton had one. So she signed me up for that, now I didn't know a soul in Hampton, had never been to Hampton, didn't have any affinity towards Hampton, but all I knew was I was going to Hampton for six weeks that summer. And you take, you know, a couple of freshman classes that, you know, get credit for (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now is this during your, your senior year or so--well, well your junior year or what? Speaker 2: This is my p--I had just graduated high school [Matoaca High School, Chesterfield County, Virginia]. Speaker 1: You just graduated? Okay so-- Speaker 2: This is pre-college. Speaker 1: Six weeks that's, that's pretty much all summer. Speaker 2: Yeah pretty much all summer, you've got that right. Story_ID: 663386 Speaker 1: I go down to pre-college and on the way down to Hampton [Virginia], you would've thought somebody was taking our family to a funeral. I'm in the back seat of the car crying, my father's in the front seat crying. He and I are both softhearted so that was natural. When my mother [Thelma Taylor James] started to cry, then I knew something was wrong. My mother was not a crier (laughter). But--so it was an emotional time taking your child even though it was pre-college and Hampton is much closer to Petersburg [Virginia] than going to Raleigh [North Carolina] to go to school--I mean not Raleigh, Durham [North Carolina] to go to school. But anyway we got over the sepera- we got through the separation if you will. And within about forty-eight hours I'd become quite acclimated to being not only away from home but to be in that beautiful Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] at that time although I was not gonna be matriculating there for the fall. Well in the middle of the six week period, I got a note to come over to the registrar's office which I did, and I spoke to one of the admissions directors and he said that--he complimented me on how well I was doing. I was taking freshman level math and English, and what have you. He said I was doing well midterm, I was doing quite well and what have you, wanted to know if I 'wanna think about, you know, staying and going to Hampton for undergrad versus going to North Carolina [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. And I was flattered, and I said wow, and I thought about it for a while, and my dad being a minister his big day off was always on Monday. So of course when I was in Hampton every Monday my father was in Hampton. He would drive on down there--he'd come and spend Monday afternoon with me anyway, so I don't know what day I was talking to this gentlemen. But all I know is the second meeting said, well my father will be here on Monday. Can I get him involved in this conversation? That's before cell phones, computers, and text, you know, and so daddy came and we went back to see the man and he told him, "Reverend James [William James], your daughter's done so well we would love to see her come here." And I began to ask him some questions about, you know, scholarship I said I had you know, I didn't have a big scholarship to North Carolina--if I had a nice one, you know it was recognizing my academic ability. And I said I've got a scholarship here, you know, what can you do help us do this. My father was so struck by the fact that he sat in that conversation and was proud of me--of how I negotiated getting money to go to school at Hampton, not a complete scholarship but a nice complement to what my parents were gonna have to pay. Anyway, he went back home and told mom, "Well it looks like she's gonna go to Hampton because she's done all these things, she's negotiated her money, got a little bit more money than I got to North Carolina." And my mother just revolted to him, she said, "She's not old enough to make a decision like that, how dare she decide--she's going to UN- North Carolina Central." And he said, "Margot's [HistoryMaker Margot Copeland] going to Hampton, because she has already committed. That's where it is," and my mother did call me, and there was a--one telephone booth on the floor that all these girls in the dorm had to share, and you could barely get a call through. But of course that call came through and my mom and I talked and I was very clear. I used the clarity I learned from her, I was very clear that this was gonna be my choice, and I said, "I don't wanna go to another place and get adjusted all over again." I said, "I'm adjusted, I like it." I said, "It's a topped named HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], you know, everybody's going to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I'm going to Hampton." And so, and so that's what where--so Hampton chose me. Hampton pulled me back in and there are a lot of things in life, if you look back and you'd like to do over, or change, or adjust, the best decision, best decision in my life was going to Hampton. It was just incredible. Speaker 2: We spent like the last two years interviewing black scientists. And we spent a lot of time at Hampton, now people who are there now undoubtedly were not there when you were there. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But they are associated with the Jefferson National Accelerator [Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, Newport News, Virginia] over there and a lot of things going on at Hampton. The physics department is re- is really, you know, doing things. Story_ID: 663387 Speaker 1: What was it like when you were at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]? Speaker 2: When I was at Hampton--oh my god it was a glorious time. You don't realize how glorious it was until you are ready to graduate. First of all, I was the first--I wasn't the first, I was the only physics major in my class. I was the class of '73 [1973] and so the physics department has changed quite a bit in that time. Now being the only one and then I was also the only girl. There were no other women in physics that I can think of. It's certainly not at--if I was a freshman--not as sophomores and juniors. Maybe someone who may have been a graduating senior but not the, not the people who are right ahead of me and the people who came behind me. I was the only, only woman in the physics department--in the physics cohort and the only physics major in the entire class. So I took my classes with the upperclassmen and I had a couple of glasses by the time I was a senior, you know, myself one on one. Well gave me intimacy with the faculty that was quite unusual incredible. We had Dr. Stepan Benda [Stepan V. Benda], S-T-E-P-A-N Benda. He was from Czechoslovakia [Czech Republic and Slovakia] and he and his wife lived on campus and campus housing. He was chair of the department, and Dr. Benda took me under his wing as if I were granddaughter. I was the same age of that time at his granddaughters and I got every possible exposure in the sciences that a young aspiring student could have. The National Science Foundation the opportunity to study at Argonne National Laboratory [Lemont, Illinois] in fact when I went to Argonne, Dr. Banda a faculty placement there that same summer. My mother [Thelma Taylor James] was so thrilled 'cause she thought he would be supervising me. Of course, you know, that didn't happen, but the point is that it was just very powerful time. I had another professor who gave me the blues, he's from China [sic.]. Kwang Soo Han, K-W-A-N-G, S-U-H-A-N [sic.]. Dr. Han--really thought Dr. Han hated me. I thought that he thought that I didn't have any business in the hard sciences let alone being in physics. I don't--I didn't think he thought I was competent or capable. It was really Dr. Benda always kind of paved the way to make sure, you know, I was doing well and doing fine. It wasn't until about five years ago, I was invited to Hampton to be the keynote speaker for convocation. And right before it was time for us to, you know go on stage there is Dr. Han, and--by this time his hair is all white, but I recognized the face, and I said, oh my god. I said--I mean I don't get intimidated very easily--I--when I saw him, I almost melted. I was so intimidated, I said, "Dr. Han, look I turned out okay," (laughter). And he loved it. He had just retired--he was at Hampton all the time. He had just retired from Hampton, so, so when you think about a HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] and the faculty, you don't necessarily think about someone who is from Czechoslovakia or someone who's from mainland China. But that's--really they were the lifeblood the two of them. There were other faculties but those two--very prominent in my mind and my development evolution as a, as a student, in the, in the field. So academically I was able to do well there, and with exposure, you know, outside of the Hampton campus. And get recognized for some pretty, pretty, you know, wonderful opportunities. I was at the University of North Carolina in Greenville [sic. University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina] one summer representing Hampton in a program there. And that was the first time that I had been in an environment with other white physics majors. Every time--every other thing I'd done had been around minority physics students. But this time--and so and that was--it was fourteen of us. And I said well how is this gonna be? It went extremely well and these students were from all over. I had this one kid in there from Caltech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California], another one from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I'm there from Hampton. And I clearly held my own, got--made some great relationships with friends, and in fact, UNC Greenville offered me--I was--I did that in my junior year so I went back for my senior year. They offered--they invited me to apply to graduate school in the physics department. Dr. Byrd [ph.] was his name, they had a physics department at that time. He asked me to apply. And I declined it because I was more interested in Chapel Hill's [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] as I've said earlier. And Dr. Byrd wrote a letter from--it was another one of my writers. A letter for me from Chapel Hill. But--so I had academically a very rich academic experience at Hampton. Now with that said, I had a very rich social experience at Hampton, a very rich one. My uncle Clayton--not a real blood uncle but one of my dad's best friend's Dr. Clayton Robins [ph.] who was our family physician. He used to call me Bonnie Coed because I was the--I was the coed that--in other words if you gonna put a label on a young woman who's in college doing all the things that a young girl supposed to do in this period of her life I did that. I pledged sorority [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], I volunteered, I, you know, led clubs groups. I tried to sing in the choir one--they let me sing for a year in the chapel choir. And I danced, you know, I did all those things. I, I--it was just such a rich and full life and had great friends. So it was a good balance of social and academic, and it--four years just rushed by. It moved by way too fast, but if I could put my life on hold now, and go back and do those four years again I would without any hesitation. Story_ID: 663388 Speaker 1: Were there any blacks in the physics department when you were there? Speaker 2: There were no blacks in the physics department at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] during my time. There were several African American chemistry and math professors, biology so the other sciences and we were all in--all of those departments were in one building. But--so I certainly saw black faculty, but none in the physics department. Speaker 1: Okay, okay just wanted to make that point. So as you--well, so you were in--you, you wanted to be involved astrophysics at one time, but you didn't really pursue that really? Speaker 2: No, it was, it was just subject that I took and it was--I believe it may have even been the elective. I didn't have to take it and I found it interesting, now part of--one of the reasons I enjoyed it so much--that was one of the classes that I was in the class by myself and Dr. Benda [Stepan V. Benda] the chair of the department taught the class. And I literally--it wasn't like I went to his office and he taught me in his office at, at a conference table no, we were in a classroom with a lot of empty seats he's standing there at chalkboard and, and, and lecturing to me as is if he had thirty students in the room. It was amazing and I, I was working just like that so, so I remember that but it was a very--it's a very interesting, it was a very interesting class. Story_ID: 663389 Speaker 1: Now, it's o--often said that if a black student wants to go into the scientist--the sciences, it's best to be at an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] because of the attention you get. Speaker 2: Attention, yes. Speaker 1: Do you agree with that? Speaker 2: Well I would say that for any African American going to an HBCU is the best thing they could do period. Because of the cause of that very reason, the attention. And because what you do is you strip away all of the other things, the subliminal problems or the subtleties, that can be barriers to access. I mean at the end of the day, we can do better in this country in educating and preparing all of our children for college. But we, we ex- definitely have to do better as it relates to preparing children of color. And so when you could put them in an environment where they are safe if you will, where they don't have to think about race, in other words when you're in a black school the burden of racism is totally lifted because you don't have to think about race. You are stripped down to who you are, so it's really about you. And then there're no other excuses, and so you--so that was really--I think probably, probably one of the best things about being at a HBCU, I could--and being Bonnie Coed, if you will, I could function and move back and forth, you know, as Margot [HistoryMaker Margot Copeland]. Margot was just--it was just down to me and there were a lot of Margots on the campus. My three children [Kimberley Copeland, Gary Copeland and Michael Copeland] are all graduates of historically black colleges and they came out of, you know, very exclusive prep schools and a suburban high school here in Cleveland [Ohio], but I still wanted them to have that black college experience before expanding onto the larger stage, because you can go to a larger major mainstream campus like I did for graduate school [at The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]. But those four years are so critical in terms of your preparation for your larger life so I look at the decision to be at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], really being a true preparation for my life, and that's one of the mottos of Hampton is preparation for life. But it's true. It is a--it was a great preparation for life in every aspect. Speaker 1: Who was president then do you remember? Speaker 2: We had several during that time. Jerome Holland [Jerome H. Holland] was president I think my freshman year through the first part of my sophomore year. He went on to become ambassador to--I don't wanna say which country but President Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] made him an ambassador to that--I think one of the Scandinavian countries [Sweden] I believe. And then we had an interim professor and then we had--I don't remember the gentleman's name who was president when I was finishing up. I can--Dr. Hudson--yeah it was a Dr. Hudson yes, yes. And I don't think he was there--Hampton had probably three presidents during my four years there. So it was not something that I, you know was fixated on. Dr. William Harvey [HistoryMaker William Harvey], who's president now, celebrating his thirty-fifth year. Well the irony is, is Dr. Harvey arrived five years after I graduated. That shows you how long he's been there (laughter) so I just missed him by a cohort. But--so Hampton has had great stability in the president's office since Dr. Harvey arrived--but there were several presidents, you know during the time that I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. So you graduated in '73 [1973]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And I don't think I covered--the high school [Matoaca High School, Chesterfield County, Virginia] was '69 [1969] right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) '69 [1969] yes. Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969], your graduation and then graduation from Hampton in '73 [1973]. Story_ID: 663390 Speaker 1: You were trying to get into University of North Carolina. Now, what, what happened, what happened? Speaker 2: I got a full ride to Ohio State, so I was appli- I applied to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], OSU and UNC Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] and it was just a beautiful package. Ohio State at that time, Dr. Frank Hale [Frank Hale, Jr.] was head of minority affairs at Ohio State and he just had a passion for attracting African American students to major state universities--Big Ten [Big Ten Conference]. And I had absolutely not one connection contact or friend in the State of Ohio, but he recruited fourteen of us from Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] so when I, when I started my master's degree program at Ohio State, there were thirteen others from Hampton that were in my cohort, they were--we were all in different disciplines, but--and then he did that and then the following year another group of fourteen or fifteen behind us, so there's so many of us from Hampton that had the dual degree Hampton--bachelor's degree, Ohio State master's degree that only last a couple of years but, it was a very interesting, interesting time, interesting experience, but he was very focused on--and I'll never know why he selected Hampton versus any other school 'cause I don't know that I saw that number of students from other HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], but he came to Hampton and he, he recruited us and I was just one of the ones and we got full rides to graduate school, all of us, all of us. Speaker 1: Of course the Frank Hale Center [Frank W. Hale, Jr. Black Cultural Center] stands at Ohio State now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --he's, he's like a, like a legend. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Is he still living, Dr. Hale? Speaker 1: I don't think so, but yeah, Dr. Frank Hale, I hear about him all the time. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Yeah. Speaker 1: So at The Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Ohio State University, yes. Speaker 1: Okay nineteen se- '73 [1973], this is when their football team--well it's always been good so-- Speaker 2: Archie Griffin and Cornelius Greene, I think that was the year--I think when I arrived Archie was receiving the Heisman [Heisman Memorial Trophy] the second time when I arrived to Columbus [Ohio], and Cornie Greene and what have you. I did not know those guys at that time 'cause one they were still an undergrad and I was grade student, but, you know, you, you know in Columbus they were just everywhere and I would see them on campus certainly they were celebrities. I've since gotten to know Archie Griffin the last two years because he's head of the alumni office for the university, so in fact, he's come up to Cleveland [Ohio] to speak for me a couple of times. Story_ID: 663391 Speaker 1: Are you going to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] for the science, for, for science? Speaker 2: No, I was recruited by Dr. James Gru- Grurnell--no James Gunnell [James B. Gunnell] G-U-N-N-E-L-L, James Gunnell. He was at Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia] and was at Ohio State on faculty in the college of educational development, this speaks to what is my passion and I was a physics major because my mother [Thelma Taylor James] wanted me to be in physics and I certainly did well, enjoyed it, but I knew when I got my degree I did not wanna pursue anything else in physics, that's not what I wanted to do. I really wanted to major in business and I came home at the end of my freshman year and told her I wanted to switch my major from physics to business. Well you would've thought I told her I wanted to drop out of college. Oh my god she just went into a meltdown behind it, so I stayed in physics to keep the peace at home and ended up getting a degree, but I just knew when I got my degree, I did not wanna do that. So when Dr. Hale [Frank Hale, Jr.] and company came down I had no idea what I wanted to do in grad school. I just knew I wanted to go. And one of the main reasons I wanted the grad school was because I didn't know what I wanted to do in life. So one thing I knew I could do well was school. So I said I'll go on to grad school and try to find myself. So one, one of the programs that I got matched with, and Dr. Hale matched Dr. Gunnell's program so when I went to interview at Ohio State, he had me before Dr. James Gunnell and, and I was accepted into his program and in educational development which is really educational research and statistics understanding institutional, the institutional side of education, not the teaching and academic side, but understanding, you know, what it takes to, to grow institutions and to shore them up in position for the future. The work around ed development was gonna be to, you know, give a group of practitioners the skills to become, you know, leaders with--at an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] environment so I was paired with--I was a master's degree student, I was paired with a Ph.D. candidate who was gonna be going back to Morgan State [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and I was supposed to be going to work at Morgan State in institutional relations and advancement at Morgan State. That never came to pass but at--that, that was the notion behind it, you know, to pair graduate students to really go and be strong administrators if you will, you know at HBCUs. So here I am again in another program. I can always do the work but I had no great passion for the work itself. I had passion for HBCUs and I thought that was pretty-- a pretty good idea. But I had no real desire to get a degree beyond my master's degree, although I did have eighteen hours that could've been credited towards a Ph.D. that I did take while at Ohio State. But I went into the workplace shortly after getting my master's (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Story_ID: 663392 Speaker 1: As a physics major, higher math I guess--I mean--well it--I guess it was helpful in statistics, you know, I would (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Certainly, yeah. Speaker 1: So you had like a--probably--you were a little ahead of the rest the, you know, the grad students in terms of your math? Speaker 2: Well I wouldn't say I was ahead of anybody--I mean it was some pretty sharp students there. I was able to, I was able to compete effectively and certainly the ability of being in the hard sciences like physics, is you're taught so many skills, you know, the analytical thinking, the problem solving, inquiry, never getting to the real answer, you know, why, why, why, why? And that, that sort of thing. You're taught to pursue that and--but those of skills that really work well across disciplines. So, I did, did well at The Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio]. Proud of it, proud of it, proud to be a Buckeye, it was second academic place for me. Especially following Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] it would've probably been very difficult for me to have gone to Ohio State coming out of Matoaca High School [Chesterfield County, Virginia]. And that's something that I studied when I was at Ohio State. The attrition rate of blacks at the undergraduate level at Ohio State was very, very high, whereas the attrition rate of blacks at the graduate level at OSU was very, very low. In fact it was better than the attrition rate of the larger population of whites. So, so blacks could come to graduate school at Ohio State and, and get their degrees whether they were Ph.D.'s or master's degrees. But undergrads, you know, there was a, you know, a drip, drip, drip (gesture), you know, dropout so I did take a look at that. I didn't come up with any particular answer. Although at that time most of, most of the grad students and the cohorts that I study had come from HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] most of 'em had, had come from smaller environments and they were HBCUs, so I was trying to draw a comparison then to while that experience was important and vital. So by the time you got there you were able to, you know, really settle in, and compete effectively. Speaker 1: Okay. So your master's degree was in educational research and statistics? Speaker 2: Yes that was specialty area, but it's the college of educational development is the official group that it's called. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had pro- I had physic- no I had a statistics professor, statistics professor named Dr. John Kennedy [ph.] and he used to march around the room, I remember he would just march around the room and the first class I took under him, it had to be two hundred of us in the class but I finally as I advanced in statistics I had smaller environments with him so I, I was even lucky enough to have him in class with maybe fifteen students, he was a great professor, great professor. Another one Dr. Lang [ph.], I had--he was good and of course Dr. Gunnell [James B. Gunnell], was a very good faculty at that time. Story_ID: 663393 Speaker 1: What did you do after graduation, had you? Speaker 2: Well I was about to panic then because I knew I didn't wanna continue in school--in for my Ph.D. Although, that's what's my mother [Thelma Taylor James] wanted me to do. She was willing to accept the fact that I was no longer in physics--but I had to get a doctorate, but I didn't wanna do that. I got a job through a connection. One of my best friends from Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], who is now at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], she was dating a gentleman who--what did he do? I think he was--I forget what he did, but the guy she was dating, but he was connected one of the state senators and it happened to be right. Senator Mallory [sic. William L. Mallory, Sr.], I think he was like on staff at the statehouse and working for Senator Mallory and he helped me get a job at this--for the state legislature of Ohio [Ohio General Assembly], and it was called the Legislative Service Commission, I don't know if they're still there or not or if they still have it, but LSC, as it was called, Legislative Service Commission was put in place to do research for the House [Ohio House of Representatives] and the Senate [Ohio Senate] on the various bills that they would put forward so when a legislator had an idea about a bill, we would have to do all the research and then draft the legislation for them. I had absolutely no background in doing that kind of work, but there I was, and it really wasn't a grea- a direct application to the research and statistics background that I had just picked up. It wasn't that kind of work at all. It was far more legal work, you know, someone who had come out of maybe political science was better suited or certainly someone who was a strong writer. I wasn't--I'm still not a strong writer. And but I did learn how to write while I was there. As a physics major I never really had to do a lot of writing, but I, I had to struggle to learn how to really write well and it's still a very painful process for me right now, but that's where I had to hone that so--you know some things happen for a reason, a season or lifetime, that was one of those experiences that happened (laughter) for a reason so I would learn (laughter) how to write. But I was at the Legislative Service Commission for eighteen months. I staffed the House transportation and urban affairs committee [Ohio House Committee on Transportation and Urban Affairs]. I got to know, you know, obviously several of the legislators at that time now and some of them or passed on but others are still around, Dennis Eckart is probably one that I got to know the best during that time that before he came back and ran for cong- U.S. Congress. And--but there was a John D. Thompson [John D. Thompson, Jr.] from Cleveland [Ohio] was there at that time as well as--there were others yes. Story_ID: 663394 Speaker 1: This is around the time--correct me if I'm wrong but--well they may have already formed it--I know they formed a black cau- caucus in the state legis- legislator-- Speaker 2: I believe it was formed at that time, I was not involved with it. I was a staffer for--as I mentioned to one of the programs there, but I, I was I was not involved on the political side of things. I only got to meet Senator Mallory [sic. William L. Mallory, Sr.] once while there, 'cause he was on--I think he was probably the only black at that time in the Ohio state senate [sic. Ohio House of Representatives] and he was speaker pro temp maybe. I don't wanna make up history for you here but, he was, he was high ranking and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So was Mallory from Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: No Cincinnati [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Cincinnati. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah his, his connections provided an entree for me to get the opportunity at LSC, Legislative Service Commission. Speaker 1: How long did you work them-- Speaker 2: Eighteen months, didn't like it too much, and by this time I had a roommates who--a young lady that I'd met while--in grad school at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], sorority sister and she and I got her--our master's degrees around the same time. But the difference is, she got a M.B.A. the same time I was getting an M.A. And that what I should've done, I should've gone to business school, but I didn't. She got a M.B.A. same time I got an M.A. And she got her M.B.A and went to work for IBM [International Business Machines Corporation]. And she was loving it. She was traveling. She was making a lot more money than I was. And I just knew that I could do what (laughter) she was doing, even though I didn't have an M.B.A., I said I could do what she's doing. So I talked to her about how do I get in front of the powers that be at IBM at Columbus [Ohio] and she arranged that and I did not get an offer from them. But in the process I said, let me hedge my bets, so I applied for position at Xerox in Columbus and the Xerox people there told me that they didn't have any opportunities at that time but that the Cleveland office of Xerox was hiring and I said oh. Now I didn't know I know anybody. I had one sorority sister and maybe another friend here in Cleveland and I got in my car and I came up to Cleveland and interviewed with Xerox Corporation. And they hired me. Speaker 1: Let, let me go back and maybe get some dates. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: You got your master's degree in what? Speaker 2: Educational development. Speaker 1: Yeah in what, what year? Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974]. Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974]. Speaker 2: Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] was the brand new president. It was, it was August of '74 [1974], Watergate had exploded on the scene, and Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] had resigned that summer. So it was an August graduation. Gerald Ford had already been invited as vice president to be the commencement speaker, but by the time our graduation occurred, he was president. So my mom [Thelma Taylor James] came out and I marched because it was si- we knew it was historic, at that very difficult and critical time in a country. Speaker 1: Graduated with your master's in '74 [1974], then you worked for the state legislature [Ohio General Assembly], eighteen months, so that brings us around '75 [1975] or, or '70 [1970], so did you start with Xerox (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-six [1976], '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976]. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was at LSC from seventy--I started in LSC probably the latter part of '74 [1974], early '75 [1975] and there for eighteen months. I remember I said I got--I had eight--I, I stayed in school after I got my master's degree, so I do have eighteen hours on my on a doctorate. I was never in an official doctoral program however, but it was certainly something that could have been. So I have eighteen hours beyond my master's. So I probably didn't start working at LSC until January of '75, [1975] and then left Columbus in '76 [1976] mid--cause I started with Xerox the summer, I remember it was summer time, summer of '76 [1976]. Story_ID: 663395 Speaker 1: All right. Xerox [Xerox Corporation] in Cleveland [Ohio]. All right, so (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two new things, working for one, a major corporation that had never, you know, I had never had that exposure. And I'm in the business world now and then being in a totally different city where I have no contacts, no relationships. I didn't know anyone in Columbus [Ohio], but it's a university--so you meet peers and other students and plus you had the whole group from Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] that came along. So it wasn't like being in a strange place. Coming to Cleveland was coming to a strange place for me. I didn't have any relationship here and my mother was about to have a meltdown. It was--I may as well been moving to Anchorage, Alaska. I mean it was just unheard of for me to be this far away from her with no connections, no one that, you know, she could put--could put--reach out, reach out to me. In Columbus, my father's brother's brother--no my father's brother's sis- whatever--my father's brother-in-law, that's what is was. My father's brother's brother-in-law, Dr. Newkirk [ph.] was in Columbus practicing there so they were indirect in-laws who were in Columbus so you know, they were--I had, you know, some type of support with that. Cleveland--nobody--we didn't know anybody in Cleveland--nobody to call on, there was--you know, come to think of it, there was a couple here, but I didn't make--they were, they were from--he was from Petersburg [Virginia]. But I didn't meet them until I'd been here a couple of years. Well anyway--so that's enough about that. But yeah so I'm at Xerox, I loved Xerox, great company to work for. I was in sales and I said, "Okay I could probably do that," and, and the first thing they do when you work for a big corporation like that is--the first thing they do is they send you to school. Well you know me I love school so I'd always do well at school, so I'd go down to the scho- the training school for all our entering salespeople for Xerox was in Leesburg, Virginia. Some I'm doubly happy, I'm back on my stomping ground, I could come home every weekend to Petersburg and see everybody, and I'm back in school me and a bunch of young bright people. It was really almost like returning to undergrad in many respects (laughter) so it was great. I did well at--in Leesburg for Xerox and I had a lot of--I was a salesperson with a lot of promise. They sent me back here thinking I was just gonna just new tear it up in Cleveland, that didn't quite happen. When I got back to Xerox, I really discovered that I didn't really like sales. You had to sell four machines a month if you planned on getting paid. If you planned on getting--'cause, you know first thing they do is pull back. First you're on salary while you're in school, but when you come back in your territory they pull back salary, and you're only gonna make it up on your commission. That pressure was just enormous on me because I was determined to not have to rely on my parents [Thelma Taylor James and William James] for anything. I was determined to be my own--I had my own car, I had my, my I'm apartment you know, taking care of myself and I didn't wanna ask them for much. I would ask periodically for extra things but I didn't have to, you know, ask them for too much. And I was really trying to establish my own independence. By this time I'm twenty-four years old changing to twenty--turning twenty-five and being independent was very important to me. And that pressure those four machines a month was just--I mean it was crazy. I would wake up at the first of every month looking at the ceiling and say, "Where am I gonna get these four machines this month." And in fact if I got to a month where I was about ready to sell a fifth machine, I wouldn't. I'd hold it over to the next one just to give myself some cushion (laughter) with that. The moral of the story is one year into this experience, I knew that I just could not handle the pressure of being in sales. I, I didn't like it enough, I could certainly do it but I had no passion. So here I am now, I have a master's degree, I've got a family in Virginia that thinks I'm walking on water up here and that was not the case at all. And I'm on my second job that I don't like. My first job at the legislature [Ohio General Assembly] I didn't like the work. Legislature was fine, learned a whole lot, but didn't like the work. Learned how to write so that was good, now my second job totally different. Loved the company, I love Xerox. It was my goal to try to move back to the East Coast and--with Xerox. But selling those machines was just too much and so you getting pretty concerned and nervous about yourself, and about your future. And you don't wanna be a failure and the last thing I wanted to do was go back home. I did not wanna go back home and let alone go back home as what may be perceived as a failure. My par- this make me proud, make me proud, make us proud, well that was that drumbeat and it wouldn't be making them proud if I returned after all this la di da education I've had and, you know, when my mama was telling what I was doing, it probably sounded a lot bigger than what it really was. Story_ID: 663396 Speaker 1: But anyway, one day---talk about how the Lord just lines things up. The sales--the young salespeople and I was probably--they--we're called area sales reps which means you weren't quite a full salesperson. We all had a big training room that we congregated in on Monday morning. It's always--always every week it's always somebody new coming in from the outside that--joining our team. So this young woman came in, and--young white woman came in and she said she had just left Polaroid Corporation and she loved her job and how she hated to leave Polaroid but she wanted to get into sales, that's why she's at Xerox [Xerox Corporation]. And she began to spell out what was she was doing at Polaroid. She said, "Oh yeah we--I had training programs in Lake Tahoe, and I was always in Boston [Massachusetts], and be on the West Coast," and she's just talking about how grand this is and I said, "What did you do?" She said, "Well I was in customer service." I said, "Well what was that like?" And she told me what that job was like. And I said, "Is your job still open?" And she said, "Well they're not gonna replace me" 'cause she was a customer service rep. She said, "They're going to hire a supervisor for the department." I said, "Is that job still open?" And she said, "Yes." But she really looked like you know, yes but why are you asking about it. And I said, "Who do I call?" And she said, "Well the center manager is--his name is--," and she gave me his name and contact information. Now this is the key here--this is, this is the third time's the charm. What I had learned being at Polaroid--first of all I was--it was a cold call, I had no connection--she was not facilitating a call for me, she just told me who to call and gave me a number. But everything's in your life for a reason, a season, or a lifetime. I was at Xerox--learn some fundamental skills as a salesperson and one thing a salesperson knows how to do is overcome objections. And also get through the screen, you through the secretaries and the receptionist to get to the decision maker. I knew how to do that through my sales training at Xerox. And I got to the decision maker and when I spoke to him, he said, "Well you know, we're very close to bringing a young man from Chicago [Illinois] to run the department." I convinced him that he wanted to see me before he made that final decision. I said, "Let me come in and interview for this position." I went in the interview for that position, I don't remember what I said but I went into--for the position, he then marched me down the hall to the person who was gonna be my real direct supervisor--manager who was an African American male, and I sat down with John Small [ph.] and interviewed with him, I had the offer, I had the offer. Story_ID: 663397 Speaker 1: All right we're gonna backtrack a little bit to, to your uncle whose name you're trying to remember. His name is? Speaker 2: Theodore, Theodore Taylor, and he was the first black to pass the Virginia state bar from Petersburg [Virginia]. And a young man brilliant apparently sharp as a tack. He died at thirty-two, just suddenly abruptly died, apparently with strep throat, but was not something they could address effectively at that time. He had one child, my cousin, Joyce [ph.], who is in Baltimore [Maryland] now and she's in her eighties at this juncture. But Theodore is recognized in the Petersburg, Virginia hall of fame for being the, the first black. He was a graduate of Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and just quite, quite accomplished. Apparently the world came to a standstill when he died and my [maternal] grandparents, they're--him being the firstborn and then so accomplished at that. You know, you look at a woman with a fourth grade education, a man with a second grade education, then have a son to go on to become an attorney and come back and practice, to be taken out of your life, that was devastating. I believe my grandfather [Matthew Taylor] passed away in just a couple of--few short years after that followed by my grandmother [Mary Jane Taylor]. It was just a devastating time for them, but he was--in fact my cousin Joyce, his daughter, was only two years old when he passed so it was a very trying time. But another one of the names that made the Taylor family in Petersburg, you know, so promised, and well regarded but his bro- he had--there were four boys and each one the brothers, you know, did something significant, either through education or what have you, and then my mother [Thelma Taylor James] and her sisters, you know, came along after that. Story_ID: 663398 Speaker 1: Okay, and the other thing that we wanted to talk about for a minute was the Richmond Improvement Association, of the boycott. You said your parents [Thelma Taylor James and William James] were really involved in that one. You were little kid right? Speaker 2: Little kid yeah. I don't know it as the Richmond Improvement Association. I was too young to know the formal name of it, but what I do remember is the economic boycott of Virginia. And I knew it was big and I knew it was important. As a little girl, it was always a big deal to get dressed up and ride over the car--in the car to Richmond [Virginia]. And we would go shopping and do a lot of things at Thalhimers and Miller and Rhoads, but one thing that we never could do was have lunch. We would buy a sandwich maybe and eat it in the car in the back seat, but because the lunch counters were still very segregated at that time, and they certainly allowed blacks to go to the bathroom or, you know, eat at the end of the counter with a sign, but my mother refused to do that. So we didn't participate in that, but we did certainly shop. And I remember when--hearing my mother and her friends talking about the fact that they were gonna pay off the--all their credit cards and they were gonna stop shopping--they actually stopped shopping for a considerable period of time. And this was so well organized, I know it was well organized between Petersburg [Virginia] and Richmond and I can only--I think it went throughout the entire state, that, that's what really broke the back of segregation in Virginia. Story_ID: 663399 Speaker 1: That's the activities of Samuel DeWitt Proctor, and later Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker], yep, yep (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yeah. Yeah shortly after that, Reverend Walker I believe went on to Atlanta [Georgia] to join the larger movement run by Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and, and others from--in, in Atlanta. But Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker was very prominent in those days in Petersburg [Virginia] circles. He led all of the movement that occurred in the Petersburg area. My father [William James] being a pastor in, in Petersburg was obviously very supportive and a part of that. I remember them talking about having mass meeting and the mass meetings would move around from church to church and that's how the information came out and people were organized. And we would have mass meetings at Bethany [Bethany Baptist Church, Petersburg, Virginia] and the pastors would lead prayers on the courthouse steps. My father did that sort of thing. I do remember coming home--I remember saying it, I remember--and my mom [Thelma Taylor James] would tease me about it during that whole era and I had to be first or second grade. And I said, "Daddy, how come you're not a hero?" And, and he said, "What do you mean I'm not a hero?" Well I said, "Well Patti Walker's dad is a hero 'cause he keeps getting arrested and you haven't gotten arrested, and you can be a hero if you get arrested," (laughter) so, so he never got arrested, so (laughter). But, but anyway it was a very interesting time. So that was just my little view of it from my world. Speaker 1: Well, the name Richmond Improvement Association--I mean and the activities, you know, set the stage for the Montgom- Montgomery Improvement Association and preceded--which made national news. Richmond [Virginia] struggled, didn't seem to make national news, but it certainly set the stage for Dr. King's activities in Montgomery [Alabama] so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's interesting. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: That's why Wyatt Tee Walker was so essential. Speaker 2: So essential to that yes, yes. Story_ID: 663400 Speaker 1: At any rate, let's go on to Polaroid [Polaroid Corporation]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now this is a story we, we left you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Polaroid okay-- Speaker 1: --getting this job at Polaroid as community service director. Speaker 2: It's customer service. Speaker 1: Customer service-- Speaker 2: Customer service supervisor didn't have a big lofty title. I was just in charge of the customer service department. And so I ended up having some natural instincts that worked as a supervisor. I was probably twenty-five, twenty-six years old. I had never supervised a flea and I had a small staff, I mean there was a woman there twice my age that I was in charge of. She was so not happy that was I was in that job. I come from outside the company. I'm barely twenty-six years old and now I'm her boss. I don't even know anything about cameras. But I got the job because of all the sales training I got at Xerox [Xerox Corporation]. Well anyway the first thing they do is, when you go to a new job, they'd send you to school (laughter) and, you know, I had mastered school by this time so I went to Boston [Massachusetts] for a few weeks and I learned every single camera that Polaroid made and sold at that time and how to operate them and not that I didn't--not to repair, but I could troubleshoot a repair because part of the customer service department, you were the front end to the service department because often time a custom will come with a camera that they think is broken when, when really it's not and they just don't know how to operate it. So we were taught how to troubleshoot and know the difference between that stage of the, the entry point for the customer versus going, taking it back to the service department for them to really get involved and taking a look at it. So I learned all about camera lines. It was so much fun. I have so many pictures taken with the Polaroid snapshots and what have you I took to it like duck to water, had great management, at this Cleveland [Ohio] center. But Polaroid was a big company, but it was still in some respects, kind of small because everybody knew each other. So I knew everybody up my hierar- hierarchy in customer service. There was an executive vice president over customer service in Boston and he knew me like he knew other people at my level, in the company. I was in Boston a lot. I was on a plane all the time. My boss had to do a presentation in Lake Tahoe and I remember coming in on a Saturday helping him put his charts together and getting his presentation together and he was often gone to, to his meeting. And he called me one night during the week and I jokingly said, I said, "Do you need some help in Lake Tahoe?" He said, "No, but we need you on the West Coast in the, in the morning," because we're getting ready to--we were launching a new product out there and the person who did my job in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], she was being taken away from that job to do the launch of the product, they needed someone to backfill her in her department. So I got on a red eye. I didn't have--I was single. I didn't have anybody I was accountable to or responsible for. I got on a red eye out of Cleveland. I, woke up in Los Angeles and I started to supervise the customer service group at the Los Angeles operations for Polaroid. I was out there three or four weeks. It was a great. It was wonderful. And talking about spreading your wings and, and having the company recognize you. There were five or six other people in the company that did what she and I did and for me to be recognized as the one that would--take and go--and take the larger operation of L.A. and, and, and to run it to keep the day to day business going on while we were doing this product launch, was just an incredible honor. So within nine months, I got promoted at Polaroid and I was moved up to distribution center manager. That's not the exact title but that's kind of what it was. There was a center manager over me and operations manager and all that kind of stuff. But I was in charge of distributing product to the five states in the Midwest that we were responsible for. And I had a staff of, you know calling individuals that took orders over the phone, you know, from camera dealers and--course you, you had, you had large con- you know, con- consumers at the big chains like, you know, Penney's [J.C. Penney Company] or Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] or places like that. But, so we had those customers to, to handle. But we also had a lot of small businesses too, like a Dodd camera company [Dodd Camera and Video], a small camera shops, what have you. So still on the--still I was on the service and distribution side, but I'd also been on the product side and just great time at Polaroid, learned a lot, grew, grew in my confidence. I really found my passion in working with people and knowing what it felt like and what it was like to be excellent in the workplace and workspace. So-- Speaker 1: So, so you were there from 1977 I guess to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm 'til about '80 [1980]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 663401 Speaker 1: In that time I got married, I got married in '79 [1979]. And the Boston [Massachusetts] headquarters decided to consolidate some of the field operations and the Cleveland [Ohio] office was combined with the Chicago [Illinois] office. Meaning that the distribution center--customer service center in Cleveland was being absorbed by Chicago and I was offered to relocate to Chicago to locate--relocate to Boston. But '79 [1979] I was married, young up and coming attorney [Terence Copeland] in town and, you know, we we're gonna grow a family and the rest is--so I couldn't relocate. So when they came in to make that decision about closing the Cleveland operation it was like a death, because, you know, I really found myself, you know, my profession. But what you do is you say, okay, now what did you take from this experience, you know, cry out of one eye. What do you take from this experience that can take you further? And so I looked at the aspects of the position that I liked the best and took them further, and I was able to then get a position with--at that time the company was called Ameritrust, Ameritrust Bank [Ameritrust Company]. And ironically Ameritrust Bank is a forerunner of the bank I work for, now KeyBank [KeyCorp, Cleveland, Ohio]. So I went into Ameritrust Bank and I went into it employee relations and was at Ameritrust for four years, and learned a great deal about being in HR [human resources] if you will and learning how to advance the needs of the company while balancing the needs of employees and, and making sure that employee rights, employment law were adhered to and in place. I had a lot of experiences at Ameritrust that were, you know, wonderful building blocks and foundational to my career, and a great mentor who ran the human resources group at that time, Peter Osenar [Peter R. Osenar], who took interest in me, and they had to be about three or four levels of managers and supervisors between his level and my level. But he really took interest me, and was quite a mentor and remains so for years following that time. When I made the decision to leave Ameritrust after having been there four years, it was to take on a bigger role in human resources at a company that was once call Picker International [Picker International, Inc.]. Picker is now a part of Philips [Philips Medical Systems], which on the medical device side--Picker International at that time was a diagnostic imaging engineering and manufacturing operation. And the modality of X ray technology was founded right here in Cleveland from Picker. Harvey Picker was the founder of it, you know, early in the 1900s and the successive modalities like CAT [computerized axial tomography] scan, and MRI [magnetic resonance imaging]. All those were then developed and found their birth right here in Cleveland. So--through Picker, so when I worked there, here comes my physics degree now coming back because being a science major--physics major, I worked with engineers, physicists, mathematicians, knowledge workers, individuals who were taught that they were paid to think, to think and create, and it took a special kind of HR person to know how to work effectively with individuals like that. And I didn't have any problem learning the modalities. I remember going to--at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] we were recruiting young engineers and I remember talking to a group of students and one of them said, "Are you an engineer?" I'm not an engineer, but because of my background I adapted to that well. I was at Picker about eight years, primarily in human resources. The last couple years I went over to the compliance side of HR. But that, that whole period with Ameritrust and then Picker, that window of time was quite foundational devel- and good development time for me. And also it was clear that I really thrived in a large corporate environment. I worked well between Xerox [Xerox Corporation], Polaroid [Polaroid Corporation], and Picker effectively in a large corporate environment and navigating that. I have a knack at organizational savvy as it's called here in my company. But that's a strong suit for me, and really knowing how to advance the organization, as well as develop employees to help them begin to advance as well. Story_ID: 663402 Speaker 1: You were at Picker [Picker International, Inc.] until 1992 you said? Speaker 2: (Mumbles) I was offici--I went on--it's interesting--I went on leave of absence in in '91 [1991] to 92 [1992] because I was elected the first African American president of the Junior League of Cleveland [Junior League of Cleveland, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio], which is another story (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is, okay now--yeah this is--I think before that you were president of the local chapter of Links [Western Reserve Chapter of The Links, Incorporated, Cleveland, Ohio] right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: So these are all--all these are related--just kind of--this is a, this is a quite a civics--I mean a community service track that you're on, you know, so maybe we'll start with Links and, and segue into-- Speaker 2: Okay. Thank you for attending to that because I tell young women today that my professional career and my civic career really grew in parallel. And in all those cases I had employers who were very gracious about me taking time to volunteer in the community and they were also very supportive. So especially with Picker, they were very supportive of my time as president of Links and really supportive of my time as the first black president of the Junior League. I got newspaper attention and what have you. And the CEO of Picker at that time sent me a very nice note. I'd never met him, and to congratulate me, so they very proud of that. And Picker at--during those days was not really known to be a real big corporate citizen and giving money, but they gave money to the Junior League, you know, while I was, while I was president. But as president of the Links chapter--I was president of the link (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah okay, I just wanna make sure-- Story_ID: 663403 Speaker 1: I know your mother [Thelma Taylor James] was in The Links, but explain to us like what is Links and, and--it's an African American organization and, and like kind of a little bit about the hi- the history of it and how got involved? Speaker 2: Certainly. The Links, Incorporated was founded in 1946 by two community minded women, Sarah Strickland Scott and Margaret Hawkins [Margaret Roselle Hawkins] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where they gathered a group of their friends because (background sound) (pause)--Margaret and Sarah gathered a group of their friends to really advance the cause of the underserved in Philadelphia at that time. Certainly there were many other African American organizations that did work similar to that, especially women's organizations at that time, but they really felt that with a group of individuals like themselves who were women who were well positioned, women who had access and influence in their respective communities that The Links could really make a bit of a difference, a difference that may be other organizations could not make. And this chain of friends, and that's what Links stands for, chain of friends grew. One of the first and the earliest chapters was in Petersburg [Virginia] and that was my mother's chapter [Petersburg Chapter of The Links, Incorporated], and I grew up as a little girl watching The Links and being a part of the--many of the programs that they offered to the community and really seeing the work that they could do, so it was really focused attention, you know, on the needs of the underserved in the African American community. Story_ID: 663404 Speaker 1: How is Links different from the black sororities, the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] and the Deltas? Speaker 2: Okay, sororities are like Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] or the AKAs and others, sororities are really a lifetime commitment you, you the pledge, that is a different process you go through and then of course there's a service component, but there's also another dimension to it that, you know, has a sisterhood dimension that and a relationship dimension that transcends other affiliations if you will. Sorority is not an affiliation, it really is it true membership if you will. The Links [The Links, Incorporated]--and oh sororities are large--I mean my sorority, you know, has probably upwards of three hundred thousand members, you know, around the world, and with, you know, hundreds of chapters, you know, well placed around the United States and the world. Links is small by design. Links is a circle of friends. And really truthfully, you have to be invited to join The Links. You have to be recognized or sponsored by someone in The Links who will lift you up before the membership for invitation. A Links member has to--a potential Links member has to be someone who already has demonstrated what they can do in the community. Not someone who's aspiring, but someone who really has demonstrated what they can do in the community, that they have served and they served at the leadership level and they served in a very honorable way, so that we like to identify women like that of promise. If--in fact, we will have members in The Links who are members of the major sororities, some not affiliated with sororities and others, you know, who are doing other things, but they're leaders and that's leadership quality that we look--most chapters don't have more than forty to fifty members by chapter, again small by, by design whereas with sororities, you know, you'll have five, six, eight hundred members, you know, in a sorority chapter. So it's a more intimate experience in Links--and Links is a membership organization so you're not a Link for life. You've got obligations and commitments. You've got a service and volunteer commitment you have to meet every year. And you have a commitment you have to make to the national organization every year in supporting the foundation [The Links Foundation, Incorporated, Washington, D.C.], the work of the foundation every year. And the year that you choose not to, that's the year you're not a Link. So it is a membership organization and--but one that's a real privilege to be in. It has heretofore been thought of as an organization that people join when they're more midlife and older, and that's con- has concerned the leadership of late that, you know, we don't want to age out and become obsolete. So we are encouraging younger women to now join the organization, especially those of us with daughters. So being a daughter of a Link [Thelma Taylor James], I knew the benefit of it and knew the purpose of the organization. And Links was always just a cut above the rest in terms of what they did. So I was privileged to serve as president of the Cleveland chapter of Links [Western Reserve Chapter of The Links, Incorporated, Cleveland, Ohio] in the late--it was '89 [1989] to '91 [1991] that I was president of Links here. Story_ID: 663405 Speaker 1: And obviously through my familiarity with the organization and the fact that my mother [Thelma Taylor James] was a Link, that was helpful when I moved to Cleveland [Ohio] and certainly connecting with individuals who were members of The Links [The Links, Incorporated]. And then becoming a member myself, and then growing up in my civic life really grew and blossomed in The Links, I mean we just did--everything we did in Links, especially during that time, we were the first at it. We were the first to do this. The first, to have a partnership, mainstream partnership, with the Cleveland Museum of Art [Cleveland, Ohio]. The first to bring the attention of the atrocities of HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus and acquired immune deficiency syndrome] to the black community when you couldn't get black folks to have a conversation about AIDS they wouldn't--all sorts of outreach was done, but they couldn't get the audience, you know, other organizations had tried they wouldn't have more than a half dozen or twelve people show up, you know, for a session. We filled the basement of Mt. Zion Congregational Church [Mt. Zion Congregational Church United Church of Christ, Cleveland, Ohio] on a Saturday morning, wall to wall, with our people, black people leaders in the community so they would understand how, how serious this disease was, how it was impacted--disproportionately impacting the black community and what we as civic leaders, collectively as civic leaders needed to do to get out about--that was the mid to late '80s [1980s]. So Links was always--we always--we always could make it happen. We know how to execute. We know how, we know how to envision what it is we want to accomplish and we know how to execute. After serving as the chapter president of Links [Western Reserve Chapter of The Links, Incorporated, Cleveland, Ohio], I went on the leadership at the area level of Links and so during the '90s [1990s], I found myself on area board for the organization and then subsequently I became the Central Area director for The Links in 1999, and my term was '99 [1999] to 2003. Central Area, that's the Midwest, fourteen states, and about twenty-nine hundred members where I was responsible for that. And of course as area director I sat on the national board, executive council as we call it at, at that point and again still doing things. Links endowed a scholarship under my watch at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], named after one of our deceased members who was an alum of that. But understand that the import- point- point--the importance of having significant dollars at schools like that so that children can matriculate and, you know, these are last dollars in if you will. And to this day this endowment, which was set up with the Middle Tennessee foundation [Community Foundation of Middle Tennessee] in Nashville [Tennessee], this en- this endowment is still thriving today and every year they send me of five to eight students that has received monies from that endowment. So doing things just different and, you know, longstanding of what have you. And then in 2010, I took over as national president. I probably should back up, in 2006 I ran for national vice president, where I served in that role. And the vice president's job is to be in in charge of membership, and all the things that implies. We have twelve thousand members with vast majority of them being active members. The older members are called alumna members. So all the programming that we did for member--all that fell under me as vice president. And in 2010 in Detroit, Michigan, I was elected national president of The Links. And you talk about an high honor--a high honor to run this organization to represent this organization of some of powerful and influential women and black women in, in America. Now all of our members are not African American, the larger number of our members are African American, but it's not exclusive to African American. We do have non black members of the organization. In fact, recently a year or two ago met the president of the Albuquerque, New Mexico chapter [Albuquerque Chapter of The Links, Incorporated] who's a white woman and--but she is any woman who is committed to and focused on needs of the underserved community, no matter what these children look like. We have children in our programs that are certainly African American. We have Hispanic children in our programs. And we have white children. I remember being down in Jackson, Tennessee for a boys program. They run a boys enrichment enhancement program in Jackson, Tennessee and I went to be their graduation speaker a few years ago, and it probably--a good three or four or five of the young men in the class were white boys, and their parents were there just as proud as the parents of the black students because they knew this was special, it was different. It was about promoting their self-esteems and encouraging them to think higher than what their surroundings, you know, allow them to see themselves, in growing. And yes, you too can go to college and here's why you should, and this is what it means. So it was funny because they, they wanted to take pictures with me as I left there were so many white parents taking pictures with me for--to commemorate that program. So we don't exclude, we don't exclude. Story_ID: 663406 Speaker 1: But our organization is clearly focused on serving and uplifting the African American community and our culture as well as the work that we've done on continent of Africa. We have been relevant. Our organization is over sixty-five years old. But we have been relevant on the continent of Africa for over fifty years old. We've built water wells in Uganda. We've built sixty-two schools in--we've built or renovated sixty-two schools in South Africa. We just opened and dedicated four schools in Liberia. And one of our newest members was an honorary member President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, the first African American--excuse me the first woman of an African country. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf is a member of Links now. And she is invested in the work of The Links [The Links, Incorporated] in her country as well as a great spokesperson for the work that we do on the continent. One of my other highest honors and probably best moments is when we inducted Condoleezza Rice, sixty-sixth secretary of state of United States as a member of The Links and we did that in October of 2013. What a high honor that was? How we are so thrilled to have her in our ranks but she gives example to black women of, of--who are accomplished. It's not about politics, it's about that she has been and walked and done things that few of us men or women black or white have ever done. And she is humble. She was thrilled to be invited. She is--will more than likely be a part of programs that we have going forward in the future, and for me to be the national president at the time that she became honorary member. It was an exci- very high honor. Many other things too, we--The Links--we've raised over $25 million and awarded that in scholarships for students throughout, we've made a $1 million gift to UNCF [United Negro College Fund], a $1 million gift to NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], a $1 million gift that we've just completed to the National Civil Rights Museum in Memphis [Tennessee]. And I'm proud to say that before I leave office and I leave office in July of 2014, before I leave office we've now--I made a pledge a $1 million pledge to the Smithsonian's National Museum of African American History and Culture [Washington, D.C.]. So I am thrilled with that because that's what we do. We're gonna be significant. We're gonna be different. We're gonna look at sustainability, continuation and anything that, that enriches and uplifts the lives of African Americans. Story_ID: 663407 Speaker 1: Tell us about the Junior League. How did you get involved in the Junior League? Speaker 2: Through--I got involved with the Junior League--it was--I was at, in a social setting with my then husband [Terence Copeland] and he had some connections that he had made in the community. Speaker 1: Now he's a lawyer right and, and don't forget to tell us what Junior League is to. Speaker 2: Okay, all right so, but anyway, there was a--at the--the then president of the Junior League, Diann Scaravilli had indicated to the first lady of my church who was also in the social setting. In fact, it was a Leadership Cleveland event. They were all in Leadership Cleveland the same time before I even began to look at Leadership Cleveland as a career option for me, I was just there as a spouse if you will. But Diann Scaravilli had said to Edwina Moss [Edwina Hudson Smith Moss] the first lady of my church, Olivet Institutional Baptist Church [Cleveland, Ohio]. She said we really want to begin to identify and attract young black women into the organization and Edwina recommended me. And that's really how I became a member of the Junior League. At the time that I joined the league, you could count the number of black women on, you know, two hands with fingers left over. I was not the first, Juanita Storey was the first, but I was certainly among the first to join. Pepper Taylor [ph.] and I went in the same time and Dianne Derrick was already a member. But I mean really it was just a very short list of us that were, that were, that were there. The Junior League is such an extraordinary training ground and preparation place for young women who are interested in civic engagement. Much of what I've learned how to do in nonprofit leadership, I learned in my days in the Junior League. I mean I can put a meeting together like this. I can put an event together like this. I can put a fundraiser together like this. All those are skills that you can't assume someone is gonna acquire or get. So you can get some of that certainly through experience. But the league actually trains you to do that. And I already told you I'm real good at school. (Laughter) So I'm a good student. And so I knew when I joined the league, I had an agenda when I joined the league. I knew that those women in that organization knew how to get things done in a big way and I wanted to learn those skills, so I could take it back to my community and that was my point. Never in a million years did I see myself as actually running the Junior League of Cleveland [Junior League of Cleveland, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio]. That was so off of the radar screen for me, it wasn't on the ra- anywhere near the radar screen. But I did find myself moving up into leadership. And there's subsequently was a president who not only wanted to just bring in African American women into the organization. She really wanted to demonstrate diversity at all levels of the organization. Margie Wheeler, she--my mentor in the Junior League and I would say in many other civic endeavors. She was president of the league and I was a secretary on her board. And it could've all stop there, but she saw something in me, and she said, "Margot [HistoryMaker Margot Copeland] we're gonna put you on track to be president." Yes, those kind of conversation are held, you know, there are people who may aspire, but inside conversation where someone will say, we will put you on track to be president. I had a national president of The Links [The Links, Incorporated] say to me years ago, "I want you--see you stand for office," and I'm now saying that to key women in the organization who are coming behind me. You see something in an individual that maybe you see a bit of yourself, but you see that they can come to the situation and bring the organization their best gifts and then push forward and take the organization to a higher level. So that's what happen with Margie Wheeler's, you know, invitation to me, to think about leadership in the Junior League. When I became the first black president of the, the league, it was a lot of media attention about that, and I got invited to everything that Cleveland [Ohio] had to offer. I was asked a question by a reporter-- Story_ID: 663408 Speaker 1: Let me just take, take advantage of that pause for a second and just make this point too, that, I think an organizational life--I mean The Links [The Links, Incorporated], and the Junior League [Association of Junior Leagues International Inc.] and other organizations that are service oriented replenish their leadership, right? Somebody doesn't aspire to become the president, stay a president until they die (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They stay forever, exactly, exactly-- Speaker 1: --like in a lot of org- organizations we see. They replenish leadership-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --so the idea of bringing somebody along is, is a philosophy that, that meshes with service. Speaker 2: Yes, it does, it does, that's, that's very insightful. That's important. I refer to it as a co- a conti- the continuum of leadership, because when you have a leader that wants to come and just dismantle what her predecessor has done to create her own vision, to put her own thumbprint on something, that she really hasn't done that for the good of the organization. I believe in--you, you build on what your successors have handed over to you. It is a sacred trust. You build on that. You take the organization higher and you leave the organization a better place in which you found it and you continue to go up and move forward. But if people continue to reinvent and reinvent that's when organizations die because it's about the person or that president versus about the organization. And I think we've done a real good in my administration with Links in building on the success--the successes of my predecessors and still now creating our own that we can hand off to the, to the next administration. Story_ID: 663409 Speaker 1: Back to the Junior League, though. When I was asked by a reporter because it was a lot made of my presidency being the first black president of the Junior League. And I was not the first black president of a Junior League, but that was too another short list--I mean in the country there probably were no--there were fewer than ten of us at that time that had been elected, presidents of the leagues. Speaker 2: Because the term is just, is, is what? Speaker 1: It's a one year term. You serve one year as president elect and one year as president. And that varies from city to city, but that was what it was in Cleveland [Ohio] at that point. When I was asked by this reporter, "What, what are you focused on for your term as presi- ," and she said, the reporter said, "as the first black president of the league?" And I said, "Not to mess up," and she looked at me. I said, I said, "You know what, unfortunately for me as a first black president, I don't have the luxury of failure." I said, "A white woman can come in here and have a bad run and nobody's gonna think much of it, but if I have a bad run, there'll never be another black president." So I said, "I have to be focused on success, so it's an extra burden," I said, you know, "It's a privilege that we don't have. We don't have the luxury of failure." That's what I call it all the time. Because when you're the first black anything, you gotta make sure that you don't close the door for others. And I'm very happy to say that there have been other black presidents of the Junior League of Cleveland [Junior League of Cleveland, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio] subsequent to my presidency and that's, and that's very important to note. That was, even though it was only a year as president, my god, it was a powerful year. I mean doing all sorts of things and getting to mix and mingle with, and get to know and form relationships with the power elite in this city. And the Junior League in the early '90s [1990s] was part of that power elite and it was just nothing for me to know the CEOs, Corporate CEOs of that time and the heads of major institutions of that time and, and to be really treated very much like a peer, and for the league to be called on to be supportive in certain things, I mean the league was very, very powerful has gre- had a great place in this community. And the league, Junior League of Cleveland not under my leadership, much before mine, was responsible for the theater district in Cleveland being what it is today. When there was a threat to tear down those old theaters, the Junior League came up with the dollars to say, "No, let's look at this as a major restoration opportunity," and began to rally the community around it being great. So when you go in the Playhouse Square [Cleveland, Ohio] now, you have to hear the whispering of those individuals like Lainie Hadden and Ray Shepardson [Raymond K. Shepardson], who was the big advocate and others like that around them. Lainie was the president of the league at that time. The--really they, they lift up--one of the gems of this of this community right now and really one of the largest theater districts in the country outside of New York [New York]. So, that, that's the kind of difference. I've always wanted to be affiliated with organizations that are catalyst--that are catalytic and being a catalyst is so important that no one person, no one organization can do it all, but to be a part of movement for change and for making things better and to have that be something that has permanence and sustainability in a community or with a person or a group of people--I mean that is, that's when you're doing transformation of work that'll make a difference, you know, from point A to point B, to person A to person B. Much of that has influenced the work that I do now in philanthropy, in my profession at KeyBank [KeyBank Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio]. We'll talk about that a little bit in a minute (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we'll (unclear)-- Speaker 1: But the Junior League has been very instrumental in me developing the organizational savvy that I know about working in nonprofit organizations and making them the best and making them as effective as they can be. Story_ID: 663410 Speaker 1: Now during the same period of time, here comes Leadership Cleveland you go (laughter), you're like building steam. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Leadership Cleveland really came as a result of my presidency with the Junior League [Junior League of Cleveland, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio]. So as--when I was president elect, I was a member of the Leadership Cleveland class of 1991. Boy is this documentary dating me and--but anyway I was a member of the class and again a great set of peers that I got to know and meet. And then I was president from '91 [1991] to '92 [1992]. By the time I was a past president of the league, my active days as a Junior League member began to wane, because you know, you've been the president and I be- once you turn forty you can become an alum. So I, I applied for alumni status. I'd already actively served about fifteen years in the league so it was time. It was time to begin replenishing ourselves. We have younger women coming in and others, you know, moving on. I don't believe in older women, you know, holding up all the--holding all the top jobs so the younger women can't advance and move forward. I'm a real proponent of bringing along younger people. But anyway so Leadership Cleveland came in my life as a--first as a participant in the class of '91 [1991] and by the fall of '92 [1992] I found myself in the job. I'd taken a leave of absence from Picker International [Picker International, Inc.], had--with all their support. And when it was time for that year to come back, I remember my manager calling me, he said, "Okay you got your year back." He literally--it wasn't that he held the job for me, but he had a place for me at Picker and invited me to, you know, come back and, and come back and regain, you know, the te- be a part of the team at Picker. And during that time, the directorship for Leadership Cleveland had opened. God lines up all the stars. He has a plan and I tossed my hat in the ring as the director, executive director of Leadership Cleveland. Great mentor of mine, probably the mentor. I've had many along the way, Carole Hoover. Carole Hoover was a senior executive with the Greater Cleveland Growth Association [Greater Cleveland Partnership], which at that time was the chamber of commerce for greater Cleveland that Leadership Cleveland program reported up through to her and with her encouragement and the encouragement of others, I was selected as the executive director, Leadership Cleveland, becoming the first black director of Leadership Cleveland. And I ran that program for about eight years from '92 [1992], my last class was a class of '99 [1999] and in a class it was always fun putting those classes together. You would have CEOs or you would have clergy and head of the labor union and, and somebody who works in the social services or in the arts world or what have you. There was one meeting where I had this, this--the COO of Lincoln Electric [Lincoln Electric Company] and the CEO of the Midnight Basketball League and at the opening dinner I placed everybody where they were gonna be I sat them together. Where else would the two of them come together and meet. So and the learning, the learning that you would get, you know from that sort of thing. There was one session in Leadership Cleveland where you know, you can go and listen to the practitioners talk about, you know, issues. I like to demonstrate the issues, you know, for that the community had. These are established accomplished leaders so they don't need me to introduce them to problems (unclear) has the whole bombard of--of barrage of speakers coming talking about topics. I wanted to--them to actually touch and feel and see. So we had a session around quality of life. And I had them all arrive that morning around 6:30 A.M., most of them are up and moving, these are powerful folks, they're up early anyway. But it was a December, it was freezing cold outside, and I--we told them to leave their coats in the car. And when they got to the church where we were having this session, the door was locked and they were all lined up in the cold. And this real gruff, wiry looking man came out, pushing a cart and gave each one a pa- a brown paper bag, with a carton of milk, a Twinkie and a banana in their bag, well that was their breakfast. They were accustomed to coming into a place and getting a nice warm cup of coffee or tea and having continental breakfast. That was their breakfast and we made them stan- they were pounding on the door--they were so upset with me and we inside church looking at them pou- because they were freezing and we made 'em do that for thirty minutes and they were not happy. But the demonstration was this is what it feels like to be a homeless person getting ready to start their day on a December cold morning. They got it, they got the point. Same thing I took them to the Hospice of the Western Reserve [Cleveland, Ohio] so they--so the hospice was not just something that you heard about or maybe unfortunately experienced. But at least--you actually talk to people who are in--going through the process or families going through the process with a loved one. Story_ID: 663411 Speaker 1: We had not just someone to, to tell us about gang members. We had gang leaders come to the class. We invited these young men to come and talk to us about what their lives were like. And there was this one boy, Mango [ph.] was his name, he didn't let anyone have a word in edgewise. He just had everything he could possibly say negative about folks like us, especially the blacks that were in the class, I mean he really slammed the blacks in the class and what have you. And people kept trying to interject with questions and trying to be constructive. You, you learn more if you just sat and listened to this boy. I forget what was said toward the end of--and I say boy because he nineteen years old, but at the end of his presentation for lack of a better term for it. He didn't swear, but he may as well--he was just very, very tough, tough language. But he made it very clear that, you know, if he wanted your veh- if he saw you in your car and he wanted that car, then he, he said, "I'll take the car and if you offer me any resistance, I'll kill you." I mean he said it point blank, boldly just like that. And something--toward the end someone said--one of the members said, it was African American male said, "We wanna help you, but we don't know how. How can we help?" And this child's voice cracked for the first time. All that venom and anger came out. And he said, "I am nineteen years and I have been to 100 funerals." And we just--I mean just to--you could just hear the room go (gesture)--I mean we middle aged folks can't think that that's a number that remotely, that you would even know--and he began to tell us the real deal about his life and his mother being on drugs and he had an eight year old sister that he had responsibility for and he was in this life to care for her. I mean it was just the most touching story. One of those CEOs, one of those CEOs in that class offered a small business person in our class who had been trying to get some money for his business the whole year. He said, "I'll invest in your company if you hire Mango. You hire this boy for your company and I'll pay for his salary for a year." Story_ID: 663412 Speaker 1: Leadership Cleveland was so powerful. We, we--I would--I took them over to the women's prison here, over right over there by Cuyahoga Community College [Cleveland, Ohio], because I knew that the face of the incarcerated did not look like what they're thinking in their mind it looks like. I wanted them to see what it looks like because at that time women were being incarcerated in Ohio at a higher rate than men. And most of these women, who were in there, were there because they were part of a drug deal gone bad experience kind of thing. And the man that they may have--they may have been convicted also, he got, he got less time to serve than they did. There were women in there for eighteen, twenty plus years on a drug deal gone bad. Not that they shouldn't have done some time. But their counterpart man probably got out in four or five years. And so they heard those stories, and they also saw the number of white women that were in there, that really shocked them, because they saw women that looked like their secretaries. They saw women that looked like people who live on their street. But I wanted them to see what the face of the incarcerated in Ohio looked like. We took them to the prison every year. I could go on and on and on (background noise) (pause). But I--I could go on and on and on and on about that time. But I really felt my role as the executive director was to put them in places where they would stretch. I said if you feel uncomfortable today, then we've done a good job because this is not about being comfortable. I wanted to take them so they could really, really see the fullness of this community. Now certainly we had good times too. We had wonderful affairs and it was always a balance and what have you and the positive things going on in town. But I really wanted to show them the entire community. Story_ID: 663413 Speaker 1: One of the most notable things we did though, with two of my classes [at Leadership Cleveland], class of '96 [1996] and '97 [1997]. We traveled to Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. A professor had done a--had done some research around Cleveland's then turnaround. They were looking at Cleveland's turnaround of the '90s [1990s] and how Cleveland [Ohio] was back and with all these beautiful ballparks and stadiums, this was before the Browns [Cleveland Browns] left the first time. And--but anyway and so they wanted to do a real time study with the then M.B.A. students at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] and leaders in Cleveland. So for two years in a row the class would go up for a full day session with the students at Harvard. It was powerful because we could talk to them about various aspects. They broke us down into functional areas. So you had government over here and economic development over there or, you know, social services, you know, different groups whatever the students were interested in. Then we would be paired with the respective disciplines. But one of the student said to us, "You guys have done all the glitzy stuff, but you all haven't taken on the hard issues and that's your public education system." And one of our CEOs came back just dumbfounded, he just couldn't get over that. He said, "We've worked so hard. We've done all of this, this work." He said, "But this kid inside a half a day just shot me down and said, 'You all did the easy stuff. You haven't taken on your public education system.'" And energy from that encounter began to--where the public schools system and that supporting it that began to begin the frame and form the dialogue at the big table in town, where now the leaders of this community were saying, you know, "This is right. This is hard and we haven't, we've thrown up all these buildings and stadiums and what have you, theater district [Playhouse Square, Cleveland, Ohio], all those things and it says getting beyond the glitz, you know, what are the real and founda- who's gonna work in these places, you know, who are you preparing? So that was great. Something else happened to us while we were in Boston [Massachusetts]. One of my class members, Judge Randy Baxter, Randolph Baxter, federal judge. A group of us went out to dinner at a local restaurant and we needed cabs to get there, multiple cabs to get there. And by the time we were leaving the restaurant we had called for cabs to come and no one really thought about the pattern about how we were entering the cabs, you know. So as a cabs can--and I'm being the director, I'm staying back until everybody gets, you know, a cab, arrive. Well anyway, we noticed as our group, which there were more blacks in our group than whites. Most of the whites, their cabs came and they went, but still other cabs were coming. So Randy went out to the curb to hail the cab. That cab saw Randy--now Randy tall, good looking, had a herringbone jacket on and, you know, open collar sh- just very professionally dressed, although he was casual but, you know, just very polished. The cab came down, did a U turn and went back and then another cab comes he began to hail the cab, the cab sees him. I said okay, I know what's going on, so, so since I'm the director I'm in charge now. I said, "Randy let me ask Tom to do this," Tom Sadowski [Thomas Sadowski] one of our COOs. I said, "Tom go hail a cab for me please." Now Tom was one of the guys who was, who doubted that there was racism ever in life, he debated that all year long with all of us okay. I said, "Tom go to the curb get us a cab." Tom barely raised his hand. Cab right there, on the curb for Tom. Tom was embarrassed. Tom looked back, he said, "Margot [HistoryMaker Margot Copeland] I'm gonna go back--," and he named the three or four people that he was taking back in his cab. I said, "No, no, no Tom. Randy will go with you." I said, "'Cause Randy can't get--I need a cab for me now. You're the only person in this group that can get a cab," (laughter), "to get me outta here." So and Randy understood. So the next morning, we could play that out real time about what racism looks like and how we experienced it. And Tom he would--and being that person all year long that just was in such denial about it. He lived it and he saw it. And it--so the point is, it was a powerful experience. It was a privilege, that was another big honor in my life to run that program for that many years and get to know the leadership elite of this community and, and understand what this community is. And who we are. What we do. And how we advance together and collectively as a community. It was a wonderful, wonderful time in my life. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And career. Speaker 2: So you did this '92 [1992] to '99 [1999]? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Yes, yes. Speaker 2: Quite a, quite an education. Now one of the participants was Michael White [Michael R. White], right? Speaker 1: Michael White was not in one of my classes he was--he was a graduate of the program. But Mike always came to speak to the class, he was mayor during that time and Michael White was in my wedding and he and his wife Linda [Linda White] at the time--they were in our wedding and I was in their wedding. 'Cause I met Mike White in Columbus [Ohio] at The Ohio State University when we were both there in graduate school. Story_ID: 663414 Speaker 1: You were vice chairperson of the bicentennial commission of Cleveland [Cleveland Bicentennial Commission] in 1996 right? Speaker 2: Yes that was Mike [Michael R. White] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Speaker 2: --that was when Mike was reelected. The first time--his first reelection if you will. He served a total of twelve years, but that was after his first term and I was vice chair of his--of, of the bicentennial. Speaker 1: Cleveland [Ohio] was actually founded in 1797 [sic. 1796]. Speaker 2: Oh you know what I'm, I'm getting to things--excuse me I'm getting two things, bicentennial and his inauguration--I was co-chair of his inauguration celebration his second--his second term. I was one of the vice chairs for the bicentennial in 1996 absolutely. Dick Pogue [Richard W. Pogue] and Bob Gillespie [Robert W. Gillespie] were the two chairs and Alan Kopit and I were the vice chairs. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So this is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's funny how things begin to blur together now that was so prominent in those days. Story_ID: 663415 Speaker 1: So this is a period of time that the Browns [Cleveland Browns] leave town, right I think in the--this is 'round '95 [1995] or ninety? Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. I know more about the time that the Browns came back, this would've been the time--I remember in 1995 when the rumbling around the Browns need a new stadium and David Modell, Art Modell's son hosted us at the old Browns Stadium [Cleveland Municipal Stadium; FirstEnergy Stadium, Cleveland, Ohio] and I took the Leadership Cleveland class over there and David walked us around so we could see the stadium, you know, when nobody was there of course but us to see how rundown and dilapidated, decrepit it was and how bad it was. And David took us on a personal tour, and we walked, you know, through the whole place and saw that yes probably we could use a new stadium. And it seemed probably by the class of '96 [1996] is when the Browns had made their move somewhere in that window. Yeah, I remember '95 [1995] David taking us around the stadium. Speaker 1: Okay, and, and (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before they had made the decision to move, the Modells made their decisions to move. Story_ID: 663416 Speaker 1: Michael White [Michael R. White] did something that was unprecedented right in--and faced with this kind of crisis. Other cities have faced it before but they--it's been said and other people said other than just knowing those in Ohio, that Cleveland Browns fans are the most loyal and it had the highest attendance of any group of fans in the NFL [National Football League]. But yet the team leaves so--but he was able to--well I just want you to explain what he did. Speaker 2: Oh sure. First of all Mike's leadership through that entire Browns [Cleveland Browns] episode--them leaving and then the return was such a sterling example of what not only a mayor can do in marshaling his resources and efforts, but also what a leader--a true leader does. And one who's extraordinarily smart and brilliant and he and Fred Nance [Frederick R. Nance] and others, you know, around them worked on that I mean it was just masterful. How they--one dealt with the loss, the abrupt loss--and then began to negotiate the return of a new team to the city. But by no means--where that may be Mike's most visible contribution to the city, by no means was that his most impactful. Michael was such an incredible mayor and leader during his time--twelve years because as we began to develop and grow and position downtown Cleveland [Ohio] and the institutions that are so important that make this community what it is, Michael was the strongest advocate for developing the neighborhoods and he said, "We cannot have a good downtown if we don't have a good neighborhood environment." So I forget the exact dollar amount, but I think they were probably under his watch 2 to $3 billion in neighborhood development throughout the Cleveland area on both sides of town, east side and west side so you can go into probably some of the most difficult parts of Cleveland and see gorgeous homes, gorgeous--just gorgeous places and encouraging people to return to the city and, and that has really been wonderful. So--and he did so much more, more than that. But certainly the Browns' return was something very special and I, I really encourage you to interview Mike for this program. Story_ID: 663417 Speaker 1: Well tell us about the Greater Cleveland Roundtable. Speaker 2: Greater Cleveland Roundtable. I took that position on right after Leadership Cleveland. In fact, I was recruited by several of the leaders from Leadership Cleveland who were civic leaders, like Dr. Jerry Sue Thornton and other to--Carole Hoover also encouraged me. She was my boss at the time--to take a look at that. The roundtable was one of the, entities in Cleveland [Ohio] that was formed by the business community to advance social and racial justice, to advance diversity and to really promote inclusion. The roundtable was also, kind of floundering at that time and they really wanted to bring it back and to turn it around and have it repositioned if you will. So we went in with some pretty unique programming. But the first thing I was faced with, as the CEO of the roundtable. I went in to be creative and to be innovative, and I brought in a consultancy practice around diversity and inclusion that we actually marketed to businesses in the area--I mean it accounted for half of the revenue stream for the roundtable, you know, as the consultancy practice, you know as contributions and foundations dollars decreased, you had to find a way to continue to, you know, have your revenue for the organization. And, and those were the innovative and exciting things we were doing. But one of the first things that I had to deal with, was the Browns [Cleveland Browns] were coming back to town and the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] decided to have a major demonstration in Cleveland on the weekend that the Browns were going to be returning. That's why I say, I can tell you more about when the Browns came back, because we were called upon to address how will the community, or should the community respond to this Klan rally when it's supposed to be such a big and high point. We were gonna be on national television, televised game in our brand spanking new stadium. It's a glorious time. ESPN, everybody, anybody just covering us and you had this blemish on the community. So they came to the roundtable say what does this--does the community do. So the first thing you do is you partner with the mayor's office and you see what his plans are. And another thing what he did so masterfully, he secured and protected this community. And he also allowed the Klan to do their thing, but he controlled how it was going to happen, you know, freedom of speech. He controlled it because what you don't wanna see, our people breaking up into riots and dogs and police and all that kind of stuff going on, because that just puts a blemish. On our end we had a lot of meetings in town and we met with pastors. We encouraged pastors to keep their folks at home, stay in the neighborhoods. We also worked and partnered with organizations around town, in Cleveland Heights [Ohio] and out in Berea [Ohio]--I mean, it, it was the local weekend for one of the college's was--it was there--freshman were entering, coming to college that weekend. They opened the doors to their schools so we could have program, you know, on campus out at Baldwin Wallace [Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio] that weekend. We did this multiple programs outside of the, the immediate Cleveland area so that people would have places to go and express how they felt. So the whole point was to keep people away from downtown. We had a letter writing campaign where CEOs--we drafted letters for CEOs. We said get this to your--all of your employees, asking CEOs to keep your employees at home. Tell them do not come downtown on Saturday. So the whole point was we did not want the Klan to have an audience that was the whole point. And fewer than three hundred people showed up. And some of these protesters showed up, but they were all contained through the city. It was a brutal time that--that's all I can say. It was, it was a very brutal day, very difficult, a lot of effort and energy went into it. But we'd also had our--one of local PR [public relations] firms did a good job of working with the national press, and the national press said that we won't cover it, the Klan rally, unless it becomes an issue, so if it's quiet and whatev- there's not. So when the--the heading of The Plain Dealer on Sunday morning said, "Klan Rally, Major Nonevent," well a lot of work went into that being a nonevent. So that was my introduction into the leadership of the roundtable. And one of them--one of the people who really help guide me through that was--I'm not Catholic but Bishop Pilla [Anthony Pilla], and he was archbishop for the Cleveland diocese [Roman Catholic Diocese of Cleveland]. And I went to see him, and he said a lot of things, but he says, "Margot [HistoryMaker Margot Copeland], you have everything you need to move through this successfully," and it just that calming support and that quiet push that really helped me, you know, see how we can get through that. So that was our role in that to really complement what the mayor was doing. Speaker 1: This archbishop. What is his last name? Speaker 2: Pilla, P-I-L-L-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was great friend, great friend to the roundtable, great friend to me personally, saw him not to long ago, just a gentle and wonderful, wonderful man. But you call on different citizens to be of support and help you, which is great. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So this is--that was in 1999 right? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 663418 Speaker 1: So, at the sa--all, all the while you were, you're still working for, at Philips [Philips Medical Systems]? Speaker 2: No, no, no. The roundtable [Greater Cleveland Roundtable] was my paid position (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was, was your full time. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd left Philips, yeah. I'd left--it was really Picker [Picker International, Inc.] at that time. Speaker 1: Picker? Speaker 2: Yeah. I left--well I left Picker and went to the Leadership Cleveland and then Leadership went to the roundtable. I was only at the roundtable a couple of years when the opportunity opened up here at KeyBank to be the CEO of the KeyBank Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio]. And my god, that's where, you know, this is where I am, this is where I am, and what a blessed place to be. We ran in excess of, you know, $20 million a year to programs and nonprofits around our franchise that meet our philanthropic strategy and to be the head of that, to work with our leadership in this company around that is just really--has been incredible. Story_ID: 663419 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you had your work cut out for you. Because when you started, from what I understand, Key Corporation [KeyCorp, Cleveland, Ohio] had received a grade of F by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in terms of economic reciprocity. Speaker 2: (Nods head) And that grade F was probably something that we should've gotten at that time, because as--we probably didn't put a lot of credibility or credence into it. And so I d- when I arrived at Key [KeyBank Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio], I began to say, no we have to pay attention to this, and we're going to have to be responsive, and although we don't have the best story to tell, we do have a story to tell. And one thing I am, I'm very competitive. And I'd look at the fact that we had an F and other companies that I knew weren't much better than us had a B or B minus so I began to do some benchmarking and so certainly that tide turned. Also developed some relationships in the NAACP, you know, this who we are, this what we're doing. Sold I was not--I'm not a dismissive executive. These, these inquiries are true and real, are important and, and we need to also be measured around what we're doing in diversity and inclusion. So I would benchmark our company against the best and then report that back in. So subsequent to us moving from the failing category for NAACP, there were economic reciprocity score card they kept--we got it--we moved into C and we got a B minus one year they don't do it. I think it--I think it was great when they did do this report card--they don't it now. But in those early days when I was--when they were doing it, it--we, we prided ourselves on moving up with that. And, and a lot of that is building relationships and addressing the concerns and issues that are raised in these exercises. We also participated very aggressively, in DiversityInc, benchmarking process, where we have been ranked by DiversityInc for several years, either as a top fifty company or most noteworthy company. And, and those are--that list is very difficult to be on, and in subsequently the Human Rights Campaign [Human Rights Campaign Foundation], you know, which measures your activity around how you treat your gay and lesbian employees and, and how--in other words how do you practice inclusion in every dimension of diversity. So we went after this catalyst and, you know, the premier organization around research, women in business. All of these were partnerships that we were looking to form nationally into really be listed and included among the best of the best. I'm very proud to say that I've just been asked to join a very impressive list. The Network Journal magazine out of New York [New York] has just named me as one of the top twenty-five African American women in business. And it's a big honor I'll be joining that list in March and I'm looking forward to that. But I think some of that is just observing, you know, how Key's profile around its true community engagement, you know, not just giving away money but what are we given away money to. We've invested over $2.5 million in STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] education alone, K through twelve [kindergarten through twelfth grade] in this community. And if you go back to what I see when I was a little girl, fifth, sixth grade and my elementary school was housed on the campus of Virginia State College [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and art---my little group of fifth and sixth graders, we had full run and access to all the wonderful opportunities of being on a college campus. Well, we just funded half of that 2.5 funded putting the eleventh and twelfth graders on the campus of Cleveland State [Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio] for that same reason, so these children could get out of a rundown dilapidated high school and be on--in a totally refurbish part of campus and wonderful building, totally refurbished and then they matriculate--they're taking classes with undergraduate at Cleveland State. They can see themselves on a college campus. It's not a remote kind of thing about go to college, college prep. No, they're on a college campus, taking classes, matriculating. They have got great state of the art science labs at their disposal. They eat in the cafeteria, you know, with college students. I mean all of those things that they need to see. Unlike a child, like my, my own three children [Kimberley Copeland, Gary Copeland and Michael Copeland], which they knew what college life would be like before they got there. These--some of these children don't have a clue. Some of these kids, their parents didn't finish high school, so college is a foreign concept to them. So it was important, a monumental to put that school on the campus at CSU and you could not find better partners in the Cleveland Metropolitan School District and Cleveland State University for our investment of that $1.25 million for that high school over there. Speaker 1: You mentioned, trying to be effective in how you spend the money that--I have a quote here that says, "It's not the amount of dollars given by how effectively the dollars are used." So how do you vet, you know, organizations and programs? Speaker 2: Certainly. We have a strategy of a giving strategy in our philanthropy around economic self-sufficiency. And we're looking for strong programs that are transformational in nature. In other words, we wanna make sure that something is gonna be different and better because those dollars have been inves- invested. And we trust the nonprofit partners to do that. So we, we really hold them to a pretty high standard around economic self-sufficiency whether it's workforce development or diversity and inclusion or financial education. We hold them to a very high standard around how they're performing. And then we measure them, we measure their performance and that investment. And we know that program at STEM--the STEM high school program [KeyBank Classrooms for STEM Education] is transformational. Story_ID: 663420 Speaker 1: Is there a highlight in terms of programs that have, or projects that are funded by KeyBank [KeyBank Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio] as far as you're concerned? Speaker 2: Well the big one to highlight is the STEM program [KeyBank Classrooms for STEM Education], I mean that's where my passion is at ti- you think about science technology, engineering, math. I'm I now back to my physics degree? I mean everything that I am, that embodies me because what I learned, even though I don't practice the science, analytical skills, problem solving skills. You know, all those types of--the critical thinking skills that you need to be successful in life in any career, you learn that through the sciences and math. And to be able to instill that in our kids. We have K through twelve [kindergarten through twelfth grade] now and I've seen them in all levels. I mean I had a second grade, a little girl present a PowerPoint presentation that she and her classmates had developed that one of our schools here in Cleveland [Ohio] and to see her go through that with such ease. I mean you think about it she--they created this PowerPoint deck and here she's making a presentation. I mean fluently, very well--I mean it was it's--this is what it's about. So that I would, I would say that there's a legacy for me in my role as head of philanthropy for KeyBank, it will be our investment in STEM education. Overall we've invested $5 million in the Cleveland Municipal School District. So we believe in invest. We believe in these children. We believe in their future. We believe in where they can go. And certainly we have counterpart investments around the country. We just announced a three hundred thousand grant--three hundred thousand dollar grant at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York] for STEM education that we presented a couple weeks ago, and looking at a couple of other cities, you know, in our franchise so we can do something, something similar. Story_ID: 663421 Speaker 1: Now you're on the executive board of KeyCorp [Cleveland, Ohio] right? Speaker 2: No, Executive Council. Speaker 1: Council, yeah. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Council, yes, yes. So I'm part of what we called the senior leadership of the company, which is really probably the top two hundred are so people in the organization. We just had our leadership conference last week and people fly in from all over the country and we, you know, pretty much, you know, understand where we are and, and get good thinking about where we need to begin to go and move for this coming year. Speaker 1: So are, are you--now I know the answer to this is yes, but like how--maybe in what ways are you getting the leadership at KeyCorp more involved in civic activities, you know, you're certainly way over the top investing-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --and, you know, and you know how, how, you know, what you ought to do in terms of becoming a leader in the community. You've been through it, you used to run the process. Speaker 2: Well, it's not, it's not hard getting our leaders involved. In fact, as new leaders come into our company. It's an expectation, they will serve, the will ser- so it's part of our culture and that was a part of our culture even before I came. Yes, I have had a hand in helping to probably expand the view of civic engagement in, in the company. But really it's very much a part of the DNA of Key itself. This is really the best job in Cleveland [Ohio] for someone who does what I do. And, and there's nobody, there's not one other company, whether it's--even in the other sectors banking or otherwise that really has the perks that we have when it comes to philanthropy and civic engagement in the corporate setting. So it--I do help advise our executives and help them match, and get, you know, positions, you know, in the community. We have a team of my staff that, you know, is focused on that for individuals who are little lower in the organization. And we know the organization are important to our community, important key in our relationships and reputation and we do wanna make sure we have our leadership very much aligned and matched up with that. You'll see some companies will just send the same two or three people out all the time to the same organizations. I don't know what these people do--you've got, you know, the CEO is at every single thing. I don't know how they do that. Our CEO [Beth E. Mooney], we selectively place her where she should be, she knows what she wants to accomplish in the community. We know what we need her profile--but we can't have her five days a week, you know, going from event A, event B. No, we can't, that's, that's not a good use of brand. We, we are protective of her brand. We have a lot of talent here Key. So you may not get our CEO. You'll ask for our CEO. People get that all the time, but we'll send you an executive vice president, or we'll send you the--a business unit leader when other--and trust me you're gonna get a dedicated and very capable volunteer who have the backing and support of the KeyBank Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio] when they come to your board table. Story_ID: 663422 Speaker 1: Where do you go from here? I know when I--we were coming over here I thought the building was a, you know, I saw the red key on the terminal top. I said well that's, that's gotta be it. But it wasn't the actual b- building-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --but, but this is pretty high up in the City of Cleveland [Ohio]. So, how--where do you go from here? Speaker 2: That's a great question. I would say that page hasn't been written yet? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I, I really right now, I'm at a stage now where I'm in stage of gratitude, in a stage of appreciation. I have three college graduates and part of my life I had to raise them by myself. And when it was time to go to college, that's the time I started raising them by myself. But I have a graduate of Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] and she's now--she went on to Princeton Theological Seminary [Princeton, New Jersey]. Like her grandfather, she's a theologian and she's now a Ph.D. candidate of Rutgers University [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Is that your oldest? Speaker 2: My oldest, my oldest-- Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Kimberley [Kimberley Copeland], Kimberley. And then my number two, but he's number--he's not number two to anybody except just chronologically to his sister. He was a Morehouse man [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and went on to Howard dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.] and is now a practicing orthodontist here in Cleveland, doing extraordinarily well. He'd been practicing for a year, he went to Case Western Reserve University [Cleveland, Ohio] to do his residency in orthodontics. And my youngest Michael [Michael Copeland], my second--I didn't say his name, his name is Gary and his full name is Garrison [Gary Copeland] after my father, William Lloyd Garrison [William James], his, his official name is Garrison. And so Gary's the orthodontist and Michael the baby, you know, he--that's the baby, but he's the biggest one of the three of them. (Laughter) He's a big guy. Michael is living in Nashville [Tennessee] and went to Shaker Heights High School [Shaker Heights, Ohio] and on to Cleveland State University [Cleveland, Ohio] and he's now teaching in the Nashville school district [Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools] and--but I'm just very proud of all three of 'em--we couldn't--immensely proud of them. And so that's really what it boils down to and all this hubbub that I've been doing as I grew it was so important to be able to raise three adults that were well adjusted and could mainstream effectively in society and I think that's what I've done. So that's really the most prideful thing I have in my real true claim to fame. So I'm looking forward to letting the ear- years become a little easier as we go forward. I'm looking forward to somebody coming home with a future daughter-in-law, a future son-in-law and hopefully grandchildren at some point in time. And, and just enjoying that, that phase of my life. Speaker 1: Okay. When you look back over everything you've done at this point in there any major thing you would do differently, if could change something? Speaker 2: The one in particular I would have taken my time in education to get a business degree. Undergrad degree in B.A. That's what I really wished I could've--I had done differently. Story_ID: 663423 Speaker 1: Is there any end to service? Speaker 2: Is there what? Speaker 1: Any, any end to service in life? Speaker 2: Never an end to service. Because the needs is so great and they're always around and for those of us who are blessed and favored I mean it is an expectation that you will continue to serve. The service may take on a different, you know, view or different, you know, point of view or different approach if you will, but there's no end to serving and trying to be helpful. And even--you don't have to serve--like Links [The Links, Incorporated] have a group of twelve thousand people to serve you can just serve one person and I would really like the young people that will call me from time to time that they think that I make a difference in their life. I got a kid at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] right now sophomore and to talk to him about--he was one of my STEM kids [KeyBank Classrooms for STEM Education], my STEM high school kids and how he's doing and, you know, staying on top of those grades and I know I'm saying things to him that maybe others aren't saying to him. You know, I say okay what's a GPA [grade point average]? This sort of thing, and can he, he called over the holiday and just said, "Just wanna hear your voice Ms. Copeland [HistoryMaker Margot Copeland]." I got a couple of couple of young men down in Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] that call me like that. These are not kids that when my son [Gary Copeland] was there, these are young men that are younger than he is. And mentee there and a young lady who just called me, she's a graduate of Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]. So there are--some of it I--just mentoring moments I had with a wide berth of young people trying to help them, you know, get on solid footing in their careers or their academic life and I, I really enjoy that. And I will make time for a child. I'll make time for young person who's aspiring and wants to do something. Story_ID: 663424 Speaker 1: Back to my STEM high school experience [KeyBank Classrooms for STEM Education], when I went over last fall, we were getting ready to have our ribbon cutting and there were three black girls on the elevator and two were very polite and the other was pretty--not very interested in getting to know who we were at all. My colleague and I and subsequent, as the principal was taking us around the school, I saw this young lady off in the corner and I said, "What's going on," and he said, "Well she's in time out," and he explained what the issues were with that. I said, "You mind if I talk to her?" And it was so much easier to sit down and talk to the kid who's doing so well in high school and the one who's gonna achieve and thrive what have you. But I, I wanted to talk to her and see what is going on--what--how did your day get off to such a bad start that you're in a corner already and you're not engaged with what everyone else is doing. The point is, is that when I go back to visit the school she's the first one run to me and I put my arms around her, first thing I ask her, "Are you behaving yourself today?" I said, "What did you learn today?" I think children need to know that somebody is, one paying attention and someone believes. I asked this girl, I said, "What do you wanna do?" She told me she wanted to be a biomedical engineer and I said, "Well help me un- ." Now, I know what that is but I just asked her I said, "Help me understand what you'll be doing." She began to talk about prosthetics and how she wanted to design and engineer prosthetics, you know, the people use for implants or hip replacements and she began to talk--this child was brilliant. But you couldn't--you had to get past that persona and a little bit of that attitude and peel back and what have you. And I told her, I said, "You know what? Everything that you think--that you're thinking about doesn't have to be said." I said, "There's some things you need to keep to yourself." I said, "Even if you're in a bad mood, you know," just advise that you would hope that someone would say you your child if they saw--if you saw--just like Ms. Queen Brown [ph.] when she opened that window and said, "Margot [HistoryMaker Margot Copeland], your mother [Thelma Taylor James] would not approve," it's kind of that thing, to, you know, basically say, "You've got a lot of promise and--," I said--I told her, "You got a lot of promise," I said, "and, and the people--your teachers and your principals at this school they want to see you succeed, they're gonna work hard to see you get out of high school and get into college. But let me tell you when you get to college no one's gonna be invested in your success." I said, "It's gonna be every day, it's gonna be sink or swim." And I said, "With the kind of attitude that you've just come in here with, that won't survive in a college setting." She listened to me, she put down her phone, and she actually listened to me. So hopefully those kinds of things that you do with young people that, that will make a difference, make a difference. When we went back to the school in the fall and I took all the execs [executive] from the bank [KeyCorp, Cleveland, Ohio], I took about forty, fifty from the bank so they could see the space and kids. All the kids were certainly asked to dress up and have their, you know, they have a sweater with the school's, you know, logo on it. She chose not to wear that, she wore her Sunday best. She had on a dress and heels and makeup. I said--I couldn't believe it I said, "Is that you?" And I said, "Why don't you have on the sweater?" She said, "I wanted to look real special for you." I said, "Well you do look very special, you're standing out." And I said, "When you stand out, then you really have pressure on you--on how you carry yourself if you wanna stand out from everyone else." But the point is that she's comfortable talking to someone like me, and that she won't be afraid of that 'cause she's gonna have a trail of people like me in her future. And some they'll be--probably be a lot less sympathetic than I am. I just want her to be able to know who she is and how well she could do, and all the promises she has in store for her. And if she just kind of works on the soft skills. In fact I came back to the bank and met with some of our young executives and I said--volunteering. I said, "This is what I need you, you to do. I need you to help me package these kids." I said, "These kids are learning math and chemistry and physics and all the engineering. They're," I said, "they're getting exposure, they're going to the University of Arizona [Tucson, Arizona], they're going everywhere, great experiences on the hard sciences." I said, "But the soft skills, they don't have it." And my kids--my young people here--my millennial networking group here put together a six part series called Keys, (air quotes) KeyBank Keys to Success - What to Put in Your Backpack [Keys to College Success Program - What to Put in Your Backpack]. And around that, you know, your personal brand and your communication style--I mean and they go over there every month for the seniors getting them ready to understand what it's gonna take to be successful in college. And how you have to comport yourself and our last session will be an etiquette session, you know, where we're taking them up to the club with the linen and crystal and china. And because I said, "People will judge wherever--you may not have to eat like this every day, but there're gonna be sometimes you're gonna--the dean will invite you over to his house or you get invited to a professor's home or whatever." I said, "Wanna make sure that you know what to do, which fork to use, so you know how to put a linen napkin in your lap, you know, how to--how you even fold it when it's all over with." So it's, it's, it's trying to give these children as much as I can give them within my realm of resources to make sure that they're successful. Story_ID: 663425 Speaker 1: What today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I keep having to say the STEM high school [KeyBank Classrooms for STEM Education]. The STEM program. Being in philanthropy in the STEM program, I believe--I still believe in it. Speaker 1: I didn't like--give us a update on The Links [The Links, Incorporated]. Now you're still the--you're, you're the national president of The Links as we speak? Speaker 2: Yes current national president but not for long. My term will end on July 6th of this year, it's been four years. On Thursday--being a Links president is really a very special honor as I said earlier and we've done some important work, you know, in this time that my administration has been in place on number of fronts. We have a HBCU Initiative that was funded with a STEM education program was funded through Chevron [Chevron Corporation], the HBCU initiative funded by the Lumina Foundation. Kellogg [W.K. Kellogg Foundation] has funded our childhood obesity program. I could just go on and on, and on about the great things we're doing across the country with that. But I think probably what's most special about being the president of Links is really just seeing the power of how we can operate. So--operate and execute just so--with such elegance and grace, and leadership, you know, on--at the grassroot level--at, at a national level and seen across the board. I have the privilege of representing The Links on Thursday at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. My--our Congresswoman Joyce Beatty has arranged for me to come. The president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is gonna be rolling out a major national initiative so he'll be there, you know, and we'll hear what this in--or gotten an idea what it--I know what's gonna be about. And it's right up our alley, so, so it's not that Margot's [HistoryMaker Margot Copeland] there because it's a nice thing to do, it is a nice thing to do. But Links has already done great work in that particular area, that he wants to roll out nationally. So we really can sit there as a partner and a--potential partner to the White House to, you know, basically show--as a demonstration how--this is how we do this program in New York [New York], in Jackson, Tennessee. It's about black males and we've, we've got programs that, you know, address the issues around black boys, you know, all over the country, so it's gonna be an honor to be there. I've been to the White House before but I've never been there with the president, so this is gonna be--it's gonna be a great opportunity. But it's because of the organization and the regard that the--that, that The Links are held in by so many across the country. So having this job is a real privilege and having an employer like KeyBank [KeyBank Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio] provide the kind of support I need to be able to do that work is equally important and KeyBank has just been extraordinarily, not only supportive but they've encouraged me in many, many ways. Story_ID: 663426 Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to--we must discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I can't think of anything, I'm just pretty exhausted (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right, all right. Well the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Ma'am how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That's a great question, not one I pondered a great deal. So I guess to put it very simply, as someone who tried to help somebody. I've always said to my members in Links [The Links, Incorporated] and others that I believed that when you're given opportunities like this whether it's president of Links are CEO of the KeyBank Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio] whatever the opportunity is, that you have to be a good steward on your watch. And there's a beginning to your watch and there will be an end to your watch, but you wanna look at your watch and know that you have done your best and that you've left a legacy that someone else can benefit from. So I just pretty much say that I'd like to remember that I really cared about people and willing to help someone. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you Larry [Larry Crowe]. Story_ID: 663427 Speaker 1: I was probably about six years old, and that's my mother and father. To the left Reverend William Lloyd Garrison James [William James]. And to the right Thelma Taylor James, and that's Margot Marietta James [HistoryMaker Margot Copeland] at six years old. Speaker 2: That's Margot James at probably less than two years old, sunbathing in Virginia in (laughter) Petersburg, Virginia. That, that was a bikini in those days (laughter). Speaker 1: This is Margot when she was--again about six years old, and I had a ballet recital. That was a very short lived career, but again part of the exposure that my mother had me involved in. Speaker 2: Okay, I remember that--I remember that night that was Margot, at five years old and I was in a fashion show, and that was org- a lavender organza dress and my little pocket book, and baby doll shoes. Speaker 1: Okay, this is--to the left that is Dr. Garrison Copeland. That was the day he graduated from Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]. He was a Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society] graduate, all these stoles and ropes are all the honor societies that he was inducted in. That is his Professor Dr. Hollingsworth [Keith Hollingsworth] from business school at Morehouse and his best friend Chaz [ph.], I forget Chaz's last name. Chaz's father was killed in--during 9/11 [September 11, 2001] in one of the towers [World Trade Center, New York, New York]. But Gary and Chaz are still to this day very, very close friends. Speaker 2: And that's Dr. Gary Copeland he's named after my father, Garrison, and that was don- his college graduation picture from Morehouse. Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is baby Margot as an infant. I don't know why they had naked pictures of babies in those days, but it seemed to be the thing to do at that time. So I was--I guess since I'm holding my head up, I couldn't been more than about, you know, four or five months old. Speaker 2: That's Margot as an undergraduate at Hampton Institute at that time now Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia]. And I was a majorette and performed with the band for four years. Speaker 1: That's Margot as a young woman. I was probably in my mid-twenties then. The photograph was a Polaroid, even though that's a portrait that was instant photography that was landscaped in those days. We had instant cameras that took pictures, and four, five by seven and eight by ten, nine by eleven [inches] and that was just one of the photos we were taking and practicing on. Speaker 2: That, okay, that's Margot when she graduated from high school, Matoaca High School [Chesterfield County, Virginia] graduation in 1969. Boy did I have a lot of hair. Speaker 1: Okay, that more recent. That's Margot receiving an award last year at Morehouse College. My mentee, I have a mentee that's to my left, and Dr. Franklin [HistoryMaker Robert Franklin] who was president at Morehouse at that time, presented me with a corporate sponsor award. Speaker 2: Oh my, this is Margot, I was in graduate school then, so that would've been at Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], probably around somewhere in 1974. Speaker 1: And that's Margot in the si- fifth or sixth grade, see I was probably ten or eleven years old then. Speaker 2: That's my three children, Michael [Michael Copeland] to the left, Gary in the middle, Kimberley [Kimberley Copeland] to the right. The siblings are there to celebrate their brother's graduation from Morehouse. Speaker 1: That's Margot as the Central Area director of The Links, Incorporated, probably in 2003. Speaker 2: This was Margot in 2013 getting ready to celebrate the centennial of Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], and I'm standing with Congresswoman Marcia Fudge, who's a past national president of Delta and also, U.S. congresswoman from the Cleveland [Ohio] area. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my entire family, my daughter Kimberly when she received her master's degree at Princeton Theological Seminary [Princeton, New Jersey] and my boys on either end and their dad [Terence Copeland] in the middle. Speaker 2: This is photograph with Tony Blair, he came to speak here for a program at Cuyahoga Community College [Cleveland, Ohio], and KeyBank [KeyBank Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio] was one of the sponsors of that program, not the greatest picture of me, bad hair day. Speaker 1: That's Margot and Gary again, graduation from Morehouse, proud Morehouse mom. Speaker 2: Do I have pictures of my other children (laughter)? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's a picture of Margot and colleagues Lorraine Vega is in there and Lisa Oliver. We were making a presentation of--I believe it was $100,000 to the local community college here for their Hispanic initiative. Speaker 1: And that's a photograph of when I first joined KeyBank and we're making a check presentation to the United Negro College Fund [UNCF]. Speaker 2: And that's a picture, Margot as president of The Links, Incorporated with a group of our younger members. Speaker 1: Okay here she comes, a photograph of my daughter Kimberley. My first born when she graduated from Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Photograph of my youngest Michael when he graduated from Central State University [Wilberforce, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Photograph of Mrs. Coretta Scott King when we had the opportunity to hear her speak in--for a program here in Cleveland. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay, that's an award, that's an--that's an award that I received when I was one of the finalists for the ATHENA Awards [ATHENA Leadership Award] here..