 Story_ID: 130898 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please giv-- state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My full name, Anne-Marie Clarke. Anne, A-N-N-E, hyphen, Marie, M-A-R-I-E, Clarke, C-L-A-R-K-E. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Date of birth, June 25, 1949. Oh, okay. Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born in St. Louis [Missouri] at Homer Phillips Hospital. Speaker 1: All right. And, ma'am, what, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am--my title is that of family court commissioner. It's a judicial position for the 22nd Judicial Circuit [Missouri Circuit Court] here in St. Louis. I've been in this position since October 1, 1998. Speaker 1: Okay. And what, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is October 19, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we at this present time? Speaker 2: We are presently in the Civil Courts Building of the 22nd Judicial Circuit. We are in the promenade area of the court and bank area. Story_ID: 130899 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that the management compels me to ask everyone. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: They only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food would be lobster. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is red. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is probably summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Las Vegas [Nevada]. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I do, and it's "You never have a second chance to make a first impression." Story_ID: 130900 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but, but we'll start with your mother's side first. Now can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Mary Ann Vincent, her maiden name, Clarke. Mary, M-A-R-Y, Ann, A-N-N, Vincent, V-I-N-C-E-N-T, and she married my father, becoming Clarke, C-L-A-R-K-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: She uses Mary V. Clarke. She doesn't use Mary Ann very much. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give us her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mom was born on November 18, 1913, in Lawrenceville, Virginia, I think it's Brunswick County or New Brunswick County [sic, Brunswick]. It's south of Richmond [Virginia] and north of North Carolina down--I wanna say 90--it's between Interstates 93 and 95. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've driven it and so found it. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a good description of where it is. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, do--what do you know about your mother's side of the family in terms of ancestors? How far back can you trace? Speaker 2: Not very far, unfortunately. Her parents are Wiley and Lavinia [ph.] Vincent. They were not from that area. It seems like they might've come from North Carolina. They were farmers. They owned farm land and I remember as a child going to the, the--what I thought was this big white house. When I got older and went back and saw it, the house wasn't so big. It was white and it was kinda big, but it wasn't near as big as I thought it was when I was growing up. But in terms--my grandmother's--let's see--I guess my great-grandmother was half white. There's a picture of her and my mother talked about her hair being completely white in, in her thirties, but I don't even--I--she would know her name, but I--I'm not even calling her name at this point. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about your ancestors that--now, now they were from North Carolina on your mother's side? Speaker 2: We think from North Carolina. We, we think from North Carolina, and I hate to say, but no, I really don't know any, mm-mm. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Do, do you remember your grandparents well? Speaker 2: I remember--I remember--right, my grandmother lived with us until I was about seven years old. She came to St. Louis [Missouri] when--I guess soon after I was born, but lived with us until I was--until I was seven and then she went back to--at that time she went back to [Washington] D.C. She lived in D.C. and my grandfather was on the farm in, in Virginia. I do know, my, my grandfather was a, a, a minister. I think my mother called it an itinerant minister, so he didn't have a particular church, but--and this, this would've been my great-grandfather; my great-grandfather was, was a minister. He was also Wiley--Wiley Archie Vincent was his name, so my grandfather and my great-grandfather were both named Wiley Vincent. And my great-grandfather, Wiley Vincent, was a, a minister, and I guess it was his wife, would've been the--had a white parent, I guess, her, her father, I don't know. Story_ID: 130901 Speaker 1: So there are no stories passed down about life out there in Virginia or not? Speaker 2: Actually, not that--not that--no, I guess. Speaker 1: So they [grandparents Wiley and Lavinia Vincent] were small farmers, had a house, and-- Speaker 2: He had--he had--he had a farm-- Speaker 1: Your grandparents. Speaker 2: --it was a tobacco farm. There were--my mom [Mary Vincent Clarke] is the oldest of her siblings, she's the only one living now. She-- Speaker 1: Did she have a lot of brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: She had three--my mom had three sisters, Martha, Evelyn, Cil [ph.], and her brother, her only brother was Archie, and they--the last to die was her youngest sister, and so she is the only one left. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So did your mother talk about growing up out there? Speaker 2: She--yeah, she told stories and she worked as a--during the summer, the, the students--the, the kids would go to Montclair, New Jersey, I remember her talking about, and working in--working in homes, white homes, for, for the summer. My grandparents sent all the kids to school. They went to school that my mom thought was--she used to talk about it was two miles that they had to walk to school. And actually when--some years later, she and my father actually drove the distance and it turned out it was about four miles each way that they were walking to school. She also talked about how--my mom talked about how she flew in an airplane when she was probably about ten years old, I think she said. My grandfather paid twenty-five cents for her to get a ride in this, this airplane, and as the oldest, she was the one who got to, to take the ride. But at--in the early '20s [1920s] to have that kind of experience. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she worked-- Speaker 1: Now, now how did--I don't know if you know, but how did it work? Now, I've heard these kind of stories before where people go up north and work in people's homes and stuff. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: What was it, like a seasonal thing where they-- Speaker 2: It was a seasonal thing and-- Speaker 1: --and, and--what, did they work at a resort or something or, or vacation homes? Speaker 2: Just worked in a home. They would work in a home, and my mom tells incredible stories about that because they take these country kids, girls, and they put them in these homes and say, you know, kinda go for it, so they were babysitters and cooks and housekeepers and-- Speaker 1: I mean, now why was--well, I would--I'm just asking--I guess the question is that why would they need help from these black girls in the summertime and not in the wintertime? I mean, I don't--I don't know. I mean, I'm asking-- Speaker 2: It may be because it was summer homes for them. I'm not-- Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: I don't know, but it--the, the-- Speaker 1: That's what I was asking, if they were their summer homes or something they were-- Speaker 2: It's-- Speaker 1: --working in. Speaker 2: I got the impression that these were--it was kind of--because it was only seasonal. They would only do it in the summer. She would, and maybe because they were going to be back in school that, that--my mom and her sisters would all be back at school, but she does tell one story of the lady asked her to make some clams or oysters or something, and she said, well, what do I do? Now she's--my mom's coming from a, a, a pig farm, a tobacco farm, and so she's never seen a oyster, a clam, or whatever this was. And the lady said, well you put it in a pot of water and boil it, so that's what she did. She put all of the clams in a pot of water and boiled 'em and then she took them in and had the lady serve to her guests. The lady neglected to tell her that you take the brush first and you clean the sand out the edges of the clam, so when the lady opened up the--the guests starting opening up these clams, they couldn't eat 'em because they're all full of sand. But she has stories of just the experiences that she was exposed to being in situations that she had no idea what she was doing, meaning--and, and just doing things that she didn't know really what she was doing, and kind of flying by the seat of your pants and, and-- Speaker 1: It had to be-- Speaker 2: --and doing these things. Speaker 1: --sort of a frightening experience on some levels being-- Speaker 2: It--I, I-- Speaker 1: --taken all the way-- Speaker 2: --would certainly think so. Speaker 1: And, how, how old was she? Speaker 2: Probably a high school student, so they would go as high school students-- Story_ID: 130902 Speaker 1: She graduated--she and, and her sister, they were going to a, a one-room kinda--well, maybe two-room school, but she [Mary Vincent Clarke] talked about how she and her sister who was--her sister was probably a year or so younger than she was, and the teacher giving them assignments, giving them their work assignments with--and then getting them confused, even though it's only the two of them in this--in this small, little--the, the two Vincent girls in, in this classroom. So she and her--she and her sister were graduating from high school at the same time. My mom had decided at an early age she wanted to be a nurse, and it was because she had a--the, the visiting nurse who came to their community. This--Lawrenceville [Virginia] was a little town of I think five thousand people and the nurse--she talked about how the nurse had this beautiful cape, her, her blue nurse's cape, and I think she said it might've even been lined in red or something, but she just thought how elegant this lady looked as, as a nurse with her nurse's uniform and her--just as--dressed as, as a nurse, and so that was something-- Speaker 2: The cap and all that. Speaker 1: --that was something my mom decided she wanted to do, and worked at that. She graduated--their, their high school was Saint--Saint Paul's College [Lawrenceville, Virginia], which is a college, but there's--I guess there's a high school component and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's an-- Speaker 1: --it's-- Speaker 2: --Episcopal school. Speaker 1: Episcopal-- Speaker 2: That's an Episcopal--yeah. Speaker 1: Right. And so she and--she, she went there, graduated from high school, and then trying to figure how to get the money and what to do to get the money to go to--to go onto college and to go on to nursing school. But she went to West Virginia State [University, Institute, West Virginia]. My mom pledged Delta at West Virginia State. She was an older student by this time because she had gone to--I'm trying to think. She--when she would--when she was at West Virginia State, because she had taken--she took longer to graduate from high school because they're in this country town, and then seems like she was getting some nursing experience in school, then going to West Virginia State. She went--she also went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and that's where she graduated--Freedmen's [Hospital Training School for Nurses, later Howard University School of Nursing, Washington, D.C.], Freedmen's nursing school, that's where she graduated from-- Speaker 2: At Howard, yeah. Speaker 1: --at, at Howard--at Howard University. Story_ID: 130903 Speaker 1: All right. So, so your mother [Mary Vincent Clarke] went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] first. Speaker 2: She went--yeah, she went-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --to Howard and I think graduating about '36 [1936], thirty-something from, from Freedmen's [Hospital Training School for Nurses, later Howard University School of Nursing, Washington, D.C.] nursing school at, at Howard University. And then she was hired as a nurse at West Virginia State [University, Institute, West Virginia], and went there and getting her bachelor's degree in the--in the '40s [1940s]. But she has stories about being a nurse. My mom was weighing less than a hundred pounds and, as I say, an older student, because she'd already had, had finished her, her nurse's training. And she particularly talks about the experiences she had when she was pledging Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta sorority]. She was asked to--you know, was rushed by the sorority. Again, this was something that she didn't know much about coming from her--from her small town, but decided to go through pledging the sorority and going through the experience of, of getting into the sorority. And the hazing that they did in those days is certainly different from the bad, really bad things that we hear them talk about now with the sorority. But she said one of the--one of the things that she had to be careful of, because she was older, said a lot of the--a, a lot of the sorors were--kinda--had it kinda in for her. So she was missing a lot of the meetings. She was missing a lot of the activities because she had to work, and said that they would just--and she would just take on different work assignments so that she didn't have to go through a lot of these kinda difficult activities that, that they were involved with. Well, she talked about one night that they just waited for her, and she started coming in probably eleven o' clock or so, and as she came in, she--the, the lights were out but she heard the, the other sorors saying, here she comes, here she comes, get her. And my mom said she then starts running to get away from them, gets in her room, and just as they're kind of--I guess, getting ready to pounce on her, she said she started crying and said, if you all do something to me, I'm gonna go and tell the dean that you all did this. And for whatever reason, they left her alone, didn't make her go through any of the other pledge activities, and she did become a Delta, had been a Delta since 1940 and is still very active with the sorority and very much involved with Delta activity. But she had--her work experience--because she was in a different--kind of a different position of being--you know, being a professional, but also being a, a college student. And then in--at, at--there at West Virginia State, she had older friends who were also professionals, also nurses. And she had--I remember seeing a picture she has of these elegantly dressed black women in their nurse's--in their nurse's uniform with their cape, bag, things that you don't see at all now with, with the--with, with the--with the nurses, and how serious--seriously she accepted the responsibility of, of being a nurse there at West Virginia State, and then when she came to St. Louis [Missouri] in the--I think about 1941 or so to work at Homer Phillips Hospital. Speaker 1: Okay. So, she, she was in her late twenties I guess when she became a Delta--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: By, by the time-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --she came to St. Louis, she would've been I guess almost, almost thirty when she came to Saint--Well, yeah, almost thirty. Speaker 1: Okay, so she came to Homer Phillips in, in her--well, she was about thirty at-- Speaker 2: Well, she--not, not quite thirty. Speaker 1: Not quite--okay. Speaker 2: Not quite thirty 'cause she was--she was just about thirty when she and my dad [Thomas Phillip Clarke] got married. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 130904 Speaker 1: Well let's, let's go to your father's side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's name is Thomas Phillip Clarke. Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S, Phillip, P-H-I-L-L-I-P, Clarke, C-L-A-R-K-E. And one of the funny things was my father and his name was that he was saying Thomas Phillip Clarke, and that's always what he thought, and then found his birth certificate and actually had Thomas Phillie Clarke on it. Speaker 1: Phillie? Speaker 2: Phillie, P-H-I-L-L-I-E, but he was--he never changed it or never did anything about it. He didn't find it until much later, but Phillip Clarke is--Thomas Phillip Clarke is the name that he always used, from Bay St. Louis, Mississippi. Bay St. Louis is in Hancock County, Mississippi, on the Mississippi Gulf Coast, and he was born October 11, 1913. Speaker 1: All right. So that same age-- Speaker 2: And he died--I'm sorry? Speaker 1: They're the same age then? Speaker 2: They're the same age, um-hum. But he died July 13, 1999. My dad wanted to live to see 2000 and that was his big regret that he did not. He was diagnosed with, with pancreas cancer on--in, in April, about April the 1st of '99 [April 1, 1999]. And the good thing was that it was quick. We made a point to--he wanted to be in Bay St. Louis. His parents were buried there in Bay St. Louis, and we're convinced that he wanted to live and die in Bay St. Louis. But he was diagnosed in April. We went back in May to visit. We went back in June to visit. And I just took two weeks off. I told my presiding judge my dad was sick, was--had terminal cancer. I wanted to be with him, and I took two weeks off, and was able to be with him when, when he died. Story_ID: 130905 Speaker 1: But--I'm jumping ahead-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --by talking about the end rather than talking about the beginning, so go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay. But--well, what do you know about your father's [Thomas Phillip Clarke's] ancestors? Speaker 1: They're from, from the Mississippi Gulf Coast. His mom is Adele Beard Clarke and his father, Jefferson Clarke. His dad died when he was nine years old. He always talked about that. It was a storm and his dad died, I'm not really sure of what. His mom died sometime after I was born, so in the early '50s [1950s]. I have a picture of her holding me as a baby. I don't know or remember her, but with his--they were poor because his dad had died at such a--with--because his dad had died when my father was such a young age. He was the third youngest. He had a sister, Genevieve, a brother, Joe, a--his sister, Cloteel [ph.] who's the youngest, and they've all died except Cloteel. Cloteel is still living. I just saw her last month; I went to Mississippi and visited with her. But they were poor. They talked about living in a converted railroad car and they didn't have indoor plumbing. Their home--the--that they moved into in the late '20s [1920s], after he died, they moved from the railroad car into a house, and talk--I remember as a child visiting there, kind of a typical Gulf Coast, New Orleans [Louisiana], type, type of house. There were two doors on the front of the house, two doors on the back of the house, and you just went through these two doors. One side had a, kind of a sitting room, living room, and the other side a living room, sitting room, and a kitchen at the back, and another bedroom at the back. Didn't have indoor plumbing. When we would go to visit, we would go and stay with his sister, Genevieve, who did have indoor plumbing. They had an outhouse and at my mom's [Mary Vincent Clarke's] farm, they had an outhouse forever. In fact, as long as we were going there, there--you always had to go to the outhouse. So as the city relatives, we would get to use the, the slop jar. We didn't have to go outdoors to, to use the facility. But for my--for my mom--for my--for my father's family, they, they--he just talked about how, how poor they were, that it was--everything fell onto his mother and his older brother then was kinda responsible for the family. His brother, Joe, married and moved to New Orleans, and was living in New Orleans. He died in the '40s [1940s] and then it fell to my father to be responsible for his mother--taking care of his mother. But my dad had his story of just how he got to where he was and the things that he was doing. He was waiting tables and, again, kind of a same thing with my mom of you went to the city--you went to these larger cities to, to find work, so he was in--working in New Orleans, and waiting tables, and met--somehow was introduced to this family named Goldstein [ph.]. And the Goldsteins took a liking to him, and Mr. Goldstein suggested and told my father that he should go to Xavier University [of Louisiana, New Orleans] and he would pay for my dad to go to Xavier University. Story_ID: 130906 Speaker 1: So that's how my father [Thomas Phillip Clarke] wound up going to--going to Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans]. He had received a scholarship earlier, a football scholarship, to Rust College in, I think Holly Springs, Mississippi-- Speaker 2: Right. That's right. Speaker 1: --and hurt his--hurt his leg, and so he lost his scholarship, and that's what got him then to New Orleans [Louisiana] and waiting tables and meeting somebody who then met Mr.--introduced him to the, the Goldsteins [ph.], but he always talked about them. I don't know that I ever met them and I don't really know what Mr. Goldstein's background was. But my father graduated from Xavier in I think 1939, '36 [1936], '39 [1939]. He pledged Omega Psi Phi and was always active in the fraternity from college all the way to the end of his life. But when he finished Xavier, he was interested in law school, but at that point, it was really a question of where you were gonna go if, if anywhere. And what my father was fortunate about--Lloyd [L.] Gaines in about 1936 filed a law suit [Gaines v. Canada, 1938] here in Missouri to gain admittance to the University of Missouri Law School [University of Missouri School of Law, Columbia, Missouri], and the University of Missouri--University of Missouri denied his admittance, he filed suit. The Supreme Court then ruled that the University of Missouri had to admit him. Well, you have to admit him unless there's a comparable law school for blacks. There wasn't, but overnight, the State of Missouri saw that--Lincoln University [School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] was created here in St. Louis [Missouri]. Lincoln University is in Jefferson City [Missouri], but they created the law school here in St. Louis in The Ville area. The Ville area was the--just--I mean, just--it was--according to my parents, it was just a wonderful place to be in the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s] for blacks. Homer G. Phillips Hospital was there, Sumner High School [St. Louis, Missouri], one of the oldest black high schools in, in, in really in the country and certainly in, in Missouri, many black churches, Poro [Beauty] College [St. Louis, Missouri], which was the, the home of-- Speaker 2: Annie Malone. Speaker 1: Thank you, Annie Malone. I say--I think, think of [Madame] C.J. Walker and say, that's not her. But Annie Malone created her line of beauty products in Poro College, and I can remember seeing the building, was a huge building, took up a whole block, five, six stories high, and they put the law school in there. The-- Speaker 2: Oh, in, Annie Malone's building? Speaker 1: It was in, in Poro College. Yeah, the law school--the law school was located in, in Poro College. I have pictures of my dad and Margaret Bush Wilson who's one of his classmates. My godfather was Edward Patterson from Louisiana, Slidell, Louisiana. Other--Joe McDuffie who was an attorney here in St. Louis who filed the school desegregation case in St. Louis. But they were members of this illustrious class of law students and, and young lawyer-- Story_ID: 130907 Speaker 1: And he--my--Lloyd Gaines in filing the suit never got to go to University of Missouri [School of Law, Columbia, Missouri] or Lincoln University [School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri]. Days before-- Speaker 2: What happened to him? Speaker 1: Lloyd Gaines went to Chicago [Illinois] because--and, and there's been more and more kind of being written about him now because we're on the fiftieth anniversary of the lawsuit, but he went--was in Chicago, was living in Chicago. The last thing people knew, he--and he was an Alpha [Phi Alpha] or an Omega [Psi Phi], I forget which--but he was living in the fraternity house and told the fraternity brother, he said I'm going out to get some stamps, some cigarettes, something, walked out, and no one's ever seen or heard of him again. And what was interesting about that, even after he was missing, his family didn't say or do anything about it for months, because he said it had really been kind of his, his custom to just kind of go off where nobody knew where he was for a while. So nobody thought anything about it until they're finding out that we really--no one really knows where he is. So-- Speaker 2: So he was never--they never solved it. Speaker 1: Never solved the mystery. Never solved the mystery. He, he disappeared, never showed up either at Lincoln University or at the University of Missouri. No one ever saw or heard of him again. The Missouri Bar--the--well, first the University of Missouri in two thousand--the spring of 2006 granted him an honorary law degree, and then The Missouri Bar, which is the integrated bar, the bar association of all members--all lawyers and judges for the State of Missouri, gave him an honorary law license in the spring--in the fall of two thousand--2005, 2006. So that's how my father [Thomas Phillip Clarke] got to law school because Lincoln University has a law school--had, had a law school for blacks. They had a library, a very small library, but it passed ABA [American Bar Association] accreditation. They were able to take the bar exam. The graduates were then able to take the Missouri Bar and be admitted to--admitted to the bar and become practicing lawyer. But my dad was working at--what do you call it? The small arms plant. It was some sort of a--of a munitions plant for building war material, and working there, going to school, sending money to his mother. And while he is in law school, he gets his draft notice, and he now is just crestfallen because he's doing what he wanted to do, which was, was get to law school. And he talks about how he's on the bus to, to be drafted. They're getting ready to take these--everybody on this bus to the--I guess the induction place. And he talked about how a man got on with the clipboard and looked at him and said, Thomas Clarke, get off the bus, and he was the only person who was--right, he was the only person (laughter) who was called off. But he did not--my father did no military service during, during World War II, was able to continue in law school. Story_ID: 130908 Speaker 1: Now your father [Thomas Phillip Clarke], he miraculously escaped the draft. Speaker 2: He escaped--my father avoided-- Speaker 1: He was on the bus and he was pulled off the bus. Speaker 2: Was on the bus, expected he was on the way to be drafted and as he said, the man with the clipboard, soldier, somebody with the clipboard got on, pulled him off. He was the only person who was pulled off. But he was able to go back, continue his job, continue through law school, and graduate and was admitted to The Missouri Bar in 1946. The interesting thing about the--my father's admittance to the bar, the American Bar Association, which was the bar of the, the, the large voluntary bar, did not admit blacks, so that's how the National Bar [Association] came-- Speaker 1: Yeah, and made it the white bar-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --in, in that sense. Speaker 2: They--right-- Speaker 1: They defined themselves as-- Speaker 2: We--well what we found out, and I did--I researched the--just the, the whole creation of the various black bar associations, but the American Bar Association by charter that they adopted in the--around 1912, purposely excluded blacks, and the National Bar came about in 1925. Speaker 1: Now this is a--The American Bar Association is a national organization? Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's, it's-- Speaker 1: Is this their national policy or just a policy in Missouri? Speaker 2: It's a--it's a--well, it's the national policy for the American Bar Association, but then the Missouri Bar Association, which was an affiliate had to follow the same--the same policy, so the Missouri Bar Association--and you have to make the distinction--The Missouri Bar Association would not admit blacks either because of the ABA Charter. The Missouri Bar Association ceased to exist in 1946 with the creation of The Missouri Bar, and that's the--that is the official name of our bar association, The Missouri Bar, not the Missouri Bar Association. So when I hear people say Missouri Bar Association, I cringe because we as blacks would not have been able to be a member of the Missouri Bar Association. But The Missouri Bar, and their official name is The Missouri Bar (Integrated), meaning--integrated, meaning that all lawyers and judges had to be a member of The Missouri Bar, but for blacks, it also meant, especially for us, integrated because now black lawyers would be able to be a member of the state bar. But my dad was a part of--he was admitted to the bar in 1946 when he graduated from law school, so-- Speaker 1: This is a national (unclear). Speaker 2: This was--this was The Missouri Bar. This was The Missouri Bar. But because of--what he always recognized the fact that he was always able to be a member of The Missouri Bar, would not have been a member of the Missouri Bar Association, so he was always very active and very involved in The Missouri Bar. As a result of being involved in The Missouri Bar and not being able to be a member of the American Bar Association, he became very active in the National Bar [Association], which is the black lawyers' organization. He attended his first meeting of the National Bar Association in December 1946 in, in Detroit [Michigan], and he had a photograph that he kept over his bed--over their bed forever until he died of all of the attendees at the nineteen--at this 1946 meeting, but he was very proud to be a member of the, the National Bar, he was always an active member of the National Bar, attended all of their meetings, instilled that in me, and it's something that I've continued to do to, to, to this day. Story_ID: 130909 Speaker 1: But when he [father Thomas Phillip Clarke] finished law school, he opened his office with an attorney, David M. Grant, who was a--just a phenomenal black attorney here in, in St. Louis [Missouri], who was involved in politics but also was just very good about helping and nurturing new lawyers and young lawyers. My father wasn't a young lawyer as such because he had been an older--again, an older student, but as a new lawyer needing to know how to learn his way around and, and finding his way in the courthouse. He started out in private practice and was a trial attorney all of his life, but he was always grateful to Mr. Grant for helping him and nurturing him and mentoring him as he started. He worked with--Mr. Grant opened his own office some years later and then about 1966 started working at Legal Aid Society, what's now Legal Services of Eastern Missouri, and he was a managing attorney of Legal Services. And so in that position, he was responsible for mentoring and just teaching the law to literally thousands, hundreds--I'll at least say hundreds of law students and young lawyers from--who would come and work at Legal Services. And even now in, in my position, I still meet lots of attorneys who say, oh, yes, I worked with--I worked with Mr. Clarke. Because he took the responsibility of mentoring very seriously because this is what was instilled in him from, from Mr. Grant. Story_ID: 130910 Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: Yes, there is a story about how they met. They met on a blind date and my mom [Mary Vincent Clarke] was living in a nurses' residence at Homer Phillip [Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri], which was a short two blocks from the Poro College, which is where my dad [Thomas Phillip Clarke] was staying at--where the Lincoln University Law School [Lincoln University School of Law, St. Louis] was. But they were meeting--they--someone had arranged a blind date and he knew only that he was meeting Ms. Vincent who was a nurse. He talks about how when mother and the other lady who was also a nurse came down the stairs from the nurses' residence, that my father said, I hope my date is--the, the little one is Ms. Vincent, that's all he knew. And, and as it turned out, the little one was Ms. Vincent. But they met in around 1941 and got married in 1943, lived--so living in The Ville area [St. Louis], going--they're both working in The Ville, or at least dad's going to school in, in The Ville, mother's working at Homer Phillips. They lived in--they were roomers, and so they would live in a room in a home until late 1943 when they moved to 4242 West Cote Brilliante [Avenue], which is a house that we still--we, we still own. My youngest sister and her children live in the--in, in, in the house that I grew up in. Speaker 1: Okay. What a name, Cote Brilliante (laughter). Speaker 2: "Cote brilliante," "bright hill" is what--is what it means, and there's nothing bright or (laughter) anything about it. But again, my mom talked about how when they first went on that street how it had a tree canopy with the, the trees arching all the way down the street. Now, there are probably two or three trees on, on the block. Only a handful of the homes are there. Kind of depressing hearing how it used to be, and then as a child just knowing what it--what it was like. But growing up in the neighborhood, I went to Visitation [Academy of St. Louis] Catholic grade school, which was only a few blocks away, walking to-- Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: --the grade school-- Story_ID: 130911 Speaker 1: --Before we get you there, let's--now, do you have any brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I have two sisters and no brothers. I like to think of myself as being my father's [Thomas Phillip Clarke's] son. I'm the oldest. My two sisters are Denise, Denise Adele Clarke Levison, L-E-V-I-S-O-N, and Thomasina Patricia Clarke, so she was named after my dad. And the three of us were all--my, my middle sister Denise and I are only fourteen months apart, and then Tommy and--my youngest sister we call Tommy--but Tommy and Denise are just a little over two years apart. My parents were married for seven years before, almost seven years before I was born, so my mom [Mary Vincent Clarke] said she thought they were never gonna have any children, and then once they started having children, it's all three of us kind of right together. But I could always say--my father and I were very, very close, so I just always say that I was kind of a son. We, we, we--each of us kinda took on different traits. My youngest sister was very athletic, involved in a lot of sports, and I just had this great rapport with my dad because at an early age, when I was nine years old, I decided I wanted to be a lawyer, and it was just something that the two of us always-- Speaker 1: So you think you take--you take after your, your--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I took after him with that and I--I, I tell people--but what made you interested in law? When my parents would talk at dinner about what they would do and listening to my mom talking about the nurse, being a nurse, she was working--she was the supervisor of the nursery at Homer Phillip [Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri], and so listening to her talk about working with these babies, which did not sound interesting at all, but listening to them talk about what they were doing and listening to my father that being a, a lawyer sounded like the thing that I wanted to do. And then I was really fortunate because unlike a lot of people who don't know black lawyers and didn't know black judges, I grew up knowing, and not only knowing black lawyers, black judges, but also black women lawyers. [HM] Margaret Bush Wilson was a classmate of, of my mother, [HM] Frankie Freeman was a member of Delta Sigma Theta [Sorority] with my mom, so I knew women lawyers, black women lawyers all my life. So for me, it was nothing unusual, nothing strange, just decided this was what--something that I was interested in doing. Story_ID: 130912 Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Cote Brilliante was a great neighborhood, The Ville area [St. Louis, Missouri] was a great neighborhood, and I didn't appreciate how great it was until I got older and really understood the historical significance of The Ville. But I can remember--well, at least for us as a family, sights and smells and sounds for us were always--my dad [Thomas Phillip Clarke] liked to barbecue. We would barbecue and have cookouts. He had his--he built his little grill in the back, his little brick grill and doing--he barbecued chicken and we, we rarely had ribs or things of that sort for no reason other than I guess chicken was easier, quicker for him to cook. That was a sight--that was just a, a something that, that I always remember with them. Walking to school that I was able to walk to school, walking to Visitation [Academy of St. Louis]--well, actually we'd walk home 'cause my dad would always take us for some reason. It was only a few blocks away, but he would take us to school and then we would walk home--walk home from school. The neighborhood had--I can remember there was a Velvet Freeze in the neighborhood, there was a, a Woolworth's, an old five-and-dime, and I mean, old, old five-and-dime. I was probably two, three or four years old. I just remember the wooden floor and the wooden counters. It--I could barely see over. The swinging doors--you went in one side and down an aisle and then came down the other aisle. It was torn down probably maybe when I was six or seven, but I remember that. And just looking at, remembering the way that The Ville used to be. Eastern Avenue is the street that the, the, the main thoroughfare in, in The Ville and in--just in the black neighborhood period. It's now [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Drive]. And there's nothing. I mean, the, the buildings that are there are--I mean, just--they're just in utter disrepair. They're falling down, they're falling down, they're missing, they're vacant. There's lots and lots of vacant land. And it's just sad remembering what it was and just how it--just how it is now. Story_ID: 130913 Speaker 1: Where did you start school? Speaker 2: Visitation [Academy, St. Louis, Missouri] grade school I guess 1954. Speaker 1: Okay. So this--this is a Catholic school. Speaker 2: It was a Catholic grade school. I can remember my first day of kindergarten. My mom [Mary Vincent Clarke] took me to--we had to go to mass first and then--but, but my father [Thomas Phillip Clarke] was Catholic, was cradle Catholic, always Catholic. My mom became--was Baptist and became a Catholic when--soon after they got married, and she's a devout Catholic. My dad until he died was--they were both always involved and active in their church. But for kindergarten, we had to go to--had to go to church first, had on our little uniform, and then after mass, they marched us over to the grade school and into our different classrooms. So I was walking with these little kindergarten kids, people who I did not know, and I remember stand--so as they went into the classroom, I stood there in the back of the, the back of the school waiting for my mom to come and get me and take me wherever I'm supposed to go, but it's not with these other kids into, into this classroom. And eventually the nuns had to come and get me and (laughter) make me understand that that's where I was gonna be from now on in the--in the class with these--with the other kids at, at Visitation. But went through Visitation grade school from kindergarten through fifth grade. At fifth grade, the school merged with Holy Ghost Catholic School [St. Louis, Missouri], which was--Visitation was two blocks south of our house, Holy Ghost [Catholic School] was two blocks north of our house, and this was kind of a--the ethnic segregation that went on in our community. Visitation historically had been a--an Irish Catholic school and Holy Ghost was a German Catholic school. Now, neither Irish or German people are living in this neighborhood by the time the black folks were coming along, but they--the Catholic Archdiocese then merged the two parishes so that sixth, seventh, and eighth grade, we used the--we went to school at Holy Ghost. And we had the two churches, two different parishes with, with one name. Eventually, Holy Ghost was--the church was torn down and the school closed. Both schools are now closed. Story_ID: 130914 Speaker 1: Now did you have any--when you were in grade school [Visitation Academy, St. Louis, Missouri], were there any particular teachers or mentors that you remember? Speaker 2: Grade school, yeah, was great. Sister Margaret Louise [ph.] was my kindergarten teacher, Sister Leon Marie [ph.]. And they changed names now, so trying to remember their names now because Sister Leon Marie was my eighth grade teacher. My mom [Mary Ann Vincent] stays in touch with her and had regular--she's here in St. Louis [Missouri], and so they are in touch regularly. My fourth grade, the first male teacher I ever had was Mr. Williams [ph.], and we go to the same church now. So those are--the--just--but always understanding and, and knowing that, and, and that was the one thing with probably my, my early education is that with going to an all-black school, it was--Visitation was an all-black Catholic school, but we were always encouraged to do whatever we wanted. I don't really remember or know of any--of, of any segregation. I--while I was going to a black school, I don't recall anything of, of not being able to go to the movies or any of the accommodations here in St. Louis. Now maybe that our parents just didn't take us to those places. Speaker 1: Were most of your activities in The Ville [St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Well, the--we, we--I know there was a Parkmoor restaurant up on Kingshighway [Boulevard] that's outside of The Ville. I know that blacks could not go there to eat, but then my parents didn't take us there, so it was not segregation that I experienced of, of being denied or being turned away from, from any place. But the--we did go to Union Station and there was a Fred Harvey's restaurant in Union Station, and I can remember going there at a very young age, so obviously there was no segregation there. Blacks were able to go and, and, and dine out of those facilities. But the school was always encouraging us to just do those things that, that, that we wanted to do. Story_ID: 130915 Speaker 1: My high school was even more challenging and, and probably more supportive. I went to Rosati-Kain High School [St. Louis, Missouri], which was an all-girls' school. Speaker 2: I'm sorry, how do you-- Speaker 1: Rosati, R-O-S-A-T-I, dash, Kain, K-A-I-N. And the school is still in existence. We just celebrated our fortieth high school--my class's high school-- our fortieth high school reunion. But-- Speaker 2: Now is that--that--that's a Catholic school? Speaker 1: Catholic school, Catholic girls' school. And if anything, and I, I always say just talking about your life's to-do list and your life's activities, this would definitely be a do-over. You know, there are lots of things that you say, well if I had a second chance, I--I'd do something differently. But having the opportunity to go to school with--there were 450 girls for--it was almost all white, exclusively white. There were eight blacks in my graduating class of 150. Of the 450 girls, there were twenty--I think 22, 25 blacks in the class--or in the school, in, in, in the whole school. And it was just a tremendous opportunity to do whatever you wanted. As, as young women, we were met with no obstacles as far as you can't do something because you're a woman, you're not supposed to do something because you're a woman. We were taught to strive and achieve and, and soar to any height we thought imaginable. And it was just a tremendous setting for a young woman who was looking to do something that first a lot of people say, oh, no, you can't be a lawyer, and secondly, a woman can't be a lawyer, and thirdly, a black woman can't be a lawyer. And it--I was--I was supported in wanting to do that. I was supported in wanting to do that. Story_ID: 130916 Speaker 1: Now are there any special teachers in high school? Speaker 2: Oh, at Rosati-Kain [High School, St. Louis, Missouri]--and again it's kinda hard to remember because the, the nuns have, have, have changed--have changed their names, but my, my second year in high school, I became a straight-A student. My first year in high school, I was kinda struggling, and second year, I became a--this straight--this wonderful straight-A student. In fact, I had the, the distinction of our honor roll that would go up the end of the third quarter, would stay up until the first--the end of the first quarter for the following year, so that was like the big honor roll because they didn't change the, the rankings. They didn't change the posting over the summer; there was nobody there for the summer. So the people who came during the summer, your name was there on that honor roll, and the folks who came at the start of the next year, your name was still there. And I wind up at the top with a straight A--you know, with a straight-A grade, grade report for that semester--for, for that--for that quarter. But my math teacher--and I can't call her name. I, I don't remember what the sister's name was. But my math teacher in my second year was the teacher who I think just really kind of challenged me because algebra I had not done well in, and then I get to geometry. We had to take all of these--it was--Rosati-Kain was an advanced college preparatory high school, so we were taking advanced classes in high school. The--I took physics in college and the physics book that I used in college was my high school physics book. That's how advanced our school was. But the--something just clicked with the nuns and with me in, in that second year, and I kind of found myself on the things that I was working on, things that I was interested in. I played in the--we didn't have a band; I played in the orchestra. I played in--playing the bassoon. Very few people play a bassoon. Speaker 1: Did you start playing that in grade school? Speaker 2: I--no, I started in high school. I started--we had a--the summer before high school, they had a, a--you know, come and meet the band or come and meet the orchestra members, and I noticed that of all the instruments, the only one that was a solitary instrument was the bassoon. So I thought, well, I'll play the bassoon so I can play with this, you know, girl who's playing the bassoon. Well I learned after I got there, the reason she was the only one playing the bassoon, the school only had one bassoon (laughter), and she fortunately was a senior, so they were able to teach me how to play the bassoon. I learned how to play it my freshman year and then sophomore, junior, and senior year, I was the star--the only bassoon player. The school then bought another bassoon, I guess, my senior year, and my parents bought the one that I had been using. They bought that for me and I still have it. So-- Speaker 1: Can you play it? Speaker 2: I can play it, yeah. I mean--we--it's--all it is, is a lot of wind. It's a lot of wind and then your fingering and stuff. Speaker 1: And it uses a reed. Speaker 2: It's a double reed-- Speaker 1: It's singularly different from any other wind instrument. Speaker 2: Double reed is a wonderful tone. The theme from Alfred Hitchcock is played with the bassoon. The-- Speaker 1: Which one? Speaker 2: The--I, I'm not a singer, so I'm not gonna (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: But, but the theme, the, the--dah-dah-dah-dah-dah-dah-dah-dah-dah, dah-dah-dah-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's played--that's played with a bassoon, so-- Speaker 1: That's right, it is, yeah. Speaker 2: --that was, again, something that I probably would not have thought of doing in most other settings, probably would not have been something you were gonna encourage a girl to play a bassoon. But I carried my bassoon around and go off--I was in competitions with it, played in St. Louis University's Concert Band my, probably junior and senior year in, in high school. Wasn't so much because I was really, really good, it was just that most people don't have a bassoon. I had my very own bassoon, so it's like, come on down, we really want you for that. Story_ID: 130917 Speaker 1: Now was, was popular music important in your home when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Different kind of popular music. My parents [Mary Ann Vincent and Thomas Phillip Clarke] weren't into the really popular stuff. My mom--I, I can remember listening to show tunes. My--the, The Muny Opera, The Municipal Opera, a big outdoor theater here in St. Louis [Missouri] has been in existence since early, like maybe 1917, 1920 or so, and that was a big activity for us growing up. They had the back--probably fifteen hundred seats are free seats. It's a huge theater, I forget how many thousands of seats. But the very, very back of the opera or The Muny was--were these free seats, and so that was an activity that we did. And my mom was seated, we would go out to The Muny for the production during the--during the summer, sitting in the free seat. Later when I was an adult and told my mom, I said, okay, we're gonna go through the gate. We're gonna go and sit in the pay seats. And I can remember that it started raining and we--then everybody'd have to leave and go for--run for cover to the back and my mom said, see, that's a sign. You're supposed to stay up in the--we're supposed to be back up in the, the free seats. She has gotten over that and we do sit up in the--in the paying seats now. But those were the--the popular music not, not so much with my parents, and so I grew up with an appreciation of a different type of music, I guess. Speaker 1: So the radio wasn't playing a lot and (unclear). Speaker 2: Not really. My mom and dad even back then, they listened to talk radio. KMOX was the, the big radio station here. For me with high school, you know, and because I'm at a white high school, so I was a big Beatles fan and am, am still now. I did--The Supremes, though, and Motown because they were--I was coming of age with--they were coming into prominence at, at that time. So listening to radios and my--my sister and I, my middle sister and I probably listened to music differently from what my parents did. But it was kind of getting two--get--getting music from, from two different--two different types of music, two different places. Story_ID: 130918 Speaker 1: Did your family keep up with the Civil Rights Movement on television and the radio and the, the things that were going on? Speaker 2: Most definitely. And particularly with--I guess with both my parents [Thomas Phillip Clarke and Mary Vincent Clarke] coming from the South, they were--though I guess with everybody, very interested in, in, in what was going on and what was happening. I can remember, because now we're talking about The Little Rock Nine [integration of Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas, 1957], of seeing those images on television. We always had a television growing up--growing up, we always had a television. But I, I remember seeing Little Rock Nine and just thinking how evil those--you know, that the whites were, and saying I'm a little girl of seven or eight years old. But that was just coming through the, the, the hatred that these people had, not understand--not that I understood everything about what The Little Rock Nine, what they were doing, what the students were doing of just wanting to go to school. But I could just tell that what the other people were doing and, and seeing them shouting and, and just the contorted faces that something was not right in, in, in what was happening and what was going on. We would spend most summers either in Lawrenceville [Virginia] or Washington, D.C., visiting my mom's family or going to Mississippi, Bay St. Louis, or New Orleans [Louisiana] for my dad's family. And I can remember being in Bay St. Louis when they found the, the three civil rights workers' bodies [James Earl Chaney, Michael Schwerner, and Andrew Goodman]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's 1964, yeah. Speaker 2: Sixty-- Speaker 1: Yeah, summer of '64 [1964], yeah. Speaker 2: '64 [1964]--sixty-- Speaker 1: It was '64 [1964]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But, but we--but we were down there at my cousin, who had the indoor plumbing, we were at her house and seen--when, when that came over on the news. And being really afraid in, in--and that was the one thing I, I, I did, did not know fear in St. Louis [Missouri]. I did not know fear growing up, but I did know it when we would go south and just knowing this, really almost a sense of foreboding that something would happen. You know, we never--again, never experienced anything in part because my cousins, I guess, were making sure that we didn't go where we weren't supposed to go, and then with Bay St. Louis being a small town, we didn't have a lot of places to venture out there where we were going we were going to be walking. But I just remember being afraid when, when--and particularly when it was in Mississippi. I don't--didn't have that sense in Lawrenceville, maybe because Lawrenceville was so much more isolated -- Story_ID: 130919 Speaker 1: Now, now-- Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: (simultaneous) --did your family drive to Bay St. Louis [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Bay St. Louis, sometimes they would put us on a train and we would take the Spirit of New Orleans [sic, City of New Orleans or Panama Limited], and get on--seems like the train left at midnight or something. We'd get on the train and just ride into New Orleans [Louisiana], somebody would pick us up and, and get us over to Bay St. Louis. We would drive on occasion, and driving was obviously the challenge. And, and, again, not really appreciating just what the segregation was at the time. But, you packed your picnic cooler and your bag, you know, the car was loaded with food, knowing now or, or I guess even then not fully appreciating, but the reason we had all this food in the car was 'cause we didn't have places you could stop to go and get food. I remember stopping in Mound Bayou [Mississippi] for something. And usually my parents [Thomas Phillip Clarke and Mary Vincent Clarke] did not stop. We would just eat whatever food we took. But they stopped at Mound Bayou, and I can still remember this greasy, greasy, greasy hamburger that they got. I mean the grease was oozing through the paper, through the bag, and on our hands, and it was just so good because this was some hot foods that we did not have. Because from the time we left St. Louis [Missouri] and literally until we got to Mississippi, we were just eating with things that, that we had brought. Speaker 1: And, and just for the benefit of people watching this, Mound Bayou's an all-black town. Speaker 2: Right, um-hum. And that was the thing about stopping there. And, see once the highways changed, that was on, I think, 61, and then when they put the Interstate in probably later in the '60s [1960s] or '70s [1970s], then you bypassed Mound Bayou. I haven't been through there in years, continued to go--because my parents retired--in 1979, my folks retired. My father retired to Bay St. Louis, so we were always, even from the time I've been married, my husband and I have continued to go down to the--to, to the Gulf Coast. Going to Lawrenceville [Virginia], we would generally go into Washington, D.C., where my mom's two sisters were, and from there, we would then go--would drive down to, to Lawrenceville. As I say, because, I guess, Lawrenceville was more isolated, we really did not have any kind of--I, I don't remember any kind of discrimination out there, and somehow Virginia you would think that, that there might be. But the sense of, of just knowing that something wasn't right in, in, in Mississippi was one that I just, just always felt-- Story_ID: 130920 Speaker 1: What did your relatives think about what was going on? Say in '64 [1964] when you're down there and the civil rights workers were found; that was the Freedom Summer and all the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] volunteers were in Mississippi, and-- Speaker 2: Again, I, I think there was kind of the sense of, you know, we'll go along and get along kinda thing. They knew not--you know, the places that they weren't supposed to go. And the, the, the Saint Rose de Lima was, was a black church. There was a white church, Our Lady of The Gulf. And we never went to the white church; we never went by the white church. We stayed at, you know, Saint Rose. I can remember going to the movie theater and we had to sit upstairs, which when you think about it, really is kinda dumb because we'd be upstairs and the fun thing was to throw stuff on the folks downstairs (laughter). But it just--the, the, the--just whatever the, the, the rationale of, of, of the--of the segregation is somehow it was better to be downstairs where you all are gettin' pelted. 'Cause--I mean, that--that's what the folks would do. They--you know, you'd dribble your soda over the rail and you, you know, flick your popcorn out at the folks, but that's what--that's what would happen. And we knew that upstairs was where we were supposed to go. Story_ID: 130921 Speaker 1: Just fast forwarding, what's happened now, the movie theater years later was converted into this snow cone store, wonderful shaved ice snow cone store. We'd go and, and, and get snow cones. And with [Hurricane] Katrina [2005], we were just there; we were just down there last month, all of Beach Boulevard in Bay St. Louis [Mississippi] is gone. Yeah, all of that's gone. Speaker 2: It was all destroyed by Katrina. Speaker 1: All destroyed by Katrina, yeah. So what--it's, it's very, very sad and heartbreaking about Bay St. Louis, my aunt as I say is, is--she was in California with, with her daughter, came back to Bay St. Louis, and when was calling her before I came down there asking about coming to--you know, I wanna come and, and, and just talk with you a little bit, and I said, I wanna make sure that you're gonna be there. She says, where am I gonna go? She said there is no--there is--she says I go to mass on Saturday and try to find somebody to take me to the grocery store. She said, that's it. There's--she said you'll see when you get her. And she's right. There's nothing there. Casinos-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --you got casinos now, but nothing there. Story_ID: 130922 Speaker 1: Now, now was your father [Thomas Phillip Clarke] active with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 2: Very active in the civil rights organizations here in--here in St. Louis [Missouri]. He had part of his practice involved, discrimination cases, though at the time, you never thought of them so much as, as discrimination cases. One of his early cases involved fighting the extradition of a man who was charged with some crime and they were trying to extradite him, I believe, to Mississippi. And for a new lawyer, a young lawyer to take on a case like that is kind of unheard of, unprecedented, but he and my godfather--my godfather, Edward Patterson [ph.], was an albino. So one of the pictures of the Lincoln Law School [Lincoln University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] had what looks to be this class of all--of all these black people and this white man standing in, in, in the midst of them. But he was from Slidell [Louisiana], and he and, and daddy took on this, this man's extradition case, I say early in--early, early in his practice, and they won. They were able to prevent the man from, from being extradited. Story_ID: 130923 Speaker 1: Now, back to high school [Rosati-Kain High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. Now, now did you get involved in clubs and things and high school activities? Speaker 2: Yeah, but, again, with a girls school, it was kind of a different type of--we had a--we had a pep club, but, I mean, we were--we were cheering at our volleyball games and our basketball games. I was not athletic enough. I didn't play on either of the--not the varsity--either, B team, volleyball or basketball. We had some track, but not a lot in, in, in high school. But I was more--I was a student and I loved school. The public schools, St. Louis Public Schools, had a summer enrichment program that was open to all high school students the end of my sophomore year and junior year called Laclede-Chouteau, so it was an opportunity to just get immersed into the sort of things that you might not have had during the course of the regular school year. So it involved a lot of field trip. There was a, a band; I'm playing my bassoon at the, at, at Laclede-Chouteau, but starting-- Speaker 1: How do you spell that? La, Laclege [ph.]? Speaker 2: Laclede--two names, Laclede--these were French settlers who founded St. Louis [Pierre Laclede and Auguste Chouteau], but Laclede, L-A-C-L-E-D-E, hyphen, Choteau, S-H-O-U-T-E-A-U [sic, Choteau]. And Laclede was the--one of the adventurers or whatever, founding St. Louis, Choteau an, an early--an early settler here in, in St. Louis. But from that summer of the second year of high school until I graduated to law school, I went to school year round except for one summer. One of the reasons was I knew that as long as I was in school, I didn't have to work, and I didn't wanna work, so my parents were content to let me go to school, I loved going to school, so it was just going to school every summer. The only summer I did not--that I was not in school was the end of my first year of law school, and I went to Washington, D.C., as an intern, which was basically a vacation. They paid me money to come to D.C. and work for two months at HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], and not only pay me, they gave me a place to live. On lived on Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] campus, gave me money, and, and I'm away from home for, for two months, so that was the only summer that I was not in school. But I loved school. I loved going to school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you were on the verge of graduating from high school--now did you graduate with, with honors? Did you stay on the honor roll? Speaker 2: I--the remarkable thing about Rosati-Kain are--because everybody was smart. We--it was--it was a school for smart girls. I had a four--the equivalent of a 4.3, had a 5-point scale, so I had a 4.3 average, which one of my friends graduated with a 4.3 in his public high school, and he was second or third in his class. My 4.3, I was in the bottom half of my class, so--I mean, that's how remarkable our school was. I had a, I guess, you know, a B-plus, high-A average, and it was wonderful, but it put--you, you--so you have to explain this when you tell people your class rank. You say, well I'm in the bottom half of my class, and say well your grade point average is 4.3--no, no, what's--something's not right here. But that was just how accelerated our, our school was. And, again, if I had--if I were doing it over and picking things that I would do, that I would still--I would still do it all over again. Story_ID: 130924 Speaker 1: So how did you pick the college that you attended? Speaker 2: How I picked college--I finished school the probably sixth, seventh, eighth of June [June 6, 1967] and I started at Forest Park Community College [St. Louis Community College - Forest Park, Missouri] that same summer, that same month. I was offered-- Speaker 1: This was in 1967? Speaker 2: '67 [1967], um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was offered a four-year scholarship to the University of Missouri in Columbia because I came from a high school with 450 students, I knew that I did not want to go to a college with at that time was about 12,000 students. So I couldn't figure out where to go, and decided, okay, I'll go to junior college for my--I would just go to junior college until I figured out where I wanted to go. I went from summer to summer and during--in my year, those two semesters or two summers and the fall and spring semester, I had fifty-two credit hours. And for people who say don't go to junior college because you wind up falling behind, you don't--your credits don't transfer, every credit that I took transferred to Northwest Missouri State [University, Maryville, Missouri]. I wound up at Northwest Missouri State because it was the farthest I could go away from St. Louis and still be inside the State of Missouri. My father [Thomas Phillip Clarke] wanted me to go to Xavier [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] because that was his alma mater. For no reason other than I just didn't wanna go, I wound up going to Mary--Northwest Missouri State was in Maryville, and I went up there sight unseen. I had a friend who was going there, a male friend, who went to, like the brother school of Rosati-Kain [High School, St. Louis, Missouri], and he says, come on up to Maryville. So with nothing other than the thought of I'm going up to Maryville--I went up there. My mom and dad were driving up there. We dropped my sister Denise off at Lincoln [University, Jefferson City, Missouri]. She started at Lincoln the same time that I'm, starting at, at Maryville. So we'd drop her off in Jefferson City. Well, we knew Jefferson City and Lincoln because we used to go there for their homecoming. We then continue on Highway 70 to Kansas City [Missouri], which wasn't bad. From Kansas City, you then head north and go another hundred or so miles. And we're driving through absolutely nothing. I mean, there is nothing in Northwest Missouri. And Maryville was as far north as you could go and far northwest that you could go in the state of Missouri. And we were boarded by Iowa, Nebraska, and Kansas; that's all that's up there, corn fields. And the farther we're driving, and the farther we're driving, and my father kept saying, you know, where is it? Where are we going? It's like, you know, you're seein' it the same time that I am. But I got there, and the two years that I was there, I was--enjoyed it. I was appointed to the student government, becoming the first black to serve on the student government--the student--I think it was congress or whatever the governing body was, and was a dorm, dorm representative. My plan was to--had always been to graduate from college in three years. And my first year there, I had an eight o' clock political science class. I had no real thoughts about major and minor for college because I knew I just wanted to go to law school, so this degree was kinda this, you know, bump in the road. I had to do something, but I wasn't really sure what it was I wanted to do. And I can remember standing there in the gymnasium when we're doing registration, and they say, well what are you gonna major in, what are you gonna minor in? Well, at the junior college, you didn't have to pick major and minor; they had a prelaw program and that's all you had to pick. I had no idea what I wanted to major and minor in. And a student, Perry Burgner [ph.], from New York walking by, and he said major in political science and minor in history. Sounded good to me, so that's what I said. Story_ID: 130925 Speaker 1: And I then wound up with an eight o' clock political science class, and for the life of me, I could not get up from my dorm and get to my political science class at eight o' clock in the morning. So after probably, probably just a couple weeks, I dropped that class. And one of the reasons was, I was the only black in the class. My teacher who was Dorothy Dyke, D-Y-K-E, from Texas; she and her husband were from Texas. He was a lawyer. She had this southern accent, and she would sit in her class and she would talk about--and, and whatever something was going on, and I heard her say, the negra [ph.], the negra. And I'm the only black person in the class, and I'm thinking, you know, I must not have heard that. This is eight o' clock in the morning, and I know that's what she was saying. And so, nobody's coming to my defense--not that, you know, she's saying anything to me, she was just talking whatever some reference to blacks, but saying the negra this, the negra that. And I just decided, I don't need to be in this class. It's eight o' clock, I don't need to be in here, so I dropped it. I then switched to sociology, I think, or psychology and was taking those classes. Then, the dean probably--I guess that summer, the dean calls me and he says, well, you know, you're talking about you wanna graduate in three years. You gotta have a major, you gotta have a minor, he said, and, and you can do it, but you gotta get all of these things outta the way. So my third year in college, my second year there at Maryville [Northwest Missouri State University], I said, all right. I looked to see what did I have the most of, and I didn't really have--I had all these other classes out of the way, but I still didn't enough for any major or minor, so I said, fine, I'll go back to political science. I have to go back to Dorothy Dyke, and I just talked to her. I went--and, you know, just talk to her, and the first thing I said was that it sounds like you're insulting me by saying negra. And she said, no, no, that's just the way that I talk; that's just the way that I talked. And as it happened, we--we managed to--we became friends. I would go over to her house. She didn't cook. She would order pizza. That would be--she'd order pizza and other students would come over and, and meet with her, meet with her husband. But I took my beginning classes, the prerequisites, and the advanced classes all in that one year. And the amazing thing--and I know I'm going to law school and I've already--you know, I've taken the law school admittance test and that my father had--my father [Thomas Phillip Clarke] was paying for me to go to law school, and he said you'll go to St. Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri]; it's like, okay fine. So I've been accepted into law school. If something happened with any of these classes that I didn't make it, and I'm graduating in the summer, so there's no wiggle room anywhere, but I could've been set up for a horrible disaster. Didn't happen that way, but I got my beginning classes or prerequisite classes, the advan-- the required classes, the advanced classes, everything all out the way in one year, and started St. Louis University Law School [St. Louis University School of Law]. Story_ID: 130926 Speaker 1: You had the habit of going to summer school. That's-- Speaker 2: I loved school. School was good. School was good. You go to school, you don't have to work. My father [Thomas Phillip Clarke] had a saying, and I use it all the time and, and other people will use it and say that's Mr. Clarke's saying. He always said you can work for four and play for forty, or you can play for four and work for forty, meaning you do your four years, high school, college, whatever, work those four years, your forty years of your work life, you can play. You can enjoy yourself and do things. Or you can play for four and then your forty years of work, you're gonna be working. And real simple, I say it all the time, I have people come back and tell me, I remember what you told me. And my middle sister--my youngest sister and I both have--my youngest sister has two bachelor's degrees and working on a master--had worked--had worked on her master. My middle sister's been going to school forever; she never got a degree. And she is instilling in her daughter that, you know, remember what Papa said, you can work for four and play for forty. She said because I played for four and she's working--she's a secretary, but she is not having the same sort of success, professional success that my youngest sister and I have had, and she says because she didn't listen to what my father said. Story_ID: 130927 Speaker 1: Well, so when you--when you graduated, how, how was St. Louis University Law School [St. Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: St. Louis University Law School was interesting. Came to law school in September 1970, and that was the first--that was the big influx of law students. It was the first time we had more than two blacks in law school at a time. There were eight blacks in my class. And we had two sections of law students. It was a big influx of women, which going from perhaps two women and--and white women 'cause there were no black women. There had been one black woman who had ever gone to St. Louis University Law School at all before we got there. There were four black women in my class. And we were met with so much resistance and opposition from the white male students, from the black male students, from professors, from just people period for--the one thing that we heard over and over again was why would we--and for some of the black--from some of the black male students as well because it was a selective process, but, you know, we were asked--we were asked if we would step out of school in place of some black men to get in school because we knew that we were all just being just a part of the white man's plot to keep the black man down. That's what they said to us. Of course, we said, not no, but hell no. But, but that was what we were--that, that was part of what we were dealing with. We heard from white men who resented the fact that we were there in school taking up the place that another man could've used because everybody knew all we were gonna do is get married and go and have babies. The professors were trying to figure out what it was, and they say it wasn't just because we were black women, it was because we were women, and that this was--you know, just women, women were this kinda new thing. The law school was an old building at the time and the, the--we, we tell the students now that they don't know what law school was really like. The women had--our only--just our only rest spot was the women's "lounge." And we had--there was kind of a seating area outside--it was a, a long narrow hall, but there was a little seating area. It was a, a, a sofa with the coat rack and maybe a chair, and then on the other side of the door were the restrooms, and so maybe two or three restrooms. That was it. That was the only, only facilities for women. That was our--where we would hang our coats. That's where we would put our books. That's where we kept our stuff. The guys had, you know, a number of places that they could go, but for women, we had--we had absolutely nothing. So going to law school--going to law school was challenging. Going to law school was, was, was challenging. We had--just talking about professors in, in law school, Dean Childress, Richard [J.] Childress was the dean of the law school, and he was--he had been involved in civil rights in the--in, in the '60s [1960s]. He was committed to seeing that we as women were going to be successful, that we as blacks were going to be successful. The law school that summer before I got there introduced a program they called The Summer Institute, and for many of the blacks who were coming to, to law school, they came to St. Louis U that summer, took a contracts class, so they got a feel for what law school was like, and then I think doing some legal research and writing, but trying to give 'em a--you know, kind of a leg up and helping them just make it through the--through their first year. Well, I didn't go through the summer program. In fact, there were only two of us in our class who, who did not go. Managed to get out of law school, though, got out of law school, and the success was being able to take the bar exam. Took the Missouri Bar. Not--my, my success was being able to take and pass the bar on one try without virtue of having to do a bar review course. I was living in Boston [Massachusetts] at that time and just simply got the bar review books and just read them, went to the library and just read them. Came back, took the bar exam, went back to Boston to wait out the results, that's where I was working by that time, and fantastically passed the bar exam. Story_ID: 130279 Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-three [1973], just received your G--your J.D. from St. Louis University [School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri], and, and did you join your father's [Thomas Phillip Clarke's] law firm or? Speaker 2: He thought I would and he had stationary printed up saying Clarke and Clarke, yes, and my mother [Mary Vincent Clarke] had more sense than I did, knowing that--my father and I are very much alike, very opinionated, very bull-headed, very stubborn, and my mother knew that it was never, ever going to work, and she was right. And, no, we never, ever worked together, and that's one of the reasons that my father 'til the day that he died continued to say, even though I've done remarkable things in my career, that I didn't do 'em right because he didn't teach me how to do them. But our swearing--when I was sworn in for the bar, we all went up. It was a--it was a family occasion, my mom and dad, my--just being, very, very proud, as my father's watching me sign the--all lawyers, we sign the book, and watching my father watching me signing, signing the book, taking the oath of office--or taking the oath of, of the, the bar, being sworn into the bar. What happened, we're all sworn into the Supreme Court, the, the state bar in Jefferson City [Missouri], and then you're sworn into the individual circuits or the, the local bars. And what happened for me because I was living in Boston [Massachusetts] at the time--after, after law school, I--probably six months or so after law school, I moved--had moved to Boston and-- Speaker 1: And what, what, what took you to Boston? Speaker 2: Well, before I got to Boston, what took--after I got out of law school, I finished law school that summer, and that was all I had thought about, was finishing law school. I hadn't thought about what kind of work I wanted to do, where I wanted to go. Because I finished in the summer, I wasn't able to take the Missouri Bar until--the bar is given in September and in February, and since I didn't finish school until August, I wasn't able to take the bar exam--wasn't gonna be able to take the bar exam until the, the fall--the spring, in, in February. So when I finished that summer, I was just kind of out of it and not really doing anything, and I just stayed at home all day, and my mom said she thought I was having a nervous breakdown or something, but I didn't do anything. I'd wake up in the morning and I'd watch 'The Today Show' at seven o' clock and seemed like 'Jeopardy' would come on about 9 and I would watch 'Jeopardy,' and then watch something else at ten o' clock, and I did that for probably a couple of months, not really doing much of anything. And was out at a function, at some social event, and [HM] Wayman Smith, who was a black lawyer that I knew because of my father, but Wayman Smith and I are seated next to each other and he says, hey, he says, well, you know, when are you--aren't you gonna be graduating from law school soon? And I said, well, I graduated, and he said, and what are you doing? I said, nothing (laughter). And, and he said, well you can come with me and do nothing, and so that's what actually got me started into, into practicing, in--into doing something. And Wayman at that time was a municipal courts judge and, and practicing. So I would come down and meet him; the municipal court was just a block or so up the street. But I would come and, and meet with Wayman while he was on the bench and just observe what was happening in traffic court and the, the city court, and then during the day would go with him to his office and, and just handling--just kind of interviewing clients, getting a sense of, of what one does in, in a law office. So it got me up and got me out of bed and got me out from my 'Today Show,' 'Jeopardy' watching television routine. Story_ID: 130280 Speaker 1: But what got me to Boston [Massachusetts], at the time, I, I was dating a guy in, in Boston, and interviewed--he sent me out on a--he actually was a recruiter, and so he has a, a notice for a, a job, and said, you ought to go and interview for this. Well, I did, and I got the job. So I was working at Boston--I was working at Arthur D. Little as a researcher, as a--Arthur D. Little was a consulting firm and I was a researcher with them from--I went out there in February--in--I went out there in February, and--the first--the first part of February, my parents [Thomas Phillip Clarke and Mary Vincent Clarke] had given me--my father had given me a car after I graduated from law school, and so I was tooling out to Boston in my brand new car and got as far as Wilks-Barre, Pennsylvania, hit a patch of ice in the middle of an ice storm, and totaled the car, I mean, smashed the car up, and the battery split, the whole front end of the car--it was a Pontiac Luxury Le Mans, and so it was long front--the whole front of the car is compressed. And the highway patrol came and interviewed us later and said, looking at the damage from the car, they would've sworn that no one would've gotten out alive. Wore seatbelts, and that's what I--to this day, I always wear my seatbelt. But had--we both had our seatbelts on and we had--we, we walked away with no--with no injuries at all. But was in Boston from February until the, the summer, came back to St. Louis [Missouri] the end of February to take the bar exam. And, as I say, I didn't have a bar review course; that's generally what most people would do in, in preparation for the bar. I didn't have anybody else to study with. I just had books. My classmates who were taking Missouri and Illinois bar, I got their books--their books from the classes, and I just read the books by myself. And so I am just proud of that because that's an accomplishment; that's an accomplishment. But I came back to St. Louis the end of February, spent the weekend with a few friends who were going to be taking the bar, and drove up to Jefferson City [Missouri], did--sat for the bar on, I guess, Tuesday and Wednesday, that Thursday or Friday had gone on back to Boston and kind of tried to put it out of my mind of whether or not I had passed. My classmates who had taken the bar in, in September, meanwhile, had all passed and so they were practicing lawyers, and I'm kind of in this funk that I might not be successful. And, like I say, the results came out that April. And as it happened, we were in New Orleans [Louisiana]. My mom [Mary Vincent Clarke] and dad [Thomas Phillip Clarke] and my middle sister, we all come to New Orleans to see my younger sister [Thomasina] who was performing in a play at Xavier University, and my middle sister came back to St. Louis early, Denise came back to St. Louis ahead of us. My mom, dad, and I drove back together. And as we were parking the car to come to--come--coming into St. Louis, I asked--I got out of the car for some reason and went in--went into the house, and Denise just rolled over--she's in bed and she just rolled over and said, oh, you passed the bar, and then rolled back over. I ran outside yelling and telling my parents--one of the trees on our neighborhood was still standing at that point and my dad almost backs the car into the tree, but we're all very excited about that. The results had come out that summer--or, I'm sorry, that weekend. The results had come out probably that Sunday while we were in New Orleans. We all knew it, but nobody wanted to take the chance of finding out that we might get bad news, so-- Speaker 2: And ruining the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, and spoil--and spoil our trip. So this was Wednesday before I found out that I had passed. Well now, I start calling all my friends and telling them and they're like, you know, Anne-Marie, we know that, you know (laughter). That's old news. We've known that since Sunday. But my mom and my dad, my sisters, my classmates who had already been admitted to the bar, they went with me to, to my swearing in, and it was--it was--like, I said, it was just--it was just a wonderful, remarkable thing to know that I'm a lawyer too. Story_ID: 130281 Speaker 1: But practicing with my dad [Thomas Phillip Clarke]? Mm-mm, no (laughter). Speaker 2: So you didn't even, even--you never even tried. Speaker 1: Didn't even entertain it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Didn't, didn't even--and never did. Never--we never--we never worked together. We would never have worked together--I'm sorry. We would--it would--it never--it never would've worked with the--with the two of us trying to work together. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Well, now--let's see. Where do we go from here? Speaker 1: From Boston [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Okay, so you're in Boston still-- Speaker 1: I was in Boston-- Speaker 2: --you, you stayed in Boston after you passed-- Speaker 1: I--they--I was there from--got the results--I was sworn in, in May and then that August, was offered a position at Northeast Utilities in Hartford [Connecticut], and moved to--moved--actually, I moved to Middletown [Connecticut], which was just south of Hartford. I did not like Boston at all, I guess in part because I didn't have a car when I got there. I had to ride the subway. I never really found my way around. It was cold up there, and I just didn't care--I just didn't care for Boston, so I didn't do that much. I, I wasn't there that long, and worked and come home, that was about it. Connecticut, I loved. I loved Connecticut. I was working--at Northeast Utilities, I was assistant corporate secretary for them, so I was an officer of the company. I was part of the legal department. And I just enjoyed, enjoyed Connecticut. I had a little [Volkswagen] Karmann Ghia and--my Karmann Ghia--and I would drive--a, a bright yellow Karmann Ghia convertible. And we were tooling all over New England and all over Connecticut and, and just get out and, and, and go and drive. And I enjoyed--I enjoyed Connecticut. I enjoyed getting involved in things there. I was--eventually became president of an organization called The Black Women's League of Middletown. It was--you know, kind of the opposite of the junior league. But we were an organization of, of, of black women there in Connecticut and a lot of us were in the Middletown area, but doing community sort of--community sort of projects. I can remember a couple clothing drives that we did, voter registration that we did, some social things for, for the members. There may have been perhaps twenty of us or so. But just kind of finding my way when, when, when I was--when I was in Connecticut. I'm by myself; I didn't know anybody there. My family was still back here in St. Louis [Missouri]. I spent a lot of time running back to St. Louis 'cause I was very close to my--I'm, I'm a daddy's girl, there was no question about it, and I spent a lot of time coming back to St. Louis. And after a little more than three years or so, eventually did come back to St. Louis, knowing that if I came back, that it meant I would probably never ever leave, and I haven't, and I'm not sorry about it. Story_ID: 130282 Speaker 1: Coming back to St. Louis [Missouri] and--so what, what did you do when you came--when, when you came back? Speaker 2: When I came back in 1977, I was hired as staff counsel for--it's MetroBus now, or Metro, but it was Bi-State Development Agency that operates the, the public transportation, and I worked at Bi-State; I was the first and the only staff counsel that they had. They had a general counsel law firm that they were sending and spending big, big bucks, so it's the--and it was a political type position, so they decided we'll, we'll stop--we'll try to save some money and create a staff counsel position, but they continued to spend money with the big law firms, so eventually-- Speaker 1: The staff counsel for the, the--staff counsel for the-- Speaker 2: For Bi--it was Bi--called Bi-State Development Agency at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, Bi-State. Speaker 2: Bi-State Development Agency. They're now, I guess, just called Metro. But the bus and the Trams in the Arch. They had an airport, a small airport [St. Louis Downtown Airport, then Bi-State Parks Airport] over in--on the east side, not in East St. Louis [Illinois], but over on the east side, and now they operate right--the light rail system [MetroLink]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I was there a couple of years and when my job was phased out. Story_ID: 130283 Speaker 1: I then went into private practice and started with Bill Russell [William P. Russell] and Curtis [C.] Crawford. Bill Russell was a classmate of my father's from--well, not a classmate. He was at Lincoln University Law School [Lincoln University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri], but later than my father, and Joe McDuffie [Joseph S. McDuffie, Sr.] who had been a classmate. The two of them had started--had filed the school desegregation case here in St. Louis and that was what got me involved in working on--working on that case. Earlier in my legal practice of just trying to find my way around, I got back to [HM] Margaret Bush Wilson, came back--actually worked with her three times during my--during my legal career. The one summer that--before I went to Washington [D.C.] as an intern, I worked in her office for about--for about four weeks or so, and after law school, I worked in her--worked with Margaret for--before I moved to--when I was working with Wayman Bush [sic]--[HM] Wayman Smith and Margaret Bush Wilson, working with the two of them before I went to Boston [Massachusetts], and then after I came back to St. Louis, again, working at--working with Margaret Bush Wilson. So I had benefit of female mentoring, black women--a black--you know, a black woman lawyer being able to mentor me. Speaker 2: How, how--what was the--what do you consider the--now what, what, what did you learn from Margaret Bush Wilson that you couldn't learn say from Wayman Smith? Speaker 1: I learned how to practice law, and that was the thing that my father wanted to see that I learned. Their method of, of, of practice, their method of being a lawyer, one, it was a responsibility that they took very, very seriously, the trust that was placed in them for the work that they were doing. The second was that you did your work the way that it was supposed to be done, and Margaret will still tell you the story of me and these two pennies on a probate estate she had--she, she gave to me to, to balance, had to--you have to do an accounting on these estates, and I could not for the life of me--I did this, this accounting over and over and over again, and I was two pennies off. I could not find these two pennies, could not account for these two pennies, and I--and she'll tell you I went in there with these two doggone pennies and said, here, you know, take this accounting and these pennies and just take it to the court and be done with it. That's not how it's supposed to be done. And she sent me back again and again and again. Eventually, I found it. Eventually, I found it. But that was what she--that was--that was the way she and, and Wayman made sure that you did your work. It wasn't--it wasn't, you know, half-assed, it wasn't messed up, it wasn't--it was supposed to have been done right. It was supposed to be done in a manner that represented you well, that represented the office well. It was supposed to look good, and it was supposed to be the way that the law expected it to be. But I could not have asked for just a better start to getting into the practice of law, and then working with Bill Russell and Curtis Crawford, and I--you know, go ahead. Speaker 2: I guess what I was trying to get at earlier was what advice did Margaret Bush Wilson give you as, as a black woman that's different from what you got from these--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, what's different? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What's different? With Margaret--and, and the thing that I, I say about Margaret and observing her is you don't have to be loud. Because we, we are going to be different, and that's something that I've known early on. I'm not gonna be able to get into as, as a friend of mine said once get in a pissing contest with, you know, with, with these men; I don't want to. I am going to be different and I know that. And looking at how she carries herself. Wayman says it best 'cause Wayman describes her as Mary Poppins with a switchblade. Did he say that? Have you heard? (Laughter). But that's, that's the description. I mean, I have never, ever heard her raise her voice. I have never, ever heard her get loud. I've never heard her use a curse word. I've never heard her be anything but a lady, and she is--I mean, she--she's, she's wonderful. So her, her advice is how she's presented herself, how I have seen her present herself, and what she said. You know, you're a lady. Be a lady. And that's, that's the advice. That's the advice. But Mary Poppins with a switchblade. Speaker 2: That's interesting, yeah. Speaker 1: That's her. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: That's her. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She'll cut you up and be just as nice about it. Speaker 2: Okay. So, so you worked with her off and on as an intern while-- Speaker 1: I worked with her at three-- Speaker 2: --while you were in-- Speaker 1: --at three different periods-- Speaker 2: --three different periods. Speaker 1: --in, in my legal--in my legal career. I'm a better person for it. Story_ID: 130284 Speaker 1: Now did you have much contact with [HM] Frankie Freeman? Speaker 2: With Frankie, I have had more in recent years. We've never--we've never worked together, office together, and it's been probably more in the last fifteen or so years in part because of, of political things and civic things that I've done here in, in the [St. Louis, Missouri] community. But again, it's, it's the same sorta thing. I have never heard Frankie use a bad word. I have never heard Frankie raise her voice. And knowing that--because these are ladies who knew first and foremost, we're ladies, we're women, we're not gonna be the same as you guys, we know that, but we are going to be effective. You're not gonna take us for granted in the things that we do. One of the stories that Margaret [HM Margaret Bush Wilson] talks about, I think it was a job or something that she was turned down for, and she talks about how when she walked away from this office, she had to walk down these steps that had metal treads on the steps. I've asked her about the story and she says, I don't even remember it, but I have. But she talks about how when she had to walk down these steps that her heels made a, a click, you know, you heard her, her heel clicking on these--on these metal treads. And she walked deliberately and solidly on those steps, making sure that they heard her loudly going down those steps. Because she said she could've gone down, you know, with kind of a defeatist attitude, quietly tipping out, and she said no. You know, and so she went out. They don't even--they're not even seeing her. They're back in their office and where--but she heard the noise that--the sound, and to her it was a sound of this is not--you know, I'm not gonna let you all defeat me by turning me down or whatever it was that had happened in that office. That's something that stayed with me. It's something that I've always remembered. And something that I have just always tried to carry, carry for in the, the, the various things that I've done. Story_ID: 130285 Speaker 1: Kind of fast forwarding a little bit, when I was elected to--when I was appointed to the police board, which was a very--of all the things that I have ever done in my life, that was probably my most unpleasant experience of getting on the police board [St. Louis Board of Police Commissioners]. Speaker 2: Okay now be-- Speaker 1: Before you get there? Speaker 2: Now this--what, what year is this? Speaker 1: Getting on the police board was April 19--well, the, the unpleasant part was April, May of 1993. And-- Speaker 2: You were appointed in '93 [1993]. Speaker 1: I was appointed to the police board by the--by [Missouri] Governor Mel Carnahan. I was recommended for the appointment by Senator J.B. "Jet" Banks [1924 - 2003], and Senator Banks is my godmother's husband. The newspapers--and this was my introduction into newspaper placement and publicity and all of that, but the governor--the police board is probably the biggest political appointment in St. Louis City [Missouri] and Kansas City [Missouri]. People actively seek wanting, you know, to get on the police board. Speaker 2: Now, now, now at the time, you were a juvenile hearing officer--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, and, and that's kind of, I guess, to, to, to set that up, I was--back in 1985, applied--I applied to become referee of the juvenile--of the juvenile division. The finalists were myself and a white man who was actually filling the job in an acting capacity. The judges of the--of the court have to select the referee, and it took the judges five months and at least that many ballots before they finally selected the white man for the job over me. We knew that the two of us would be the finalists and because he was in the acting position, he--you know, he certainly would, would be seen as having a, a, a leg up over me on this, but the politics were such--and, and the difference of 1985 and 2007 is that you probably would never have anything like this happen. But the way that he--that, that they finally broke the stalemate--because it was a stalemate. We needed sixteen votes to secure the position; I think the first vote I had fourteen, didn't have the sixteen, and it just went back and forth like this over months, September, October, November, and finally in December when he got the vote. But how he got it was, the judge is saying, well Anne-Marie is married and has a husband, the other guy is the sole supporter of his family, and so he should get it more. Yep. But that's 1985 and that's because--that was with a court that was at that point predominantly white men, so that argument is going to go somewhere with them. Two thousand seven [2007], it's not gonna happen. Story_ID: 130286 Speaker 1: So what happens then, I'm offered the part-time position as hearing officer, but to avoid going through the same process, that we have to go through a vote, and we have to advertise, and we have to go through a vote, the judge at that point who was the presiding judge over the juvenile division said, I'll just appoint you as an interim hearing officer. You'll be--you're not gonna be an employee, you're not gonna get any benefit, but you'll be the hearing officer--part-time hearing officer, and just each month you'll submit a bill. Nobody knew in 1986 that in 1993 I was gonna have this fantastic opportunity of being able to be on the police board, but had I been--had I been an employee of the court, had I been selected as an--as the employee of the hearing--as the hearing office, I would not have been able to be appointed as the--to the police board because I would've been getting a state check. I would've been an employee of the state and could not be an employee and then serve in this appointed position. So it was this incredible luck of, of just how thing--and good fortune for me of just how things worked out. As I say, there are no benefits from it and I served in this capacity from 19--as an--a temporary--well, temporary appointed interim independent contractor, and that was the thing I had to continue to emphasize, but from 1986 to 1998 until I was appointed into the position that I now have. But what it allowed me to do was to have this tremendous opportunity of being on the--on the board of police commissioners. So that's what--so 1986, I'm this independent contractor, and then when the governor [Mel Carnahan] makes the announcement that I'm to be appointed in 1993, that was the first thing. Oh, she can't do that. She's the--you know, she's the hearing (unclear). No, I'm an independent contractor. And not that any of us could've foreseen that this was what was gonna happen in 1993, but it allowed me to get appointed. Well, it allowed me to get appointed, but then that's when all of the, the politics and all of the (unclear) really, really started. Senator [J.B. "Jet"] Banks was the speaker--was the president--I'm not gonna get the position right, but he was the highest ranking legislator in--he was the highest ranking black in the state legislature. He was the senator, the senior senator in, in the state, and he wanted me on the police board. His wife, my godmother, suggested me. I didn't ask for it. As I tell people, nowhere on my life to-do list did I say let's go and see about getting on the police board, but there were a lot of people who didn't wanna see me get there. Story_ID: 130928 Speaker 1: All right. This is the police board [St. Louis, Missouri Board of Police Commissioners] story. Speaker 2: This is the police board story. Speaker 1: So tell, tell, tell me what happened. Speaker 2: Well, Senator [J.B. "Jet"] Banks nom-- recommended me for the--for the position. The governor announces my appointment, and the furor began of why I should not be appointed. The headline in the paper above the fold on front, front page above the fold complete with picture was "Senator Picks Friend For Police Board" and what later then becomes almost a joke at the--at my confirmation hearing was why would the senator pick his enemy? Of course he picked a friend. The newspaper continued to want to make--because it was more of a story to say that I was Senator Banks' goddaughter, you know, that he was the godfather. He was--he, he died in 2004 [sic, 2003], but he was the political dealmaker here in St. Louis. I mean, he was the go-to guy for everything. And his wife is my godmother; Senator Banks is not my godfather. And--I mean, I had a reporter ask me, well what do you mean he's not your godfather? You know, why isn't he your godfather? Because that was going to be the story. But the day of my confirmation hearing, my mom [Mary Vincent Clarke] and dad [Thomas Phillip Clarke] come up to Jefferson--they were in St. Louis at the time. They came to Jefferson City [Missouri]. We were all excited about this tremendous honor that--that's being bestowed upon me, and just before the confirmation hearing, I'm called into conference room with, with the governor [Mel Carnahan]; another attorney was being appointed with me. But he calls us into a conference room and basically is telling me, I don't know that this is gonna happen. You know, Senator Banks wants it and we'll go ahead and push it forward, but I don't think it's gonna happen. Speaker 1: Who had to confirm it? Speaker 2: The senate had to confirm me. Speaker 1: The state senate? Speaker 2: The state--the state senate, which was Senator Banks' chamber, but this was a bigger--you know, it was actually--people were saying this is gonna be a bigger issue than, than just Senator Banks. It involved the control of the police board. To this point, there had never been but one black serving on the police board at a time. The first black to serve on the board was a former state senator, T.D. McNeal, and he actually was present--had been present on the board when--back in 1973. He had served on the board, there had been one black at a time serving on the board. It's a five-person board, four people appointed by the governor and the fifth being the mayor, who is called an ex officio member, but he's a full member of the board. So it's a five-person board controlling the police department. And until that time--until my appointment, there had never been but one black. Well, there was a black who was a hold-over, Charles Micheaux was on the board and actually was serving as the vice president of--at the time that I came on the board. I would be appointed, making two blacks, and St. Louis had just elected its first black mayor, [HM] Freeman Bosley [Jr.], so here, we were gonna face the unprecedented, unbelievable situation of not just one, not just two, but three blacks making a black majority on the police board. Speaker 1: Now does this create a backlash situation you think? Speaker 2: It was--it was--that's what was railroading this whole--or driving this whole effort to try and railroad my, my confirmation hearing. Story_ID: 130929 Speaker 1: So the afternoon that we expected the confirmation hear--that we expected the confirmation vote to take place, we had the hearing, and they asked questions about my relationship with Senator [J.B. "Jet"] Banks, which really were not the sort of questions that normally would've been asked, and the other issue involved, the then--the other hold-over member from the board was Jim Conway [James F. Conway], who was a former mayor of St. Louis [Missouri], and Jim Conway was known as Jim, middle name was "Closed Homer Phillips Hospital", Conway; that's how most blacks describe, remember him. So he was the other member of the--of the police board, and then myself and a, a white lawyer, Matthew [J.] Padberg coming on, and [HM] Freeman Bosley [Jr.] being the fifth member. So the hearing itself, the confirmation vote, did not take place that afternoon. I drove back to Jefferson City [Missouri]--or drove back from Jefferson City to St. Louis, really not sure what was going to happen, had to go back to Jefferson City a couple days later, and the governor [Mel Carnahan] called me on my way to Jefferson City and said well, you know, we still haven't done the vote, we don't know what's gonna happen, but when you get here, stop in to see us. So I called Senator Banks who is--who I'm beholden to and told him, I said, well I've gotten this call and I'm on my way. He said, well--you know, when you get here stop--you know, stop in. When I got to Jefferson City, they called--when I got to the senate and to the capital, they called him off of the floor, and he came out--and I mean, I had--to this day, I don't know how I made it to Jefferson City. It's a two-hour drive. I would've cried if I could, but if I was crying, I wasn't gonna be able to see as, as I'm driving, but I was as probably as low as I could've been because, first place, I didn't ask for this appointment. I did not ask to go through--to get appointed to this board and now I'm getting raked through every imaginable ugly thing that you can possibly think for no reason other than I'm looking to serve in this position that I've been asked to--that I've been appointed to. Got to Jefferson City, went to the senate, and Senator Banks comes off and he says, Colonel, what's wrong? He said, why the long face? And I started, you know, breaking out into--or trying to break out into tears, and I said, wait a minute, I said, what did you call me? And he said, Colonel. And I said what, what happened? He said you were--he said you were confirmed on a voice vote without debate--you were confirmed unanimously on a voice without debate. And I mean, I'm just stunned, startled because in the probably hour and a half since I had gotten off the phone that this was not going to happen, that it not only has happened, but has happened quicker than anyone could've believed or imagined. With that, I then went to see the governor, and he, you know, basically said, well, you've been confirmed, but I think somebody may challenge you. And he said, well what do you plan to do? I said--I said Governor, I said, I've been appointed--I said I've been confirmed unanimously on a voice vote without debate. I said I'm gonna go and serve on this police board [St. Louis, Missouri Board of Police Commissioners], and that was what I did. Probably a couple weeks later, we then had a--our, our first board meeting. Before I was going through the confirmation process, Senator Banks had explained that the governor had wanted--that Jim Conway who was the vice president of the--I'm sorry, Jim Conway who was a member of the board, that that's who the governor wanted to be president of the police board. It's the governor's board, it--you know, and so if the governor is saying this is what you have to do, this is what you're going to have to do. My thought until he said that was that Charles Micheaux, the black man, would've been the person that I would've been voting for for, for president. But if these are my instructions, this is what I'm going to do. Senator Banks has said this and Freeman Bosley knew this, Charles Micheaux knew this, Matt Padberg, we all knew that Jim Conway was going to be nominated, and that's who we as the new nominees and new board member would be voting for for police board president. Story_ID: 130930 Speaker 1: And--now this seems like--well, this seems like a prelude to a big storm because-- Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's-- Speaker 1: This is Jim "Closed Homer Phillips"-- Speaker 2: Jim "Closed-- Speaker 1: --Conway [James F. Conway]. Speaker 2: --Homer Phillips Hospital [St. Louis, Missouri]" Conway. Speaker 1: You, you know what the community's gonna think of this. Speaker 2: Oh, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Exactly. It was one thing for him to be on the board [St. Louis Board of Police Commissioners], but the idea for him to become president and to become president because a black woman is gonna be the one who gives him the vote to put him on there. But a deal's a deal. And as I have explained--would, would say through the process, I said, now I practiced domestic relation law and there is no more emotional, tougher area of law to practice with, but when I had no, I guess, kinda forewarned--forewarning about was just the way that this would be handled so publicly. The night before the vote, I'm getting phone calls from politicians and other individuals asking me what I'm going to do and the thing is, you know what I'm going to do because I've told the governor [Mel Carnahan]--this is what the governor said I'm going to--that, that we're supposed to do, Senator [J.B. "Jet"] Banks has said this is what we're going to do, and this is what I have to do. But what I was not prepared for or expected was that it was--that the public vote--that the vote was taken in public. I guess I thought we would do that in an executive session and simply announce the result. Well, we have the, the nomination is made, Conway's nominated, he's seconded, the vote was three for Conway and two for [Charles] Micheaux. I thought it was over then, but it wasn't because what we did--also, I had never been to a police board meeting until my first police board meeting. What I also didn't know was that the police board then allowed a period for public comment. At the end of our meeting after we had--the vote had been early on, but at the end of the meeting, ten people had signed--I mean, this happened in May 1993. I remember it as if--as if it was yesterday. There were ten people who had signed the list to make public comment. The first was a little white guy who came up and wanted to talk about some cars that the police department had bought; that was fine. And we're all seated in this huge conference room, a very ornate table, and I was seated--my seat at that point was on the right side of the--the right side of the table--of this huge conference table. Speaker 1: Were, were you seated next to Conway or? Speaker 2: Conway was actually on the other--well, by this time, he had moved to the center--no, he didn't. Conway was on the other side. I was on the right side, Conway was on the left side. Micheaux was actually in the chair presiding and [HM Freeman] Bosley [Jr.] was on the last chair, the fifth chair. Conway was four, Micheaux, [Matthew J.] Padberg was two. Speaker 1: So the mayor sits on the police board--okay. Speaker 2: The mayor--the mayor is the fifth person-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of, of--the fifth member of, of the police board, so that's-- Speaker 1: So that made a three to two-- Speaker 2: Well, it made-- Speaker 1: You got three blacks to, to, to-- Speaker 2: That's what I said, it was the first time ever that there had been a black majority. It--and, and-- Speaker 1: Majority--so you could've actually elected Micheaux-- Speaker 2: Well that was-- Speaker 1: That was the-- Speaker 2: That was what everybody expected. And that was what until the--when, when Senator Banks told me that he was--you know, that he was nominating me for the police board, which was all--you know, that was--normally would've been just saying it's a done deal. He told me that and then he said, and you're gonna have to vote for Jim Conway for president. Well, I mean--you know, either you're gonna be on the board or you're not. And a deal is a deal, and if this is what he knew and understood, which was what was going to come from my being appointed, then I'm gonna do what I'm being--you know, what I'm being asked to do. But these ten people wanted to speak, the first being the man about the car. The other nine were black people who came up and said, as, as I have described it, if they could've severed my head from my body with a rusty knife and served it up on an aluminum plate, not a silver platter, but an aluminum plate, they would've done that. I was never in my life as wounded as I was by this public outcry of just opposition. One of the first speakers was pragmatic about it. He said, I'm disappointed with the outcome, but I understand the--you know, the political--the political implication. That-- Speaker 1: So this is after the vote? Speaker 2: This is after the vote but still-- Speaker 1: So the vote was-- Speaker 2: --during the meeting. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The vote--the vote has been taken. Speaker 1: The vote was taken already. Speaker 2: The vote had been taken after the start of the meeting. Conway was now presiding, but at the conclusion of every meeting, we would then allow for the public comment. I am seated--and as I told people later, it never occurred to me that I could get up and walk out. I, I could have, but it never occurred to me to do that. Speaker 1: Let me be clear, though. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Now that means that, that Micheaux and, and Bosley voted for Conway, too. Speaker 2: No, no, no, it was a three--it was a three, two. Story_ID: 130931 Speaker 1: [James F.] Conway--Conway got his vote, my vote, and Matt Padberg [Matthew J. Padberg]. Matt Padberg was the third person appointed [to the St. Louis, Missouri Board of Police Commissioners]. The second person appointed with me. There was--I--the two of us were confirmed at the same time, coming on the board together. [HM] Freeman [Bosley, Jr.]--this was--this--and this is the first board meeting, so--since Freeman was elected mayor. Speaker 2: So you knew Freeman was going to vote for [Charles] Micheaux. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Oh, yeah. I knew that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They're best friends or very, very good friends, and they thought that I possibly would--they--somehow they thought if they made it very, very difficult for me that I as this poor little woman was going to back down and knowing that it would be uncomfortable, I would do what they wanted me to do. That was their thinking, and that was what everybody expected and thought. And it's like, you know, folks, I'm sorry. You know, I know what I have to do. I'm not--would I have liked to have voted for Jim--you know, for Charles Micheaux? Of course I would. This has--you know, to have no other--only one other black person had ever been president of the police board. So, yes, I would've liked to have seen Charles Micheaux as president. Could I do it? No. The governor [Mel Carnahan] has--you know, we know what our instructions are, that this is what you have to do. What happened that got me through this horrible, horrible, horrible ordeal, the way we were seated in, in the conference room. As I say, I'm on the right side, the people are standing at a podium in the middle of the room. My husband is there, and my husband is, is wonderful. My husband, Richard [K.] Gaines, is just an incredible man who has supported me through all kinds of things that I've done, and this particularly. But as it happened, he was seated so that I'm looking at him directly over the shoulder of the people who were coming, standing at the podium talking. And I just locked my gaze on him. Now, it looked like I was looking directly at each person who came and spoke to me, and that's all that they saw, that I looked at each person who came there and spoke, but actually I'm looking just beyond them at my husband, who was sitting just over their shoulder, and that's what got me through it. That's what got me through it. But I sat there, I listened to each--well, I heard, I saw each of those nine black people who came up and said just horrible, horrible, horrible things about me--about me and what I've done, and sat there, listened to them, meeting ended, got up and then we went back into the executive--in--into our executive session. But what it did, throughout the department, all everybody was saying, that Colonel Clarke, because we had a lifetime title of Colonel. "That Colonel Clarke has balls," so that was my compliment, and that was my introduction in--into the police department. Story_ID: 130932 Speaker 1: Now, now what did that really mean in terms of the power of the police board [St. Louis, Missouri Board of Police Commissioners] to have [James F.] Conway as the--as a chairman? Does that--did that give--'cause it--well, at the time, you had like--was, was [Charles] Micheaux getting ready to leave? Speaker 2: No, Micheaux was-- Speaker 1: So, so he was on-- Speaker 2: Micheaux was-- Speaker 1: So there's still like-- Speaker 2: Micheaux was still going to be on. Speaker 1: There's three black people and-- Speaker 2: There's--and, and this is when I say-- Speaker 1: --not that it has to--every issue would boil down to three against two, but just-- Speaker 2: Well, it, it, it--there's a wonderful cartoon that I have of--oh, and the other thing that I did not include, we also had a black police chief. Clarence Harmon had been selected as police chief probably the year or so before, so this was the first black police chief. So we had the setting for just, I guess, everything good or everything bad, or everything wonderful or everything not so wonderful that you could possibly imagine, but certainly things that no one had ever, ever contemplated. You have, like I say, a black majority, the potential for a black president, which didn't happen because Charles did not get elected, and a black police chief, and from that start, everything bad that you can think of happened. Conway and--and Conway and Micheaux had been on the board that selected Clarence Harmon as, as police chief, but Harmon had not been--Harmon had not been Charles--had not been Jim Conway's choice for police chief. Harmon believed forever that Jim Conway was trying to oust him as police chief. And the thing of it is, you can't do anything unless you get three votes. Well, the three votes that was gonna take him for anything, for Jim to get anything done, was gonna be Matt Padberg [Matthew J. Padberg] and myself, if anything he wanted to get done. Nobody ever said anything about you gotta get rid of the police chief, and we weren't looking to get rid of the police chief, but that was the first issue, that Conway and Harmon were at odds. [HM] Freeman Bosley [Jr.] who is the black mayor and Jim Conway who was a former mayor didn't get along 'cause you got the, the power struggle of former mayor versus former mayor. Micheaux is, you know, this, this would-be president, and so he's there now functioning as the vice president under Jim Conway, who that--you know, that wasn't working well. And then Matt Padberg and I are just kinda sitting here looking and shaking our heads and wondering what the heck did we get ourselves into and why? But this went on for a year, and it was horrible. I mean, we were in the paper constantly. The police department was constantly in the newspaper for one thing or another, one issue or another, Conway something, Micheaux something, Harmon something. It was--and you just, just picked up the newspaper, it was just always something. After a while, it got to the place where Harmon kind of--and, and you would think with black police chief, black majority board, at least that would kind of set the tone for we can move forward and, and kind of all work in, in harmony together, and it just--it just wasn't happening. It wasn't happening. And so the governor [Mel Carnahan] that following January when Conway's term ended did not reappoint Jim Conway. Story_ID: 130933 Speaker 1: Well when that happened, the--as I say, I--nowhere in my life to-do list did I say let's get on the police board [St. Louis, Missouri Board of Police Commissioners], but once I got there--when [James F.] Conway's gone, the president, board president spot opens up. The governor's [Mel Carnahan's] announcement was that his new replacement who was a lawyer--and, and the other thing that was interesting about the board, we had three lawyers with [HM] Freeman Bosley [Jr.] a lawyer, myself, and Matt Padberg [Matthew J. Padberg], so that made for kind of an unprecedented situation. When the governor makes his announcement of his replacement for Jim Conway, he appoints another lawyer, Jim Haar [sic, Bob Haar], and in the announcement, he says Jim [sic] Haar, his appointee for president of the police board. Well, it's the governor's board, he can appoint who he wanted. That was how T.D. McNeal became president. He was appointed president--appointed to the board and appointed as president. You had the election which is kind of a formality, but the governor can designate who he wants as the president. Just like the [U.S.] Supreme Court, you designate who you want to be the Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court. Well, the first thing I did was get on the phone and I called Matt--or I called--well, I called Matt fist. Matt and I became good friends throughout all of this. And I said, Matt, I wanna be president of the police board. You know, I, I had gone through a baptism, not of fire, but of, of--you know, hail and brimstone, and everything awful that you could think of, and fine, I wanna be president of the police board. I knew I had two votes; I had mine and Matt's. And, and he said, Anne-Marie, no problem, I'll--you'll have my vote. I then called Bob Haar, the--who's been designated as president of the board, and I said, Bob, are, are you looking to come to this board and, and be president? He said, Anne-Marie, I didn't know anything about it until I saw it in, in, in the paper. He said no. I said, well let me tell you, I wanna be president. He said fine, you got my vote. So I was gonna be president; I had three votes. I called Freeman and I said, we need to talk about the police board. And this is where I, I, I also say, I did not--going on the police board, I didn't consider myself a politician, I said, but I became one with this whole experience. So I called Freeman, we talked, he said, well, yeah, let's us get together. So Freeman and Charles and I all got together in the mayor's office. And it was wonderful when Freeman was mayor because we had an entree that we never had of being able to pick up the phone and call the mayor and go and see the mayor and, and bring up issues, and then working with him on, on the police board. But went to his office and we're talking, and--you know, we said, well one of us should become mayor--Charles, I guess, said, well, one of us--one of us should become board president. Well, I'm already knowing I got three votes, so whatever else is gonna go on, it doesn't matter, but I know I, I have my three votes. And he's not saying where he's coming or what--or what he's gonna do as far as supporting me. I may have even told him that I had three votes. But when we left that meeting, I called Freeman later and I told him, I said, look, I said I have my three votes, I'm gonna be president, I said, I want this to be unanimous. And the politician light bulb had went off. I told him--now, Charles was vice president. I said, if you can't make this a unanimous vote, I said I'm gonna call an election for vice president and he's not gonna be vice president. I don't know where that came from, I don't know how I thought of it, but then it's on Freeman. Because this, this is his buddy. This is his buddy. So it's now on him to somehow make this happen. What I admired most about Freeman with this, this was the same time that the state was trying to pass casino gambling here in Missouri, and he is trying to marshal this through the city and also concerned about seeing what's happening with it throughout the rest of the state. This is the night before the--our election--the board election was going to be the day after the state election, so he and I were on the phone all through that night as late as midnight where--'cause he's waiting on the results for this gambling and, like, Freeman, what's gonna happen. You know, tell me something. What, what are we gonna do tomorrow? He said, I really don't know. He says Charles is--you know, I, I can't get him to commit to anything. I said, well just understand. I said, if it's not unanimous, I said, this is what--this is what we're gonna do. Story_ID: 130934 Speaker 1: So we came into the meeting and he just looked at me said, I don't know. I said, fine, we called--I took the nominations. I was--Matt [Matthew J. Padberg] nominated me, Bob [Haar] seconded the nomination, and then Charles [Micheaux] thought--spoke up and he said, well then it's--he said it'll be unanimous. Anne-Marie will get it. So that was how I became the second black president of the police board [St. Louis Board of Police Commissioners] and the first woman president of the police board just a year later [1994]--less--not quite a year later, eleven months later after this horrible way of coming onto the board. As the board president, I made it my business--because my, my position at the court was half time, so I basically had half time to devote to the police department. They had--they had me for meetings, they had me for public appearances, they had me involved in the individual--the officers--just different things that the--that the officers were doing. I was very instrumental in getting women officers--women police officers' support network started that still continues. I was able to work on some diversity issues within the--within the police department, some of that's still continuing. We were able to make some incredible appointments of the first black woman captain--I'm sorry the first woman captain, the first black woman--first black woman captain that we were able to get appointed, being able to move blacks into the higher ranks of, of the police department, but spending just so very much of my time with the police department, but also working with just this incredible group of men and women who protect and serve the citizens of St. Louis in the State of Missouri. Story_ID: 130294 Speaker 1: Tell us about the--now there was a, a lawsuit, right? Filed by one of the white [St. Louis, Missouri] police officers who was-- Speaker 2: We had a-- Speaker 1: --dismissed? Speaker 2: Well, there are a number of lawsuits that have been filed by police officers, and one of the things that I discover all the time are just the number of cases that were filed against me. As the board [St. Louis Board of Police Commissioners] president, I'm the named defendant generally in most of these lawsuits, so it's a, a huge list. But we had any number of cases that were, were filed alleging one--just one sort of--in, in many instances because the officers were either wrongfully terminated or demoted or some--something of that sort. One of the most recent cases involved an officer, Thomas Moran, a, a white police--I forget, I think his rank was sergeant, and he was charged with a, a beating of a mentally retarded man, Gregory Bell. The burglar alarm went off in the family's home, the police responded to the burglar alarm going off, Bell couldn't explain what he was doing, couldn't turn the code--didn't know the code, and the--he was beaten. There was criminal charges filed against the police department--against the police department--or against the police officer, against Moran and some other officers, and the--he was acquitted. The case was actually tried in Kansas City because of just the adverse publicity. He was acquitted of the criminal charges and then there were civil--there was a civil suit filed and he was found responsible for the--for, for the man's beating--for beating, taking--being the supervisor involved with the--on, on that call. Moran then--so he was terminated, the department terminated. He then filed suit against the police board with me as the board president to get his job back in federal court. The case was set before Charles [Alexander] Shaw, who is a friend of mine, but--and we will say, the black bar in St. Louis is not so large that you would not be friendly with other black lawyers and black judges in the community. But the attorney--Moran's attorney challenged Charles Shaw's ability to hear the--to hear the case and asked him to recuse himself, and he refused to do it. He ruled in the police department's favor. Moran then appealed. He, he ruled in the police department's favor on a motion for summary judgment, meaning that there--the case--there was no reason for the case to go forward. Moran then sued and the case went up to the court of appeals, with the court of appeals, just writing the scathing opinion against Judge Shaw for refusing to get off the case and saying that he should have revealed our relationship, that the two of us are, are, are friends. Charles Shaw then wrote a scathing opinion as to why these people--why--and, and he called them--I think he said six white men or six old white men or something, but--I mean, it--it's unheard of in the first place to be faced with this sort of, of criticism by your fellow judges, and then to suggest that because he and I as, as two black people, and [HM] Wayman Smith was by this time on the board. Charles Micheaux was, was eventually replaced, Wayman Smith came on the board. So at that point, we had all five lawyers; all five members of the police board were, were lawyers. With Wayman and Charles, Charles Shaw, and myself all being acquainted with each other, the attorney for Thomas Moran are saying that Charles Shaw should never have had this case. Now, no one has ever criticized any white judge because he has a relationship with any other white lawyer or white member of the community, but somehow the idea that Charles Shaw could not be fair, could not be impartial in this case because of, of our relationship is just totally bogus. I mean, it, it, it--it's uncalled for, it is insulting. He--after writing his, his opinion, he did get off of--he did get off of the case. But the case is, is widely circulated by members of the black bar of just how biased and unfair even now the white--the majority bar is to us as black lawyers and black judges. Story_ID: 130295 Speaker 1: Now in 1984, you wrote 'The History of the Black Bar.' Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: It was published in the 1984 issue of the St. Louis Bar Journal, and tell us why this is important and what is the history of the black bar? Speaker 2: The history of the black bar article that I wrote was part of a bar journal dedicated to black lawyers. The Bar Association of St. Louis [Missouri], BAMSL, is the largest voluntary bar association in this area. You pay to voluntarily join this organization. We don't have to be a member of the--of, of BAMSL. But in 1982, '83 [1983], I was president of the Mound City Bar Association [St. Louis, Missouri] and got to know one of the--well, I think the, the president at that time of BAMSL who was an attorney, Maury Poscover. And one thing led to another and I think he attended one of the Mound City Bar dinners and just remarked later that some of the history that was--that we were giving and the various remarks were things that he said as a St. Louisan and as a lawyer, I should know these things, I should know these people that you're--that we're talking about at this dinner, and I don't know--I, I didn't know any of them. So one thing led to another and eventually, the editor of the Bar Journal, which is published quarterly, but contacted me, if I would kind of serve as an editor to get--they needed at least four articles for the journal. Each quarter, they'll be on a different topic, domestic relations, product liability, probate law, whatever, but this was the first time ever that we had a magazine dedicated and focused to--focused on, on the black lawyer. So I took on the gargantuan task of doing this history on the black bar, which hadn't been done. The American Bar Association, which is the largest voluntary association of lawyers, as a law student and throughout my legal career, always heard that, you know, back in the day, the ABA did not admit black lawyers. My father [Thomas Phillip Clarke] was never a member of the American Bar Association, and he always said, because the ABA didn't admit black lawyers. We heard this but we never really knew if--just what are--what--where the source of, of, of the story lay. And as a part of my research, I just sat down--I found the minutes, the actual minutes from the ABA probably around 1912, there had been in some of the state bar associations--I think two states actually had admitted black lawyers, and they showed up at this ABA meeting and, of course, the, the white bar was aghast that the black folks dare to be a part of their organization, and they passed a resolution decreeing that black folk were not to be members of the American Bar Association. That's in their minutes. That's in the proceedings of their meetings. I have this, I found this, and included it in the history. As a result of the--they're not--black lawyers not being able to be a part of the American Bar Association--and blacks were coming out of law school--Washington University [St. Louis, Missouri] is--the first black to graduate from there was a man named Walter Farmer, and he graduated in I think the late 1800s or so. The story was that none of the students would march with him in the, the graduation procession, and the dean marched with him in the--in, in, in his graduation procession. But blacks were coming out. There were black lawyers in many--you know, throughout, throughout the country, not being able to be in a bar association. 1925, the National Bar Association was founded as a result of the ABA's refusal to let blacks be a part of their organization. Story_ID: 130296 Speaker 1: What we did not know, and the Mound City Bar [Association, St. Louis, Missouri], which my father [Thomas Phillip Clarke] was always a part of and always encouraged. As--again, as a student, I would go to--he kind of grudgingly would let me go to the Mound City Bar meetings. You're a student, you're not a lawyer, you're not supposed to be here, but, you know, just sit there, and the same thing with National Bar [Association]. I went to NBA meetings as a--as, as a law student. But nobody knew--we always talked about the Mound City Bar was one of--and how, how we describe it was one of the oldest black bars in the Midwest, but nobody knew how old it was. And, and in, in working on this, this article, I went to the public library. The St. Louis Argus newspaper is on--was at that time was on microfilm in the--in the library. I didn't know where to start, so I guess I kinda started at the beginning, and I'm just reading through microfilm and reading through microfilm, and I had the eureka moment where I just--I find the call to meeting. But January 1922, the--there was an, an invitation for black lawyers in St. Louis [Missouri] to come to a meeting to organize the--and at that time, it was called the St. Louis Negro Bar Association, and the meeting was held probably the week later. Speaker 2: How did it become the Mound City Bar Association? Speaker 1: Mound City is the name that's kind of given to the area of north St. Louis. It's the--ion part because of the Indian mounds. There were--there are huge collective Indian mounds in Cahokia, Illinois. But Mound City--we have Mound City Medical, Mound City Dental, and Mound City Bar, and so all of those are the black, black professional organizations. But Mound City was founded before the National Bar. National Bar was founded in, in 1925; the Mound City Bar Association was founded in 1922. And until I had done my research and had found this date, nobody knew when it was founded. Folks were thinking, well, I think it was here in the '30s [1930s], I'm not really sure. But we--and so we're now able as an association to celebrate the, the founding of, of, of the Mound City Bar, the actual founding of the Mound City Bar. Speaker 2: Who are some of the, the significant figures in the founding of the Mound City Bar Association? Speaker 1: Who--I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Who were some of the significant lawyers who founded the Mound City Bar Association? Speaker 1: The founders--there were names that I knew of through my father, Silas Garner [ph.] is a name that's listed, not necessarily a founder, but some of the early members, Judge Lucas [ph.] who was a municipal--I'm sorry, was a magistrate judge here in St. Louis, Virgil [ph.], Virgil--well, Virgil Lucas. Bob Witherspoon [Robert Witherspoon] was a, a civil rights attorney here in, in St. Louis. And you say civil rights attorney, most of the attorneys, the early attorneys were civil rights attorneys because that was the sort of work that they had to do, was fighting for people's rights, so they were also doing domestic and doing probate and doing criminal, but they were doing the early civil rights work because the--because of the discrimination in, in this area. But when you look at the list of names of, of, of men, they were all men, who signed this call to meeting, they're names of lawyers that I heard of and knew of through, through, through my father and just when he came, came to the bar in 1946. Speaker 2: Now, now were--who were the first black women members? Speaker 1: The first black women would've been [HM] Margaret Bush Wilson. There was another lady, and I'm not calling her name, Dorothy [L. Freeman] something was actually the first black woman to graduate from law school [Lincoln University School of Law, St. Louis] and admitted to the bar. Margaret was the second. There was another classmate of them--classmate of theirs, of Margaret's and my father's, Lula Howard, and the picture that my dad has from 1946 at, at his first bar meeting, my father and my godfather and Lula Howard are all pictured on that photograph. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: [HM] Frankie Freeman came later. Frankie was, I think, in the early '50s [1950s] or so when, when she came to St. Louis. Story_ID: 130297 Speaker 1: Now, I've been asked to ask you about Evelyn Baker (unclear). Speaker 2: Evelyn Baker is my law school--high school classmate, actually. She was a year ahead of me at Rosati-Kain [High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. I say, Rosati-Kain was a wonderful school. And in 1983, Evelyn was appointed the first circuit judge in the State of Missouri. She's still sitting on the bench and she's actually in the, the court across the street. But she was a high school classmate, law school classmate because I had jumped ahead in college, and then she had--she had added a year on by going--I think she went to--she went somewhere out of the country for, for school, so we wound up in the same class. So, there, there were four black women that graduated in, in my class, and Evelyn and I are still in, in practice here in St. Louis. Story_ID: 130298 Speaker 1: Now, now you--just switching I guess to a philosophical question here. Do you have a, a judicial philosophy? Speaker 2: More so when I was at the juvenile division; I'm in the domestic division now, but I was in the juvenile division from '86 [1986] until 2005, and there, working with the children, which to me was just a, a, a--it was just a wonderful experience of working with the young people in the--handling criminal cases--with juvenile, you did everything, but we had criminal cases, abuse and neglect. I did most of the hearings for the children who were in foster care, and that was probably the, the ones that meant the most to me because I saw those kids for years, and I saw them on a consistent basis and on a regular basis. I was known as the candy judge with them. The kids--we established a connection where they actually looked forward to coming to court, which is sad, but they looked forward to coming to court to see me because I was going to ask them about what was going on and ask them about what was happening. As far as the philosophy, I really think for, for the children, is to recognize that they are--that they are people, that they have needs and concerns the same as everybody else. A lot of times we're kinda ready to dismiss them on, on the things that they may want to bring forward or issues that they may have. People would always ask me, well how long does a hearing take? I don't know how long a hearing was gonna take because I don't know what issues were going to be presented with--presented to me, listening to the children, listening to the parents, listening to--just, even things that weren't being said. I, I learned that you hear a lot just by kind of listening to the answers that folks give, and a lot of times I would find that people don't really listen to what you say. They--they're so quick to kinda move on to the next thing on the list that they, they don't pay attention to, to, to what's really being said. But, just really taking the time to hear what it was that needed--what--that was being said at, at, at that particular time. One of the things that I was proud of when I was at juvenile, was I created the first truancy court here in, in St. Louis [Missouri]. We modeled it after a program in, in, in Louisville, Kentucky. But working with the kids in that--and what I did at--when we started, I was going to a school every week. I went every week, 7:30 in the morning or so, and we did kind of a holistic approach where we had the parent--tried to get the parents involved, get the--get the school involved, the principal was a part of it. We created a--an alternative school at the school, which was wonderful for those kids who were getting suspended. Now, generally what happens, a kid gets suspended and you say, okay, don't come to school for three days, five days, whatever. What kid could--you know, is unhappy about that? So they're at home, they're someplace else for the period of the suspension, then they're behind when they come back trying to catch up. What we were able to do, there was a church across the street from the school, directly across the street. The kids would come to school, come into the school building at the start of the school day, get their assignments, get their breakfast if they needed to get that, get their book, then march across the street to the church. They sat there in the church sanctuary and we're proud to say they did not deface the church, they did not do any damage to the church. The teacher had a, a monitor and a walkie-talkie connected to the school. I think there may have been an aide there. Each student got a, a pew and they sat there in their pew scattered throughout the church doing their work. At lunchtime, they then as a group went back to the school, got their lunch, went back to the church for the rest of the class, and that evening went back, took their books or whatever they needed to the school and then they were dismissed. It was wonderful because there, there was no lag time, there was no--the kids weren't falling behind. They were out of school and they were there just long enough for the rest of the students to see, oh, you know, she's been suspended; that's why she's not over here with us. So there was still the deterrent that you didn't wanna be a part of that alternative school, but you were in a segregated--you were in a segregated location, a separate location. It was a--it was a wonderful program while it lasted. The principal left and I think the school--or the church administration changed and so we weren't able to continue it. But that was something that I--that I was very pleased about doing and being a part of. Story_ID: 130299 Speaker 1: As a--as a, a judge that's been part of the juvenile court and the domestic violence court, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Well, as I continue to say in my domestic division, can't we just get along? Because that--that's the problem. At the juvenile division, the number of young people who are involved in some very, very serious and very, very, very bad crime for no reason other than kinda finding their way around. I don't know who else to, to turn to. They don't have the connection that we used to have with our parents, with our schools, with our churches, with our community, and obviously look--you know, looking to these gangs and to these other groups to provide what's missing. One of the last juvenile cases that I had involved three girls who brutally murdered a woman who was actually the godmother of one of the girls' older sister, and the--and I've done this long enough that I said nothing phased me, but that made me sick. And three girls, thirteen years old at the time, thirteen and fourteen I think--and basically, their stories was one said two did it, two said three did it, and three said I wasn't even there. But the three of them together did just unspeakable awful things to someone who friended them--you know, who, who befriended them and, and was trying to help and do something for--you know, for, for these three girls. The lady had fed them, had ordered food for them, had fixed sandwiches for them, and they came back looking for money and just did--just brutal--brutalized this woman, just brutalized this woman. Story_ID: 130300 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: Oh, differently. I can't say that I'd do--that I--that much would be different. I'm happily married to Richard [K. Gaines] for--this is our twenty-eighth--we've celebrated our twenty-eighth anniversary. He is just a phenomenal person in that a, a lot of men might not, you know, be comfortable with a, a, a strong woman, a black woman who does a lot of things. I mean, he just kinda--just sometimes, he's just kinda just missing--I'm not sure what it is you're doing, but, you know, just go for it and, and, and do it. So I'd definitely marry him all over again. I'm happy to be in the--in, in the family with, with my parents [Mary Vincent and Thomas Phillip Clarke], with my--with my sisters. We're all very close. I have my two nieces--my two nephews and niece and definitely would want to be in, in that family. No, I, I can't--I can't say--doing something differently. I say there are things--my, my high school [Rosati-Kain High School, St. Louis, Missouri] for--without question, that was for me one of the most positive tracks that I could've taken and, and having that opportunity and being able to go there. I think it, it's definitely responsible for the person that, that, that I am. It helped shape me without question into the person that I am, being in an all-girl setting, and for that, I'm extremely grateful and pleased. Story_ID: 130301 Speaker 1: Now what today would you say when you look back at everything would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Probably my work at, at juvenile [Missouri Juvenile Court Division]. I think there, I, I, I know what impact I had. I think I did some innovative things while I was there at, at juvenile. Our presiding judge there wants me to come back in the worst sort of way and I'm kinda resisting. I've been gone now two, two and a half years, and I'm doing some things here in, in the domestic division that for me, this is kinda coming full circle. I--my practice had been domestic and now to be back in the domestic area. But my, my work at juvenile is where I know I had an impact, and it's a lasting impact. I, I have--get calls from young people who I don't necessarily remember--my docket was probably about two to three thousand young people a year, so you gotta forgive me if I don't remember every name, every face. A, a lot of times if you tell me kinda what the circumstances were, those things will trigger something and I'll remember things. But the kids will call me and they'll just--you know, well, Judge, we wanted to let you know, I'm graduating from college. I'm continuing a relationship with two young people now. One young woman is thirty, she's married, had two children, is working on her master's degree. Nobody thought she was gonna get out of--out of grade school, and she's working on her master's. The other's a young man who--one of I think three boys, one of--his youngest brother was adopted. And he and his--the, the two boys, the older two that--who's now twenty-six and then his brother is I think maybe about twenty-two or twenty-three, continue to talk with them and, and, and have contact with them. So that's the, the legacy of seeing what these young people are becoming, what they are doing, being a mentor to them in the sense that I had the mentoring with, with [HM] Margaret [Bush Wilson] and, and, and with [HM] Wayman [Smith] because they helped make me, Margaret Bush Wilson probably more than anybody. I see her and have contact with her regularly, but she is--she, she, she professionally is a person who has just done so much for me. The other is my mother [Mary Vincent Clarke] who has always supported me in the things that I've done. You know, the one who knocked sense into my head when I'm kinda goin' off on things that don't necessarily make a lot of sense or I'm not sure about, but she'll be the one who'll let me know what I need to straighten up and do. Story_ID: 130302 Speaker 1: Is there anything else I need to ask you about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. The last question is similar to legacy but a little different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I fought the good fight, I guess. I'm--and just doing those things--I, I fought the good, good fight, I did it graciously, that I did it in a way to make people proud of, of what I've done, that it would not be about being an embarrassment or sorry that, you know, she was here doing things--.