 Story_ID: 31265 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Hattie Virginia Carwell, H-A-T-T-I-E, V-I-R-G-I-N-I-A, C-A-R-W-E-L-L. Speaker 1: And, Ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 17th, 1948, Brooklyn, New York. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm a retired health physicist by occupation. When I retired, I was a senior physical scientist. Speaker 1: Okay, and you worked for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission or was it the Department of Energy when you were there? Speaker 2: U.S. Department of Energy. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. All right, now, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is November the 5th, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: 4622 Meldon Avenue, M-E-L-D-O-N Avenue, Oakland, California 94619. Story_ID: 31266 Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions that we ask that are kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes, and what is it? Speaker 2: Well, the food is, I'll make this my favorite food now, is apple pie. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I love Spring. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Any place warm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You need a city? Speaker 1: Not necessarily, just, you know, if you wanna give one. Speaker 2: Any place warm. Speaker 1: Yeah, all right. And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: It has become my favorite phrase (laughter). "I am not fattening frogs for snakes." Story_ID: 31267 Speaker 1: Okay, Okay. Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name, Fannie, F-A-N-N-I-E, Francis, F-R-A-N-C-I-S, Carwell, C-A-R-W-E-L-L. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: That's her married name? Speaker 1: Okay, what was her maiden name? Speaker 2: Tunstall, T-U-N-S-T-A-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's a famous physicist name (laughter). Wasn't there a William Tunstall, a famous physicist that people talk about? Speaker 2: Well, there's some interesting Tunstall's. I don't know about, I don't think--of color? Speaker 1: No, not of color. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, I was gonna say. Speaker 1: There's a William Tunstall everyone talks about. At any rate, what was your mother's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born December the 19th, 1917 in Hanover County, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing in history? Speaker 2: Well, I can trace my mother's family on her father's side back to about 1850 or so. And it's a little shaky beyond 1850. There's a calculated date that goes into the 1830s. Speaker 1: Okay. What do you mean by that (laughter)? There's a--what now? Speaker 2: Well, my great grandfather's mother, we know her name. And-- Speaker 1: What is it? Can you give it to us? Speaker 2: Sally. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Tunstall. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I actually have a booklet that we've written, putting together what we do know. George Tunstall was my mother's grandfather. Her father was Peale Tunstall. They all lived in Hanover, Virginia. Our history tells us that George Tunstall came to Hanover from a neighboring county. And I think it's King William County. There's a little discussion within the family exactly which county. And there's also some discussion that--well, my great grandfather was enslaved. He was about 18 at the end of the Civil War. He had run away from home prior to the end of the Civil War. And he had actually come to the Hanover County area. Not certain, but under some circumstances, he returned home. And, however, at the end of the war. And he heard that he was free. He just started walking away and never really lived in the previous area again, in the King William County area. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's King William County, it's called? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: His, my great grandmother, when we become aware of her, she's around nine years old during the Civil War. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, what is her name? Speaker 2: Her name is-- Speaker 1: Your great grandmother? Speaker 2: Her name is Edmonia Woodson Tunstall. Speaker 1: Now, let me just say this. I, as I've been thinking here, William Tunstall, in my mind is a person of color. It's a robotics engineer in-- Speaker 2: Baltimore at Johns Hopkins. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you know him? Is he related? Speaker 2: I don't know, know him. But last year, the National Technical Association was planning a conference. And I was Googling, and I fell upon his name, and I invited him. We tried to make a connection, but he's from the Tunstall's in Alabama. And I have an extensive family tree for the Tunstall's, how they came from England, settled in Virginia, and how they spread out to the various states. And that's how you have Tunstall's in many, many states. There was a Tunstall at U-C, Berkley [University of California, Berkeley] that worked with college students. He disappeared. He went to Sea Cliffs one evening for dinner, and they don't know what happened to him. Speaker 1: What was his first name? Speaker 2: Oh, I knew you would ask, Tunstall. I'd have to look it up and think about it. But I will remember it. And there's a scholarship at U-C Berkley named in his honor since he was so popular with the students. Speaker 1: So, he went to--I'm just repeating what you said. He went to Sea Cliffs, this is the restaurant-- Speaker 2: A restaurant-- Speaker 1: --with the seals that are out there on the sea. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You can see 'em. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I think we tried to eat there once, I think, on a trip. And he went there one night and disappeared. Nobody ever saw him again? Speaker 2: No, never saw him again. And we tried to make a connection with him. I have one cousin out here. Her last name is Tunstall, and he dropped a note. He was looking for an apartment and saw her name on the mailbox. I actually met him once before he actually disappeared. And the funny thing about it, he looked the spitting image of my cousin's brother and father. But once again, he was not from Virginia. He was, he was from the Alabama Tunstall's. Speaker 1: And about what year was it that he disappeared? Do you remember? Speaker 2: He disappeared somewhere between '86' [1986] and '87' [1987]. I know that's the time period because I'd just returned to the states from living in Vienna, Austria. And I got to meet him once, and that following year, he disappeared. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, it's becoming quite a mystery here, the Tunstall's, who's related and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, in that regard, most definitely, especially looking, you know, just like that. That, my cousin is, my cousin's father and my mother are first cousins. And so they are brother--brothers' children. Their grandfather and my grandfather were brothers. Story_ID: 31268 Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so I was asking you about your great great--your great grandmother, Edmonia Woodson-- Speaker 2: Tunstall. Speaker 1: --Tunstall, okay. Speaker 2: She met my great grandfather when she was about 16 years old. She already had a son. She had been raped when she was 15. And they married, and he basically adopted the son as his own. My great grandfather's father was white. And so I guess he understood the situation very well 'cause probably the same thing had happened to his mother. And they had 12 children together. And pretty much the girls went to New York, and the boys stayed in Virginia in Hanover, didn't go very far away. The New Yorkers kept in touch with the Virginians. And the focus, the focus of our family reunion this year was tracing those who went to New York and linking them with the ones that stayed in Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was interesting that the girls went and the, only one or two of the boys went to New York. Speaker 1: Now, do you think the girls went because of employment opportunities in New York? Speaker 2: You know, we posed that question. I asked, my mother is deceased so I asked her sister why did she go to New York 'cause she is the oldest living female. And she said her brother thought it was a good idea for her to go. And I think that good idea was associated with opportunity, but also protection 'cause young women in the South had a pretty precarious future until, you know, they married and were protected by a man. The first Tunstall's went to New York before 1900, right at the turn of the century. So they were a little early for the migration to New York. It was my great Aunt Julia who I did not meet in life, but I did attend her funeral. She had gone to Virginia State Normal School, which is now Virginia State University. And she qualified to be a teacher, but in those days you earned more money being a housekeeper up North than you did being a teacher. So she went North with one of her girlfriends and stayed with her family members there. And there was her second sister, Lucinda, who we refer to as Aunt Lucy. I think she was the main recruiter. They would come down every summer and tell about the good life in New York and encourage the young girls to come up. And they would stay with Aunt Lucy. Aunt Lucy would, you know, get 'em a job, give 'em a place to stay for two to three dollars a week. And they would stay with her pretty much until they met somebody and got married. Speaker 1: Yeah, I heard quite a few stories about young ladies that go North to be a domestic with some white family that's even from the South even, to go with, accompany the family North. And then they serve for a period of time. Speaker 2: Right, right. So my mother went North when my grandmother passed. My mother was 18 years. And she had, at the time, let's see, she had at least three aunts there and her cousins that, her first cousins, her age, were going there as well. So she went there. Both of her sisters went to New York; same story, stayed with Aunt Lucy. One of her brothers, my mother's oldest brother, William Tunstall, went to New York to escape farm work. In fact, he hated farm work so much, he only went back to Virginia once. And that was for his mother's funeral. And so he pretty much stayed in New York. My mother had three brothers. One brother, Walter, moved to Washington, D.C. after he got out the Navy. The other brother, Patrick Tunstall, stayed in Virginia. In fact, I was reared by him. I was born in New York, but I grew up in Virginia, living with him and his wife. Speaker 1: Now, this is Patrick Tunstall, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum, Patrick Henry Tunstall. Speaker 1: I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Patrick Henry Tunstall-- Speaker 1: Okay, Patrick Henry-- Speaker 2: --and not after the patriot, which I thought for many, many years. When we did a little family history, his grandmother's brother was Patrick Tunstall, well, Patrick Woodson. And in those days, you would name your children after your brothers and sisters and mother and father. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: My name, Hattie, I'm a triple Hattie. My--let me get it right, my great Aunt Hattie, first generation of the Tunstall's to go to New York, my mother's sister, Hattie--I'm sorry. I'm a quadruple Hattie. My father's mother, Hattie, and his grandmother named Hattie. Speaker 1: And, yeah, you are quadruple. Speaker 2: So I'm good and "Hattie" (laughter). Speaker 1: I'm telling you. Story_ID: 31269 Speaker 1: Wow, okay. All right, now, your mother, did she have a chance to go to school to-- Speaker 2: She only went to grade school up to about the seventh or eighth grade. I, my grandmother went to school about sixth grade. My grandfather based on what I've been told, I was never told a grade. But I think it was pretty much primary because my uncle, Patrick, always said, you know, his mother was interested in education, and his father was interested in farming. And he didn't get to go to school because they would go to school, and then Spring, the kids would be taken out of school to prepare the land for the Spring, planting. And that was something that bothered him until the day he died. He would recant that story, and he would say how much he liked school, how good he was in school when he was in school. And his mother taught him how to read before he went to school, and math was a favorite subject. But I guess once he grew up, you know, he was involved in living and didn't go back to school. So he went to the seventh grade. Speaker 1: This is your-- Speaker 2: My uncle-- Speaker 1: Uncle Patrick. Speaker 2: --Patrick, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But you could always find him reading about things and always surprising people about things that he knew. So he was a self teacher. Story_ID: 31270 Speaker 1: Okay, now, then, let's see. Okay, so your mother is New York City. I mean she's-- Speaker 2: She went to New York in 1935 when her mother died. So she was there during World War II. Speaker 1: Okay, did she ever go back to Virginia? Speaker 2: Just for visits, not to stay. Speaker 1: Okay, so she stayed, and did she basically do domestic work when she was-- Speaker 2: She did domestic work when she first arrived in New York. When she started having children, she was pretty much a housekeeper. And then when her last child was, you know, around fourteen, she became a home health aide, sort of people are shut in, and they need people to care for them. So she trained to do that. Story_ID: 31271 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, let's go to your father's side of the family, and-- Speaker 2: Now, that's gonna be real quick. Speaker 1: All right, all right, can you give us his-- Speaker 2: I know-- Speaker 1: --name-- Speaker 2: George-- Speaker 1: --full name and spell it? Speaker 2: George, G-E-O-R-G-E, Carwell, C-A-R-W-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay. He's named after his-- Speaker 2: His dad. Speaker 1: His dad, okay. So would he be a junior? Speaker 2: Well, we never referred to him as junior, but I guess that's the custom if you both have the same first name. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born June 21st, 1920. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, he was a little younger than my mother. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Orangeburg, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, we're getting on thin ice. Speaker 1: Orangeburg, South Carolina, okay. So, now, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family and how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: I can only go back to his siblings. He had a sister named Gladys. He had a brother named John, and there's another sister. Her name escapes me at this time. And I do know his generation went to New York. I'm not exactly sure when they went to New York. I met his cousins that were in New York, and I'm somewhat distanced because I'm primarily in Virginia, and when I come to New York, my mother's taking me to her side of the family. I did, you know, go on occasion to visit. I remember, I guess I don't really remember (laughter), but I know I met two sisters. And I found out much later that they were right there in Richmond, Virginia. Gladys, I remember best, and I know Gladys had a daughter who lived in New Jersey. I know my father had a cousin. I'm not sure whether Lorraine was a first cousin or not. She lived in Prospect Park. I only met my father's brother when he came to my father's funeral. My father was hit by a subway train. And-- Speaker 1: When did that happen? Speaker 2: --actually had a seizure. And-- Speaker 1: When did that happen? Speaker 2: It happened in 1972. I'm hesitating, '72' [1972], '72' [1972] or '73' [1973]. My hesitation is I'm more inclined to say '73' [1973] because I had started a job at Brookhaven National Lab, and my first review of a program was taking place, and I got the call. And I went, I was out on Long Island living. And I went into New York, and I missed that first review and that was like June. And I moved from Long Island that September, to move to California. I-- Speaker 1: So did you know anything about your father's parents? Speaker 2: No, I'm not even sure if they were alive. In my case, with my mother's father. Speaker 1: Well, did you, well, you know, I'm just asking if you-- Speaker 2: The names? Speaker 1: --heard any stories about them and do you know their names or any stories about 'em or what they did for a living or anything? Speaker 2: I just assumed that they were farmers. My sister would know better. You know, periodically, I, I sometimes say did I really, am I really related to them 'cause I find out things in visits as opposed to knowing them firsthand. And, you know, they just kind of come out, and I say, oh, I didn't know that. And he said, oh, yeah. You know, I do know my father loved to play the, bang on the piano--I won't say play, on the piano. And I do know he used to like to play soldier with the little kids in the neighborhood. And these are stories that my, my sister and brothers tell me. And-- Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't grow up with your father? Speaker 2: I left New York at four. Speaker 1: Okay, so you weren't raised around your father? Speaker 2: No, I was living in Virginia with my aunt and uncle. And I would go to New York in the summer. So when a grown-up is working, there's not a whole lot(laughter) you find out as a little kid. Story_ID: 31272 Speaker 1: Okay, so what did your father do for a living? Speaker 2: He was a truck driver. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: You know, I never heard a story about how they met. What I can piece together, I assume they met after the War. He was in World War II. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember going to New York during the summer, one summer. And he was gonna take just me to the movies. And the movie we saw was "The Battle of Hiroshima" (laughter). And I was probably about ten or twelve years old, not exactly a children's movie. Speaker 1: Okay. Did he serve in the South Pacific? Speaker 2: You know, I'm not sure exactly where he served. I know it was out of the country. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, a number of relatives on my mother's side were Navy, and my uncle went to the Army for thirty days. Speaker 1: So was your dad in the Army or Navy? Speaker 2: Army, army. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 31273 Speaker 1: Okay. So did your parents stay together? Speaker 2: They stayed together until my youngest brother was about twelve. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Out of seven. Speaker 1: Okay, so they were together quite a while then-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I guess, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So they got married after the War, I take it, around '46' [1946] or '47' [1947]? Speaker 2: Actually, you got a good guess. Yeah, my, well, maybe--well, as I think about it, it goes back a little bit before that 'cause the War ended in '45' [1945]. And my oldest sister was born in '44' [1944]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: So it goes back--I was focused on the twins. They were born in '47' [1947]. I have twin brothers, Ronald and Donald. They're both deceased now, and I guess my mother was around twenty three, twenty four when they married. And she had my sister and then there were no children for a couple of years, and then she had the twins. Then within twelve months, she had me. Then another 11 months, she had my sister; another two years, she had my brother and my last brother was one year apart. Speaker 1: Okay, so the last brother was born what, in about 1957 or something? Speaker 2: He will be sixty around the 21st of this month. Speaker 1: Okay, it's about fifty-- Speaker 2: Fifty-one [1951], '52' [1952]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so they stayed together-- Speaker 2: He just married for the first time. I went to the wedding in New York. Speaker 1: So they were married till about 1964 or so, right? Speaker 2: (No audible response). Speaker 1: Yes, okay. Story_ID: 31274 Speaker 1: All right, well, when you think about your parents, their personalities and their tendencies, their mannerisms, how they walk, talk, look, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think I'm a hybrid and some people probably are surprised. But I've always told I look like my mother and although I'm very different from her, I'm a lot like her as well. She, she always loved looking at the new. The whole world stops when 5:00 o'clock news and 10:00 o'clock are on--it's not bothering me. She liked to talk about what's going on in the world, politically, sometimes got it wrong, but she loved to talk about it, loved to talk. She was very attached to Virginia, and after we were independent, she started going back to Virginia on a regular basis to visit family. So she's very close to her family. I consider I'm close to my family, although distance may not. But I've never been away from Virginia more than three months even when I lived in Europe. Lately, I've been going on the East coast, stopping in Virginia almost on a monthly basis because of other things. But if I get on the East coast within shouting distance, I don't feel right unless I go to the little town of Ashland and see everybody there. She had a fantastic memory, and I mean she would ask me about people that she knew when she was growing up and what they were doing, what their children were doing. So I was sort of like, I guess the bridge to Virginia for my other brothers and sisters, and they started going to Virginia as adults and making that link. Story_ID: 31275 Speaker 1: Okay, but were you the only one then brought to Virginia by your Uncle Patrick? Speaker 2: I was the only one that moved to Virginia. And I didn't get to ask my aunt before she passed, but I asked my uncle, I said, why did you guys choose me? He said, I didn't choose you (laughter). His wife chose me. And my sister-- Speaker 1: What was his wife's name--I'm sorry. What was his wife's name? Speaker 2: Idealya (ph.), Idealya Brown Tunstall. Speaker 1: Is there a story behind her name? Speaker 2: Why it's Idealya? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: No, I don't know where Idealya came from. It certainly wasn't her mother's name. There's a story about her relationship, her mother, as she knew her was not her mother. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Her mother that she knew of as her mother was her father's wife. She could not have kids. So her father had three kids by a young girl, and as she had the kids, they all grew up together as a family. That was done back then, and it's still done in Africa today. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All you gotta do is get consent. And I know about that story because the young girl went off to New Jersey to live and had five or six kids. And as they grew up, they were coming back and forth to Virginia. Their relatives told them, oh, you have brothers and sisters. She, I was staying with my aunt, and she came, and she believed the story. She confronted her mother, and she denied that. And then the brothers and sisters were split. Some believed the mother and some believed what she was saying. And when my aunt's brother, oldest brother, passed, the sister, half sister that believed her made the mother come to the funeral. And so I was there when, you know, this whole reunion kind of thing that, you know, like forty years later. Speaker 1: So the young woman that had the babies didn't raise them? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: She just had them. Speaker 2: --she didn't. She just was a surrogate mother. Speaker 1: Okay, interesting story. So, but your Aunt Idealya chose you to raise, and it was okay with your mother and father and so-- Speaker 2: Well, it was okay with my mother. My father wasn't too keen on it. As I said, you know, we were like stair steps. And she was a very practical woman. If someone is gonna take care of the child and she gets to, you know, interact with it, and it's still in the family, it was fine with her. And I think I've always been a pretty independent spirit and practical. So at four, and it's interesting the way it came about that I was staying in Virginia. I'd gone to Virginia a couple of times with my mother's youngest sister who was unmarried. And the generation of Tunstall's that went to New York when my mother went to New York, her first cousin, Lucille and her husband, Roy, would go down to Virginia to visit her mother. And they would take me and my oldest sister. I don't know why they didn't take the twins. I don't know why they didn't take my sister. I, I kind of know why, my younger sister, because she spent the summer once in Virginia and cried the whole time. So, probably they didn't take her 'cause she was too attached and wouldn't go. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My oldest sister, you know, was more of an older child, so I was four. So I kind of deduced, well, you know, I was good to go, and didn't wail about it, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: And not that I was so special. Speaker 1: So at age four, you're in Virginia-- (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: All right, so, you're four years old. You're in Virginia. Speaker 1: Yeah, actually, it was in the summer. We went down like we normally do. And everybody was headed to the car to go back, and they just turned around saying, you're not going. You're staying. Oh (laughter). Of course, I, you know, I was shocked and upset, and I began to cry. And they said, don't worry, don't worry, you know, she'll stop. And they got in the car, my sister got in the car. My cousin and her husband got in the car, and there was a big tree in the yard. And I kind of, just kind of sat under that tree, didn't wanna go in the house. And they were right, sooner or later, I stopped crying. Story_ID: 31276 Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is, I know a big memory, and you remember this. But do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I remember stealing sugar. I, I remember two things. I remember a place on the edge of Brooklyn where we lived in a house. And I have two memories from that place, playing hide-and-seek, and slowing it down so I could climb up on the cupboard and get some sugar. My other memory was branded upon me. We would take our baths and we would go in the living room and stand in front of this stove. And I backed up against the stove. Speaker 1: Now, this is a cast iron stove, like a hot, like a potbelly stove or-- Speaker 2: Not potbelly, more like the coated, you know, the stove is inside, and then there's a nice furniture look on the outside. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I (laughter), I remember when I kissed that stove (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you still have a scar from it? Speaker 2: Not much of a scar, but speaking of scars, I had a scar in my hand, and I didn't know what that scar in my hand was. And I was in New York one summer, and I was looking down at my hand. And my mother said, let me see your hand. She would say, you know, we can still see that scar. I was told that this is when I was an infant, that I was bitten by a rat. And so, you know, my hand was much smaller then. And they tell the story how my father swooped me up and ran with me to the hospital. So I still have those scars right there. Speaker 1: This is in New York, when you're still in New York City? Speaker 2: New York. Story_ID: 31277 Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you describe--now, you grew up in Virginia. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So can you describe the place you grew up at and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I remember that quite well. I had cousins around my age that lived on a working farm. They lived on seventeen acres, and they farmed. So they had pigs, cows and a horse or two. And I remember spending a couple of days down there 'cause I slept in a crib. And I remember that there was a newborn calf that we got to see while I was there. And I remember from time to time, they would slaughter in the fall, and happened to go when they were cutting up the meat into the different cuts. And they would cure their own ham. I remember, now, so to speak, I lived in this town which was the city compared to where my other cousins were living, but, I mean, population was 3,000. So I remember at one point, we had chickens. And I remember the day I saw them kill a chicken and pluck the feathers. From that day on, I never ate the skin of the chicken again. Speaker 1: So you'd eat the rest, but not the skin? Speaker 2: Yeah, take--because you could see the little pinholes from the feathers. But I remember seeing that chicken get axed. I remember the contrast between the small town in the South and being in Brooklyn in the summers. Kids in Brooklyn in the summer go bottle hunting. They're out and about all day long, and collecting bottles, and at the end of the day, we'd take our money and buy ices, Italian Icees or a hot dog. And to this day, I can't go to New York without getting an Italian Icee and a little kosher hot dog. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is in Ashland, Virginia? Speaker 2: That's, I lived in Ashland, and I would go to Brooklyn, stark contrast. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Well, that's what I meant, yeah, that you were living in Virginia, that part of Virginia. So, what other sights and sounds and smells? Speaker 2: I had, as you can tell, a dog. I had a pet named Lassie. And my Uncle Patrick liked to hunt. So he would have a sundry of hound dogs. But one of the hound--I remember two of them quite distinctly. One was named Nancy. Nancy was a tall, black, short-haired hound. Nancy never had a litter of her own. So when other dogs would have a litter, and they would tire of the pups nursing, Nancy would let them nurse her, although she had no milk. Then I remember Janie. Janie was a 16-inch bench-legged beagle, thoroughbred. And I think because she was thoroughbred, she had litters, but she had difficulties during the birth and most of her litter died. The one other sharp memory is we had a big white rabbit. And one day my uncle traded the big white rabbit for a bunch of little bunnies. And it was my job to go feed the rabbits. And there used to be a clump of woods behind our house with briars, kind of dense. One day I went to feed the rabbits and didn't close the door properly. The rabbits got out. I was scrambling in the woods, trying to collect bunnies before my uncle got home (laughter). I don't think he found out that that had happened 'cause I got 'em all. Story_ID: 31278 Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. That's something, okay. So, now, do you remember your first school? Speaker 2: I remember my first school 'cause it was my only school. I went to the same school for twelve years. And I remember just before I moved to Virginia, my brothers, my twin brothers had started school, and I remember going that day to school with them. And they were going to stay, and I was upset 'cause I couldn't stay. And then they said, oh, well, that's okay. You're gonna go to kindergarten. We're gonna put you in Kindergarten. But then I moved to Virginia, and there was no kindergarten, and so I had to wait. But I went to the same school from the first grade to the twelfth grade. And I-- Speaker 1: What was the name of the school? Speaker 2: John Manuel Gandy High School. It was named, well, high school and elementary school. It was named after a former president of Virginia State University. In fact, I went to the All-Gandy School Reunion in August. They have it every two years. Our high school was demoted to an elementary school in 19--around 1970, '71' [1971] when they took a lot of the black school and made them primary schools. And I actually bought some property across from that school from one of my school teachers. Ashland is small, and the only thing there is Randolph Macon College for Men. And they were consuming the town. And she was at an age she could no longer live alone. So she moved with a niece, and she was trying to sell her house. And I bought it 'cause I knew that would block the college from getting it. And so one of the things I would like to do--in fact, there were, her house was next door to another teacher. And the property at one time was one, owned by one family. So I would like to buy both properties and at the corner that faces the road, put a little granite wall with all the teachers that taught at that school on it. And so there's some interest in making that happen. Speaker 1: Okay, John Manuel Gandy High School, and you started in what, 1955 (unclear)? Speaker 2: Fifty four [1954], '54' [1954]. Let me see, year, four [1954]. Speaker 1: Fifty-four [1954]? Speaker 2: Six. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, you liked school a lot, I take it? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was happy to go to school. I'd been waiting. Speaker 1: Okay, and did you have a favorite teacher in elementary school? Speaker 2: Elementary school--elementary, elementary? Yeah, in fact, I saw her at the All-School Reunion. She first was my fifth grade teacher, and then she was my ninth grade French and Spanish teacher. She was fresh out of college. So she wasn't that much older than we were. So I first met her, I was 10, and she was probably twenty three. Speaker 1: Okay, what was her name? Speaker 2: Her name is Ruth Giles. And the thing that's interesting, my aunt kept her for a short period of time. Speaker 1: Oh, so she lived at your house for a while? Speaker 2: Not while I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was before me, but she made that connection for me. I think my aunt used to date her dad, and so he would bring her there like, you know, for her to stay there weekends so that she would be nearby 'cause they lived what they called, in the country, and a different country than my cousins. They lived in the country called Brown Grove, and they lived in another county, Beaver Dan. And that was truly country. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Well, I think, I liked everything. And I guess I tend to focus on the science and the math because I was always chosen to be in the science competition. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, if it meant going someplace, you got me. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had an opportunity to actually go to another town or something like, in science? Speaker 2: Go to another town, meet other people and, you know, compete, and awards, so stuff I ate up. Story_ID: 31279 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to church every Sunday. I went to Sunday school. Speaker 1: What was the name of your church--I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Shiloh Baptist Church and still a member, was there a month ago. Speaker 1: Okay, did you, did they have opportunities for youth to take leadership roles in the church? Speaker 2: Yes, I became secretary for the church. And the superintendent of the Sunday school, we lived equal distance from the church. And so it became a little competition between us, who would turn the corner first and get to the church. And so he was a deacon in the church and responsible for the counting, and I used to, you know, record the money taken in, the, what do you call it, the collection. And then I became the secretary of the church, and they had an old mimeograph machine. And I would, you know, type up the program and run it off for them. I was in the choir, in the church and at school. You know, if it was something to do, I was in it, If it was academic. I wasn't very much prone to be a cheerleader or that kind of thing. I-- Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't--okay. So, but academic things and leadership roles, you-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and I ate it up. Speaker 1: --would take. Speaker 2: I ate it up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember we did the Christmas play, the 'Christmas Story,' and I was the narrator. And, you know, whenever I got something to do I would practice, practice, practice. So, you know, I knew everybody's part and my part. And then people, "How could you remember all that?" I've said a thousand times, so it didn't take much talent to do that. But they were amazed. I, you know, I was a goody-two-shoes to a point. You know, I knew the rules, and I followed the rules. But I had a bit of mischief in me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was like a little daredevil. Story_ID: 31280 Speaker 1: Alright now, what sort of mischief would a goody-two-shoes be involved in at school? You're obviously a good student and a leader? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I recall we had choir rehearsal, you know, after school. And we kids got there before the adults got there. So we couldn't get in. But I saw that the bathroom window was cracked. And so, oh, I know how we can get in. We could just, you know, crawl through the window. So nobody wanted to do it, so I did it. And then I let everybody in, and they still weren't there. And, you know, we had a balcony, and there's this pole from the balcony all the way down. So I said, let's slide down the pole. And, you know, I was the only one would slide down the pole. You know, innocent little stuff, you know, nothing kinky, nothing compared to what people do. But I do recall that they told, the other kids told this adult that I had done this. And she, she was the pianist, and I thrive on positive feedback. So when she took me aside and told me how wrong, what I did, and how disappointed she was in me, God, that was like she whipped me (laughter) 50 lashes. And I, I took it really to heart. Oh, you mean, I can't be good and do stuff like that too. And the other thing I would always be very talkative in class 'cause I would finish my work early. And until I learned better, like in the first grade, you know, I finished my work. I started walking and talking to the other students. I didn't know any better. You know, I'd help them with their work or just, you know, we'd play a game, and I remember in the fourth grade this teacher was handing out report cards. And we had gotten our report cards, and she caught me talking. She just says, I have been trying to catch you this whole report period. She took back my report card. She'd given me a "B" in conduct, and she changed it to a "C". I used to walk to school, and the teachers would pass in cars, and I was so frozen and distraught about what was gonna happen when I got home that one of the teachers actually stopped her car and said, "What is wrong with you?" And I told her what happened. And I was always told, you know, the focus was the conduct; don't care what you got an "A" in, we wanna see the conduct 'cause they said, if you don't learn how to behave in this world, it's gonna hold you back. So learning to behave, still learning to behave has always been that challenge. And I remember in third grade, I never liked, you know, what do they call it, after lunch you have to lay your head on the desk and take a rest. Well, I wasn't into rest. So I used to contrive little things. I would pretend that I was crying, you know, something was wrong with me. And the teacher would come to my desk and by the time we finished talking, rest break is over. So little things like that, nothing really far out there. Story_ID: 31281 Speaker 1: Okay, now, were your aunt and uncle good parents to you? Speaker 2: Excellent, excellent. In fact, they insisted that I never call them mother and father 'cause I had a mother and father, and they wanted that link to be maintained. But my, my aunt loved children. And the most thing I admire about the way I was reared, they never told me, you can't do this. Even if they weren't familiar with it, if I were interested in it, they trust my judgment. And I knew, I never really asked for stuff, except for school stuff. And I would always start it out, "The teacher said". I knew that was the hook. If the teacher said I had to have it, I would get it. They always insisted that I get brand new books. They never wanted me to have second-hand books-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --without any marks, any pages missing. Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the dynamics of that? I mean did you have any control over what kind of book you got? Speaker 2: Well, at the beginning of the school year, you would buy your books. Whatever books the school-- Speaker 1: Now, this is-- Speaker 2: --had adopted. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is something that a lot of people aren't familiar with 'cause in Ohio, you didn't have to buy your books. The books were-- Speaker 2: No, you had to buy books. Speaker 1: --provided by the Board of Education. So, in, you're saying in Virginia-- Speaker 2: Virginia. Speaker 1: --in Virginia, you had to actually-- Speaker 2: You bought your books. Speaker 1: --each family had to purchase the books for their-- Speaker 2: Right, and many families bought second-hand books 'cause they had multiple kids, you know. I had the uniqueness of being an only child and then one of seven. And I can do the math, so being one in Virginia was a whole lot different than being one of seven in New York. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so they wanted to make sure you had new books every year. So they bought you new books? Speaker 2: New books, absolutely new books, and like I said, if there was anything dealing with school that I needed, they were on it-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --'cause I mentioned how my uncle felt about education. And besides really liking me as a person, my aunt thought I was really smart, so she was willing to do whatever. Story_ID: 31282 Speaker 1: Okay, now, high school. Now, this is the same, the whole school is called high school, but there's a high school that actually kicks in after a period of time. And like in every other school. And so in high school, did you--now, did you have exposure into laboratory equipment, you know, in science? Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, well, let me just tell you about John Manuel Gandy and that school was built in '52' [1952]. And I started in '54' [1954]. So this is a brand new school for black folks in the county. And when I say we have the All-School Reunion, we incorporate the people who went to the four-room school, Hanover Training School. And the reason why, you know, my mother and her generation, Hanover was six miles. So they would have, if they were gonna go to be beyond the sixth grade, they would have to walk six miles one way to that school. And so it was big stuff when John Manuel Gandy High School was built and occupied. And as I explained, my fifth grade teacher [Ruth Giles] was only about thirteen years older than me. And all of the teachers, many of them were, you know, recent college graduates and I guess it's '54' [1954], the sixties, "Brown versus Brown" [Brown versus Board of Education], so people were just enthusiastic about taking this opportunity to educate kids, especially, they tend to favor the kids that were the good kids and the smart kids, which in hindsight, I don't agree with 'cause they certainly had teachers pets. And one of the things at the school, especially in the high school, I graduated Valedictorian, and as you can tell, my parents and my aunt and uncle did not have a high level of education. So people would wonder how can she beat out the teachers' kids that were going to the school? And one woman actually insulted my uncle one day in saying, well, how come she's so smart? (Laughter) She used to be his old girlfriend, and that did not set very well with him 'cause he was a very smart man. He just didn't go to formal schools. Story_ID: 31283 Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated in '65' [1965], right? Speaker 2: Six [1966]. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966]? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, let me just go--now, you, throughout, I guess middle school and high school, the Civil Rights Movement was really boiling in the South. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you have any personal interaction with any of the-- Speaker 2: My only direct interaction is when they boycotted Talheimer's (ph.) in Richmond [Virginia]. My aunt had an account there. And she would go there to pay the account while they were picketing. And I was well aware of what was going on, and like when I was like maybe ninth or tenth grade, I lamented, there's nothing left for me to do when I (unclear). All of this will be over and done. Little did I know? Speaker 1: You wanted to be active in the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. But my aunt and uncle were not political. They did not purchase anything from the stores, but they did, you know, go to pay their charge card. Speaker 1: Okay, Talheimer's, I guess is a department store in Richmond? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, the big department store in Richmond. Speaker 1: And what was segregation like when you were growing up? Was it as bad as it was in Mississippi or was it a little better or-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, people in the South have a way of protecting their children from what's truly going on. And it's only in hindsight--well, Ashland is such a little town. Richmond's fifteen miles away. There was only, the little blue and white bus was a special bus that stopped in Ashland to take people to Richmond. I recall getting on the bus with my Christmas doll, which was life size. And I was about six years old because I wasn't paying to get on the bus, although I should have been paying on the bus 'cause I was small. And I would sit there, and I would be reading the letters (laughter), and don't do that (laughter). You're supposed to be four or five. And but I, you know, just hindsight, not that I was sensitive to it, that we would always go to the back of the bus. Well, we, I did not run into an incident ever that we were sitting upfront that we were asked to get in, go to the back of the bus. There was one incident, only--this is my out-and-out, can't miss it, racial incident. And 'cause I, we were separate, so there weren't many opportunities. I was walking home from school, and I had to pass Randolph Macon College. And there were always young couples with little kids around and about when you're going home. And as I was walking down the sidewalk, I saw this little child on a tricycle. And as black people came by, she spit at 'em. So, you know, I'm already primed. When I got there, she tried to spit at me, and I just gave her a backhand and kept on walking, didn't look to the left, didn't look to the right. And that child didn't spit on anybody else. So that's my one little racial incident growing up. It didn't really bother me from an intellectual--I didn't have that maturity, the intellectual maturity of what was going on. I know when we went to the movie theater, we sat in the balcony. And, and initially there was only one movie theater. And then, I was trying to think of his name. There was this black gentleman that started a little theater. He would rent movies, and we would go to see those movies. And my very first movie I remember was 'Carmen Jones,' Harry Belafonte. And what's her name? I shouldn't forget the woman actress' name. Speaker 1: Oh, Dorothy Dandridge. Speaker 2: Dorothy Dandridge. I know that movie up and down, although I only saw it once. One, because I had to take a nap during the day; don't like naps. So I took the nap, and everything they did, it just sunk in. Speaker 1: Now, did your parents discuss Dr. King [Martin Luther King, Jr.] at all and what was going on? Speaker 2: No, but, you know what? It wasn't so much we discussed King. We were the, you know, just like my mother, into the news. So that was into the news, and so you knew what was going on. But I also knew Malcolm X, and my uncle liked to listen to Elijah Mohammad. So the distinction between the two and I tended to favor Malcolm X. Speaker 1: Okay, now, so you came out in '66' [1966], and Malcolm was killed in '65' '[1965], so did your mother--did your uncle listen to him on records or on radio? Speaker 2: On the radio. Speaker 1: Radio, okay. Speaker 2: On the radio, and when they would be a newsflash of what was going on. I remember seeing his trip to Mecca on the television. I remember the break between him and the Honorable Elijah Mohammed. They, my uncle was non-denominational, but he listened to what they had to say about the way things were, what it would take to change things. He was never a picket line type of person, but very much aware politically. Story_ID: 31284 Speaker 1: Now, did your, was your family aware of the Richmond Improvement Association of Reverend Wyatt T. Walker and Samuel Dewitt Proctor and those people in Richmond? Speaker 2: Samuel Proctor, yes. Jackson Ward, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I have a book upstairs that talks about the Jackson Ward in the early days. They had reserved a section of Richmond for black folks and the businesses that existed in Richmond that were black owned at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And for those of us who don't--we haven't heard very much about Jackson Ward. Samuel Dewitt Proctor is kind of well known, but who is Jackson Ward and just kind of explain-- Speaker 2: You know, I don't know who Jackson was, but Richmond is divided into wards. Speaker 1: Oh, Jackson Ward is a place? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And not, okay, I thought it was a person. Speaker 2: Not a person. Speaker 1: All right, okay, all right. Speaker 2: But it's a very important historical section of Richmond. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's the black side of town? Is that true? Speaker 2: The black side of town, black-owned, black built, black businesses. That's when the money stayed in the community. Speaker 1: Okay, then we mentioned Rev. Samuel Dewitt Proctor and from what I understand, the Richmond Improvement Association engaged in sit-in's and boycotts even before Montgomery, but they're not-- Speaker 2: It didn't take. Speaker 1: Yeah, people don't talk about it for some reason. Speaker 2: Right, I mean even before Rosa Parks, there were people who, you know, refused to go to the back, but it just didn't take hold. I mean time wasn't right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause I forget her name, but there's another lady who had done the same thing before Rosa, exact same thing, you know, and got her family involved. But it didn't, it wasn't--the nucleus was not there. And I think, I think the '60s [1960s], you know, the Korean War had ended. The people that came back from World War II weren't happy about the situation, and then those that went in the '50s [1950s] to Korean and still things weren't happening, so that just kind of snowballed. Story_ID: 31285 Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you know, did you know about the March on Washington? I mean I guess you knew about it, but did you-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I saw that. I was, I mean I'm a news junky because of the atmosphere that I grew up in. You know, news is on, it's like prayer time. Don't say nothing, just sit there and be quiet. Speaker 1: Okay, and the Democratic Convention of '64' [1964], I guess-- Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: --and I mean the assassination-- Speaker 2: Fannie Lou Hamer, the whole nine yards. And I, you know, like I said, I was particularly interested in Malcolm X. Speaker 1: Okay, what was it about Malcolm X that was different? Speaker 2: Because I looked at him, he, this was a bad person that had turned good. And I, to me, what he said made sense, and he just had a way with words. So I mean to me, he was like a college professor. He, you know, he was teaching people. So, I was always open to learning no matter what it was. I've never taken a formal African American Studies class. I audited when I was in college because I was already taking too many units. And I tricked the dean. He thought I had dropped a course in German, and the instructor say, well, you can come to class. I'll turn a grade in for you. They can decide whether they give you credit or not. And I ended up going to Vienna, Austria and living five years. So-- Speaker 1: Okay, so you-- Speaker 2: --so it paid off. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: But I just love history and so my readings, you know, are self motivated. Story_ID: 31286 Speaker 1: Did you have a good history teacher in high school? Speaker 2: Mrs. Robinson was an okay teacher. Black History didn't really exist then in, as a course. You know, once a month--once a year for a week, and then later, I guess I was out of high school before it became a month. But not a lot (unclear) said. I mean everybody knew Booker T. Washington, George Washington Carver, and we knew Ida B. Wells 'cause she's from Richmond. So, you know, people were busy living history as opposed to teaching and studying history. My mother--both my Uncle Patrick and Walter, who lived in Washington--Walter, in particular, he was into family history. And that's why I know my mother's side of the history, you know. You can wake me up in the morning, it's 3:00 o'clock, and I can give you dates and times because that's what Walter did when he came to visit. When he came to visit--he was just living in Washington. He didn't come that often. But they would sit up all night long talking about the same thing from the last visit, about, you know so and so died from pneumonia, this, you know, Aunt Lucy and Uncle George buying these brownstones in New York, coming down and telling 'em how good life was in New York. So I guess that generated the interest in history, and then it just branched out beyond the family. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I didn't ask you about your science projects. Now, you said you traveled as a result of science fair projects-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --in high school. What were your projects, and where did you go? Speaker 2: Well, I went to the next county over (laughter), in different directions. In fact, the weatherman on one of the--I can't, I'm not sure whether it's CBS or NBC, but that level. I went to the--they were from Palitan. Now, Palitan is named after Powertan, Chief Powertan, Pocahontas' dad. And so there's a lot of mixing between the Native Americans and African Americans. So a lot of people in that area look Native American. And there's a guy that's the weatherman, I--he was a year or two older. So I didn't compete against him. But that was a family of six brothers. They all would go away with first prizes. You knew, you know, if you were in the room with them, it's all over. Speaker 1: What was the family name? Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of his name, and maybe it'll come to me when I'm not thinking about it. Speaker 1: But seven brothers from Palitan. Speaker 2: And he's a weatherman, and he was local weather TV, and he moved out here twenty-plus years. And I didn't, haven't--but when he first came, I was gonna send him a note and welcome him to California (laughter), and tell him the story of how I knew him. And I recognized him right away when, you know, he showed up on television. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was an opportunity, you know--going to the next county, you know, that took like a thirty-minute ride or forty-minute ride on a bus. I spent a lot of time--my uncle worked every other Sunday. My aunt's mother that raised her, became, well, she developed what you would call now, Alzheimer's or dementia. And one day my aunt came home and she wasn't there. And we found that she had left the house, gone two doors over, and she was tangled up in the woods. And the people saw her there. She was trying to escape. She said something was in the house after her. So from that day on, my aunt didn't work. She quit working to, you know, take care of her. And, and that changed. Now, we didn't have a lot of money, but like I said, anything that I needed I had. And when she, you know, didn't work, then changed, things changed and periodically, they would say, well, maybe we should put her in a nursing home. They could--my aunt could never bring herself to do that 'cause she said, she was the only mother that she knew, and she took care of her. And it was her time to take care of her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so-- Speaker 1: So, did you have-- Speaker 2: We didn't go any place. Story_ID: 31287 Speaker 1: Yeah, did you have enough resources for your science projects and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And what were the projects you worked on in high school? Speaker 2: You know, there's no one that really stands out because they were more these little poster boards. You know, I read about this, and you have an idea. You do a little simple experiment. And then you write it up and you make a presentation. But most of what we did was competition, was that, once a year students from different groups would have studied the whole book. Nobody gets through the whole book in regular class. So you had intensive study. And you would take standardized tests. And the ones that scored the highest were first, second and third on those. And I always was picked to participate. Story_ID: 31288 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you graduated as Valedictorian-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and this is 1966-- Speaker 2: Six, [1966], um-hum. Speaker 1: --right. Now, how did you decide what college to go to? You ended up going to Bennett [College], right, Bennett College? Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Bennett, and I remember more about where I didn't go and why. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The majority of the students from my high school would go to Virginia State [Virginia State University] or Union [Virginia Union College]. And I wanted change, and Virginia State is only about fifty miles away, and Union is less than twenty [miles]. And so that's why I didn't go to those two colleges. I would have gone to Hampton [Hampton University], but they didn't offer any money, was accepted. And a lot of times, I'd piece stuff together and, you know, it's circumstance. My aunt, I later found out was a housekeeper for one of the board of trustees. It was the professor at Randolph Macon College. Now, I don't know whether he told her about the college. I know my cousin that's a year older than I, she went the year before I did. But I wasn't inclined to do what she was doing 'cause I didn't even know until I got to college, she wanted to be a medical doctor. We didn't talk as cousins about stuff like that. So I don't really know who introduced the thought of Bennett College to me. But I was very receptive to it because one, I thought I'd be treated special, and at the time, it was considered a finishing school. And I thought I needed finishing. Speaker 1: Okay, so what made you think you needed finishing. Speaker 2: Well, you know, here I was this person who had grown up in this town of 3,000 people. I mean I could speak well and stuff like that, but there was so much that I hadn't been exposed to. And I liked the idea of, you know, knowing which fork and knife to use and I didn't like being stuck up. But I liked knowing those little nicety things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I looked forward to going there. Story_ID: 31289 Speaker 1: Okay, so Bennett [College] is one of two historically black colleges that's-- Speaker 2: For women. Speaker 1: Right. The other one being Spelman [College]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: You said it in the right order. The other one being Spelman (laughter). Speaker 1: So what was there, is there about, what, 800 students, seven--800 students on campus, and small? Speaker 2: When I was there, there was 650. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Our class had 250 and over there I have the newsletter with our class, took a class picture. You know, the rules didn't bother me. I mean I wasn't one, you know, here I'm suddenly free, I wanna stay out all night, I wanna drink, I wanna do this, that and the other. I was there to get an education. And I think I was driven in that way because I, I kind of lessons learned. And the thing about the important of education, you know, my uncle telling his story. And they would talk about young girls in the neighborhood, oh, so-and-so was really smart, but she went to college, and then she got pregnant and everybody got disappointed. So I didn't wanna do that, disappoint everybody. And then the other thing people used to talk about, family members who grew up and went away and never came back. So that has influenced my continuously keeping contact. Whenever I go to Virginia, my high school classmates, we go to lunch together. Christmas, I spend the last two weeks of the year there and they call, okay, when's Hattie getting to town. We're gonna get together, kind of thing. So I just kind of tiered off of those lessons. So you can go anywhere in the world, but just keep in touch. The favorite saying of my uncle was "Boys and books don't mix. You've got plenty of time for boys." So that was always ringing in my ear. Speaker 1: Now, was there a male college close by or-- Speaker 2: The A and T, 3,000 men to the 650, 'cause at the time, A and T [North Carolina T and TUniversity] had gone co-educational, but not that many girls went to A and T. So the men at A and T--in fact, I had, I had a project, unofficial project. I would go to the library over at A and T every Sunday. And my project was GAM, "Get A Man". Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: So I felt I could get a man at the library (laughter). So, so, I mean they were nearby, and they would come after class and, you know, not being in class with them did not bother me. I took a couple of classes over at A and T. That bothered me because that was the first time, going to school, someone inquired, "Well, why are you studying physics?" Why are you taking physical chemistry? And that was from an instructor. And we always laughed behind his back. I said, oh, he probably--he went to A and T and we'd say, he probably couldn't get a Bennett girlfriend. That's why he's treating us this way. Speaker 1: So your major was-- Speaker 2: Chemistry and biology. Speaker 1: Okay, chemistry-- Speaker 2: I started out as a biology major. I loved my chemistry teacher, Dr. Sayles. Speaker 1: Dr. Sayles? Speaker 2: Yes, S-A-Y-L-E-S, James Henry Sayles. Everybody loved him. Even if you didn't do well in your class, you loved him. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: He had been at Bennett probably about, almost twenty years when I went. So he was a seasoned professor. He had stopped and taken the job at job. He was trying to get enough money to go to medical school. He married a Bennett Bell, who was working at Bennett, and he stayed; never left. He could have been anywhere, doing anything he wanted to. Absolutely, brilliant. The first day of class, he would go over what he's gonna cover the entire year, made sure you were well aware that some of us would be successful, others would not. And he had three methods of calculating your grade, class participation, reading outside research articles and your lab work. He taught with his eyes closed, and he did that because when he was very young, first started, his first class, he looked at the class full of women and went blank. And it was when he turned around and closed his eyes (laughter), that he gained command. Never opened a book in the classroom. He'd start writing formulas and what they were about just from memory. He would start a class by telling you what he's gonna cover that day, and when the bell rang, he had completed what he--I mean, so he was just absolutely fascinating. Chemistry was my minor. I only had to take a few more courses to make it a major. So I made it a major. And he was a, he didn't call roll back in the day, not calling roll. However, he knew everybody that was in the class or absent. And when somebody came back after being absent, he welcomed them back. He, you know, treated us as grownups. He didn't beg you to do anything. He told you what you needed to do to get out of his class. So, and I was so happy with the National Council of Black Engineers and Scientists. We had a conference at Clark Atlanta University, and we were at an HBCU and since Atlanta has those four schools right there, we were trying to engage them and get them involved in the conference that we identified professors that we would give awards to. Now, mind you, Bennett is in North Carolina, but that's close enough. So I, you know, included him. He came, and I got to present him with an award to acknowledge because everybody says the exact same thing about him, even those that made C's and D's in his class. It wasn't him, it was not his fault. Chemistry, organic chemistry did not like them. Speaker 1: Okay, Dr. Sayles, James Henry Sayles. Speaker 2: And he's still alive. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, did--let's see. Okay, let's see, so in--so you graduated in 1970, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy [1970]. Is there anything, did you graduate with honors from Bennett? Speaker 2: I was like, I think fourth, fourth or fifth in the class. I wanted to go to graduate school, but I wanted to go to graduate school in California. 'Route 66' sold me on California. Speaker 1: Oh, the television show? Speaker 2: Yes. Okay. Story_ID: 31290 Speaker 1: And I think wonder lust also got built up inside of me as I looked at "66" [Route 66], you know, they'd get in a car, go somewhere, you know, be able to support themselves. And after they'd get tired, they'd find a new place to go. That sounded, my kinda life 'cause I literally, when, after my aunt's mother developed dementia, and she wasn't going to work. And my uncle was working every other Sunday on Sundays, I'd just look out the window. That was Sunday. That's why I can sit here and look out the window (laughter) on a Sunday, and it doesn't bother me. Speaker 2: But it was pretty dull in your hometown is what you're saying? Speaker 1: Oh, yes, yes, yes. I mean the big, you know, growing up in Ashland was being able to get on the bus and go to Richmond by yourself. But since I didn't have any money that I would, was burning my pockets, I did not go to Richmond by myself until I was in college. And that's fifteen miles away on a little blue bus, blue and white bus. Story_ID: 31291 Speaker 1: Now, in light of what you would do in later life, did you pay much attention to the nuclear-- Speaker 2: Didn't know much of any-- Speaker 1: --cold war, you know, in those days? Speaker 2: No, no. That kind of went over my head. I mean I got into my field by happenstance. I happened to pass a bulletin board that said, "Special Fellowships in Radiation Science". We will pay for your GRE exam. Okay, I can't lose. At least I'll get my exam paid for. Speaker 1: Now, this is while you're at Bennett [College], as a senior-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, my senior year. Speaker 1: --I guess, okay. Speaker 2: I was looking primarily at studying biochemistry at U-C Berkley. And then I began to think, you know, if I go to California, and I don't have any money, I'm gonna be like one of the family members. They always said, so and so went to California, and we never heard from 'em again (laughter). And I said, no, I can't go to California, 'cause I don't have enough money to come home. And then I got a call one day from Rutgers University. And Dr. Haughey said, "Say, I hear you're interested in radiation science." And I mean I had just done that to get my GRE exam paid. So I said, "Oh, yeah". And he said, well, you know, we have special fellowships, and we received your name. Had you thought about applying to go to Rutgers, 'cause they did provide you the list of schools that taught radiation science. But I really wasn't--I didn't know what it was, so I wasn't really interested in it. And the guy said, well, we'll send you an application, you know, send it in. And it was towards the end of the semester, April or so, when you're rushed trying to get all your classes in. I'm taking twenty seven units, so those exams, that's a lot of exams to take. So my exams were priority, so I didn't do anything with it. So I got a second call. And Dr. Haughey said, "Look, we have a fellowship for you. But you do have to apply for it." That message, I understood. I went out that day, put all the package together and got it in. And that's pretty much how I got into Radiation Science. It was interdisciplinary. That's me, biology, physics, chemistry. That's the focus, puts it all together. It's multi-dimensional. You can focus on many different sub-levels. So it was fine for me. Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell Dr. Haughey's name? Speaker 2: Haughey, H-A-U-G-H-E-Y. And he was my favorite professor in, at Rutgers. And he was kind of, he, you know, if I had to describe him now, he was my champion. He was my mentor. But he was one of those mentors that mentored you on the sly. He had your back. He's not, you know, advertising, "I got her back". Radiation Science is a small field. That was probably at that time 3,000 health physicists in the United States. I found out after I graduated from Rutgers, the first thing--I had not been back home a week. And my uncle said, so, where are you going to work? I hadn't really given it a whole lot of thought. I had applied for one job. It was at Livermore, hadn't heard from them. And, you know, I just didn't have the notion that it would be hard to get a job. So when he said, "When are you gonna get a job?", I went to Richmond to the employment office, told 'em I was looking for a job as a health physicists. And I knew I was in trouble when they asked me, "What is a health physicist?" Speaker 1: Okay, let's back up a little bit here. Now, you were majoring in Radiation Science, that's what they call it? Speaker 2: Um-hum, it's-- Speaker 1: And, and-- Speaker 2: It's referred to as Radiation Science, health physics. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's really the same thing. Speaker 2: Or Radiation Physics. They're all the same field. Speaker 1: All right, okay. But so, explain what you learned and what the practical application of that is? Speaker 2: Well, see that's, it's applied physics. And so everything about it is practical. People who work with radiation, radioactive materials, in a radiation environment need to be protected. You have to be able to assess the level of danger and what can be done to minimize exposure to radiation. So be it from fall-out, we were doing above-ground nuclear testing at the time, whether there's an accident in the research lab, at a nuclear plant or pretty much, you have to be at a national lab, at a nuclear reactor plant to get very much exposure through work. Now, that the radiation field has moved out into the general community hospitals, pharmaceuticals, the whole nine yards, it's much broader, the various avenues that you can develop a career, environmental monitoring. I remember early in my career, when they were doing above-ground testing, I remember that the Chinese did a test. And the fall-out was gonna reach California, and we would always be, what we called "on-duty". As a health physicist, you had weekend duty in case something happened be it at one of the labs or the airport finds an unlabeled box. And it's got radioactivity inside. You have to be on stand-by to orchestrate the response to that. I remember one Thanksgiving that was, they found a box, UPS, that had radioactive label. And at that time, people at airports, "Ooh, ooh, I'm not gonna touch that." That's all they knew. And you'd call the Department of Energy, which is the genesis from the Atomic Energy Commission. And I go back as far as the Atomic Energy Commission. The Atomic Energy Commission dissolved in 1975. And I started in '73' [1973], two, '72' [1972]. Story_ID: 31292 Speaker 1: Okay, so you saw the demise of the Atomic Energy Commission-- Speaker 2: Commission, and it was ERDA, the Energy Research and Development Administration, and then became the Department of Energy. Speaker 1: Okay, now, in that scenario, where does the Nuclear Regulatory Commission fit in? Speaker 2: Okay, in the beginning there was the Atomic Energy Commission. And it had two arms. One, the research arm and the other one, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, basically, regulating radioactivity used by the public. The rest of the radioactive material that existed was owned by the government, the government as the Atomic Energy Commission. And basically, today all, even though reactors have nuclear field, that actually belongs to the government. So when AEC [Atomic Energy Commission] died and ERDA was developed, that's when the Nuclear Regulatory Commission came into existence. Speaker 1: Now, let me back track a little bit. I believe, now, correct me if I'm wrong, I believe that there was some sort of a crisis about the Atomic Energy Commission being able to regulate itself or something or-- Speaker 2: Oh, my whole career was a crisis, self regulated-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --telling everybody else what to do, including yourself. Biggest center in the world. Every last laboratory or site AEC owned was cracked. Speaker 1: Okay, so they weren't following their own rules for-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, as they say with codes, codes change, practices change. I mean in the early, early--well, let me tell you, Marie Curie and her husband, you know, she's pouring over coal blend, getting these little tiny milligrams of radioactive material, breathing that stuff in, no mask, no shielding, being exposed to radiation, absorbing it through her skin, inhaling it. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think there's a movie with her actually, they have a table lined up with this material, and it's glowing, and they're standing there looking at it. Speaker 2: And that's how my field came into existence. People getting sick, people dying. Then, you know, someone on the team had to come up with a plan to protect the people. That's how--I mean from Day One, Rankin, who discovered x-rays, was looking at the bones in his hands, direct exposure, not regulated by those, but full exposure, getting the whole body (unclear), not to just to his hand. So, you know, and recordkeeping, you know, keeping track of people's exposure with decimeters, the accuracy over time has changed. They have historically databases of people who have high exposure doses. And they're living guinea pigs. Speaker 1: Are they, is there any danger in terms of contact with people who have had high exposure? Speaker 2: No, no, no, it's like a light switch. You turn that light switch on, you get the flow of electrons. You turn it off, no flow. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The, my being exposed to radiation can't be transferred to you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, we used to have this little joke that if you did have exposure, like if you had internal, ingested some radioactive material, and you slept beside your girlfriend or your wife, you know, you're talking about being hot (laughter), literally, your partner would be hot. And you could take a Geiger counter and count. And it would just go off the scale. And, you know, people would wear their work clothes home, not change 'em, not have protective suits. So contamination would be spread in people's homes. People would be, have sticky fingers, would take radioactive material. I put away my little souvenir so you wouldn't get radiation. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I have some copper from one of the accelerators that was decommissioned. Story_ID: 31293 Speaker 1: Now, one of the popular televisions shows is 'The Simpsons,' a cartoon that opens-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You've seen the opening? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It's gotta be horrifying to you to see the opening, where he works in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --a nuclear power plant and an egad (ph.) is bouncing all over the place. Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you. As I grew in my career, I was a pretty naive person. You know, I, I came from a point of view, a person in authority is to be believed and trusted and knows what they're talking about. That was me. And through experience and reviewing accidents and knowing what the rule says and what people do, people tend to do things which are more convenient, not, you know, (laughter). One of the scientists up at the Lawrence Berkeley lab was studying the radiation effects of different isotopes. He included himself as a guinea pig. They were using human guinea pigs. And they would tell them and not tell them. That's a big hullabaloo and there's a big pot of money as they identify people who may have received an over exposure as a result of those practices. They're being compensated. Speaker 1: Is there a reason why a scientist would do that? Is it monetary or is they wanna find out the answer so they-- Speaker 2: Curiosity driven, especially when it was first, you know, discovered. There was so much to learn, and you could create things that never exists. And, and, you know, safety was not a big deal. So, and they became more serious about protecting people after World War II and the Atomic bomb. Story_ID: 31294 Speaker 1: Yes, you were saying that there's--the assumption on your part, is that people working with nuclear materials are idiots. So you've got to give them-- Speaker 2: They're, the possibility that they're an idiot or they're gonna be careless. You know, they're gonna do something wrong unintentionally or knowingly do something wrong because they're curious. So, our approach to protecting people is, you know, you explain it to 'em like they're a child. You assume children don't always listen, and you assume the worst case. If this person breaches the first layer of protection and the second and the third, what can you do? And the answer is, you'd better not let him breach the third, 'cause the sad state of affairs is there's very little you can do. If it's enough radiation to the entire body, that's guaranteed death, just a matter of time. The more the radiation, the quicker the death. You experience--if it's a very large dose, radiation sickness. And, you know, you start vomiting and hair falls out and your immune system shuts down. And all the other side effects take over. So, you know, the one thing is all we can do is prevention. Once the Genie's out of the bottle, we're in trouble. You saw that in Japan, Three Mile Island. Story_ID: 31295 Speaker 1: Now, Three Mile Island, I wanna get to that in a second, but I know there was a movie they used to play in a news reel, I think it became a TV commercial in the '50s [1950s] about duck and cover in case of a nuclear-- Speaker 2: Duck, hold and cover? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: They use that for earthquakes. But they used to have the bomb shelters, and the sirens will go off, and you're supposed to go in the shelter. That's shielding. The earth and the building made out of concrete, the thickness is shielding you from the radiation. You close all the windows, all the, shut off all the ventilation so you won't inhale it. Speaker 1: And it was popular--I know I lived in a neighborhood at one point--in the black community, I didn't know anyone that had these, but in high school, we moved to a white community. And I was surprised to find out there were many fall-out shelters actually built in people's basements, I maybe-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --maybe 10 percent of the people had some kind of a full-out shelter, you know, arranged where they would go down in, so many layers of concrete under their house and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know, they have these science fiction movies, you know. There's an air raid and people are fighting to get in somebody's shelter, and people are turning, "Well, we have enough food for me and my family, I can't", you know, and best friends are now at each other's throats. And then one day, they decide, you know, this is expensive, and really doesn't make a whole lot of sense. Speaker 1: Now, why doesn't it make sense in the long run, I mean that you would-- Speaker 2: Well, because when there's a bomb, the area is radioactive for a very long time. You cannot stay in that shelter until all of the contamination has been cleaned up. Speaker 1: So, you're saying, you must leave when your food and water runs out, I guess-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so you may deter it, but at the end of the day, it makes more sense to, you know, sign non-proliferation treaties than, you know, it's inevitable that somebody's gonna get us, and this is how we're gonna protect ourselves. Speaker 1: Okay,-- Speaker 2: And you're in the shelter and the blow it up, come on. That's like hiding the corner (laughter) with your back turned. Speaker 1: All right, I do remember the-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, air raids. Speaker 1: --a really strong culture of people building these shelters. Story_ID: 31296 Speaker 1: And, now, tell us about, now, you, out of Rutgers, when you finished your Masters at Rutgers, it was then that you started working for Lawrence Livermore or Lawrence Berkley? Speaker 2: No, no, no. I, after I finished Rutgers, luck would have it that part of our training is a summer internship at one of the national labs. Speaker 1: Now, this is 1972? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy one [1971]. Speaker 1: So that's '71' [1971]? Speaker 2: Yeah, my Masters program I completed the school year, and during the summer, the extension of the training was hands-on training at a national lab, really doing work. And I went to Brookhaven because Rutgers is in New Jersey. Brookhaven is in New York, not New York, New York, but it's still, it carries the name of the state. It was worse than Ashland. Seventy miles from New York City, did not have a car. The biggest highlight of the day was to get a ride to the store and get enough food for this little cubical refrigerator. I literally hated Brookhaven. I talked so badly about Brookhaven. I said, you know, if I ever come, go out there to work, you have my permission to cart me off to the insane asylum. It was culturally isolated and in the wintertime, everybody bowls and goes to the Twin Shirley Theater. That's it. Speaker 1: The Twin Shirley Theater. Speaker 2: And I lived in Shirley, New York. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I said, (laughter) I did not leave Ashland to wind up in Ashland North. And people were very nice, but it, they were not New Yorkers. Many of them had never been to New York City. The typical profile was young lady, by 19, has a couple of kids and married. And that island is her world. And when students came to Brookhaven during the summer, that was a treat. People from the outside, you know, friendly, trying to make friends, caused all kinds of problems for people. So at the end of the summer, I went back to Ashland with no job. My uncle asked me where I was gonna work. So I pulled out the typewriter and this college directory of employers. And I started in the beginning of the book and highlighting anything that said radiation in it, sent out my little form letter. I'm a recent graduate, yada, yada yaha, available, looking for, you know, blah, blah. And as fast as I sent them out, they came (laughter) back, sorry, we're not hiring. And it seemed like an eternity, but I did this for maybe two and a half weeks, you know. I'm the type of person, it's gotta happen and gotta happen now. Tell me how to do it, and I'll do it. So, Dr. Haughey called--I told you he had my back. He had my back when I was defending my thesis 'cause I ran into a little, little rut there. He called, and he says, "Oh, well, you know, I'm just calling everybody, and by the way, there were only ten people in our class. I told you it's a small field. So that personalized, special attention was extended beyond Bennett [College]. He said, well, do you have a job yet? And I said, no, I've sent out a bunch of applications, but no luck. So he says, well, you know, I have a friend in Philadelphia at Thomas Jefferson University that's looking for somebody. I'm gonna, do you mind if I--no, he told me, here's his number. Call him. Well, you know, you might have to take thump but it doesn't take much. So I, as soon as I hung up the phone, I called Dr. Leeper (ph.), who was a radiation biologist. And he had hired somebody, and she's gonna take another job. He hired like two weeks, and she was leaving. And I talked to him, say hypothetically, it was Tuesday. He says, well, can you come to Philadelphia for an interview? And I said, well, you know, I couldn't possibly get there until Wednesday. He says, fine, bring a copy of your thesis with me, with you. I didn't even know, have a decent copy. You know, I had more of the notes and the rough version. I started typing those fifty pages between then and the time I was gonna get on the bus. I went, I took the bus to New Jersey 'cause my roommate was still at Rutgers and took the train over to Philadelphia the next day. And I found out, he didn't know anything about interviewing, and I didn't know anything about being interviewed. So we got along. Story_ID: 31297 Speaker 1: Now, what--I didn't ask you, but what was your thesis about specifically? Speaker 2: My thesis, I don't remember the exact title, but I do know what it was about because Dr. Haughey said that I kind of leaped out there more than some of the other students. I was calling the big guys, had it wrong. I, my, my hypothesis was that some of the dose calculations they had made from, on the people that were exposed to radiation at Hiroshima and Nagasaki were wrong because when they characterized the bomb and the ingredients and the distances that the people were, and the later illnesses and diseases that were developed, it didn't match the experimental data. And I'm a person, I didn't know you're not supposed to say somebody who's got letters and papers behind their name, is wrong. I was always brought up, if something's not right, you tell somebody (laughter), it's not right (laughter). And that's how I got in the rut that Dr. Haughey came to my rescue. We did a preliminary defense of a thesis, and this British guy, foreigner, he was, nothing I said was right. One question led to another question, like I was just an idiot and a fool standing up there saying what I said. And as I said, Dr. Haughey's one of these cool, non-animated. He just winked at me as if to say, stand your ground as long as, you know, you have the logic. From being ready to just run out the room, that wink turned the tide. I didn't care what he said, and I didn't care who he was, I came back with the logic and train of thought that I used in my paper. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's good. Now, so how did the, your interviewer respond to your thesis? Speaker 2: He finally gave up, you know. He would, you know, you go this way, he's trying to catch you on this, and people would do that periodically. I know during the summer at Brookhaven, you're assigned a professional to work with. And I guess they're supposed to mentor you. And they assigned me, his last name is Phillips, but his first name is not Ed. But anyhow, Phillips was Caucasian, but it was obvious, he was not, you know, a part of the clique. And Phillips had grown up as, with Polio. So, you know, he was accustomed to being treated differently and having to do things, you know, find out about things by himself. And so they assigned me to him, 'cause I was African American and female, I guess the best fit (laughter). And he was a nice guy, but he really hadn't put a lot of thought into what he was gonna give me to do during the summer. And, you know, we were talking one day, and I said, you know, you're really not giving me much to do here. You know, and I really, you know, wanna learn. So once I said that, you know, he let me work on what he was doing, real work. A lot of summer students don't do real work. It's busy work. And, but I was assigned to him, but there was another outlier, Andy Hull. He was an outlier because he would challenge the status quo. And the average person don't wanna rock the boat. And I didn't know that he was in his way trying to befriend me. You know, he wouldn't say anything direct, but, you know, it was, okay, maybe he's interested in my doing well kind of questions, not trying to show you what you don't know, but more helping you to learn more. So I, between--and I, I really should--Lee Phillips, Lee Phillips, Andy Hull were two people earliest in my career. Dr. Haughey in graduate school, and then, you know, I came out to California, and my best boss in life was a Hippie (laughter). I mean there's no--they called our division the Hippie division. Story_ID: 31298 Speaker 1: Now, let me just kind of get our chronology together. So in '72' [1972] you were hired by the--now, this is Dr. Leeper here that hired you-- Speaker 2: Leeper. Speaker 1: --Leeper, who hired you for the-- Speaker 2: His, I was his research assistant. Speaker 1: Okay, that's for the United States Atomic Energy Commission, right? Speaker 2: No, that's for Thomas Jefferson University Hospital. Speaker 1: Thomas Jefferson University, okay. That's-- Speaker 2: He was establishing a new radiation biology lab, and he was studying the effects of tumors on different bone marrow cells. Speaker 1: This is in 1971? Speaker 2: Yeah, this is '71' [1971]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --September, because the reason why I said he didn't know anything about interviewing people, and I didn't know anything about an interview, he happened to ask a question that I had been asked in graduate school. And the question that was asked in graduate school, it says, well, you know, most students go complete this course, and they don't know the answer to this question. And basically, it was a question how you increase the radiation output of an x-ray machine. And people would scratch their heads. Increase the voltage was the answer. So he asked that question, oh, I hesitated like I had to think about it and answer it. He was impressed (laughter). That was the end of the interview. And he says, well, I'm not gonna make a decision right now. I'll call you over the weekend. Well, my folks were in New York. So I went up to New York for the weekend. And he called that Sunday, and he says, well, if you want the job, you know, it's yours. And before I left Philadelphia, he introduced me to Jennetta. I don't know her name. But Jennetta was a black woman, and he wanted, come hell or high water, for me to meet Jennetta before I left because I think he thought, well, Jennetta can show me the ropes, where to live and what to do and what not. So I did meet Jennetta. I, I met her that day before I left, and I really never saw Jennetta again. But I did that day before I left, I went over to the "Y" [YWCA] to see if I were to get the job, were there vacancies or not. So I'd been over there. And as soon as he offered, he says, well, when can you report to work? Well, I mean this is like Saturday, Sunday. And I said, well, you know, I couldn't possibly get there until Tuesday. And he said, okay. And when I left New York, I stopped in Philadelphia, signed up for a room at the "Y", and I stayed at the "Y" for maybe two months max. And then I moved into the city, right around the corner from the "Y" (laughter). And so, you know, for a first job, he, he was not high strung, you know, real relaxed. He didn't get into high gear though until about 1:00 or 2:00 in the afternoon, which meant that you'd be at the lab late. And his wife would call, yap, yap, yap, when are you coming home? And, you know, that would unnerve him. One day, she called, and, you know, he left abruptly, not meticulously putting things away, this, that and the other. So when we came back the next day, this strand of cells, hamster cells that he had been cultivating, he did not set the thermometer. All of the cells were dead. And that was a year's worth of work. And when he, he was just livid. And then I said, well, you know, we forgot to check the temperature, not just him. And he says, oh, that's so good of you to try to take partial responsibility (laughter), but I'm the one that (laughter), the idiot that should have done that. And I, I liked the research he was doing, but I didn't like what we had to do. I was literally killing mice all day. We would inject the cancer cells into the mouse, wait for the tumor to get a certain size, and then we would sacrifice the mouse and then take the bone marrow out of the bone and analyze it to see if there were any mutations. When I first got there, I had, I don't, I don't kill mice, don't do mice 'cause he had this mech--you know, you'd catch the mouse right behind his neck, between the ears, dislocate. So he says, okay, that's okay. When you get ready to sacrifice, just call me (laughter). I even got tired of calling him (laughter) to sacrifice, so I started, but I didn't like the idea of doing that. I just, you know. And the other reason I didn't like it is because I know one holiday, you have to sacrifice them after so many days, else the tumor just gets huge and then the animal is suffering. And, you know, you're not supposed to do, be cruel to animals. So one holiday weekend, it was actually, they should have sacrificed before, and when we came back, oh, God. Oh, the size of the tumors, cancerous, you know, open-sore tumors. Oh, I said, oh. But anyway, luck would have it, is that I got a call from Brookhaven, where I'd done my summer internship. A health physicist that I had met at one of the professional meetings saying, "Hey, Hattie, they're looking for some people to come out here", and that was code, "Hattie, they're looking for some black folks". And you should come out here and interview. In the meantime, what--after I had been at Thomas Jefferson for about two months, I finally got a call from Livermore Lab. And Livermore Lab was inviting me for an interview. Now, I was straight laced, and, you know, I knew I was not gonna take that job. So I did not take that free trip to California. And now, I would (laughter). And so I, when I got this call, I said, well, you already turned down one job, and you don't even know what you turned down. You really shouldn't do that again. Brook--even though it was Brookhaven, a place I never, ever would go again to. Story_ID: 31299 Speaker 1: So I went out there, and the guy, you know, was talking about the salary, and how it would increase, and he was just sell, sell, sell. And then I had my talk with myself, and I said, well, you can't just keep, you know, turning things down and not exploring. It was more money, and it wasn't killing rats. So I went (unclear), it was Brookhaven. So the first thing I said, well, of course, you gotta get a car now. And that will help. You don't have to wait for somebody to take--you've got a little more latitude of where you can go. And I didn't know how to drive a car until I was in Philadelphia. I was there nine months. So I learned how to drive, but, you know, you take driver's, you know, pay somebody to teach you how to drive. And the only place I had ever driven was this one location that you do all the maneuvers that you're gonna have during the test. And then I didn't have a car, so I never drove again. And when I was at Brookhaven, it was raining one day, and I was supposed to go over to the lab, and the guy said, oh, you could take the car. Just take the government car. You do have a license, don't you? Yep. I had not driven a car in six, seven--and never really driven, you know, just that little practice thing. So, word got back, by the time I got back to the office, that, and they said, how much driving had you done because, you know, the car would cut off or jerk, you know. I got back, safe and sound, didn't kill anybody. So they suggested that I, you know, get someone that knew how to drive to ride with me. And I did that for about a week. Then I purchased a car, and my first trip was from New York to Cincinnati. Speaker 2: You actually drove from New York to Cincinnati? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the way to do it. You know, if I'm gonna learn something, let me, let me do it the big way. I don't like the baby steps. There's a lot of learning you can do between New York and Cincinnati. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's like an eleven-hour, twelve-hour drive. Speaker 1: Yes, one way. Yes, and I did it, didn't have any more problems driving. Speaker 2: Okay, well, let's get--so you went to Brookhaven this time with a car, right? Speaker 1: I got a car within the first three months, yes, didn't help, it didn't help that much, still nothing to do. Story_ID: 31300 Speaker 1: All right, 1973, Brookhaven. So, and your appointment was, at Brookhaven, was with the Atomic Energy Commission, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, just describe what you did there? Speaker 2: I was what they called a junior health physicist. Basically, you know, you don't take the lead. You take direction on reviews and assessments and the like. And as I had said earlier on, my father [George Carwell] passed in '73' [1973], around June-ish, and I was supposed to have my first lead assignment, and now, I'm not there. And I think, what has been said in hindsight, since I did my summer training at Brookhaven, it's kind of hard to tell your mother [Fannie Tunstall] and father that they're doing something wrong. You know, someone has taught you how to do something. Now, you're on the other side of the fence looking at how they do it, and they're not following the rules. In fact, when we were there during the summer, our little class told 'em they weren't following the rules. I, this was bizarre. They had this gamma radiation source. And gamma radiation penetrates. They put it on like a little skateboard, and this thing is hot radiation wise. They are running with the source on this skateboard-like thing, to minimize their exposure. Now, you know, we're just fresh out of school. We know, you don't do that. That's dangerous. Speaker 1: So they hoped to cut down their exposure by-- Speaker 2: By doing it as fast as they could. Speaker 1: On a skateboard? Speaker 2: Um-hum. It, I mean I'm calling it a skateboard. But it was the thing that had rollers on it like roller skates. And they had a long string, and they ran with it following behind them. Now, if they had tripped, fallen, not only would the source have been, the top could have come off the source. And they are laying there, I mean it just--poor practice. But, yet and still, this is the place that you cut your teeth, and my boss said, you know, 'cause when I came out to California, I didn't know these people out here. So I'd tell 'em when they were wrong within a heartbeat. Story_ID: 31301 Speaker 1: So did you ask for a transfer to California at some point? Speaker 2: Well, I wanted, well, this was during the time--I didn't know how the government operated. And, you know, at the beginning of the fiscal year, they may or may not have money. They may lay off people. They may not lay off. Projects that were supposed to happen, don't happen. And this guy had been around seven years, and he says, oh, this always happens. And he hoped the fence, meaning he went from AEC [Atomic Energy Commission] over to the lab. And here I am (laughter), where do I go (laughter) in case there's a layoff? And so, you know, I was saying, well, if--so I called myself leaving the government when I left the AEC because I looked around there. And there were people, had been there thirty years, that one spot. And I, I'll talk bad about you in a minute. I said, not me. You won't catch me here thirty years (laughter) in one spot (laughter). And so I left. But--I almost said his name, Mr. so-and-so said, well, you know, if you wanna work part time, I could probably arrange it. And he was--I almost said his name again. He was a very nice guy. His daughter had a debilitating accident out of high school. So she didn't get to go to college, and she didn't get to have her prospects of a future. So he just took interest in me 'cause I was young. And, you know, I don't know who he told what, but I was told later, normally, you just don't get a part-time job. You either get a job or you don't get a job. And at that time, working part time benefits' wise and accumulating hours and years, was counted full time. And then when I, you know, I was looking at people out here, and I told you my boss was a Hippie, so, you know, it was, they went to meetings all the time. And they sat in a circle almost singing Kumbaya, you know. We had, I'm not thinking of what they called it. But it was okay. If we, you know, if we're not getting along, for me to sit and say, well, you know, you walk funny. That's why I can't get along with you or, you know, you, you wear square-toed shoes and I only like round-toe shoes. And we would take a day off and go to a hotel, have a nice lunch and sit in a circle. And he had all these little code words, "Don't plop me", you know, like if I'm saying something, don't talk over me. And, you know, we need to be candid. Being candid was a hard thing for these people, and that's what I did my whole life, tell it the way you see it. And I guess they had been groomed to sugarcoat it. So that's why they called us the Hippie group. It was experimental, and the headquarters people wouldn't touch it with a ten-foot pole. But they always wanted to hear about what we were doing when they would come out. And my boss believed in following the rules, but he would bend them as far as they could be bent. I wanted to go to the professional society meeting, and I wanted to go to another meeting. And I wanted to go home to visit. And I told him, you know, well, rather than flying me, I'll just drive and drive from point to point. We could figure out the maximum you're willing to reimburse me. And it was fine with him to do that, but when it got to personnel, they're saying, oh, no, you can't do that. You know, you have to drive for a certain per diem. Back then it was eleven cents a mile. And 'cause I--when we worked it out, the miles, it was like, you know, pennies, like two cents a mile. So somebody got it in their head that it was against the rules. And he said, show me which rules say the lowest. It said the "maximum". It didn't say the lowest, and if she's willing to do it, I'm willing to let her. So, I did it. I went on vacation for six weeks once 'cause I was working part time, accumulating leave full time. And so between days off, I was gone six weeks, and used maybe a week and a half. Story_ID: 31302 Speaker 1: Now, were you going to graduate school during this period of time? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And where were you going? Speaker 2: Berkeley, U-C Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And so he was the sort of thing, if you wanna do it, and it doesn't break the rule, why not? Speaker 1: So, now what were you studying at U-C Berkeley? You-- Speaker 2: Biophysics. Speaker 1: Biophysics, okay. And who were you studying with there? Speaker 2: Latimer, Robert Latimer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The introverted one. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, and so did you--were you working on a PhD or-- Speaker 2: I was working on a PhD and I was there two years, and my aunt got sick. And she was in Virginia, and I was out here. And I was going back and forth, and after she died, I felt bad about it because I did come, you know, maybe three times to see her. But people wouldn't tell me how ill she was. And I would always says, "Should I come, should I come?" Oh, no, no, no, stay where you are. You're studying. And I followed their instructions, and then one day I got a call. She was gone. I didn't know she was close to dying. I didn't get to say good-bye, and I said, never again 'cause my first thought when I came to California, I won't be able to get home. And after that I took a few more courses, and then I started killing rats again, and that was it for me. I was killing, not mice, but rats and, 'cause my interests was cancer treatment-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --with chemotherapy. Speaker 1: So you dropped out of the PhD program? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And did you ever go back? Speaker 2: No, I never went back, but I continued to take classes. I con--I, well, soon thereafter, people were going to Europe to work. And I thought, oh, out of the country, free travel. And then it became a challenge to go there because one, when I inquired, people said, oh, why are you interested? Well, the same reason other people are interested. I wanna go abroad and travel and work. And then this one guy from Oklahoma, who I worked with--he was new to the office, but he was a red neck. I told him I was interested in going to Vienna. And so he would facetiously continuously, "Oh, how are your plans? How are your applications coming?, you know, as if [whispering], you know, "She's not gonna go. She's not gonna get to go". And then Len Lanning (ph.), bless Len Lanning's heart. He comes from the school of candor too, Italian. Speaker 1: This is a co-worker? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He had gone over there for a year, and I spoke to him and told him I was interested. And Len says, well, Hattie, I don't know how you would do over there. I said, do what? Well, you know, there're not very many black people over there. And I said, and? He says, well, I just don't know how you would fit in? That was another little booster. Okay, I said, well, Len, do you fit in? And he said, yeah. I said, do you enjoy being there? Oh, yeah, me and my wife, oh, had a wonderful time. Okay, so finally, I got an answer to an application, and I was turned down. Okay. My new boss had gone to a meeting in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], a health physics conference. And he ran into somebody from Vienna who was looking for someone to be a health physicist 'cause I had applied for something that was tangentially related to radiation science. But it was a specialty and I had not--I volunteered for a month for the group that did that specialty (laughter), and then applied for this job, which was very competitive. So I was not heartbroken that I didn't get it. But then this new avenue, the guy, my boss gave me the guy's address, took my time and wrote a nice letter, told him my interests; didn't get a response. This is '79' [1979]. I did not get a response. I was ticked off. And I was getting ready to go--I, you know, was traveling abroad by now. I think my first trip outside the country was around '78' [1978]. And so I was going to Kenya, and it was late November, early December. So it was warm in Kenya and cold in Vienna. But I was telling somebody how this guy had not responded to my letter. And I said, you know what? I ought to show up on his doorstep and get an answer in person. Checked with travel. I could make that detour without costing any money. I did that, stopped in Vienna on my way back to the States, got settled, called the guy, told him who I was, gave him a way out. I said, I'm not sure, but I wrote you a letter. I'm not sure whether you got it. Oh, yeah, I got it. And then he says, and I said, well, you know, I'm in Vienna. And I would like to come over. Oh, you know, I'm really busy, and he says, how long are you gonna be here? He's gonna be busy the whole time I'm there. So I'm freezing in these little summer clothes, and I hung up, and I said, you know, I did not make this detour to be dismissed in five minutes. So I called him back, and I said, "Well, you know, I still would like to see the place. Can you tell me how to get there? He said, where are you staying? And then he proceeded to tell me how complicated it was to get there. So I hung up again. I said, you know, there are people from my office here. What am I putzing around with him. I called him back again. I said, well, do you know, so and so? Could you give me his number? I called him, called. He says, "Hattie, what are you doing here?" I said, well, how do you know I'm here? He says you don't have enough money to call. So he says, why don't you come over. And, you know, I had dinner with him and his wife. And he said, you know, Hattie, if you want a job, you just have to use buzz words. He gave me some buzz words. I picked up a new application, but by the time I got back home, I was turned down for another job that I had not applied for. I said, this is not fair. I'm not getting the job, and I didn't apply for it. But to go to work for the International Atomic Energy Agency where I had applied, the DOE [Department of Energy] would second their workers, meaning they would loan you to them. And for Americans, DOE coordinated all the applications that were sent over there. Once you qualified, when a job came up, your name would automatically be put in the pool. And so when I got around to applying again, Voila, buzz word, same person, same, no qualifications, got a job. Story_ID: 31303 Speaker 1: Okay, so you were actually working for, who in Vienna? Speaker 2: The International Atomic Energy Agency-- Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: --doing nuclear safeguards. Speaker 1: This (unclear) they call the IAEA. Speaker 2: Yes, those are the folks that Bush [President George W. Bush] had looking for weapons of mass destruction, which if he really understood what they did, they knew, they would not find them. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Because you're trained to look for what people say is there and not for what they're trying to hid from you. You can tell by looking at their inventory of what they have on hand and what you need to make this, that and the other, whether they got any leftovers or something's missing, that kind of thing. But just to say, you know, well, let me look in that door, behind Door Number One; nope, not there. Let me go to Door Number Two. Speaker 1: So you'd never, they would never have found anything anyway-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --the way they were looking? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Well, let me you a brief, before we get into the IAEA, I just wanted to ask you about Three Mile Island. Now, that took place in 1979. Did you, what are your thoughts about that? Speaker 2: I actually was driving up to the State of Washington that weekend. That was the weekend when gas went to a dollar. Speaker 1: Up to a dollar-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --from what it used to be? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was always under a dollar-- Speaker 1: For those who didn't know, who are watching this, who are used to it being four dollars-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, gas tripped to a dollar. And so I'm listening to the radio about what's happening. And you know how media, that's the only information you have access to. And it sounded scary. And there were teams called out from the Bay area to go and respond, but it wasn't as scary as the media made it sound. I mean, but it, the levels or radiation outside, within the perimeter of the plant, were certainly above standards in permissible doses because our philosophy in radiation science is that no dose of radiation is considered safe. However, we're exposed to radiation every day, granite, concrete, natural levels of radiation, flying in a plane, high altitudes. You go to the dentist, all these sources of radiation, you're exposed to. But, so first we said, no dose is considered safe. However, low-level exposures are acceptable as long as the risk is worth the benefit. So if you wanna get from California to New York and not take three days, you will take the risk for the other consequences of being exposed to a few milligrams of radiation to get there. Speaker 1: By flying? Speaker 2: By flying. Or when your dentist says, say "ah", 'cause I got to fix our tooth, and I need to see what's going here, you say, "ah" because it's just a little bit of radiation that you're being exposed to. And so people who are not working with it, it's permissible to expose them. But the limits are five times lower than somebody who's getting a paycheck. That's my benefit. And that's the profession you chose, so, you know, you ought to take a little more risk, 'cause, you know, we do pay you. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, well, in Vienna, now, you were there for five years, you say? Speaker 2: Five years. Speaker 1: And what was that experience like? Speaker 2: The best in my whole career. I liked the international theme, scene, meeting people and interacting from people around the world. I loved the way the compensated you because when you go out on assignment, you get a flat amount of money. You can spend it or not spend it. It's yours. And the radiation facilities are, once again, these little, tiny towns, away from everybody else. So the hotels are cheap. As inspectors, we stayed in the cheapest places we could find. And so when you flew through Rome or Amsterdam, you got money to purchase any little nicety and it's no money out of your salary. You, after you're out in the field sixty days, every day that you're out on a weekend, you get a day off. You had to punch a clock. So, if you worked late, you're accumulating points, and when you get so many points, you get a day off, two-hour lunches. We trained in England and Germany, assignments, you know, I'd never been to Greece. I pulled a straw to go, you know, to Athens. That's a little (unclear) needy (ph.). When I went out on assignment, I looked to the right and to the left on the map. Where can I go the weekend? You're out in the field, so they gotta pay for you to eat and sleep somewhere. So why not a place of choice? And it wasn't, you know, like to go to Greece, the facility that had the special nuclear material, was like a thimble full. But you gotta account for it. Somebody's gotta do it. And-- Speaker 1: So this is Route 66. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, this is my Route 66. Story_ID: 31304 Speaker 1: Now, did you ever go to Russia or-- Speaker 2: Went, I went to Russia as a tourist. And the Russians we interacted with, Russians disappeared on the job that I had because the majority of us believed the Russians were spies. And they were just doing our job to see the different nuclear facilities. And they thought the Japanese were out to steal industrial secrets. And me, you know, I was harmless. It was only one of me, you know, I was the only black woman and for a while, the only woman. And so, you know, what harm could I do? I was a novelty. And so I was representing the United States. I had a Laissez-passer from the UN [United Nations]. Don't touch her. Don't mess with her. Even if she's in trouble, don't mess with her. And it was, you know, if you messed with me, it's an international incident. So I got lost, you know, trying to go places and I never worried about being lost until I was supposed to be where I wasn't, you know, getting directions in a foreign language that you don't completely understand. It's bad enough getting directions in a language that you do understand. People, you know, so concerned that you might get lost, they're going in the opposite direction, and they turn around, follow me, taking you to make sure you get to the point, going to little towns in Italy. The Italians will talk to you, I don't care what language you speak. And once again, I'm going to these tiny little towns, 'cause, you know, and small-town people will get in your business. And they would wonder why is she coming here once a month, staying three days and then going back? What is she doing? And this Thai--guy from Thailand and I used to go to this town an hour from Amsterdam, Almelo, next door to Hengelo. Hengelo, they have beer. And we stayed in this bread and breakfast place. And so (laughter) Mr. Gemung (ph.) Hung (ph.) said, I'll bet you they wanna know why the two of them come here (laughter), why the hell they come here to this little town (laughter), 'cause you know, they didn't know what we were doing. We would go to the university or out to a power plant. I went to, we--it was a new enrichment plant, uranium enrichment plant, experimental, that we would go to. And, you know, I, since I was a novelty, you know, there's dead time. You're counting samples and machine, and you're just sitting there waiting. So there's a lot of just small talk. And, you know, this was interesting. The plant was in the Netherlands, and the Germans ran the plant. And I forget his name, but the director of the plan would come, and at lunchtime, he'd, you know, just hang out a little bit. And he had a habit, when you asked him a question he would say, "in princeive" (ph.), you know, in principle. And when he would say that, I would always get this big smile on my face. And he didn't know why I would always smile. So he said, what's, what's, you know, what's the problem? I said, well, you know, I'm smiling because most times when people say something "in principle", whatever they're saying is not really true, that it's close to being true, but it's not really true or you really don't know if it's true. And for the nature of our work, if he's telling us, well, it's kinda like this, but it's not, and so I would just smile. And he, it was such an ingrained habit, he couldn't break it. So every time he'd ready to say something, he'd find himself, saying "in princeive". And then he would look at me and laugh. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: So-- Story_ID: 31305 Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, how did you get, when did you come back from-- Speaker 2: I came back Thanksgiving, 1985, 'cause I had Thanksgiving here. Speaker 1: Okay, so your assignment ran out or did you decide to come back? Speaker 2: Nope, okay, I went with a two-year contract, renewed it for two years. And then it was time for a promotion. They only give promotions once a year when the board of directors meet. The guy who wrote up our job descriptions that would have promoted us did not do a good job in justifying the additional responsibilities. So nobody got a promotion. And, oh, well, you know, next year, you know, we're a shoe-in. So the board meets in September. I went there--you have to sign your next contract before the existing contract runs out. So not knowing whether we're actually gonna get the promotion the next year, I signed the five-year--'cause you go two, two and five, meaning that, oh, you really like it here. You're gonna be one of us from now on. And I was already a group leader 'cause I (laughter) was candid one day. You know, with the IAEA, since it's worldwide, certain positions are parceled out to certain parts of the worlds, like Kofi Annan, it was African's time to be over the UN. And the United States pays the lion's share of the cost of running the IAEA. So they think they have privileges and there're certain strategic positions they want. And, you know, so this country needs to be here and there and so it's not totally on merit. So we were choosing a new group leader. And Dmitri (ph.), the Greek one, was short tempered. He, I was an assistant group leader, and he says, "Well, Hattie, who do you think should be the group leader? We're looking at so and so and so because of so and so and so. And I said, do you really wanna know my opinion? He said, yeah. I said, well, I think I should be the group leader. And I had never said anything like that to anybody. But I was feeling my Cheerios that day, and so I just said I thought, and I told him why. And he says, well, you know, I would like to do that, but, you know, we pretty much promised the Polish that the next group leader position would go to them. And so, this Polish guy considered himself a shoe-in. He arranged this big celebration for himself. And the day that he was supposed to take over, I don't know what happened. But it was my name that was announced. And I think, now, it wouldn't happen in the state this way, but I think because I yelled at my group leader who was inept, I was the only person willing to call a "spade a spade". He was there because his father was a diplomat, yada, yada, yada. And he didn't do anything. He did not make decisions. When he was out, I would take over, and all the backlog that he would not make decisions on, I'd get rid of it, make a decision. You know, be it right or wrong, a decision has been made and we're done with that. It goes up the chain. If they agree or disagree, it comes back to us. And one day, I handed him reports in, getting ready to go out on assignment. Friday, you gotta get your ticket, you gotta get your equipment, you gotta go to the bank, get your money. You gotta get all your stuff lined up. He comes in my office in the morning saying, "You put in your report, blah, blah, blah, to indicate there may be a problem 'cause you wanna go out (unclear), "Oh, no, everything's fine", you know, 'cause if there's some information missing and somebody could be doing something clandestine to divert, it's gonna get big attention. So everybody tries to make nice and smooth over. I said--his name was Ricardo Diaz Duke, and I used to call him Daddy Duke--not to his face. And I said, you know, you are the group leader. You have the final say. I can only write the report from the perspective I saw with my own two eyes. But, if you don't thing it hangs together or you wanna say it in a different way, that's your responsibility. And he kept all day, coming back and forth, getting me to change it to what he wanted, but to say that I changed it, so it would say, I said it. So I needed to leave and continue on my preparation. So I stood up, yelled at him, I said, "You need to leave my office. I've told you the same thing all day." I'm not--and I didn't say it softly. I knew the people up the hall could hear me. So after I finished yelling at him, I went up there. I told them, I just yelled at so and so. And I told 'em why. He's been bugging me all day to change something that he, if he really wanted it changed, he could change it himself. And then everybody was, "Oh, Hattie, yelled at, at Daddy Duke", and this, that and the other. So I think because I yelled at him, that Dmitri is always yelling at people. He thought if, you know, if I would stand my ground and as group leader, if a situation came up, I'd deal with it. Story_ID: 31306 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, your last year you spent as a group leader? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I spent it as group leader. I had four years left on the contract, but I had a talk with myself, and I said, if you are going to get back into the work force in the U.S., five years is a long time to be away. And I, before I left, I was very involved in the community. I felt like I was on a pedestal and a holiday was every day. I mean I didn't have any responsibilities. I mean, even the politics, you know, they weren't my politics. You know, whatever the issue was, I was in and out, flitting here and there, no real roots. And it's privileged, but if you're a more grounded person, and I consider myself grounded, it, you know--and I, there were people, you know, from Somalia, from Lebanon, and trouble, war-torn countries that, they were there, privileged, and absolutely, miserable 'cause they couldn't do anything to help their country. And yet, you know, anything they wanted they could have. So that didn't suit, sit too well with me. So I said, okay, I'm going back to the states. I was just hanging around to get my promotion so I can say I had a promotion while I was there. So I got my promotion, and Dmitri did not like that. Story_ID: 31307 Speaker 1: Alright, so you came back in 1985. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And so you continued to work for the Department of Energy? Speaker 2: Right, you're sadondant (ph.) (unclear), although you're not working for them. You're still accumulating those five years as their employee. And what they didn't tell you about is the little pots of gold that you got. That's why everybody was going over there. They, you know, they don't talk about that, that, you know, when you first go, you're relocating. You have all of these first-time expenses. So they give you a little pot of gold to work with. And then when you leave, they give you a little pot for each year of service. And then they give you just, just so--because you were nice and you worked for us, kind of extra money to get resettled when you come back. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you come back to California or-- Speaker 2: I came back to California. I brought back a Mercedes that I paid $11,000 brand new because I got the diplomatic discount, didn't pay any taxes on it, didn't pay any U.S. taxes while I was there. But I mean those weren't draws to go there. These are things I found out once I got there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I still have many of the friends that I had when I was there, that still live there. Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about, now, at some point, is it in '88' [1988], that you go to Rocky Flats, Colorado to live? Speaker 2: Oh, well, when I first came back, that, you know, normally, when you do an international stint, you know, everybody wants you to work in their division and, you know, there's a little path to grow up. And one, the five years I was gone, the guy from Oklahoma had gotten a position that I would have been senior for had I been there. And he had brought in a bunch of his friends. And they were in management. And I was open, you know, I'll go anywhere, anytime, you know, you know, I'll go, you know. So, first, when I came back I was put on a special assignment. The DOE [Department of Energy] headquarters was doing an environmental survey of all of their facilities, basically (laughter), doing an assessment of how much crap they had put out in the environment since the '40s [1940s] and what it would cost to clean it up and what it would take to clean it up. So I did that. I was in Washington for three months, and then they started a new oversight program. They started Tiger Teams. They called 'em Tiger Teams. And so the, going to Rocky Flats, I went there first to help start up the program. And I went the second time because Rocky Flats got into trouble with the FBI. Story_ID: 31308 Speaker 1: Now, this is, is this the point I--yeah, I've got a note here that this was in 1989-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --when the FBI raided the Rocky Flats plant as part of its investigation of allegations of mismanagement, negligence and criminal practices? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And because I--they wanted people independent to the people employed by DOE. They figured, you know, they'd part of a cover up. And so I got a call one morning from a Mr. Grimm from headquarters. And he basically says, is there anything that you're currently engaged in that would preclude your taking a special assignment for headquarters? I said, to do what? Can't tell you. To go where? Can't tell you. Just wanna know your availability. And then I was taking a course. I was supposed to do something locally at the office. I had a meeting that evening 'cause I was leaving that evening if I said, yes; had meetings planned that evening. And I said, well, call me back in an hour. He called me back. I said, yeah, I'll go. And he said, you know, you can't tell anybody where you're going. And I said, but I'm supposed to be in class and was, you know, we're having finals or whatever. And I'm supposed to be at this meeting. I'm planning a conference. People are gonna wanna know why I'm not there. Said, well, you tell 'em anything except what you're really going to do. And this guy from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission was on this committee. And, you know, I told 'em well, I can't come to the meeting, and I can't tell you. I'll talk to you later. And the story broke the next day. And when I talked, he said, well, I know where you went, know exactly where you went. And what they did, they said, this was before e-tickets. There will be a ticket at the airport waiting for you. And Rocky Flats is a high-security place because it designs weapons or did. Speaker 1: This is Rocky Flats, Colorado, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it's out, another boonies, away from Denver, an hour--it's always an hour's drive from civilization, DOE. Chicago, you go to Fermi Lab, you go to Argonne, hour from Chicago 'cause nobody wants to live close to what DOE's doing. Don't know what they're doing, but it can't be good if it's secret. So I, you know, came home, basically, just locked my door, didn't know how long I was gonna be gone. And I, you know, said, well, you know, if I can home and really pack the weekend, you know--and we ended up being there three months. But I came home every weekend because the cost of a hotel the weekend was the same as a plane ticket. So I chose to come, and to continue my activities. So-- Speaker 1: Okay, now, the bottom line on this one is that the, I guess it was Rockwell International, the plant operator-- Speaker 2: Who was the manager. And the director was Mr. Sankeani, and we call him Zucchini. And they would have these sunrise meetings of the senior managers. And see, I knew them from the three months that I'd been there to start up this program. And I knew some of their little closet secrets. And basically, the team that I was a part that was sent, was really to determine whether there was any truth to the allegation before a release was made to the media, you know, based on what we knew about the facility and things. Speaker 1: So what I have here is the bottom line is they pled guilty to ten counts, including violations of the Clean Water Act and agreed to pay a fine of $18.5 million. Speaker 2: Oh, that was cheap. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, one of the things, and why they paid that fine, one of the allegations, they had a plant that had had an accident, and it was shut down by DOE. Do not operate this plant. Someone saw heat signatures on the building, infrared. So that implied they were operating, when they were told not to operate. Then someone, the thing about the water, and this is public information, so, the thing about the water was they said they were seeing medical chemicals in the water. Well, what was happening, over at medical, you know, if you take an injection that's radioactive, when you tinkle, it will come out. And that's basically, you know, in radiation science, the only way I can help you, I can flush it out by giving you a lot of beer to drink. And chemicals have a biological half life, how long they will stay in your body. And then they have a physical half life, how long they will be around until they are decayed away. Speaker 1: So you're serious about the beer, right? Speaker 2: I'm serious. Speaker 1: That's the best thing to drink to get flushed-- Speaker 2: Don't you have to go to the bathroom when you drink beer? Speaker 1: I don't drink it that often? Speaker 2: Do you drink beer? [directed to videographer] Speaker 1: He does (laughter), yes. Speaker 2: It flushes your system, and there're diuretics that they'll give you to flush to reduce the resident time in your body, reduces the exposure up to, and lessens the amount of radiation you're exposed to. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 31309 Speaker 1: Now, when I was there with the program that we were setting up, they, they were at odds with the union. And Rocky Flats is one of the few DOE facilities, you know, you don't have a hundred PhDs sitting on a pinhead. These are grunt people, doing grunt work. It just happened to be handling radioactive material. And, you know, I was trying to think of the movie. What's the movie in which she suspects that they're polluting the environment, her job, she works at this plant. Speaker 2: Erin Brockovich? Speaker 1: Not Erin Brockovich. This was, what's the woman, Sonny and Cher. Cher was in it. Speaker 2: Yeah, Cher, right. Speaker 1: Cher was in it. Well, it was a situation like that. In fact, there's a scene in that movie, I've seen it a hundred times at Rocky Flats. They had these glove boxes, you know, lead-shielded glass. And you've got, you put your arms and hands in these gloves, and you manipulate the radioactive material. Well, you know, a good ole boy will get up there and prop his feet up against the window, getting a good goat--dose to the gonads, you know, should be working, but just relaxing. They had one facility, it was never built right, properly. And the containers, they had plutonium nitrate in, would leak. And I'd have to report into the, you know, so-and-so, the thing leaked on his head, and he's gotta go to medical. And medical is, all you can do is try to remove it. So it's like taking, almost Brillo and trying to brush it off, giving him a shower, take a count, put him in the shower, take another count until the count is down as low as you can. And they've gotta strip butt naked. And so (laughter) I've seen all those kinds of things going on at Rocky Flats, and I don't know, the union felt safe telling me stuff, that they wouldn't tell the Rockwell management. So there was one situation that came up, and Sankeani (ph.) prided himself in knowing what was going on, knowing it first. And I used to have to meet with him twice a week, and I just mentioned this incident as if to say, that can't be true. I didn't hear about that. Are you sure? Where'd you get that information, you know. And I said, you know, I'm just out there, folks talk to me. And so, then I got a call from headquarters, Sankeani is all upset 'cause he thinks you were overstepping your bounds, and yada, yada, yada. I said, I was helping him out. How long would it have taken him to find out? I could have kept it to myself. He wouldn't never know. And he was offended because I knew before he did, and by the way, he did die of cancer, and they were just sloppy, you know, whether--the worse place I had ever been to. Speaker 2: Now, this is something that kind of is baffling, I think, in some ways. It still goes on now with the global warming and other, that corporations will actually risk, like personal annihilation as well as the, you know, the community's annihilation to earn a profit. I mean I don't, and I mean even to the point of them--you're saying this fellow died of cancer himself and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, Sankeani worked for Rockwell, and you know, if there was not a nice profit, they would not be working for DOE. And I'll give you an example. Lawrence Berkley National Lab has been on the dole (unclear) since 1939 with the government, meaning, you could call it competitive bid if you want to, but I always get the bid 'cause I've got all the years of experience. How can anybody beat me out? I'm on university land, and all of your facilities are there. What do you look like bringing a new contractor in here on my land? So that's how things happen and get twisted. It gets to the point that DOE is giving you the money. DOE is telling you what to do and you decide, just throw the money over the fence. I'll do what I want to, and I'll tell you what I want to tell you. I'm not gonna tell you everything. And so that's that schizophrenic relationship, self regulation. Story_ID: 31310 Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 1990, you were appointed the program manager of High Energy and Nuclear Programs with the U.S. Department of Energy, San Francisco operations office in Oakland, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, the way that came about, remember I said, while I was gone, this Okie [Oklahoma guy] brought in his friends for positions that I would have been eligible for. And so we had an organization, reorganization, and some positions came up. And this one guy who I later found out barely had a degree, I mean barely any degree, much less a technical degree. These people came from Mayer Island. And they, you know, take you up from your bootstrap. You don't have to have the formal college education. You worked under Joe for six years. So now, you be what Joe is. And so there were these people that had come in, and there was one position advertised. And, you know, the guys were so overt. Everybody knew who the branch chief was gonna choose long before the position closed. And sure enough, they played it out. You know, people called it, and they played it out that way, but the position was never announced. And I, you know, I don't wait--when I got wind before it announced, I was downstairs in the manager's office, in the EEO office, demanding a recount (laughter), so to speak. And so what they decided, and the way that our office does things, they don't solve problems. They make 'em go away. They withdrew the position, so nobody got it. However, the other half of that equation is the next time something comes up, the person that got wronged, it's, you know, made to be known, and I verbalized that that person should be righted. So righting my not getting that other position was that position. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you were in this position until 1994, I guess it is? Speaker 2: Yes, because we're always reorganizing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's when, we used to have an operations office. Everybody, 300 people come to the same place to work. You're responsibility is different facilities, but everybody comes to the same place, and then they decided, "Gee whiz, you know, DOE labs are so out of hand, you need to sit beside them, you know, and watch them closely", as opposed to being downtown. If you don't feel like getting in the car and driving out to Livermore, you find something to do in the office and maybe the last time you were out there was three months. A lot can happen in three months, and people know you're not, you know, coming out there frequently, but they think twice when they know you might pop in any hour of the day. So they disbanded the central office, and Livermore got a site office, and Berkeley got a site office, and I went to the Berkeley site office. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there as an operations lead-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --for the U.S. Department of Energy at Lawrence-Berkeley National Laboratories-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --on the campus of the University of California at Berkeley. Speaker 2: Well, not the campus because the campus is down the hill. We were on University of California land, owned. We paid a dollar a year for 250 acres, nice deal. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But you know if, you know, I'm allowing you to use my 250 acres, you're not gonna bend me but so hard. Story_ID: 31311 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were at, stationed at Lawrence-Berkeley until 2006, right? And-- Speaker 2: Well, 2008. Speaker 1: Two thousand eight [2008], okay. All right, and, but while you were there, you published a book called "Blacks in Science"-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, I had done that way before that. Speaker 1: Way before-- Speaker 2: I did that before I went to Europe. Speaker 1: Oh, really? Okay, 'cause I have it down as-- Speaker 2: The book was published and it's over there. That was 1977. Speaker 1: Really, okay. I have it, they have it down for 1997. Speaker 2: Oh, no, that book has been around-- Speaker 1: But 1977, okay-- Speaker 2: --40 year years almost. Speaker 1: Oh, all right, okay. Well, maybe I won't talk about this till the end. We'll about this when we get to the end, 1977. So, okay, so basically, I mean did you retire then from that position with the Department of Energy? Speaker 2: In 2000--no, no, no. See, we, always, they're changing stuff. You know, I, I may be coming to the same office, but what I'm doing, the focus is totally different. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Okay, so you're still with the Department of Energy right now, then? Speaker 2: No, I'm retired. Speaker 1: That's what I thought. Well, so when did you retire? Speaker 2: I've been retired four years. Speaker 1: So when did you retire? Speaker 2: Two thousand eight [2008]. Speaker 1: That's what I just asked (laughter). Speaker 2: September. Speaker 1: Yes (laughter), I asked did you retire in 2008, then, and that's what I said? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: In September. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Gotta do things in September. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just noticed that. I didn't notice that before, everything is September. Story_ID: 31312 Speaker 1: Okay, in September. Now, okay, well, when you look back on your stint with the Department of Energy, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it again? Speaker 2: I would probably, when I came back from Europe, I'd already been forewarned, and I thought I understood it. They said, now, when you come back, don't talk a lot about what you got to do, jealousies. And I didn't, but one problem, one thing I did, I brought back a Mercedes. They didn't know I only paid $11,000 for it, and many of the guys looked at bringing the Mercedes back. But you had to get it converted to U.S. stats, and they were afraid that somebody would do something wrong and their little investment would dissipate. They had books and all kinds of things, and I, you know, I just read the books that they had (unclear). And I found a conversionist in Connecticut. On my last assignment to Germany, I drove the car there, left it at the harbor, (unclear) bringing it home, picked it up. It came in the states in Albany because it was cheaper, had it converted. Now, I thought I was real slick. I'm gonna have all of this done before I go to the West Coast. And this was Thanksgiving, the driver that was supposed to drive the car from Jersey back to Connecticut had an accident. There was nobody else that could deliver the car. I had to get back 'cause I didn't have any vacation time. So the beginning of the year, I went back and picked up the car that had been converted, never had a problem whatsoever. Everything was click, click, push, pull, except for the timing of taking it back. So, you know, that, oh, Hattie has a Mercedes. And-- Speaker 1: So you wouldn't have-- Speaker 2: I mean it's not what I'd, you know, I think the car did me in 'cause I certainly didn't talk, you know. You'd have to ask me for me to say something. And, you know, they were already a little red neck-ish, so it didn't take much. And so with those guys, I had to go through the thing on the first opportunity to be promoted and then I got away from them 'cause I went, I went to Berkeley, and they went to Livermore. And that was a nice parting of the ways. Story_ID: 31313 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were involved in a number of projects that, outside of work, that promoted the development of blacks in science and technical studies, of black students, and, you know, the first thing I guess I mention is the book, written in '77' [1977] was, tell us about the development of the book in '77' [1977]? Speaker 2: Well, I decided to write the book after going to my very first technical conference hosted and planned by black folks. Speaker 1: By who? Speaker 2: Black folks. Speaker 1: Okay. And what-- Speaker 2: That was the "Manpower Symposium" in Cleveland, Ohio in 1974, and it was planned by the first, very first black health physicist I met. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I went there, and I heard one paper, this one guy talked about black folks in science beyond George Washington Carver. And I thought it was really interesting, and then I wanted to find more information. It was difficult to find and the more difficult it was to find, the more I wanted to find it. And as I found it, I said, oh, you know, maybe somebody else would be interested in it. I said the magic words. I'm gonna write a book. So I wrote it. Speaker 1: And the result was "Black in Science Astrophysicists to Zoologists"-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-seven [1977]. So what was the reception for the book? Speaker 2: It was well received, and, you know, traveling to little dinky places where you don't know anybody, you've got to do something with yourself. So when, when I would go out on assignment, I'd go to the library. And so, you know, it was distributed to various libraries, and I knew, like this one guy, Roscoe Kuntz (ph.), he was a pioneering African American health physicist. Well, when I'd go down to Rockwell International, down in L.A., I'd interview Roscoe after 5:00, that sort of thing. So I always had something to do with a goal in mind. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, because it's, it's socially weird when you're maybe the only woman and on top of it, the only woman who happens to be black. So I always timed my entrance, okay. If we're going, if there's a dinner for a professional society, I'd get there ten minutes before it's time to eat. It's enough that you said you did some socializing, but you weren't there an hour and a half and people staring, and don't want--don't know whether they should go over and talk or they think you're somebody's wife and it made it easy for all of us. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is remarkable that you spent your time in a productive way, I mean the time that you spent in these places for the projects-- Speaker 2: Oh, I used to have a fit when it was time for the library to close. I'd run and copy as much as I could so that when I came back home, I could continue. Story_ID: 31314 Speaker 1: Now, what did you--is there any particular person or fact that was the most surprising, I guess, in writing this book on blacks in science? Speaker 2: Well, I have to say, now, I wrote this book in '77' [1977]. I'm still being surprised by little factoids that I (unclear) come. And, you know, if anybody knows that these people exist and if it happened, the black person had something to do with it somehow, someway, and it just rolls out that way. But when, when some things, you'd say, I don't believe it. I didn't know, because, you know, people get in these traps, I'm the first. You're the first that you know about. If you did theory--thorough enough research, you'll find somebody, just like Rosa Parks and this other woman, somebody tried it at some level, had minimal success at it, but they were there. I could say, not so much surprised, but I can say some of my favorite people. And I wish Dr. Warren Henry had lived long enough for this project. You would love Dr. Henry. And I'm just proud that I had an opportunity just to sit at his knee and to listen how he made things happen for himself when nobody else was making it happen for him. And always tell people, I went to his memorial, and one of his students said, you know, "Dr. Henry was the consummate diplomat". He was the sort of person that could tell you to go to hell and have you look forward to the trip. He wasn't one that, you know, jump up and shout and, and be out in the public. But you do him in, it may be six months later that something happens, and he's behind it, and he's got you. He was very creative in creating opportunities for himself. He got his PhD from the University of Chicago in '41' [1941]. He (laughter), now, you're talking about somebody ingenious in making their opportunities. He decided--he was teaching at Morehouse College. He was teaching physics, and he decided, you know, I'd like to see all of the large research institutions in the U.S. I know I can't get a job there, but I'd like to see 'em. So he put together an itinerary, a train itinerary, such that he would ride on the train all night, go into the city, to the place he wanted, get back on the train. He didn't have to pay hotel. And all, and he went to all of these places that all he could do is read about. He, right after he got his PhD, he worked at the radiation lab at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology]. And he rad--he worked on radar when it was secret. And when he said that, the first time he said that to me, I was just, 'radar, secret'? (Laughter) It was so funny to me. In fact, he said it as though it was still secret, and shush, don't tell anybody (laughter). But he worked on the receiving capability for radar, radio scopes. And after he took this trip, he stopped in, at the Naval Research Lab. And this guy, now, this is the really humorous part of it. One of his best friends at the University of Chicago was a native of Alabama, legally blind. They became best friends. And he stopped in to see him, and the guy said, now, we can talk about old times, but don't ask me what I'm doing here, you know, 'cause that's top secret. So Dr. Henry, being very observant, when he came in, he saw this real, this tower, you know, the antenna. And he says, you know, I came in, I told you we can't talk about my work. And that's how he got an opportunity to work at the radiation lab 'cause he knew that he was a good experimentalist, and the like. And he had been a high school teacher 'cause he'd gotten his PhD. What are you gonna do if you're black with a PhD? Teach school. And it was back in the day when they still closed the schools in the Spring so the black kids could go to the farms. And when he was growing up, his father sent him away to boarding school so that would not happen to him. Story_ID: 31315 Speaker 1: And he, Dr. Henry graduated from Tuskegee. His dad graduated from Tuskegee [University]. His mom graduated from Tuskegee. Dr. Henry was born in 1915, no, no, before then, around 1911. So his parents, you know, were from a family, you know, newly-freed slaves. His dad walked to Tuskegee to go to school. His dad was recruited by George Washington Carver for the Jessup Wagons to teach the farmers the news ways of farming. Carver would come to his home, and I don't know. The HistoryMakers may, I have seen in tape of him where they put it all together, the Carver [George Washington Carver] connection, the Tuskegee, the MIT and radar and the whole nine yards. He worked for the Naval Research Lab, and he did pioneering research in high-energy, low-temperature physics, basically, magnetic properties of different materials, that we spin off now. And we have magnetic cards and magnetic this and magnetic that. But he did some of the pioneering research. And that data is in--although he did the research in the '50's [1950s], it's still carried in today's physics book 'cause it's fundamental research and he was so meticulous that all of his points are on the line, not above and below the line and around the line, but on the line. So he, he's, you know, I used to call him on Saturdays. On Thursday, I would give him, "I'm gonna ask you these questions on Saturday", call him and talk to him an hour and record him. But he, you know, he was not your stereotypical scientist. He was a lady's man. And there's so many funny, little stories about him. One was--you've heard of David Blackwell, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, the mathematician. Speaker 1: Well, Dr. Henry claims that he made it possible--well, David Blackwell had seven or eight kids. Speaker 2: Is it Robert Blackwell or David? Speaker 1: David was the mathematician-- Speaker 2: Okay, all right, David. Speaker 1: The son may be Robert. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But Dr. Henry was going to graduate school with this woman who became David Blackwell's wife. And, you know, Dr. Henry was a player to the day he closed his eyes. And this woman was jealous 'cause she had seen him talking to another girl, and he had taken, oh, days and weeks to prepare this sample. And she was hanging, you know, had the sample, (unclear) and said, "If you don't stay away from so and so, I'm a drop this sample down in this drain." Dr. Henry--and if you knew him, you would see how out of character, 'cause he was a gentleman to a fault. You know, he was like, why do you have to kiss up to everybody all the time, you know, you know, given your rank and file, you know. That's just the way he was. But he grabbed her by the throat (laughter), and was choking her. And then his best friend--you've heard of Shirley, not Malcolm. Speaker 2: Shirley Jackson? Speaker 1: No, not Jackson. Shirley, you will know her name 'cause I think she's in this, oh, God, I can't think of the man's name. But anyhow, her to-be husband came in and pulled him off of her. And she went on later to marry David Blackweld and have eight kids. And that's documented in a book. They did a celebration of his contributions to electromagnetic, well, electromagnetism. And I can't think of the woman's name. Oh, I know her and her husband. She's the chemist, and he was a chemist as well. Speaker 2: Okay, I probably know. I can't think either. Speaker 1: I'll not think about it and her name will pop. She's still active. She's, she (laughter), she--her husband was a renowned chemist, and she was his student. So, you know, the stereotype of scientists--if people only knew. Story_ID: 31316 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I guess Ernest Just, his story, the inside story of the story, you know, the black Apollo, when he went to Germany, started up another family, not free in the states. I'll do whatever I want in Germany. So, you know, the little back stories are interesting. And, but, you know, it's people at the end of the day. Speaker 1: We won't find those stories in the book now (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Huh? Speaker 1: We won't find those stories in the book, right? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no. That book is for kids. No, no, no. Story_ID: 31317 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, but when I did a, let's see, oh, it was up at Lawrence-Berkeley Lab. And he was, Dr. Henry was good friends with Nobel Laureate, former director at the lab, former chancellor at U-C Berkeley, and that's interesting too. You know, how people think, oh, well, you know, he was just being nice to him. Glenn Seaborg (ph.) is the person I'm talking about. But one hand washes the other hand. Glenn Seaborg's daughter married a guy that couldn't get into medical school. And Glenn Seaborg was head of the AEC at the time. And he knew Warren [Dr. Henry] from his research. And Warren said, well, you know, I've got an idea. Why don't you get him to go to Howard University? Never would have thought of that. And he said, I'll write the recommendations for him. Son-in-law is a graduate of Howard Medical School. And so they maintained relationships. And we had a black physics conference at the lab, and there was some money left over. And Dr. Henry, early in the year had been honored by Howard. And he called me to get Glenn Seaborg's number and everything. And Seaborg couldn't make it, but he sent a message, if there's anything I can ever do to help you. So I took advantage of that and the lab paid for a day of papers focused on Dr. Henry's research. Story_ID: 31318 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you founded, and I don't know what, you have to give me the year, the fund, the Development Fund for Black Students in Science and Technology. Speaker 2: I did that when I was still living in Austria. Speaker 1: It seemed, so is this '83',[1983] date (unclear) (simultaneous), right? Speaker 2: I was active here, yeah-- Speaker 1: The 1983 date is correct? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yeah, I, I used to come to the U.S., whether I had business or not in February. That was my booster shot. And the same friend that I went to the Manpower symposium, you know, I came one time, and I said, you know, it's not enough for us to go to conferences and give out a scholarship here and there. You know, people, beg people to go to chicken dinners and they really don't wanna go. They're just trying to be supportive and the hotel or restaurants are the ones that get the bulk of the money. And then you just hand out a little scholarship. So when I went back, we had decided, you know, we would work on a plan to set up this fund and I came back in the summer. We were at a conference in Kissimmee, Florida, and that's where we signed our Articles of Incorporation. And we vowed, one, no chicken dinners, no fundraisers at all, that to be a member, you had to pledge to give a thousand dollars [$1,000] a year for the rest of your life, simple. One purpose to give scholarships to students attending historically black colleges. Those were the Reagan years, and they cut the funding for black colleges. And so we may not continue the college for four years, but we can help you stay there. And so I still chair it, since '83' [1983]. Speaker 1: Okay, and the other members were Omar F. Spurlock, George Carruthers, Donald Hinson-- Speaker 2: And Julian Earls was one-- Speaker 1: --Takesa (ph.) Anderson Speaker 2: -- of the charter members. Speaker 1: Julian Earls? Speaker 2: Yeah, and he's one of your HistoryMakers. He retired from-- Speaker 1: From NASA, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the director at the Glenn Research Center. Speaker 1: Yeah, Lester Clemmons, Knox Tull-- Speaker 2: Knox Tull. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you guys have been digging in some NTA stuff, I think. Speaker 1: Is that it (laughter)? Okay. And you also served in '86' [1986] as president of the Northern California Council of Black Professional Engineers. Speaker 2: Yeah, right after I got back, the organization had fallen on hard times. When I was here, I could never be president 'cause all of the young guys thought they should be president. And, one, you know, you're not even in line talking about waiting your turn. But there was, we did have a woman president while I was gone. And so I got back in December, and they didn't have a president for the new year, and they snookered me. Story_ID: 31319 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you're, you started a project in 2000 which really resonates, and we were talking off-camera about it. It's called the "Museum for African American Technology Science Village"-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And what, or MAAT-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --which resonates with ancient African history. Speaker 2: Yes, and that was not an accident. Speaker 1: I didn't think so (laughter). Speaker 2: It was not an accident. We were, at first, the very first unwritten name was the African American Museum of Technology. And then I just looked on the page one day, and said, no, it's the Museum of African American Technology Science Village, MAAT. And then, you know, MAAT and the ways of looking at science, all of that came together. So we never had a brochure or anything until it was MAAT. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Chin (unclear). Speaker 1: And, oh, Chin is, okay. Now, what does MAAT mean in-- Speaker 2: Well, MAAT is an ancient Egyptian way of approaching life. It represents harmony, order, reciprocity, balance, justice. It's the way you see life that this is the way life is and you live it accordingly. So there, there are attributes that you look for. And so it fits nicely when you're trying to get people interested in science, you know, 'cause it's got a bad side and a good side. And we acknowledge both sides and that balance, you know, there's benefits to be weighed. You try to do it as friendly to the environment as you can and do no harm; just do good. And back in, I guess around '75' [1975], I was a part, I became a part of the Northern California Council of Black Professional Engineers, right after the Manpower symposium 'cause I didn't know they existed. I met a woman from California, and she belonged to the--and I went to the meeting, and I got involved. And we had a symposium in which we showed the technology, the ancient Egyptians knew, the math, the science. And so we were aware of MAAT and how different folk from different cultures looked at different times at science and how different cultures may have not quite comprehended how the Greeks looked at the information for the Egyptians and kind of skewed it their way and did some things wrong and took a hundred years for people to straighten out, that kind of thing. So once--that's the history part, interests that I have. Speaker 1: And how, well, what's the progress of the museum project right now? Is it-- Speaker 2: Well, the museum is now ten years old, well, I guess twelve years old, 2000, we did open our doors. We didn't make it in September, but it was October. And we have had two locations, one was at 620-- Speaker 1: 630 - 20th Street? Speaker 2: 630 - 20th Street-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which is now Thomas L. Berkeley Way. Mr. Berkeley was an international lawyer and publisher of the "Post News" which is a black newspaper. And that building was about to go into foreclosure, and this contractor that I became acquainted with became aware that we were looking for a home. We were supposed to open in July. And we did, but it was one day. And we, we said, okay, we're opening in July to show people how much we accomplished, and we did what we said we were gonna do. And then we didn't have any place. And Mr. Domes (ph.) who's well respected in, as a builder in the Bay area, saw the article that we needed a home. He told his son, you gotta give MAAT a home. Story_ID: 31320 Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, tell us, what are the exhibits in the museum, and-- Speaker 2: Well, first of all, I have to tell you right now, we do not have a physical location. We are in search of purchasing a building. And I wish the market had changed when we had money, but the money we had at that time was not sufficient to purchase. But now that the market is down, we're desperately in pursuit. So most all of our activities are at events or in someone else's venue. Right now, we participate in U.S. Science and Engineering Festival in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. There were 150,000 people that came to that. And you were saying people that, not shop, but it's nice to know, kind of thing. I got a photo of the African American who got the very first patent of, you know, not a drawing, but a photo of him and was able to include that in the, in the exhibit. And since we're just more like a picture show, you gotta keep people's interests. So we do it like a game, and we'll ask, "Can you tell me who did so and so?" It's an open-book test 'cause all the answers are right there. And more than likely people don't know. They don't have a clue. But to engage them, we will blow bubbles in the directions, so they start looking. One, they read more, and they end up reading everything as opposed to something that kind of looks interesting. So, we do that. We do Juneteenth, things like that. But when we have our facility, we have groups of kids come in. My thing is solar. I don't know if you noticed my solar cells on my roof. Speaker 1: I did, I did, on the roof, right, right. Speaker 2: I've had my solar cells ten years, and I wanted solar cells when I didn't have a roof. And energy and the variety of what DOE [Department of Energy] research is, is what kept me there that long. And when we go to South Africa in two weeks, I'm gonna do a solar paper there. Story_ID: 31321 Speaker 1: Now, you delivered a paper in Uganda on "Who Will Be the Players in Green Technology and What Will Their Role Be?" Speaker 2: That was in Rwanda? Speaker 1: Rwanda, right, I'm sorry, Rwanda. Speaker 2: I got to go on a gorilla check. Speaker 1: This was at the Third International Appropriate Technology Conference. Speaker 2: Right, and we're were getting ready to go to the fifth one-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in Pretoria. Speaker 1: Now, did you know, Wangari Maathai? Speaker 2: No, I wish I would have met her. We were trying to get her to come to the conference, and so we can't try anymore. But I, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, what are you able to do with the panels on your roof now, in terms of energy? Speaker 2: What you're doing, all my electrical. Speaker 1: Okay, so this electricity we're using today is-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --generated by your-- Speaker 2: You can't tell the difference. It goes directly to PG&E. And I got my cells in 2002. I got my Prius in 2002. I did a paper on "Going Green and Loving It", "Living Green and Loving It". And so, I try to be friendly to the planet. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. That seems to make sense. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I am in health and safety, walk the talk. Story_ID: 31322 Speaker 1: All right. We always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: That we wake up and take advantage of the so many opportunities that are available that, in past years, were not. And, and I say, wake up, because, one, we don't know about 'em, and two, we don't believe that, you know, we can do these things. We limit ourselves in many ways, and I wish we could capture, not the "A" student, but that student who has "A" capability and doing "D" work because there are some bright, bright minds that--and I, this is my little pet theory. When you have like five or six brothers and sisters in a household and some do well and some don't, my theory is the ones that don't do well are the smartest. Their eyes are wide open. They see things that others don't see, the unfairness, how they're mistreated. They're more in tune to that, and they're distracted. And so they're unable to channel their energies as positively. You know, you say, jump; I'll just say, how high, and be done with it 'cause I've seen lots of families like that, even in my family, you know. The smartest one is not the one that's doing the best. Story_ID: 31323 Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back on your career and everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I usually use three. I usually say, the book, the development fund and the museum. Speaker 1: Okay, and you didn't mention your duties inspecting health (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's fun. I was getting paid to have fun. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: So, I mean there are projects that turned out really, really well, and I know one time we spent over two years avoiding taking some radioactive copper and burning it in the ground. I mean it was miniscule amounts, but paranoia. So we really had to put the case together to convince people that it was not safe, but it was worth the minimal risks to avoid encumbering the ground with valuable material throwing away some copper. You know, copper can be expensive. And I had fun with the Rocky Flats little thing. You know, that's one of the things you don't predict, and it's just, you know, it's like cops and robbers, really. And, you know, meeting different people at different levels, you know, being able to interact with Noble Laureates and the like, to the janitor and his perspective. At a national lab, you can get more of what's going on from the janitor than you can from a senior manager who's supposed to know. Story_ID: 31324 Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about your--now, we haven't mentioned any marriages or any children or anything or anything like that. Speaker 2: No marriages, no children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we always ask about your family and it seems as though what you, in terms of your family obligations, they seem to be to preserving the stories of some of the, your fellow scientists who have retired like (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You know, I have real family, like blood family. My two sisters, one brother--three of my brothers are deceased, my community is my family, although there are cousins in Virginia, like people say third and fourth cousins don't count. But because I grew up in Virginia right around them, they're like first cousins. And then, you know, my classmates from high school, more high school than college. And there's my fellow colleagues. We, you know, spur each other on, and we encourage each other and I like global so that's why I like hopping around here and there and working with people 'cause people are people. And you get surprises from people that people say, well, why are you bothering with them? Well, because that person told me this, that and the other, and I don't know anybody else who could, that kind of thing. So-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I have a big family. Speaker 2: All right, now-- Speaker 1: And I would add one thing. I, even if I had married, I probably would have been one of those that would really question whether I wanted to have children, not that I don't like children 'cause I always got kids out of the ying yang. But I don't know if it would be fair to them for, well, it would either go one or two ways. Either I would not have done half the things that I've done because I would feel that I needed to devote myself to them. So-- Story_ID: 31325 Speaker 1: All right, now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Oh, well, tell me what your last question is? Speaker 1: Well, (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Is there anything else you wanna tell (laughter). Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, you know, I used to have an acronym. And the funny thing about it (laughter), I remember the acronym, but I don't remember (laughter) the meaning. And the acronym is, it's SOSOFT, So soft, and I know the "F" is for "forever". I know the "T" is "toiling". And I don't quite remember the--I coined this around 2000, that I wanted. So I just have to get some new words to go with the same letters. I like the SOSOFT. And it's because some people, until they interact, and get on my wrong side, do think I'm SOSOFT. But I'm really not. So, what would I tell that you haven't asked about? It's, I think it's sort of something that I would like to dispel. People always say, oh, well, Hattie's always working, and she's always doing this for this one and that one and the other. And, oh, she's such a giving person. I said, no, that is not it (laughter). I enjoy what I'm doing, and if I'm doing something for someone else, that's giving more to me than I could ever give to them. So, that, you know, "Oh, you know, she's self sacrificing and this, that and the other. No, I'll jump up in a heartbeat and do something that Hattie really wants to do. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, thank you very much. Story_ID: 31326 Speaker 1: Tell us about this one. Speaker 2: Well, that's a photograph of me when I was in the fourth grade, so I'm nine years old. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: This is a photo of me in about 1973 in front of the house I rented when I worked at [dog barking] Batavia National Lab. Speaker 1: And that photo is of me sitting on the steps in front of the Eiffel Tower on my first international trip. Speaker 2: And here, I'm pictured with some Messai (ph.) women in 1979 before I went to work in Vienna. That's the trip I was talking about. It detoured and went to Austria. Speaker 1: And this is a picture of me, my ninth grade class, and it's probably ninth grade. It's probably Spanish class. And my teacher, who was just about 13 years older than me is in the picture. Speaker 2: Is that her there? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And this is a picture of my great Aunt Julia who was the first Tunstal to move to New York. And she moved there just before 1900. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me at Bennett College during graduation weekend with Hazel O'Leary who was Secretary of the Department of Energy. She gave the graduation speech. Speaker 2: And this is a picture of some women from Aqua Sea Hull Village in Ghana. I was teaching them how to make solar cookers. Speaker 1: And this photo was taken in Oakland [California] when my book "Black in Science" first came out at the DOE office. Speaker 2: Now, that picture does, it looks like Rocky Flats, but it's Nevada test site. This is a training picture at the Nevada test site. We're being trained to respond to emergencies, nuclear emergencies. Speaker 1: And as I said, I actually graduated from college with Ms. McCray, and I happened to be in Ghana, and she happened to be in Ghana, and our paths crossed, totally unplanned. Speaker 2: And this is DOE newsletter in which the group of a "Thousand Points of Lights" in Washington receiving recognition. Speaker 1: And this is a picture, the Class of '70' [1970], Bennett College and reunion in 2010. Speaker 2: And you know, I can't think of that man's name. I can't think of his name. I know--that's me, and he was the director of the Brookhaven National Lab. I returned approximately 20 years later and gave a talk. And he went on to be the science and technology advisor for Clinton [President Bill Clinton]. Speaker 1: And this is my going-away party when I was leaving my first job in Philadelphia at Thomas Jefferson University, working as a research assistant to a radiation biologist. Speaker 2: And this photo is me at the University of Uloren (unclear) in Nigeria. I stopped off to visit Professor Robert Bragg who is a very good friend and former chair of the materials department at U-C Berkeley. He was on a Fulbright Fellowship. Speaker 1: And this is my mother, Fannie Francis. And she died in 2000, and I know if she had lived in 2001, she'd still be talking about 911 'cause she would have been glued to the set. Speaker 2: And then this is my book "Black in Science, Astrophysicists to Zoologists", written in 1977 or published in 1977, after I attended a conference in Cleveland, Ohio, Manpower Symposium. And this is the entering freshman class at Bennett College, 1966. Speaker 1: And you are? Speaker 2: In the center, right there. Speaker 1: Right here. Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's my roommate, and that's me. I borrowed her hat. I didn't have one. I didn't know we had to have hat and gloves to take a picture. Speaker 1: And that's a picture of me in the "Real McCoy" newsletter, a newsletter of the Northern California Council of Black Professional Engineers. I'd just come back from Vienna, and assumed the presidency the next year. Speaker 2: And that's one of the Bennett College publications and one of the alum interviewed me for that. And this is at a family reunion, the Tunstall family reunion. And I'm there with my mother, cousins, and my uncle in Virginia, Hanover, Virginia at that. Speaker 1: And this is your Uncle Patrick, right here? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. My mom is standing beside him. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yes, and then my niece is right behind her. And then these are her sisters' kids, these three, and then that's me. Speaker 1: And, you know, I had gotten a call. They, you know, are hiring at Brookhaven Code. We need some black folks, and, of course, once they got them, they would take pictures of them and see, we got some. There are some out there. Speaker 2: Okay, so that's it..