 Story_ID: 521701 Speaker 1: I will reintroduce myself, I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers and I will conduct the interview today. This is Neculai Burghelea the videographer, he will videotape the interview today. And then we have observing a new interviewer, Adrienne Jones. So I will have you introduce yourself to us, including your middle name and spelling it out for us. Speaker 2: Okay. So if you want the full name it's Marcia Elaine Young Cantarella [HistoryMaker Marcia Cantarella]. And it's M-A-R-C-I-A, Elaine, E-L-A-I-N-E, and Y-O-U-N-G, C-A-N-T-A-R-E-L-L-A. Speaker 1: Is that Italian? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, my late husband's father [Michele Cantarella] was Italian. Speaker 1: Did you speak, did you learn to speak any Italian? Speaker 2: I learned to understand a fair amount but I didn't speak very much. My husband [Francesco Cantarella] was also trilingual, his mother [Helene Paquin Cantarella] was French-Canadian, so, so French was also a language and I do speak some French, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Your date of birth? Speaker 2: October 31, 1946. Speaker 1: Place of birth? Speaker 2: Minneapolis, Minnesota. Speaker 1: Okay. Now were you raised in Minneapolis as well? Speaker 2: No. We (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Because-- Speaker 2: --both of my parents, my mother [Margaret Buckner Young] started getting her master's degree at the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] during the war [World War II, WWII], and my father [Whitney Young] joined her and got his social work degree at the University of Minnesota. Speaker 1: So you spent some time there? Speaker 2: So we stayed there until I was about three. Speaker 1: Okay. So your place of birth again is Minneapolis, Minnesota. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: To, the location of this interview-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --is? Speaker 2: New York City [New York, New York], Manhattan, yeah. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Is April 20, 2007. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: At the moment I am an associate dean at Hunter College [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 521702 Speaker 1: And I'm gonna start with five basic pop culture type questions. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Simple, short answers. Your favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, that's really hard. I, I'd have to say a genre, probably Italian (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I love to cook, so, I can't, a favorite food, I don't know, cookies, probably (laughter). Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color is probably green. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: And favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Either France or Cape Cod [Massachusetts] with my kids. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh, dear, that's hard. I don't know (laughter). I almost have to ask somebody else. Speaker 1: Is it something you say often to the students? Something that was said to you over the course of your life that, well, we'll come back to it. Speaker 2: Okay. We'll come back to it. I'll think about that (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But before the interview ends or whenever it pops up-- Speaker 2: Okay. I've gotta, I've gotta come up with that one. Speaker 1: Yeah, you'll say-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that's it. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 521703 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, we're gonna start, and we're gonna start by talking about your family's history. And we will-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --start with your mother and your mother's side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So if you can give me your mother's full name and her date and place of birth? Speaker 2: Okay. My mother's full name is Margaret Buckner Young. She was born, we believe, there's a little discrepancy in the family history but the date we celebrate is March 20th, and I think it was about 1921, '22 [1922], so. And-- Speaker 1: Place of birth, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) she was born in, in Kentucky and I'm not sure I remember the town. Her family moved shortly thereafter to Aurora, Illinois, so that's where she was raised, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that's the town I associate that-- Speaker 1: We're gonna have to pause for a moment because of the bracelets-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --they're mak-- Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: Okay. So continuing with your mother. Her last name-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --is Buckner, B-U-C-K-N-E-R. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: She became Mrs. Young. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And Kentucky, before the family, did she live there any amount of time before they moved to Aurora? Speaker 2: Not that I know of, and very short as far as I understand (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, let's just keep going back and then we'll work our way-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --back to your mother. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Her parents-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --do you know your mother's, did you know your grandparents? Speaker 2: I knew her mother slightly. Her mother-- Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Eva Buckner [Eva Carter Buckner]. She died when I was five, she actually died when she was visiting us in Nebraska. So I, I don't have, you know, very strong memories of her. Speaker 1: But do you know where she was born? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Now, your grandfather-- Speaker 2: But I can find out (laughter). Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And my grandfather was Frank Buckner. And I'm not sure where he was born. Speaker 1: Do you know anything about the family's connection to Kentucky? Were they raised there, was your mother raised in Kentucky? Speaker 2: She-- Speaker 1: No, I mean, her mother raised in Kentucky? Speaker 2: I am assuming so. And I can, I can fairly easily find, I've, I've got some of this information elsewhere, so, it's just not on the top of my, my mind at the moment. But I'm assuming that they probably were raised in Kentucky (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did they do for a living? Your grandparents? Speaker 2: My grandmother, I believe was a homemaker, which would have been typical at that time. My grandfather was a firefighter in Illinois. Story_ID: 521704 Speaker 1: So your mother [Margaret Buckner Young], did she ever talk about her childhood growing up in Illinois? Speaker 2: A little bit, a little bit. Speaker 1: What did she share with you about it? Speaker 2: Mainly having to do with going to school. I think her parents [Eva Carter Buckner and Frank Buckner] were fairly strict. And, and not unlike parents or children (laughter) at any point in history. You know, she'd be required to wear, you know, dark stockings to school and then she'd change them at school or, you know. She was on the track team, I think, in high school. And may have continued into college on the track team. But she was, you know, my mother is very smart. You know, she was definitely a scholar and a reader and, intellectual reader (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she ever talk about who her mentors were growing up? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Who do you think, who do you think were the people she looked up to that she patterned herself after? Speaker 2: She has never to my mind spoken of who she looked up to. And I think, you know, certainly there were, were, film and media (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because her mother was a homemaker-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --so what inspired her to go outside of the home to go off to college, because she became a teacher, correct? Speaker 2: She, her master's degree is in educational psychology. And she taught educational psychology at Spelman [Spelman College] when we lived in Atlanta [Georgia]. I think at least in, in my experience, both of my [paternal] aunts [Arnita Young Boswell and Eleanor Young Love] who also went to Kentucky State [Kentucky State College for Negroes; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] with my parents, with both of my parents, worked. African American women were working before, you know, other women were, you know, in the workforce. Or as, or before that assumption was made that one might continue to work after marriage. For a lot of other women, women worked but then that ended as soon as you got married, it was something you did on the way to marriage. I think for African American women the experience was more often that you continued to contribute to the family income or to work throughout your life. And, and that was my mother, my godmother [Ersa H. Poston], my aunts. Speaker 1: How many siblings did your mother have? Speaker 2: There were five girls in the family. Speaker 1: And what order did they come in? Do you know? Speaker 2: My mother was the next to the youngest. Speaker 1: And what became of her sisters? Speaker 2: One died fairly young, the oldest, Ruby [Ruby Buckner Compton], died fairly young and left behind three kids. One of whom Jim Compton [HistoryMaker James W. Compton] actually became head of the Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois]. One did not fare well, and the other of, of Ruby's kids, Janice [Janice Compton Pannell], went on to become a teacher and a homemaker, and outside Chicago [Illinois]. And Janice is still alive, as is Jim for that matter. And then the other sisters, Virginia [Virginia Buckner] became a piano instructor. She stayed pretty close to home. Speaker 1: Pretty close to home would have been Aurora [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Aurora. Eugenia [Eugenia Buckner], I think also taught but she was, lived in Louisville [Kentucky], she married and moved to Louisville, and had a son, Jimmy [ph.], and a son, and what is his name? I've, I've forgotten his name (laughter). I used to play with him when we were kids. And let's see, so it was Ruby, mother, Eugenia, Virginia, there may have been one other sister who died young. I think that was the-- Speaker 1: Were they close in age? Did they all grow up together during the same era in Chicago, I mean, in Aurora? Speaker 2: Pretty much. Pretty much. They were, they spanned maybe a ten year range. Speaker 1: So collectively, do you have stories about them from their childhoods? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We, we were not very close to my mother's side of the family after she left Illinois she, we would occasionally visit and as I said her mother visited us but she didn't very much go home again, so I was much closer to my father's [Whitney Young] family. Story_ID: 521705 Speaker 1: So let's talk about your father and-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) his side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And your father is? Speaker 2: Whitney Young, Whitney Moore Young, Jr. Speaker 1: And before we talk about him, we, I guess, we should step back and talk about his parents. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Your grandparents-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --on your father's side. Speaker 2: Right. His mother was Laura Ray Young and his father was Whitney Moore Young, Sr. [Whitney Young, Sr.]. And-- Speaker 1: They were born? Speaker 2: They were born, I believe, Laura was born in, in Detroit [sic.], I think she was born north. And Whitney, Sr. would have been Kentucky, so. Speaker 1: Any stories about those sets of grandparents? Did you-- Speaker 2: Growing up? Speaker 1: Growing up. Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: Did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I do not remember their telling stories. I, I think there was, I don't remember either set of grandparents sort of telling stories about themselves as children. They carried themselves with a sort of dignity that precluded the idea that they were ever children (laughter), so. Yeah, one could not imagine, you know, particularly, my, my father's parents ever playing, you know, that was just, there, there was just this incredible dignity about them that, you know, one did not think (laughter). Speaker 1: What do you remember about them? Speaker 2: Fond memories of both. My grandmother, we used to spend summers, I used to spend summers at Lincoln Institute [Lincoln Ridge, Kentucky] where they, which my grandfather was president of and my, my grandmother was the president's wife but also the post mistress, and from what I understand, one of the first black post mistresses. And, and I used to go to her office and help her sort stamps. And in later years, my Aunt Eleanor [Eleanor Young Love] was the librarian at Lincoln Institute and I used to play in the library. And my grandmother was the kind of person who would certainly, you know, deliver on the treats which grandparents do, but it was, it was White Castle was, was a big treat, that was, you have to go to White Castle, or go for ice cream, one, one or the other. But she also, you know, delivered on the lessons, you know, the, you know, how do you shake hands, and look people in the eye, and, and being correct, you know, one wore dresses and Mother Dear, she, she was called Mother Dear by everyone, everybody. So in Mother Dear's presence, you didn't wear, you know, the overalls or shorts or play clothes, you wore dresses. She kind of got over that eventually because (laughter) kids wore what you wore. But, but, you know, she was very much one for teaching how to be correct and-- Speaker 1: Manners. Speaker 2: --and manners. And, and at the same time, you know, a sense of confidence. And she could move in any circles. You know, I remember going out into the community with her and she'd be visiting people who were ill or elderly, and in impoverished areas and she was always, always, always gracious, and, you know, treated people with, you know, just great, kindness. But she was, she was strict. She could, you know, you didn't mess around either. Story_ID: 521706 Speaker 1: And my [paternal] grandfather [Whitney Young, Sr.] was, was at least to me in comparison to her seemed quieter but I came to know much later actually that there was a lot of power behind his being quiet. As he got older, and my grandmother [Laura Ray Young] died in the early '60s [1960s], I think around '63 [1963] or '64 [1964]. And so she died before my father [Whitney Young] did but my grandfather was alive when my father died and he'd come to New York [New York] for various events honoring my father and then he was in his seventies. And, and, you know, there were women pursuing him and he was just adorable, I mean, he was, you know, very fun, you know, sort of in, in, in that moment. And, you know, it was probably a time when I was, I got to know him better than I'd ever had a chance before because Mother Dear had been around or the aunts or other people sort of intermediary or taking up more room in the room. Speaker 2: What did you come to know about him? Speaker 1: That he did have this playful side, which, you know, I hadn't seen as much of growing up. Although I remember, you know, as, as a child, you know, sometimes he and I would be the first ones up and we'd have breakfast together and, and he was enormously kind. Speaker 2: Did he ever talk about his years as president of Lincoln Institute [Lincoln Ridge, Kentucky]? Speaker 1: Later, and, and in fact there is an oral history, there is an audio tape that he did the year of his death at age seventy-five on, on that history, which I have. I've been accumulating bits and pieces of things to pass on to the grandchildren (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Lincoln Institute is located where? Speaker 1: It's now a Job Corps center about, like, like thirty miles or so outside of Louisville [Kentucky]. Speaker 2: And its mission was to-- Speaker 1: It was a school meant to educate young African Americans in primarily vocational directions although students often went on to, you know, higher education. But at that point in time, you know, the, the opportunities were more vocational and so the preparation that was offered was more vocational. But it is now the Whitney Young Job Corps Center [Whitney M. Young Jr. Job Corps Center, Simpsonville, Kentucky]. Speaker 2: And its mission has continued? Speaker 1: Well, as a Job Corps center pretty much, yeah, yeah. And, and my father's birthplace on, is on the campus, you know, all of my father and his sister [sic. sisters, Arnita Young Boswell and Eleanor Young Love], both were all born there. And is now also a national landmark thanks interestingly to Bush, Sr. [President George Herbert Walker Bush] (laughter) so. Speaker 2: Very nice though, very nice. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: What are you, what did, what did you learn about him and his own words from those, did he ever tell you any know stories directly from those days as president? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: How did he become president, did he ever say to you? Speaker 1: He never said to me. You know, again I was fairly young, I mean, it wasn't really until I became an adult that we, you know, had a chance to talk so. Speaker 2: What did you come to respect about him? Speaker 1: What I respected was the way others respected him. It was the way he was viewed by, you know, the students, both of my grand- grandparents commanded enormous both respect and affection. Story_ID: 521707 Speaker 1: And then they [Cantarella's paternal grandparents, Laura Ray Young and Whitney Young, Sr.] had your father [Whitney Young] in July 31st, 1921? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: And he was one of how many children? Speaker 2: Three. Speaker 1: And the, his other siblings were? Speaker 2: Arnita [Arnita Young Boswell] who was a year older and Eleanor [Eleanor Young Love] who was a year younger. Speaker 1: And did you have an opportunity to talk with your father about his childhood? Did he ever talk about what his childhood was like (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, oh, yeah. Speaker 1: What did he say his childhood was like? Speaker 2: Well, I mean, we had, we had some of the usual, you know, I went to school barefoot and uphill both ways stories, so (laughter). Speaker 1: How much of that was true? Speaker 2: Not true (laughter). I mean, I think, I think they did walk to school but it was not, you know, you know, it wasn't forty miles in (unclear) (laughter) but they did walk to school. He did have the responsibility of, you know, this was the era, Lincoln had it, its own post office which is what my, my grandmother was responsible for. And, and there was a train that ran by the foot of the campus and, and back in this period, you had to hang the mail sack on a hook for the train to come and snatch the mail sack off and it would drop off the mail which then had to be lugged up to the building, and that was daddy's job, was to, you know, deliver the mail sack and bring it back. And so that was one of his responsibilities. I understand, I think I heard this actually from his sisters not from daddy, but he used to get into trouble, you know, he used to, you know, break his arms (laughter) climbing things, I think climbing trees which I used to do too but I never broke any arms-- Speaker 1: Now, is Lincoln Ridge, Kentucky, where he-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --lived, is it rural or was it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --a town? Speaker 2: It's rural. Speaker 1: Rural, okay. Speaker 2: It's definitely rural. Speaker 1: So he lived on a farm then? Speaker 2: Well, Lincoln Institute [Lincoln Ridge, Kentucky] is a, it's a camp, I mean, it's a very large, one of the, the forms of education was agricultural. So there were, you know, cows, you know, and the students had that responsibility of, you know, that was part of what they were learning to do. So this is a very large rural space. There's a lot of controversy even right now about whether some of the, some of the land should be sold off or whether it should be maintained. And, you know, in an era where Louisville [Kentucky] is encroaching, its, you know, it's an issue. But it is definitely a rural area or has been, and is becoming sort of more exurban, I think. Speaker 1: So as a child he had the opportunity to be on campus, to roam around, and to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. The home, family home was on campus, yeah. It was the, the president's house, which was, it was a wonderful house. It was a great house. Speaker 1: Who were some of the other people he may have interacted with during those early days? Speaker 2: I don't know during that, well, well, no, I take that back. There were doctors, I think there was a Dr. Rabb [Maurice Rabb, Sr.], his name I remember. So there were other sort of middle class, upper middle class black families that, you know, were all engaged in, in the same struggle. So, so, you know, my grandparents certainly would have associated with and known them and they would have been important. And, and the politics of maintaining the school, you know, maintaining the funding which came from the state. So, and that was important (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it was, the schools were legally segregated then so this-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --would have been an issue-- Speaker 2: This was all-black. Speaker 1: An all-black school. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Absolutely. Speaker 1: So the, the faculty makeup, was it mainly men or mainly women? Speaker 2: It was a-- Speaker 1: Equal. Speaker 2: --mix. I mean, mainly men but, but-- Speaker 1: Because of the vocations. Speaker 2: Because of the vocations but there were, there were women on campus who had, I think, both faculty and administrative roles, so. Speaker 1: And if they were teaching, what would they teach? Do you know at the time? Speaker 2: Oh, English, you know, the, the normal, you know-- Speaker 1: Gender, okay. Speaker 2: --history. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yep, yeah, yeah, yeah. Home economics would have been an important area so, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, who in the family attended this school? Speaker 2: All three of the kids. Speaker 1: All three of the kids. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 521708 Speaker 1: My father graduated at sixteen. And all three of the kids went to Kentucky State [Kentucky State College for Negroes; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky]. And, and it was at Kentucky State that my parents met. Speaker 2: And they, Kentucky State is a historically black school [HBCU]. Speaker 1: It has been, it is no longer, I mean, it's now integrated so, but-- Speaker 2: But at the time-- Speaker 1: At that time-- Speaker 2: At that time. Speaker 1: --it was a historically black school, yeah. Speaker 2: Did they, did he ever talk about what his choices were or was that his only choice of, for schools? Did he wanna stay in the state or-- Speaker 1: I'm not sure whether there was a question of choice. His sister had gone there before him so, Arnita [Arnita Young Boswell] was already there. So I don't know whether, whether he considered other options or whether the idea was to stay, you know, not far from home and-- Speaker 2: And what about the brother, the younger brother? Speaker 1: Sister, his younger sister. Speaker 2: The younger sister, so the older brother (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were off all, the aunt, Aunt Arnita-- Speaker 2: Arnita. Speaker 1: --Whitney [Whitney Young], he was the only boy. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And-- Speaker 1: --and Aunt Eleanor [Eleanor Young Love]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So all, all three of them went to Kentucky State. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: So were they the, then they, the three of them graduated? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And do you know what year your father graduated Kentucky State? Speaker 1: Let's see, it would have been about 1940-ish, maybe '41 [1941]. It may have been just before the war [World War II, WWII] broke out, before America entered the war. Speaker 2: Right. What year did, did he meet your mother [Margaret Buckner Young]? Do you know how did-- Speaker 1: I think that was probably in their, maybe their junior year. Speaker 2: Did they ever talk about the meeting? Speaker 1: There are varying stories about the meeting. One, one is that Aunt Arnita made the introduction. Another is that mother was considered, you know, sort of a, a catch. And, and that my father was told that, you know, he wasn't, he, he couldn't get a date with her, and so this was a challenge, was, you know, that he, he was gonna show that he could get a date with her and he did obviously, so-- Speaker 2: And her catch was her looks or-- Speaker 1: Both, she was, you know-- Speaker 2: --and her smarts? Speaker 1: --she was very smart, she was very smart. I think she used to help my father with his homework. Speaker 2: Now had your father's, had your father's family established the Young name at that time? You know, they were a well respected family. Speaker 1: They were absolutely-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Absolutely, yes, yes, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: So would she have known the family that he was from and about the institute [Lincoln Institute, Lincoln Ridge, Kentucky] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't know, I don't know, she may have, she may have. I mean, you know, as I said the sisters were there, so, you know, so there would have been an awareness I think on campus and-- Speaker 2: And when your father pledged [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] I think when he was-- Speaker 1: I think he did, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Any stories he ever talked about his college years at Kentucky State? Speaker 1: He started off thinking that he was gonna be pre-med and then changed directions. My father, you know, would faint at the sight of blood, so that wasn't gonna work. And then ultimately he, he went into social work but, you know, his original plan had been, you know, to, to think of himself as, as, as pre-med because that's, and this continues to be an issue in higher education today, that the perception, particularly in either African American, in, in communities of color, that there are limited vocational options, doctor, lawyer, teacher, kind of our, you know, that's it, and maybe business. But and so, you know, doctor was a, you know, a respected thing to be and so that's what he thought he was going to be and then that changed in the war. Story_ID: 521709 Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were talking about your father's [Whitney Young]-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --him deciding not to become a physician, a vocation that was-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --extremely popular-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --at the time. And that he decided then to-- Speaker 1: Well, what happened was World War II [WWII]. And, and so he went off to war. And during the war it was found that, because it was still a segregated military, he was very skilled at mediating conflict, and, and that's when he realized his own calling. And so when he joined my mother [Margaret Buckner Young] at the end of the war, they had gotten married during the war, I think they got married when he was on leave, and then he joined mother who was at the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], working on her master's degree, and he got his social work degree there at the University of Minnesota. And I'm, I'm literally a baby boomer, nine months after, you know, he, (laughter) he came back-- Speaker 2: After, after he came back? Speaker 1: After he came back, yeah. Speaker 2: But, you know, it's, people have written about or they say that, it, it, it was the experience in the [U.S.] Army and the-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --southern white officers that helped-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --was a turning point. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But did he ever give you any specific examples of any particular incidents that may have been turning points? Speaker 1: No (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No, no. It was just that this was something that he discovered he was good at and-- Speaker 2: So he was a good liaison between-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --the two communities in brokering-- Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: --he felt-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --an (unclear) something that both groups could be-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --could live with? Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. So he decided to make that his vocation? Speaker 1: Right, right, and to go in, to go into social work, right. Speaker 2: And, and you're born nine months after he gets-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --out of the war? Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: And that you're born in Minnesota? Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 521710 Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories? Speaker 2: Minnesota, I'm not sure I have any. We left when I was about three. I have memories of going back, you know, visiting my godparents. Speaker 1: Where did you go at three years old? Speaker 2: Omaha [Nebraska]. That's, and that's where I actually have memories. And, and actually had a very ironic or interesting thing happen recently. There is someone who's been writing a history of Omaha and in the process he encountered a woman, Elfi, Elfi Hornby, who was a German immigrant into Omaha and she was a dancer and she began a ballet school. And I was a student in her ballet school. And so this guy tracked me down and there is actually a little piece in her story, in her book, an autobiography that she has done about the fact that my father [Whitney Young] came to her and asked, I was four, if she would take black children, and she took me and one of my friends. And, and there's a picture of me in my first recital at age four. And I now have a granddaughter who's turning four who is, loves ballet so, (laughter) so, you know, it's fun. And so Elfi and I have just recently been e-mailing, and, you know, yeah, she remembered daddy asking permission and, you know, she said she'd be happy to do it and so, so that was one of my memories of Omaha. Speaker 1: And that was in the, you were born in nineteen forty-- Speaker 2: Six [1946], so this was 1950 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was 1950. Speaker 2: It was 1950. Yeah. Story_ID: 521711 Speaker 1: Now, can you describe for me Omaha [Nebraska] and the lay of the land and, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --African Americans in Omaha? Speaker 2: It, it felt, at least in my experience, like a pretty integrated community. You know, there was the Urban League [Urban League of Nebraska, Omaha, Nebraska], the Urban League board was integrated. I remember we moved from one house to another in Omaha and, and for the day that the move was taking place my father [Whitney Young] took me to one of his board members, June Vance [ph.], who was a very wealthy white woman. And I played with June for the day (laughter). And I was pretty, you know, in hindsight I thought this was pretty gutsy, asking, you know, your white board member to babysit your daughter, you know, (laughter) while you move, it was, (laughter). And, you know, I remember, you know, we went, I, I think we actually went maybe to her country club, and, you know, big old station wagon with, you know, the wood panels on the side, went to her house. And so she was clearly a good friend. I went to an integrated elementary school [Lothrop Elementary School; Lothrop Science and Technology Magnet Center, Omaha, Nebraska]. And, you know, including my ballet classes were, were also integrated. Most of my social life, I think, was probably with other black kids except for my ballet. I went to an integrated nursery school, it was actually a nursery school was in the Omaha museum. And it was actually, a, a fairly happy time, you know. The, it was before my sister [Lauren Young Casteel] was born, I was the only child for, (laughter) for that period. Daddy built me a sandbox in the backyard. I remember my mother [Margaret Buckner Young] and I making snowmen, and, and, you know, stealing daddy's hats to put (laughter) on the snowmen which didn't make him necessarily happy. I had a baking set and I used to, that my father used to eat whatever I baked which was pretty bold, (laughter) it wasn't necessarily good. But, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember any of your father's involvement with the community and the Urban League? Speaker 2: I was too young to appreciate, I mean, I went to daddy's office, you know, but as far as I was concerned I would, you know, if anybody asked me what he did, I'd say well, yeah, he talks on the phone, that's, that was daddy's job to talk on the phone (laughter). You know, so I had, I just had the child's appreciation of, you know, that was his office and that's what he did was talk on the phone. I'm sure my grandchildren say the same thing about their dad, you know. I, I remember, you know, a couple of, you know, he, he was very good about sort of taking me with him. Occasionally, I traveled with him, you know. If, if he had to go to Minnesota for example, I would go and stay with my godparents. Speaker 1: And who were your godparents? Speaker 2: Laura Gaskin- Laura [ph.] and Ashby Gaskins [ph.] who my parents came to know when, when they lived up there. So I actually would fly up there by myself and be joined by my father or there were times when I would go to Kentucky and he would catch up with me. But we would, you know, take the train together. I remember Atlanta [Georgia], I mean, not Atlanta, Omaha was a place that could be plagued by floods. And, you know, going, being present watching, while my father and others helped to sandbag the river. I remember going with him to Boys Town [Nebraska], out to Boys Town. And, you know, I have no idea what the conversations were about but just, you know, visiting, being there. So, you know, I remember just kind of being around with him when he did things. Speaker 1: And how much time did you spend with your, with your mother during that same time? Speaker 2: We, we spent time together. I think, you know, it probably was split 50/50 between who took me to ballet classes, sometimes she did, sometimes he did. But, you know, mother was, loved gardening, has always loved gardening and so, you know, I would help her in the garden and we'd play, you know, you know, she'd squirt me with a hose and, you know, or we'd make the snowmen or I'd help her, you know, around the house and watching television. And, you know, I, I think I went home for lunch, the school wasn't far away so I could walk home for lunch. And so-- Speaker 1: Before you started school though, you know, we're talking about the really early years, do you remember what the holidays were like in Omaha? Speaker 2: A little bit, a little bit. Part of me says that we may have spent some holidays with family but, but it's very fuzzy, it's very fuzzy whether we actually went to Kentucky or, or maybe spent some holidays with my mother's family. Story_ID: 521712 Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school? Speaker 2: It was Lothrop Elementary School [Lothrop Science and Technology Magnet Center, Omaha, Nebraska]. So, I started there, I think, at kindergarten. And I had to take a special test because being born in October I was sort of off sequence and so I had to be tested to be allowed to go in, you know, I was technically four but I was gonna become five, to go into kindergarten, so. Speaker 1: Now, were the schools in Omaha [Nebraska] segregated? Speaker 2: No, they were integrated. Speaker 1: They were integrated. Speaker 2: They were integrated, yeah, yeah, yeah. And I seemed to be doing fine. I was, you know-- Speaker 1: Right. Do you know why the family chose Omaha? Speaker 2: It was the Urban League [National Urban League]. Speaker 1: It was the Urban League (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was the Urban League, the Urban League offered the position to my father [Whitney Young] and it's what he wanted to do so that was the, it wasn't, it's almost, I'm not sure it was a choice. It was, you know, the calling-- Speaker 1: The calling-- Speaker 2: --for him, for him, yeah. Speaker 1: --yeah, the calling for him was the Urban League. Speaker 2: And he, so he-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --took the job and that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --moved the family to-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Omaha. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Percentage wise, how many African Americans do you feel were in Omaha at the time? Speaker 1: I don't know. I have no idea (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Were the numbers small? Did, did you-- Speaker 1: No, there had to be some-- Speaker 2: Significant number. Speaker 1: Substantial enough to have an Urban League, to justify having an Urban League-- Speaker 2: Having an Urban League. Speaker 1: So yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. So that first elementary, or the first nursery school was integrated? Speaker 1: I assume it was, I, you know, I, I don't remember, you know, sort of the classroom. I remember going into the museum to get to the classroom. It was the setting that, you know, that made the impression because it was certainly a grand setting to have a nursery school so. Speaker 2: What years of schools are, do you remember the early years, of the early years, what schools were you going to-- Speaker 1: Well, I, I remember Lothrop in, in Omaha. The Dick, Jane, and Sally readers which had no brown faces in them, you know. You know, textbooks at that point were, they were, you know, it's just-- Speaker 2: Did you recognize that as a kid or you could only comment on it as an adult? Do you think you recognized it as a kid? Speaker 1: I think, I think that I, I, I think on some level I was conscious of it. I think there was a consciousness. I mean, I, I wouldn't have articulated it but, but I think I was aware. Story_ID: 521713 Speaker 1: When do you think you became aware, or your consciousness is raised about being African American in the sense that that was a bulk of the work that your father [Whitney Young] was doing to make opportunities better for people of color? When did you become conscious of that awareness of your ethnicity or being black? Speaker 2: Probably more when we moved to Atlanta [Georgia], which is when I was seven, because of the stark contrast from going from a really integrated environment to a completely segregated environment which my mother [Margaret Buckner Young] was not happy about that move because it meant just such a drastic change. And, and change, one of the things that she was unhappy about was the change in opportunities for us. And-- Speaker 1: Did she feel that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the limitations. Speaker 1: Okay--that the opportunities would be diminished by going south? Speaker 2: Right, the limitations that she felt we would have, particularly educationally. So, so she was not happy about that move. But, but that was certainly when I became, you know, aware of the differences, so. Speaker 1: Can you speak to any of those moments now where the, you know, that a light bulb moment I, I would say or a turning point moment? Speaker 2: Well, my first experiences in Omaha [Nebraska] were really just, were had to do with, with the cultural shift. You know, I had a northern accent. I went in, I had changed schools in the middle of second grade, literally in the middle, second semester of second grade. And, and I talked differently than the other kids. And, you know, of course, all of the cliques and relationships had been formed, so it was just a struggle to adapt to being in another school and to being in a whole other place. And, and my sister [Lauren Young Casteel] had just been born two months or, you know, a month before we moved. So, you know, so everything, you know, my whole world had been up-ended. Race was not the only factor (laughter) in the equation, it was everything. And, and so it was just a very unsettling time for me. And I think probably it took some months before the race piece as such kind of really entered into my consciousness. And, and at this point, you know, Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], you know, was in 1954, by the time I kind of, (laughter) you know, felt a settle to even. And so, and, and that's when the conversation, clearly the conversation around me was around race, and, and the differences. And, and I understood then the idea of separate but equal is not equal. I was attending what was a university lab school, the Oglethorpe School [Atlanta University Laboratory School, Atlanta, Georgia]. And it was in a building that had been built probably going back to the Civil War and was crumbling literally, crumbling. And so while, you know, it was probably academically the best school in the city for an African American school because it was affiliated with the university [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], the plant, the physical plant, the facility, was horrible. And, and, and that was certainly in contrast to the school I had been in in Omaha [Lothrop Elementary School; Lothrop Science and Technology Magnet Center, Omaha, Nebraska]. So, you know, that was just very jarring. The library for example, there was a public library that was available for African Americans, and I was, I was an avid reader, I was a voracious reader. And I read my way through it and so mother had to find other ways to get books for me because it was a, it had a limited selection or at least (laughter) selection of books that I wanted to read (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: We, we had, we had a rule that I, for every three fiction books I had to take out a nonfiction was the rule. And, and then I discovered biographies so those were my nonfiction books. Story_ID: 521714 Speaker 1: Let's go to the time at Oglethorpe-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --Lab School [Oglethorpe School, Atlanta University Laboratory School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Who were some of the other students there with you at the time? Did you know any of the Dobbs family? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Who did you know? Who would it have been? Speaker 2: I've forgotten her-- Speaker 1: Was it June? Speaker 2: --first name. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] June Dobbs Butts? Speaker 2: No, no. June doesn't ring a bell. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But there, there was, yeah, I mean, I can see her face, I can't remember her first name. We are going way back. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: You know, this is a long, long time ago, so this is, you know, second and third grade, so. Jane Smith [Jane E. Smith], who's now at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], was in my class. A woman, Johnsie Middleton [ph.], who I think is in the corporate world. Samuel Westerfield [Samuel Z. Westerfield III] whom I understand is a doctor. I'm trying to remember if Roy Thompson [ph.] was junior high or, or elementary but I think he's a judge in Atlanta [Georgia] now. The Yancey boys, Prentiss Yancey [Prentiss Q. Yancey, Jr.] would have been ahead of me in school but Bob Yancey [Robert Yancey] was my class. So, yeah, yeah, I remember. Speaker 1: So during the early day at this school were there any teachers that stood out for you? Did you have any great teachers? Speaker 2: Not that I'm remembering by name. I remember, you know, fifth grade I had a teacher, math has never been a strong suit and she worked really hard with me on, on math. I can see her face, I can't, I can't remember her name. I remember Mrs. Lewis [ph.] who was the principal, not necessarily fondly. And I didn't think she was particularly good. Speaker 1: But I'm assuming-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --all of the teachers at the lab school were African Americans (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Which was different than what it had been in-- Speaker 2: In Omaha [Nebraska]. Speaker 1: --Omaha. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Yeah, yeah. And part way through, probably the year or so before I left, the Atlanta school system you went to elementary school through seventh grade and then you switched to junior high school for seventh, eighth, and ninth, and then you moved into the senior high school system. So probably sixth grade we finally were given a new building and-- Speaker 1: And what year would that have been? Speaker 2: So I would have been in sixth grade, I would have been about eleven, so '57 [1957] or so. And so it was, it was certainly, you know, much, much better plant facility. It, it became part of the public school system. So I'm not sure of kind of what the dynamics were in terms of the relationship to the university [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and its position as a lab school but the school became much bigger and, and the community, 'cause the students who were in, in the school up until that point had pretty much come from the professional classes and faculty and, and people related to the university. So, so up until that point in sixth grade it was a pretty elite group. And then in sixth grade when it opened up as a more public school, then, then it became much more socio-economically diversified. Story_ID: 521715 Speaker 1: During those early years do you remember what was happening at home? Who were the people that were visiting the home? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Was your father [Whitney Young] becoming extremely active within the southern civil rights community (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. We lived in a, in a sort of complex of other faculty, you know, separate homes but we were, it was a little kind of like a gated community. And one of our neighbors who was a good friend was Horace Mann, Horace Bond [Horace Mann Bond], and his son Julian, Mr. Julian Bond [HistoryMaker Julian Bond], who I thought was just adorable, (laughter) that was when I was a little girl, he was much older, and, and his brother, James [James Bond], and sister, Jane [HistoryMaker Jane Bond Moore]. Jane I adored because she gave me all her books as she, you know, out grew her books she just passed them on to me, which was wonderful. James was a pain, yeah, yeah, yeah, he was just a bother. But, you know, so, you know, my father was certainly, you know, working with that family and, and others. You know, I became aware of the fact that as, as the sit-ins started, you know, daddy wouldn't be home for dinner 'cause he was bailing students out of jail, you know. There-- Speaker 1: Do you remember your first sit-ins, do you remember what the conversations were at home and what your father's specific role was (unclear)? Speaker 2: Not really. I mean, it's not, you know, again, I'm, I was, you know, ten or eleven (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eight, yeah, and okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so this was kind of all going over my head. It really wasn't until, you know, I was getting into my teens that, that he and I began to really engage and I, I began to form my own activism. So, but, you know, I was aware of the fact that there were meetings that took place. Speaker 1: And that the sit-ins were happening and that your father was late-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --coming home because he was dealing with it? Speaker 2: Right, exactly, exactly. But I, and, and, and the piece that I did because it, it absolutely hit home, that I remember was the boycotts because the, we weren't allowed to go to stores that we used to go to. The department (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now when did the boycotts take place? Speaker 2: The, the, the boycotts took place in, I'd say probably '55 [1955], '56 [1956] thereabouts, around lunch, lunch counters and the fact that the major department stores had segregated lunch counters. So you could shop at Rich's Department Store [Atlanta, Georgia] but you couldn't eat at Rich's Department Store. And so everyone, you know, the entire black community began to boycott the major stores. And so as a kid, you know, it was like why can't we go to that store anymore? And, and being, you know, told the reason and, and supporting the reason. So, you know, that was, that was certainly, you know, a crystallizing experience. Story_ID: 521716 Speaker 1: An interesting sort of byproduct of, of segregated facilities, there were two. An interesting byproduct of segregated facilities was that the city public pools were segregated. Speaker 2: In Atlanta [Georgia]-- Speaker 1: In Atlanta (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the pools were segregated? Speaker 1: And this was the area, era of polio. So upper class families who had the means built their own pools and their own tennis courts. And so, you know, the circles that we traveled in, I went to my friends' pools and tennis courts. And, you know, I can remember on a couple of occasions maybe going to, to the public pools but, but the scare of polio, you know, kind of that became taboo. The other thing was that we integrated the Unitarian church in Atlanta. And, and I am still Unitarian. My father [Whitney Young] was one of the early and few African American Unitarians at that point. And we had attended the Unitarian church in, in Omaha [Nebraska] and, and continued in Atlanta. And there was a time, my mother [Margaret Buckner Young] initially went with us but then there was evidently supposed to be a retreat of the Sunday school teachers and she was one of the Sunday school teachers, and they couldn't find a facility that was an integrated facility for the retreat because accommodations were segregated. And mother was so furious that, you know, that it was segregated, that she stopped going to church. My father and I continued to go to church together. And so I was again in, in Sunday school I was in an integrated setting. And-- Speaker 2: But you were the only kid of African descent? Speaker 1: Well, others began to come from the university [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Once Daddy started going to the Unitarian church, other families did begin to join. But there were certainly periods and in fact probably, fifth, sixth grade thereabouts, I was, I don't know what happened to the girls but there were only two girls in my Sunday school class for a couple of years and, and the other girl was white, Suzanne. And, and so because you're at that age where girls don't speak to boys, Suzanne and I became really good friends. And Suzanne's mother, Suzanne Pascal [ph.], her mother used to write for Atlantic Monthly [The Atlantic Monthly; The Atlantic] and, and, was, you know, clearly a liberal, you know, it was her political views were out there in, in the public eye. After church Suzanne might come to my house or I might go to her house or, you know, we'd have sleepovers. And on one occasion Suzanne's house was bombed. Nobody was injured. We never knew whether it was because of my relationship with Suzanne or her mother's political views or some combination thereof. But, but, you know, this was not popular obviously. Didn't stop us, you know, we continued our relationship. The other thing that happened at the Unitarian church which I didn't think about until later, but one year in the Christmas pageant, I was Mary, Joseph was white, the doll was white, I was Mary, this is Omaha--this is Atlanta, Georgia, in, in the middle '50s [1950s]. This was pretty bold (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --on the part of this church to, you know, just kind of allow that to be, you know, but it just, you know, nobody seemed to think about it and it, it really took me a while later to realize oh, my goodness (laughter). Story_ID: 521717 Speaker 1: From my childhood we were Unitarian. I remember occasionally going to church with my [paternal] grandparents [Laura Ray Young and Whitney Young, Sr.] which would have been much more, I don't know whether it was Baptist or but something along that line which I assume is what my father [Whitney Young] had grown up with. What I think drew my father to the Unitarian church was the belief in, in egalitarianism, as manifested later by, you know, the number of Unitarians who became martyrs in the Civil Rights Movement. But even historically in, in Unitarian history abolitionists were often Unitarians. So, so that's part of who Unitarians are. And, and it is a faith that believes that we have the capacity to change our world. That, that there is a godliness within us, a higher power that we are a part of and participants as opposed to being passive or acted upon. And, and my father as an activist and as one who valued enormously human life and believed in the human capacity for change, this resonated for him. And I think was a, a comfortable environment for him so. Speaker 2: Did the church then play a role in what he was doing in Atlanta [Georgia]? Did the, how, how was the church involved with the sit-ins in the, in the bombing of Suzanne's [Suzanne Pascal (ph.)] house? Speaker 1: I'm not sure of, you know, I'm, I'm sure that there was a, a church response to, you know, in terms of support of Suzanne's mother and, you know, her mother was divorced, so it was just Suzanne and, and her mother. But, you know, so I'm sure that there was a communal response. I am sure that there was also a presence in, as, as the sit-ins and activities in the Civil Rights Movement became more active in Atlanta, church members were involved and, and, and Suzanne actually became part of that. After we left Atlanta when I was in eighth grade, ninth grade, she and I continued to write and she was actually, you know, getting arrested at age fourteen. She was actively involved in the Civil Rights Movement to the extent that ultimately she left the U.S. She was so uncomfortable, she was made to feel so uncomfortable in her community for standing up for what she believed in that she went to England. And that's where we lost track, we lost track in our late teens when she moved to England. Story_ID: 521718 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you didn't leave Atlanta [Georgia] until you were in your early teens? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Eighth or something like that, eighth grade (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighth, eighth, well, ninth grade. We moved to, there, there was a game plan which I'm not even sure my father [Whitney Young] was aware of but he had taken over the Atlanta University School of Social Work [Whitney M. Young Jr. School of Social Work, Atlanta, Georgia] in 1953 at the age of thirty-four. And the Rockefeller Foundation had their eye on him, and when Lester Granger stepped down or was planning to retire from the Urban League [National Urban League], the Rockefeller Foundation which was a heavy supporter of the Urban League, had their eye on daddy. Speaker 1: But that was in 1961, right? Speaker 2: That was in '61 [1961]. So they moved him to Harvard [Harvard University] for a, for a sabbatical and funded that sabbatical so we were in Cambridge [Massachusetts] for a year. And that was the year that I was in private school. My mother's [Margaret Buckner Young] objective was to give me time to, well, not knowing that that we were gonna be moving to New York [New York] she thought that the, the school that I went to, the Cambridge School of Weston [Weston, Massachusetts] was both a day school and a boarding school. And, and that if we were moving back to Atlanta that I would stay as a boarding student which a lot of kids that I knew from Atlanta did, they went to the, Deerfields [ph.] and, you know, in fact James [James Bond], Jamesie Bond, Julian's [HistoryMaker Julian Bond] brother, went to the same school I went to but he was a boarding student at the Cambridge School of Weston. And when we moved to New York, our Thanksgivings used to be with all these kids that we knew from Atlanta that were in northern prep schools were at our Thanksgiving. You know, so, so that was not an uncommon practice by any stretch of the imagination. So I was in, in private school trying to compensate for the education, some of the education I didn't fully get in southern schools. Speaker 1: In Atlanta? Speaker 2: In Atlanta. Speaker 1: Did your father meet Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] prior to leaving Atlanta? Did he meet him there the first time? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure, I'm, I'm sure that they knew each other. I mean, I'm, I'm not aware of the extent of that relationship. I know there was one point when we went to Birmingham [Alabama] but again I was too young to kind of know what the grownups were doing or talking about. You know, I was maybe ten or eleven or maybe, maybe, yeah, something like that. So, you know, again, I wasn't aware of what the context was, I just know we took this trip and it was, you know, and there were other kids that I played with while we were on trip, so. Story_ID: 521719 Speaker 1: The time in Atlanta [Georgia] you only remember the sit-ins as a teenager. You said you'd gotten (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the boycotts. Speaker 1: And the boycotts. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What organizations did you belong to as a teenager? Speaker 2: As a teenager-- Speaker 1: During those Atlanta years? Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't a teenager in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I, I was-- Speaker 1: I mean, I guess-- Speaker 2: --thirteen when we left. Speaker 1: --eighth or ninth is-- Speaker 2: Eighth, well, we were in Cambridge [Massachusetts] when I was fourteen. And that was just a year of, well, it was sort of an interesting year because it, it was kind of, I was being exposed to a whole other universe, Harvard Square [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. The emergence of, of interesting films, you know-- Speaker 1: What were some of the films? Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I remember seeing 'The Virgin Spring,' Bergman [Ingmar Bergman], you know. What was the one Melina Mercouri, a great film, that, you know, so, you know, the sort of grainy, interesting arty films, you know, were beginning to emerge. Folk music was emerging. We used to do a lot of folk music at this private school [Cambridge School of Weston, Weston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Was Odetta [HistoryMaker Odetta Gordon] popular? Speaker 2: Odetta was popular, Joan Baez was popular. You know, so, I mean, this was a whole different scene than Atlanta culturally. Speaker 1: Right. Now, were you paying attention to what they were talking about within the music? Was or was-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, sure, sure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that was-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --it was the content as well? Speaker 2: It was the content as well, yeah, yeah. So-- Speaker 1: So during your time in Atlanta you were a preteen? So you-- Speaker 2: I was pretty, preteen. Speaker 1: How involved did you get in, in what was going on with your father [Whitney Young] and-- Speaker 2: Not, not much. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, none of us were, none of us really were politically involved at that point. Speaker 1: What about your mother [Margaret Buckner Young]? What was she doing during the Atlanta years? Speaker 2: She was teaching at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], teaching psychology at Spelman College. And, you know, being the wife of the dean of the School of Social Work [Atlanta University School of Social Work; Whitney M. Young Jr. School of Social Work, Atlanta, Georgia], you know, which carried, you know, certain social responsibilities and so. Speaker 1: Do you remember their social events? Did they-- Speaker 2: There were parties. Not so much dinner parties but, you know, cocktail parties and, you know, things like that, yeah. Speaker 1: Now were they involved in social activities, I mean social groups outside of academia or their-- Speaker 2: Well, again, that, you know, there, I mean, organization like Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Jack and Jill (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We belonged to Jack and Jill. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And so that was certainly a part of the social scene. Speaker 1: And then you would spend summers where? Speaker 2: Summers-- Speaker 1: During the Atlanta years? Speaker 2: --either in Kentucky with my [paternal] grandparents [Laura Ray Young and Whitney Young, Sr.] or Chicago [Illinois] with a aunt, with my Aunt Arnita [Arnita Young Boswell] or as I got older, my godmother, Ersa Poston [Ersa H. Poston], who was the first woman to head the Civil Service [Civil Service Commission] in New York State reported by--appointed by Nelson Rockefeller. And Ersa was married to Ted Poston, the journalist. So I was sent north to spend some, a little time with Ersa. Speaker 1: What did you learn from her? Speaker 2: Oh, Ersa is a remarkable woman. She's still, she's still alive. She's not in great health but, you know, we talk periodically, I send her pictures of the grandkids all the time and stuff. She was just a very powerful, independent woman. She was, she served on the Urban League [National Urban League] board when daddy ran the Urban League. But she, like my aunts, I mean, they were all very similar, very independent, very outspoken, very self-assured, very, very glamorous. I've got a picture of me and Ersa, it was taken here when she was here for Thanksgiving one year. So she was just, you know, this remarkable woman that I looked up to. And she, she was always very honest with me, she answered my questions, you know. Speaker 1: What questions would you have for her? Speaker 2: Well, there was one year, I mean, I would, I'd visit Ersa as a pass on my way to camp up north, I was, you know, there were a couple of years when I went to summer camp up north and so I'd, I'd be sent to Ersa as the first stop and spend, you know, some time with her and then she'd put me on the bus to camp and then she'd take me off the bus to camp and send me back home again. But there was one year that there had been a rape that was very highly publicized and, and Ersa not only knew the young woman who had been raped but had taken her under her wing. And so this young woman was around during the time that I was around. And I didn't have any appreciation for what that was about, you know, I, again, I was probably about eleven or twelve. And Ersa explained, I mean, yeah, you know, Ersa, you know. My mother would shy away from those conversations, Ersa didn't. Story_ID: 521720 Speaker 1: At this time were you considering about what your options would be as far as a professional life? What you'd do for a living? What did you think you'd do? Be a doctor? A teacher? Nurse? Speaker 2: I, I, I don't know what I thought at that point. Teaching I think was something that I had certainly always probably considered as a possibility, so I think that was always a thought. I mean, I had certainly as a child I thought I'd be a ballet dancer, I mean, that was one, you know, (laughter) took ballet, I mean, for, for years and years and years up until my late teens. But as a little kid I thought I'd be a ballet dancer. Later I got, you know, smarter about that that that wasn't real. Speaker 1: And why was that not real? Because you didn't see any other African American ballerinas or-- Speaker 2: Just not being good enough. Just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) family's too practical. Speaker 2: Well, I, a, I'm not sure I'm, I'm reasonably sure I wasn't good enough. But I also had other things I wanted to do so I wasn't gonna give it the passion and the dedication and devote, you know, every waking hour to practice and that's when I stopped dancing was, you know, my mother [Margaret Buckner Young] finally said, you can't be president of the class, or, or vice president of the class and, and, you know, this organization and that organization, this organ- and, you know, something's gotta give here, so what's it gonna be? So, yeah, so the ballet went. Story_ID: 521721 Speaker 1: So you leave Atlanta [Georgia]. Your-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --father [Whitney Young] is recruited-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --to go to Boston [Massachusetts] for the year. Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah. Speaker 1: And your mother [Margaret Buckner Young] sees it as a great opportunity to catch you up on things you may have missed. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: What did you learn during that time? Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was a time, as I say when I, I began to just be exposed to, you know, a much broader world culturally. Speaker 1: Where did you live in Boston? Speaker 2: We lived in campus housing. You know, grad school housing, in an apartment, you know, short walk from Harvard Square [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. It wasn't, you know, we weren't there long, we were only there a year. And so, you know, and I was fourteen, and so there was just a lot of trauma kind of in, you know, this was yet another move. We had, while in Atlanta I had spent my eighth grade year in junior high, so I had left Oglethorpe [Oglethorpe School, Atlanta University Laboratory School, Atlanta, Georgia], went to Turner High School [Henry McNeal Turner High School, Atlanta, Georgia] for junior high, and then, you know, the next year for eighth, for ninth grade, we were in Cambridge [Massachusetts]. So I had moved three schools in my early teens which is not to be recommended (laughter). So I spent a fair amount of time just kind of trying to figure out, you know, who my friends were and, you know, and how to be and, and the drama that goes with that age, you know, 'cause everything is drama at that age. So, you know, I read a lot, that was all, that's always my, been my default is to, you know, when I can't cope I find a book, so. Speaker 1: But then the family moved to New York [New York]. Speaker 2: Then we moved to New York (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did that opportunity come about for your father? Speaker 2: Well, that was, that was the Rockefeller Foundation's game plan. The, that was the point was they were moving him out of Atlanta, giving him the, the education and exposure at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to take on the leadership of the National Urban League. And so he didn't necessarily know that that was what they were moving towards but that was the opportunity that was presented to him and so we moved to New Rochelle [New York] and I went to New Rochelle High School and daddy took on the Urban League. At that point we're, you know, in 1963 and I'm clearly political at that point. And, and, you know, my father and I had tons of conversations about, you know, his work and so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were some of the conversations you were having about his work? You're in New Rochelle-- Speaker 2: We're in Rochelle. Speaker 1: --it's 1963. Speaker 2: Right. The, the biggest kind of challenge that I lay in front of him, aside from my being really annoyed that he wouldn't let me go on the March on Washington, which in, in hindsight I now understand because when, when President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was shot, daddy was traveling and he was given a [U.S.] Secret Service detail because it was felt that the tensions in the country were such that civil rights leaders needed to be protected. So, so I, you know, in hindsight I understand my father, not, nobody knew what the climate for the March on Washington was going to be, whether it was gonna be a peaceful demonstration or a high risk demonstration and so he didn't want me there but I was still annoyed. Story_ID: 521722 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about that before you move on. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because he, what was his role [in the March on Washington]? I mean, I know he spoke (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was one of the organizers. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was one of the organizers, okay. Speaker 2: He, he, he was one of the organizers. I mean, at this point my father [Whitney Young] was one of the leading-- Speaker 1: He was central to the movement (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) voices in the movement. And he was one of the people, he was a strategist. He was a strategist around the march, he was a strategist around the different roles that people played in the movement. You know, his focus was on, on jobs and economic opportunity. Roy Wilkins, you know, was, was doing the legal strategy. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was sort of the public face. And then there, and then there were the student leaders. So, you know, there were all of these voices but each had their, their role and their place in, in the structure, which wasn't always transparent to the rest of the world. But, but some of those conversations took place, you know, in our living room. Where if anything my father and I, and, and it wasn't even an argument, he didn't, he didn't allow it to be an argument, we had arguments about other things, that teenage daughters and some fathers have arguments about. But one year, and I, and I think it probably was '60 [1960] maybe, '63 [1963] or '62 [1962], probably '63 [1963], the Urban League [National Urban League] conference that summer, Nancy Steeger [Nancy Steeger Jennings], her father, Hank Steeger [Henry Steeger III], was chair of the Urban League board [Council of Board Members] at that point, and the board chair was always a white corporate person because the fundraising had to come from some place, so. So Nancy is white, and she and I began talking about the fact that this Urban League organization which had so many programs to serve young people had no voice from the young. And we thought that didn't make a whole lot of sense. So, I'll never forget I went to my father to say at--during the conference, which is the busiest moment of his year, right, during the conference, I, I went to say, you know, we need to talk about this. He told me to see his secretary, Enid Baird, to get on his calendar. Enid yelled at him and said no, I'm not making an appointment for your daughter, you're gonna talk to your daughter. And, and so we had a conversation and he agreed with, you know, Nancy and I laid out our case, I think, obviously, fairly cogently. And he said so, why don't you present your views at the board meeting tomorrow? Which we did. And ultimately, and, and this was also the time when the young firebrands in the movement were complaining about the relevancy of the, the older civil rights organizations. And so my father in his wisdom understood that what I was saying might be a way of addressing this question of relevancy. And so the Urban League board voted to have, and still has, two under thirty members of the board. At one point in time when he was in his twenties, my son [Mark Boles] had was one of those under thirties. He's now well passed his early, he's, he's gonna be thirty-seven in a couple of weeks, but he is, Mark is on the Urban League board and on the strategic planning committee for the board and stuff. But, but he was one of the youth members of the board at one point as, as a result of the presentation that Nancy and I made. We also then tried to create an Urban League youth auxiliary which worked for a while. Speaker 1: Which its function was to-- Speaker 2: Was to bring young people, increase the awareness of the Urban League with younger people, bring, you know, cohorts of younger people to the Urban League conference to have conversations and to get to know each other. And, and Nancy and I ran that for, you know, a couple of years and then, and then we both, you know, went off to college and, and, and I think it continued in some way, shape, or form. Story_ID: 521723 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did you live when you were in New York? Speaker 2: In New Rochelle [New York]. Speaker 1: In new--I mean, what is it a section of? Speaker 2: In Westchester County [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's Westchester County, yeah. And there, there were a lot of us. I mean, and still are I guess, but [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee and [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis were in New Rochelle, Hugh Pierce [ph.] still lives in New Rochelle. In Hastings-on-Hudson [New York] there was the Clarks [ph.] were, were both there. So there were, you know, a lot of leaders who were in the Westchester, in the Westchester area. So, yeah, that's where we were. Speaker 1: So deciding to go to a university-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and what was happening within the country? Was your father [Whitney Young] concerned about your safety? Was that ever an issue because he had to have detail (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Security and stuff. Speaker 1: --security for the family? Speaker 2: Not really. I mean, he, he certainly was not an advocate of my being way out there. Speaker 1: Which meant he didn't want you to go down south-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --during Freedom Summer. Speaker 2: Right, right. I went to Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] and it was interesting from the standpoint that in my high school, New Rochelle High School [New Rochelle, New York] which is a huge high school, my graduating class was nine hundred, it was split into sort of three parts. There was the vocational track, there was what was called a general education track which didn't prepare you for much of anything, and then there was the college prep track. And, and mostly, you know, if you divided it ethnically, the Italian kids were on the vocational track, the African American kids were in this general education track, and the Jewish kids were in the college prep track. And I was college prep, so there were not a whole lot of us in the college prep track. The guidance counselor, there was one African American guidance counselor, and in fact, I used to have a, a job at school and I worked in his office, which was interesting 'cause I got to see everybody else's records (laughter). But-- Speaker 1: What was his name, the one African American guidance--? Speaker 2: Payne, Henry Payne [ph.]. And my college guidance counselor on the other hand was sort of an elderly white woman and she kept trying to steer me into really basically second tier colleges and my mother [Margaret Buckner Young] was having none of that. So, so we pretty much ignored her and, and my choices were, you know, a historically black college [HBCU], you know, Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] or Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts] or Bryn Mawr. And, and I, I fell in love with Bryn Mawr. I really just kind of really liked the campus and, and the feel of the place. And, and so that's where I went and had a sufficiently good experience, and my stepdaughter [Maratea Cantarella] also went there so. So I went to Bryn Mawr and, and civil rights was an issue on campus. My class was the largest, and had the largest number of African American students to enter it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which, how many of-- Speaker 2: There were about twenty-eight of us and my graduating class was 250 students. So that was a pretty significant number of, and this was '64 [1964]. Story_ID: 521724 Speaker 1: So the issues were civil rights and, and the war [Vietnam War]. Those were the big issues. And, so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And how did your father [Whitney Young] feel about the war? Speaker 1: Well, it was interesting. He had to ride the fence because there were so many young black men fighting in the war that he couldn't really take a position. He didn't feel he could take a position overtly in opposition. So he let me be the firebrand on the war. And there was one night we were at a dinner together and he was sitting on the dais with McGeorge Bundy, and he proceeds to tell McGeorge Bundy all about what his daughter thought about the war. And after the dinner there is a reception and daddy brings McGeorge Bundy to me and introduces me as this is the person who's, you know, I was telling you well, what, what she thinks. And then daddy walks off and leaves me with McGeorge Bundy and me being all of like nineteen, continued to mouth off on my views of the war to the undersecretary of state. And many years later, my husband [Francesco Cantarella] and I met McGeorge Bundy at a dinner and reminded him of this story and McGeorge Bundy said, "And history proved you right." Very gracious of him, I must say, (laughter) it was really remarkable. But, you know, my, by this time my father trusted my judgment enough that he could throw me out there and assume that I would probably equip myself reasonably well. Story_ID: 521725 Speaker 1: I just wanted to know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --what your points of view were on the war [Vietnam War]? And this is early on that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was early on. Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964] you said. Speaker 2: Well, mid, mid-'60s [1960s]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966], '67 [1967], thereabouts. In places like Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] we were actively protesting, we had teach-ins, so we were pretty well informed. And we were in opposition. We thought this was a mistake. We thought we had no business being there. That it was, you know, an imperialistic war. And, and, and then there were these side issues of who was engaging and, and, with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And by that, you mean? Speaker 2: Dis- disproportion, you know, all wars disproportionately fall on the poor because college students, you know, you could, if you were in college, you didn't have to go for a while, that was, that worked. And, and then that stopped working. And, or if you were going to be an educator or, you know, there were certain fields but, you know, so the war would fall disproportionately on those without means, which was my father's [Whitney Young] concern. And he traveled to Vietnam to support the troops, which my mother [Margaret Buckner Young] was not particularly happy with but, but I, I, you know, I understood. And, and actually my son [Mark Boles] has a photograph of, of my father, you know, on, on the trip plane in camouflage. And so, so my father couldn't be as overt about the war but I was certainly in opposition and active on campus in opposition. Speaker 1: Did you consider yourself an activist during-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --your college years? Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: And you were taking the lead from your father? Speaker 2: I'm not sure I would have said I was taking the lead, it was just, you know, it, it just kind of runs in the family. It just, (laughter) you know, was just what, you know, my [paternal] aunts [Arnita Young Boswell and Eleanor Young Love]-- Speaker 1: Because you-- Speaker 2: --were activists and so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you were, you came along at the time of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --were you involved at all with any of the student organizations? Speaker 2: No, because I was never, I have never been a separatist. And, I mean, if, if one looks at the configuration of my current family, you know, having married my second husband, Francesco [Francesco Cantarella] was Italian American or Italian French American. And so I've got two white stepchildren [Maratea Cantarella and Mick Cantarella] and, you know, three white grandchildren. And so, you know, this is, this is the Unitarian, this is the, you know, belief in people as people, there are good people and there are bad people, so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you chastised for those views during those, during that period? Speaker 2: Not, no, I mean, that was my father's view. Story_ID: 521726 Speaker 1: There were people who chastised him and, you know, so he took a lot of heat, I mean, people like Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] used to refer to his as Whitey Young. But my father's [Whitney Young] role was to make inroads, to create jobs, to create equal housing opportunity, and you don't do that unless you engage with the power structure. So he engaged with the power structure. I mean, his, the Urban League [National Urban League] board [Council of Board Members] was an integrated board. Speaker 2: Who were some of the people that were on that board when your father was president? Speaker 1: Jim Linen [James A. Linen III] who was head of the, head of Time magazine, Hank Steeger [Henry Steeger III] who was head of a publishing company [Popular Publications Inc.], and then he stepped down and, and Jim Linen stepped in, Ted Kheel [Theodore W. Kheel] the labor leader, a guy by the name of, of Chet Burger [Chester Burger] who headed a huge public relations firm, Chet and I are still close, Chet's in his eighties and still going strong, Ersa Poston [Ersa H. Poston]. So it was a, you know, it was a powerful and integrated board but it was what one needed in order to create the kind of access. And, you know, the, this was the time in the burning of the cities. And, and this is the era of, of when corporate responsibility was taken seriously. And my late husband, who was fourteen years older than I, was involved at Chase Manhattan [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] where David Rockefeller was kind of leading the charge in terms of, you know, he and, and, and Walter Wriston at, who was then at Citibank. And, you know, a lot of the bankers had very large, powerful, urban affairs departments and, and that was under my husband at Chase. And were involved in, in the Urban League and the National Urban Coalition, the creating of the, of the National Urban Coalition. Francesco [Francesco Cantarella] wrote the position paper for, for David Rockefeller on the National Urban Coalition and worked with my father, well before Francesco and I met. So this was, you know, the climate was actually a positive climate for making those inroads and making change because the white power structure wanted to have, have constructive action taking place, you know, they didn't want the cities burning but they wanted to know what they could do to fix it. And, and so that's where daddy stepped in. So he had to be functioning in the environment he was functioning, you had to have the allies that you needed to, to be able to have that leverage. Story_ID: 521727 Speaker 1: And during that time what was happening within your personal life? You were at Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] and you were-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --what were you doing over the summers, like the long hot summers that were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Well, one year, actually this is before Bryn Mawr, I worked, I worked at the Urban League [National Urban League] one summer. I worked one year with The Fresh Air Fund [New York, New York]. There was one summer I, I told my father [Whitney Young] I didn't want him to find me a job and I ended up working in a department store. The following summer I let him help (laughter) and I worked for Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] as, as an intern in Bobby Kennedy's office in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: And how was that experience? Speaker 2: That was a, a pretty amazing experience. The, the issues there really had, (laughter) the issues there had to do with gender. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: This was '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 2: This is the year before we lost Bobby, yeah. Speaker 1: And the issues had to do with gender? Speaker 2: Had to do with gender. Speaker 1: Was this a switch for you? Was it something new you were seeing? Speaker 2: I, there was, you know, emerging consciousness I think on the part of all women. We were all just coming to realize what the issues were. Speaker 1: For women? Speaker 2: For women. Speaker 1: And what were the issues? Speaker 2: Well, for example in Bobby Kennedy's office there were interns, we all came from, you know, we came from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Bryn Mawr, whatever, and the boys got to go work with the legislative aides. The girls got to work in the mail room and on the reception desk. Didn't, you know, we, we were smart women (laughter) we figured out pretty quickly this wasn't working, this wasn't making sense. So we began to rattle the cages on, on that and the staff was in a flap because they didn't want the senator to realize that we weren't happy and so, you know. Speaker 1: What did they do? Speaker 2: They began to realign our responsibilities and give us some projects and things but, you know, it took, you know, it took probably most of the summer to finally have them realize that, you know, there was a problem, for us to realize and then to articulate the problem and then to finally find (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) One moment. Speaker 2: --a solution. Speaker 1: Is that the end of the tape? Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: Okay continuing. We were talking about, I, I had asked the makeup of the interns in-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the office and we'll start there. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, I was the only African American intern. However, the, the climate of the office was such that, Bobby had been very much behind the creation of Bed-Stuy Restoration Corp [Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation]. And so there was a chance for a couple of interns, I wasn't one of them, I don't remember what I was working on but something else, but a couple of interns to go be part of that. Peter Edelman was in that office at that time and was dating [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman, who became Marian Wright Edelman, so she was in and out of the office all the time. And there was one night when I, I had been at the office late and the senator was the last to leave and my mother [Margaret Buckner Young] had me living in, she was worried about my living in Washington so she had me living in this boarding house that was miles away from anything and anybody. And so I was going back to there and the senator asked how I was gonna get home and I usually took, you know, it was two bus trips and, and he said, "Well, why don't I drive you home?" And he put his driver, who was African American, in the backseat and he drove me home (laughter). He and I sat in the front seat together and chatted and, you know, and he drove me home so (laughter). So, yeah, and then he was, he was, he was, you know, really quite a remarkable guy, quite a remarkable guy, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: That is remarkable. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what did he talk about? Speaker 2: Oh, you know, he's kind of asking, you know, how things were going and, you know, I knew enough not to say well, you, your staff screwed up in the placement of people in the front and, and what we were doing. Speaker 1: Did he know who your father was? Speaker 2: Oh, of course. Speaker 1: Of course, he did. Speaker 2: Of course, yeah, yeah, that's how I got there. Speaker 1: Right. And did he talk about the relationship between the two of them or did he talk about the Urban League at all during that-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, no, I mean, not that I remember, yeah, so, yeah, yeah but it, well, it wasn't, you know, it was a fifteen minute car ride. Speaker 1: Car ride (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, yeah. Story_ID: 521728 Speaker 1: So during that time, what was your father [Whitney Young] working on within Urban League [National Urban League] because he had come in '61 [1961]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And this is-- Speaker 2: And it, and it, it was really, you know, I mean, the Urban Coalition [National Urban Coalition] was being formed, it was really about jobs. It was, he was working very closely with President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], he was very close to President Johnson. Speaker 1: He was awarded the highest, what was that, the-- Speaker 2: The-- Speaker 1: --the presidential citation? Speaker 2: --medal, Medal of Honor [sic. Presidential Medal of Freedom]. In fact, I remember one year and, I guess, I was probably about seventeen or eighteen, home for Christmas and the phone rang and it was my sister [Lauren Young Casteel] I think answered the phone, she was about ten, and she said it's the White House. And it was President Johnson calling just to wish daddy a merry Christmas. And, and I was, of course, very excited about this. And my sister's (laughter) attitude was the president talks to a lot of people (laughter). So yeah, she was a kid, what does she know so (laughter)? So, so, you know, my father was very much engaged with, you know, the power structure at the highest levels and trying to make legislative change and trying to engage, you know, the corporate world and opening doors. And, you know, affirmative action as, as we have known it traditionally was really something that was a product of his creation or he was certainly involved in the formulation of that idea. He created the idea of the Marshall Plan. Speaker 1: I don't know the Marshall Plan. Speaker 2: The Marshall Plan, his, his idea which never actually came into being was, was based on the postwar Marshall Plan which funneled millions of dollars of American money into the rebuilding of Europe. And my father's thought was the same concept should be applied to the rebuilding of the American city. That there should be an urban Marshall Plan. And to some extent some of those ideas crept into the poverty program. So the Office of Equal Opportunity [sic. Office of Economic Opportunity] and, and some of the community based programs of the '60s [1960s] that were part of the, the sort of the new society and that was all-- Story_ID: 521729 Speaker 1: Do you remember the first time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --in, the first time you voted? Speaker 2: I would have voted, '68 [1968]. And, in fact, no, before I even was able to vote, I was a political science major at Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] and I thought I was going to go on to law, was, was the thought. But the election, the '64 [1964] election, there were busloads of us that went from campus to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to man the phones the night of the election. And so, so that was my first, you know, kind of really hands on feeling like part of the political process moment. Speaker 1: What do you mean man the phones though? What, what-- Speaker 2: I guess, we were taking, getting the returns as they came in, the, the returns were being phoned into the central bank and, and so volunteers were taking the returns for Philadelphia, in Philadelphia for the state, so, yeah. Speaker 1: Did your father [Whitney Young] ever talk about voting and the importance of voting? Speaker 2: It was, you know, it was just like in the air, it was, you know, you just knew. You didn't have to talk about it, it was, you know, something that I learned about growing up. And, you know, similarly my, my stepdaughter [Maratea Cantarella] has, has taken Sophie [ph.] when she was four to the voting booth with her to, you know. And, and I think we bought her a T-shirt that said vote or something, you know, so, yeah, just keep it going (laughter). Speaker 1: Just keep it going. Story_ID: 521730 Speaker 1: So going back to what year did you graduate [from Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 2: And daddy [Whitney Young] was my commencement speaker, yeah. Speaker 1: And this is after King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death then-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --after the assassination. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you remember that day? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you were afraid for your father's life? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, yeah. Immediately called home, wanted to go home. My mother [Margaret Buckner Young] wouldn't let me come home. It was, you know, exam time, it was late April and, and, you know, I needed to stay on campus which was probably the safest place to be anyway. And we were, the whole campus, I mean, we were just in, in horrible shock. And, you know, it was just sad, it was just horribly, horribly sad and, and the sense of powerlessness-- Speaker 1: Because you had lost Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy], whom you'd interned for-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So that-- Speaker 2: Well, Bobby, Martin was first and Bobby was second. Speaker 1: Oh, Bobby was second, okay. So, yeah, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bobby was second so. But, you know, that, that summer was, was just, it was a horrible summer, it was just a horrible, horrible, horrible, horrible period. And, and then you had the Democratic Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois] which was another debacle, it was horrible. Story_ID: 521731 Speaker 1: One of my classmates from Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania], who I'm very close to now, we, we've been talking about, that we've got a little mini reunion coming up 'cause one of our classmates [Drew Gilpin Faust] from the class of '68 [1968] is, is the new president of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And, and so a bunch of us, about sixty of us are going to, to Boston [Massachusetts] this summer to, you know, celebrate with her. And, and so, so this particular classmate, Kit Balkey [ph.] had asked if we wanted to room together, which we may or may not, but Kit was, was part of the Weather Underground [Weather Underground Organization] at Bryn Mawr. And Kit has a four hundred page FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] file. And she was, you know, I mean, she, Kit knows, did, now, know how to build a bomb and, you know, just out there, yeah. She was, she was, you know, on the radical fringe (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you socialize with her during your college years? Speaker 1: As an undergraduate we were both political science majors. Speaker 2: Political science majors. Speaker 1: We, you know, she, she was-- Speaker 2: So by day she was at school, by night she was building bombs with the Underground? Speaker 1: She was, yeah, yeah, she was, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: What were your feelings on-- Speaker 1: She, she later married somebody who was early at Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation] and her whole life (laughter) then became fairly different. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But she has taken her kids to, to political demonstrations to show them what it's like. I mean, she's still, you know, her politics haven't changed very much but her lifestyle has changed (laughter). Speaker 2: What were your feelings on the Weather Underground? Speaker 1: It was not something I could do but I thought, I had some admiration for people who had that courage of their convictions. Speaker 2: What were your feelings on the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party]? Speaker 1: Similarly, I understood and I thought, you know, they're, I, I am nonviolent so, you know, so that's never been, violence is not something I'm comfortable with. I'm not good with conflict. You know, I'm, I'm, you know, my father's [Whitney Young] daughter, I'm a peacemaker. But I can understand the motivation, I can understand the motivation. Story_ID: 521732 Speaker 1: I want to know what your father [Whitney Young] spoke on at the March on Washington. Did he speak on job opportunities? Speaker 2: Right. You know, he, he talked about, you know, essentially equality of opportunity. And so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did he see as being like an equalizer? What did he see as something that would elevate us all to relatively the same opportunities? Speaker 2: It's education and jobs, you know. If, you know, you gotta be able to, to participate in the economic system. And it was very interesting, my son just reread my father's book, 'Beyond Racism' ['Beyond Racism: Building an Open Society,' Whitney M. Young]. And my son did a speech recently, there was an unveiling at the Washington Urban League [Greater Washington Urban League] of a wax figure of my father and so it was down in Washington [D.C.] or Baltimore [Maryland]. Anyway, and so my son represented the family and spoke. And, and he quoted substantially from, from 'Beyond Racism' and said basically, you know, everybody needs to read this again 'cause the, the points haven't changed, you know, the agenda, the needs haven't changed. And it was a, it was quite a wonderful speech on Mark's [Mark Boles] part I must say. But, yeah, yeah, yeah, that's the agenda. Speaker 1: So just give me a couple of the points that your father made so long ago. Speaker 2: That, you know, we have been contributing, you know, working, you know, as people in the building of this country. And it's time that, you know, we also participated in, in the rewards and the bounty. And, you know, it's time that, you know, the doors be open, that we be seen for who we are and not the color of our skin basically. Story_ID: 521733 Speaker 1: So you were saying to me one of your favorite films? Speaker 2: Oh, is, is, is the film, 'The Long Walk Home' which is set during the Birmingham boycott [sic. Montgomery Bus Boycott] and really speaks to what was happening in terms of women's consciousness being raised. That there were parallels in terms of the ways that women had been held back and their ability to participate economically and to take care of themselves. Speaker 1: Did you only see that with the experience at the Kennedy, at Senator Kennedy's [Robert F. Kennedy], that internship? Speaker 2: I said, that film didn't come out until '89 [sic. 1990]. Speaker 1: No, not the film (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, right. Speaker 1: --but I mean your awareness of-- Speaker 2: Oh, that-- Speaker 1: --that, well, that story that they're telling. When did you become aware that that would be an issue for, for you? Speaker 2: That became, I became aware, aware of that probably really in my first marriage. Speaker 1: And when were you married for the first time? Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], okay. Speaker 2: It was a short marriage. And-- Speaker 1: Were you not allowed to work? Speaker 2: I was allowed to work but the, sort of didn't count, you know, I didn't-- Speaker 1: Now, when do you--okay. Speaker 2: --I didn't have a voice and it was a marriage where I, I had no voice. Speaker 1: When do you feel historically that it was recognized that black women would continue to work during the marriage and that white women, you know, generally would-- Speaker 2: The, all the black women I knew worked. You know, my [paternal] aunts [Arnita Young Boswell and Eleanor Young Love] worked, you know, my godmother, Ersa [Ersa H. Poston], worked. I mean, you know, so my mother [Margaret Buckner Young] had taught, I mean, women, you know, the black women I knew, my [paternal] grandmother [Laura Ray Young] had, you know, been the postmistress, so, you know, they all worked so that just was part of, you know, just, it was what it was. Speaker 1: Then you got married before you graduated [from Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: After, right after graduation. Speaker 1: Right after graduation. Speaker 2: It was, it was, you know, this was the period where the choices for women were either you got married or you went to graduate school. If you wanted to work, you were gonna work as a secretary, regardless of where you had graduated from. There was an ad agency that used to have a competition for young women to come work at the ad agency, and, you know, you have to write and, and. And then you'd get there and they'd think you're a secretary. And, and, and I remember hearing that story from a woman who's now head of, you know, Ogilvy and Mather or, you know, so (laughter) who graduated from Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts] so. The roles for women, and one of my favorite films we're getting into sort of some of my academic stuff but-- Speaker 1: That's okay. But go ahead. Speaker 2: A film that I often used in class was a movie called 'How to Marry a Millionaire' which is set in the '50s [1950s] and these three beautiful models Lauren Bacall and, and Marilyn Monroe, and Betty Grable maybe or so. But anyway they're beautiful models and, and they realize that they are getting beyond the age where they can continue to model so they've gotta find a millionaire to marry. And, and the way I've contextualized that for students is that this is, you know, this is prostitution. You know, they, they were selling their bodies to the highest bidder because that's how they needed to formulate economic security. That's what women did. Women got married because that was the expectation and that's how you had economic security. And if you got divorced, and the stats bear this out, you then probably slipped into some level of poverty. And, and so, you know, in the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s], that was the shifting point where women were beginning to take hold of their own economic destinies and, and be, be able to, and this is what Sissy Spacek does in, in the film ['The Long Walk Home'] is say, I've got my own belief system, you know, and it's not my husband's and so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But that's not a world that you grew up in because you grew up with your-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --all these aunt-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --being professional women. Speaker 2: The, they were professional women in traditional arenas for the most part, you know, they taught. That's what women did, they taught or they were nurses or, you know, they weren't chief executive officers, they weren't, you know, they weren't even the copywriters. Story_ID: 521734 Speaker 1: While at Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So. Speaker 1: --who was, who were the role models? Who were you looking up to? Speaker 2: Oh, all the faculty. Speaker 1: All the faculty. Speaker 2: All the faculty, I mean-- Speaker 1: And who were some of those women? Speaker 2: Well, one that I, I still look up to now, who was, who became dean while we were, while my class was there is Pat McPherson [Mary Patterson McPherson], and Pat and I are still close and she's kind of a mentor. She went on to become president of Bryn Mawr, was president when my stepdaughter [Maratea Cantarella] was there. And, and Pat is, is, is nationally known as probably one of the best college presidents ever. She's now at the Mellon Foundation [Andrew W. Mellon Foundation] getting ready to retire this year. But also there was a woman, Gertrude Layton, who was one of my professors and she was in, at Yale Law in the 1930s, one of the few women at Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut]. And she taught political science and, and particularly taught a course in law and psychology. She, you know, had her law degree but also was equally knowledgeable if, if, I don't think she had a Ph.D. in psychology but she knew enough to have had a Ph.D. in psychology and brought those two disciplines together and she was extraordinary. And on, on the side she painted, she was also an artist, so, yeah somebody else I admired. Story_ID: 521735 Speaker 1: We were just going to talk a little about your father's [Whitney Young] Washington [D.C.] years, and you were explaining. Speaker 2: That we never lived in Washington, he spent a lot of time there because of the political agenda that, you know, he was helping to, to formulate. So, you know, he spent a lot of time, you know, literally with, with President Was- not, President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]. He spent, you know, time with Hubert Humphrey. And both of whom I had an opportunity to meet at, at Urban League [National Urban League] conferences and things. But, yeah, he was very heavily involved in, in the Washington scene and the policy making and, and was definitely a force. Story_ID: 521736 Speaker 1: So back to your days at Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania], you were just talking about a couple of the women-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --that had made impressions upon you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Were there men who may have had the same sort of affect during that time? Speaker 2: Hm. Speaker 1: Or your father [Whitney Young] was the only man you sort of looked up to? Speaker 2: I guess my father was really, you know, kind of the, the primary male figure and then my [paternal] grandfather [Whitney Young, Sr.], certainly. But in terms of people I really admired, and, and well, any, obviously I admired Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] and, and the Kennedys in general, you know, Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] has continued to be a, a stalwart, you know. But, yeah, my father and, and ultimately then the person who, who mirrored him in, in many ways, was, was my second husband, was Francesco [Francesco Cantarella]. And I was just sorry that they never, they, while they knew each other, they never knew each other in the context of family together and they would have had a blast (unclear) yeah, they would have loved each other, so, yeah. Story_ID: 521737 Speaker 1: Let's talk about some of your father's [Whitney Young] travels. He was able to go to Africa. Did you ever take any of those trips with him? Speaker 2: No, no, I was, I was-- Speaker 1: Did you ever travel with him? Speaker 2: Well, we went to Europe together. And, and it was amusing, that was when I was actually in college [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania]. And it was amusing to travel with him because he, again, because of the corporate connections and stuff he often had a, you know, a company car put at his disposal and driver and stuff. And, and he would always be, he would always ask to be taken to the ghetto. You know, he wanted to see where the poor people lived, you know, so. So, we might be staying at the Ritz-Carlton but he also wanted to have that balance and see, you know, kind of how, how did the other half live in this context, whatever that context was. And, and one of the characteristics that I've, I valued about him, valued about my husband and, and my son [Mark Boles] continues to, to appreciate because he, he saw it more through, through my husband, but was the ability to connect with all kinds of people. So when daddy traveled, you know, the, the Red Caps at the train stations and the airports knew him because he was nice to them, you know, he paid attention to them. There was just, and, and that came from his mother [Laura Ray Young]. His mother, you know, imparted that quality of just treating everybody well. Speaker 1: So you were, you existed in a pretty upper middle class African American-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) community? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Were there other people that resembled you that you had contact with or were you specifically living in a broader society with little contact with other upper middle class African American teenagers, students I mean. Speaker 2: Well, we, we, we continued now to be part, a little bit of Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] and, in, in Westchester [Westchester County, New York]. There were, you know, there were the sons and daughters of, you know, other leaders, so, you know, the Clarks [ph.], Ken [ph.] and Amy Clarks' [ph.] son, Hilton [ph.], is somebody I knew or, or Ralph Bunche's son [Ralph Bunche, Jr.] or, I mean, so there were, you know, yeah, they were just of, the kids of other figures. Of course, those things never work out as relationships because they're artificial, they're like, you know, your parents say you're supposed to play together and-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --you may or may not have anything to talk about but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Right. Speaker 2: --but there were those relationships. There was somebody that, an African American guy I dated at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] for a while. And, in fact, my husband ran into him at one point and he's up in Boston [Massachusetts] and saw a picture of my father on, on this guy's wall and, and, and Ted [ph.] said, "Yeah, I dated his daughter," and Francesco [Francesco Cantarella] said, "And I married her," (laughter). So, but, yeah. Speaker 1: When did you consider, I mean, I mean was it an issue to date outside of, like black people at the time? Speaker 2: It was, yeah, it was an issue. It was, it was an issue. And, and, you know, it was a battle that I actually had with my parents because, you know, they, you know, were not comfortable with it necessarily. And the, and the battle that I had was I am who you raised me to be, and you raised me to be open. And, you know, and so I will date anybody that makes me happy, you know, that's, (laughter) so I'm not going to discriminate 'cause you raised me to not discriminate. So, so, yeah, we had that battle. You know, there was initially probably a tiny bit of resistance when, when Francesco and I came together but it was tiny. And, you know, he just, he was the kind of person who won people over easily and so. Speaker 1: But your first husband was he-- Speaker 2: Well, he was African American. Speaker 1: He was African American. Speaker 2: He was African American, yeah. Speaker 1: And I'm assuming they liked him before, as (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he was a writer and so daddy had a little question about, you know, people who made their living by writing, you know, can you really, you know, do that, that was just kind of wasn't a career, even though he had, he had done some freelance work for the Urban League [National Urban League] in, in the PR [public relations] department. He was basically a novelist and so I think daddy kind of had some questions about that, you know, can you support my daughter in the style to which she's become accustomed kind of questions, you know, so. Story_ID: 521738 Speaker 1: We're talking about your father's [Whitney Young] latter years now. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you were how old in '68 [1968], you were-- Speaker 2: I was-- Speaker 1: Twenty-one (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twenty-one, twenty-two, so. Speaker 1: So you could have somewhat of an adult conversation with your father? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we had been having adult conversations for years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. But-- Speaker 1: From the standpoint of you understanding what he's doing-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --and what he's fighting for. And-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what were the things he was talking about and working on in the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was the, it was, it was, it was the economic agenda. Speaker 1: It's still the same. Speaker 2: It was, it was, it was, yeah, it was the economic agenda. And, and by that time I was in college so, you know, we'd talk about the war [Vietnam War], we'd talk about, you know, the economic issues so. Speaker 1: Did you talk about campus issues, what was happening, was he concerned about your life on campus? Speaker 2: Well, the camp- the camp- the campus issues were the same issues. Speaker 1: Were the same. Speaker 2: 'Cause we were, you know, we were boycotting the war, and, and, and having sit-ins and talking about civil rights. One of the issues that came up early at Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] when I first got there, bear in mind that was a time period when everything on campuses changed dramatically. So I walk in the door and we used to be required to wear skirts and we had to be in the dorm by the ten o'clock, eleven on weekends, and no men were allowed in the, you know, in, in our rooms and in the hallways. And, you know, this was pretty rigid, you know. And by the time I graduated, you could wear slacks to class, you could, men were allowed in the rooms. By the time my stepdaughter [Maratea Cantarella] got there, she was in a coed dorm so (laughter). But it, during that four years things were changing dramatically. One of the things that changed was as freshmen we had maid service, there were, there were African American maids who came in and cleaned our rooms and made our beds and served our meals on white linen tablecloths. We thought this was a problem. We thought this was a little plantation. And so we raised questions with the administration about the appropriateness in this time and age. And the administration, wisely, said fine, you're right but what are these women going to do if we take away those jobs? And, you know, we need to think this through in a way that doesn't cause hardship, you're on the right wavelength but we've gotta think about the implications. And, and, and they did. And they, you know, they found other work. And I ended up my junior year I was waitressing tables and we all learned how to make our own beds and, you know. But, but they, they had to find a way to not do harm by our good intentions. So, so that was one of the things that was going on at campus, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, that was, I mean, that's a great story. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: So what did they find for the women, the women to do? Various jobs? Speaker 2: A range of things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, one of the women, the woman who used to, you know, make my bed my freshmen year, ended up being, you know, supervising, you know, the, all of the housekeeping for, I think, she was responsible for two dorms. Story_ID: 521739 Speaker 1: So during the time your father [Whitney Young] goes off to Africa-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and the incident happens, you have already graduated from [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania]-- Speaker 2: I was graduated, I was married, I had a child (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Married, and you had a child. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So those first, through '69 [1969], '70 [1970], and '71 [1971], you didn't do anything but raise a family? Speaker 2: Pretty much. I mean Mark [Mark Boles] was born in, in '70 [1970], so, around '70 [1970], '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: What did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a year old. I, I, I, I-- Speaker 1: --you graduated with a degree in political science? Speaker 2: Yeah, and my first husband had a, took a job at the, at Iowa [University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa] at the Writers' Workshop [Iowa Writers' Workshop], had a year to teach at the Writers' Workshop. And then had a Guggenheim fellowship and we were in Morocco actually, the year that my father died. And so while he was at, in Iowa for a short period I went to law school but I wasn't getting any emotional support behind that at home and so I dropped out of law school. Then when we were in Morocco, I taught at the Rabat American School [Rabat, Morocco]. And then my father died and my marriage fell apart at the same moment. So when we came back to the states I legally separated from my, from my husband. Speaker 1: So when you came back for your father's funeral you never went back to Morocco? Speaker 2: Never went back to Morocco and never went back to my husband. Speaker 1: And your father drowned? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And it just was an-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --accident? Speaker 2: From what I understand, he was swimming in a place-- Speaker 1: Now, where was he swimming? Speaker 2: He was at, it was Nigeria. And I think that the trip was sponsored by The Africa-America Institute [New York, New York]. And interestingly my, my stepdaughter [Maratea Cantarella] is a fundraising consultant and one of her clients is The Africa-America Institute. And she just e-mailed me a picture of the staff of The Africa-America Institute at my father's memorial service. So, yeah, yeah, yeah. They found it in the archives. But he was swimming and everybody had taken a break, they were all out swimming and he was swimming some place where there was a heavy jet, jet stream current and, and there is a history of heart disease in the family, so my father's heart wasn't strong enough to enable him to fight that current and so, so he had a heart attack, I think, in the water and drowned, yeah. And Ramsey Clark was there. Donald Rumsfeld was there. The guy [Robert E.L. Strider] who was president of Colby College [Waterville, Maine], actually he was president when my son [Mark Boles] was at Colby was there. And so, you know, it was a very, high power group who tried to save him and, and were not successful. Speaker 1: And you said that the eulogy was given at the memorial by-- Speaker 2: Oh, at, at, at, for, for my-- Speaker 1: Father. Speaker 2: --father, there, it was everybody. I mean-- Speaker 1: Everybody spoke. Speaker 2: It was at, it was at Riverside-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --cathedral [Riverside Church, New York, New York] and it was huge. My, David Rockefeller was one of the people who was supposed to have been there and could not be there and he sent his vice president, Francesco Cantarella. Speaker 1: Is that how you met-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Francesco? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, okay. Speaker 2: No, no, we kept, we kept bumping, we kept crossing paths and then finally we, we met in '73 [1973]. Story_ID: 521740 Speaker 1: So after your father [Whitney Young] passed away and you were able to reflect on his life, what do you think it is he taught you? Speaker 2: Oh, my god. Everything. Everything. (Pause) Sorry. You know, just about people, about how to be with people. I was so lucky that what I began to learn from him I was able to continue to learn from my husband because they were so much the same person. And so I'm, you know, I'm just incredibly grateful for having had the exposure, thank you, thank you. Having had the opportunities, having been able to see, you know, kind of living your values. Speaker 1: How was he towards people? Speaker 2: He was just genuine. He was just, he was just himself and genuine and interested and open. And, you know, he wanted to make things better. He enjoyed life, you know, he loved, you know, he loved parties, he loved people, he loved, he loved being in the limelight. He was a Leo, you know, the attention, and now I've got four Leo granddaughters (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: If they follow that model we've got our hands full. But, yeah, he was just, you know, genuine with people. And, and as I say I, you know, I then lived it again for almost another thirty years with Francesco [Francesco Cantarella]. And, and I remember what, Mark [Mark Boles] and I, my son, were watching an episode of, of 'Family Ties,' I guess, and, and the father to teach his family a lesson brings home a homeless person. And, and it's supposed to be a humorous moment, Mark looks at me and says, "It's not funny, Mom, Dad could do that" (laughter), 'cause he really could have. But it was, it was that quality that was one of the qualities that I knew from my father that I also married in, in Francesco. Speaker 1: And you married Francesco in '70 [1970]-- Speaker 2: We met in '73 [1973]. Speaker 1: You met in '73 [1973]. Speaker 2: We dated for a few years, we lived together for four years, and we married in 1980 and then he passed away in 2001. Story_ID: 521741 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you find Avon [Avon Products Inc.]? Speaker 2: When my [first] marriage broke up, I was given an opportunity to work at a black owned ad agency. Speaker 1: What was the name of that agency? Speaker 2: Zebra Associates. It doesn't exist, it, it ceased to exist in the '70s [1970s]. But it was an integrated ad agency, I was an account executive. I knew nothing about advertising but Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] swore they would teach you how to write and they did and, and, and how to learn. Speaker 1: And you could write. Speaker 2: So I could write, and I could learn. And so I was an account executive and something told me that this agency was not real stable which it wasn't. And so I began looking for, you know, a safe haven where to go next and, you know, through networking, through a friend who was a headhunter, there was a position opening in the public affairs area at Avon where they were developing their position on, on community relations, on corporate responsibility and so I was able to start at, at the ground floor. I was promoted rapidly in, in a relatively short time. In fact, before I was thirty I was made a director, just, just before I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, the thing that impressed me most is that I read about some of your initiatives in-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, in recruitment, and that my mom used to get that magazine in Mississippi-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah Speaker 1: --and order from it. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, it worked-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, Avon was all over-- Speaker 1: --like it reached out to-- Speaker 2: --Avon was all over the place, Avon was everywhere. Speaker 1: And I remember at some point having black representatives-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --come out-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and we, you know, I mean, we worked hard on, on, when I finally moved into marketing, I was in public affairs for about seven years. Speaker 1: And, and during your time there, your, you mainly worked on-- Speaker 2: I worked on community relations, building relations with the community. Speaker 1: And was it specifically the black community? Speaker 2: Specifically the black community. But also women (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Had they not done such a great job before? Speaker 2: --but also women's issues. I mean, it was, it was really specific to where we had a corporate presence. We had plant facilities around the country. And so wanting to make sure that we have good relationships with those communities. Speaker 1: Communities. Speaker 2: And so, you know, in some, to some extent the black community but we also had to look at issues around our employment, our equal employment practices so you had to tap into the community if we were gonna have equality of employment opportunity for the company. So I was looking at the affirmative action issues. So I was heavily involved in, in all of the issues around, you know, corporate social responsibility. Speaker 1: Which is something you had seen your father [Whitney Young] do for a number of years? Speaker 2: Precisely, precisely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so-- Speaker 1: What skills could you directly attribute to things you had learned from your father that you were using at Avon? Speaker 2: Being able to be comfortable in the corporate world 'cause I had certainly grown up, you know, knowing CEOs and, you know, corporate people. So it wasn't an alien culture. So that was part of it. Speaker 1: But were there, were there many black women doing anything but being secretaries at the time? Speaker 2: There weren't. I mean at Avon at that point there were only two women who were vice presidents. Speaker 1: In the whole company? Speaker 2: In the whole company, yeah, yeah, yeah. So we, at one point, and actually Francesco [Francesco Cantarella] and I were seeing each other at this point but, but we did retain him when he was consulting for a while to reshape the Avon Foundation [Avon Foundation for Women] which was then giving money to things like the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] and to refocus it on women. And so that continues obviously to this day, to be the focus of the Avon philanthropy. And so women and, and economic opportunity were the two issues that we really focused the Avon Foundation on so. Speaker 1: Did you-- Speaker 2: And that came, you know, obviously from my father's. Speaker 1: Yeah, did you, I was going, I'm going to ask like did you learn how to speak to people via your father, how to-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --you know-- Speaker 2: Well, just being around-- Speaker 1: Being around him. Speaker 2: --being around, yeah. Story_ID: 521742 Speaker 1: Was there a corporate dress at the time, could you wear pants or did you only wear skirts or-- Speaker 2: No, it was pretty open. This was the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: This is the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You could get away with a lot (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A lot in the '70s [1970s] so. Speaker 1: Now, did you wear a natural or did you-- Speaker 2: No, I've, I've worn my hair, yeah, well either like this or, or, you know, down but, you know, mostly ponytail forever, you know, for a long time. Speaker 1: Well, what did you, what were your perceptions of like [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis in the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: I thought she was terrific. I thought she was a really smart woman. I thought, you know, smart, gutsy. My sister [Lauren Young Casteel] was the one with the Afro, she, she did the Afro thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Then let me ask, who were the other women that, around that time that you could socialize with, that looked like you? Were there any? Speaker 2: Well, there, I mean, there were other women who were also doing corporate public affairs. I mean, there was a bunch of, of us public affairs folks that was a, somewhat diverse and, and probably equal number of men and women, certainly racially diverse, and we all hung out together, Francesco [Francesco Cantarella] was one of them, I mean, was, you know, part of that, that crowd. Story_ID: 521743 Speaker 1: Well, during the time in public affairs at Avon [Avon Products Inc.]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --what do you consider to have been the challenges? Speaker 2: The big challenge for, for everybody was, you know, you had, if you didn't have a CEO who was on board with the agenda, then you couldn't move the agenda. You know, I was fortunate that the CEO, at that time, you know, was, was very much on board with the agenda. But-- Speaker 1: How much did you talk about affirmative action and actually use the word affirmative action? Speaker 2: Oh, we did. Speaker 1: You did? Speaker 2: Oh, we did. Speaker 1: You did. Speaker 2: We did. I mean-- Speaker 1: And you put a model into play (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for one thing, for one thing, you, you had, you had the law at that point, you know. So, so it was a question of, of following, you know, what was by then mandated. Speaker 1: And the law stated that you must have a certain number? Speaker 2: No, you have to, but you had to have an affirmative action plan that you had to be able to show the absence of discriminatory patterns and practices in your hiring, and, and promotional policies. Speaker 1: And at that time you were responsible for helping Avon-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --to create that plan? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: And the plan was created? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And so that plan did what? Did it increase the numbers? Speaker 2: Yep, the numbers, the numbers began to increase. We had a, a corporate responsibility committee chaired by an executive vice president that was a policy making committee that looked at, you know, all aspects of our, our corporate responsibility, including, you know, we began to look a little bit at environmental issues. You know, we were right next to Central Park [New York, New York]. And, and, you know, got into, you know, looking at what happened in the park and the ecosystems of the park as well as, you know, you know, what happened with women, what happened with minorities in the company, what, we looked at, you know, wages, had the personnel staff look at the wage history and equities and, and people's wages. We reshaped the corporate giving program. Yeah, we, we got people to do volunteer work as, at, at every level of employment but also working on, on strategic issues around helping organizations and their business practices that we would, we would deploy executives to work and, and solve business problems. Speaker 1: Then are you surprised today when you see companies like FedEx settle suits for, you know, money discrepancies or rates or pay discrepancies? Are you shocked? Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm not shocked, hardly shocked. Speaker 1: But I mean it's been so long. Speaker 2: People, people, you know, there are ebbs and flows. And, and unless, you know, again, unless you've got the attention at the top, then somebody says, this is a priority and this is a value for me, and I'm gonna pay attention to it consistently, it is very easy to have things slide. You know, if you're not really making a conscious effort, things can slide. And, and, you know, so the, the challenge, part of the challenge is unless we fill the academic pipeline, then we're not gonna have the people who have the skills and the capacity to go into the positions that they need to go into. There's also (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were--go ahead. There's also. Speaker 2: --a need to, to pay attention to kind of the value systems operating in firms. Black people I think and, and Hispanics and the other cultures, are often more communitarian than corporate cultures. And, and so, unless there's an, a, a way that the corporate culture can allow for, you know, functioning in teams and, and reduce the, the negative aspects of competiveness, then we will continue to lose, for example, women. Women bail out of corporations just at the point that they become eligible to be, to have real power. And, and I was one of those. Speaker 1: Is that because they wanna start families or is it because the structures-- Speaker 2: I, I did a presentation once back in probably 1990, and I had shifted into the academic world at that point and I was talking to about two hundred women, the topic was career changing, there was a panel of us who had all done career changes, and I raised the question of how many of you are thinking of changing your career because your values are out of sync with those of your employment? That was the reason, 95 percent of the women raised their hands. And, and so women create their own businesses often because they wanna control their own environments. Story_ID: 521744 Speaker 1: Hello, this is tape six. My name is Adrienne Jones and I'm the interviewer, Neculai Burghelea is the videographer, and there are no observers. Today is July, what is the date? Speaker 2: Twentieth (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Twentieth. Speaker 2: Twenties [July 20, 2007]. And our interview is with [HistoryMaker] Marcia Cantarella. Hi, how are you? Speaker 1: I'm fine. Story_ID: 521745 Speaker 1: When we finished our discussion with you last time you had described working at Avon [Avon Products Inc.] and you said that you left Avon because the values that the corporation had differed from those that you have. Can you tell us a little bit about what you were doing at Avon and how and why you decided to leave? Speaker 2: Okay. I was, when I started at Avon in 1972 and was in the public affairs area, and I think I mentioned earlier that the chairman, David Mitchell [David W. Mitchell], was very, not only simpatico with the general ideas of, of corporate responsibility but was a very humane person. He loved people and really knew everyone. And, and if you went to visit one of our plant locations with Dave, he would walk down an assembly line and ask people about their grandchildren and, you know, and he just knew everybody. He had been there for a really long time but he was very caring. When Dave retired a man by the name of Hicks Waldron [Hicks B. Waldron] came in as the CEO. And by that time I had moved out of public affairs and into marketing and did some work initially on-- Speaker 1: Was that around 1980? What year was that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was around '79 [1979]. And I had initially done some work around ethnic markets and doing some of the research on, on the importance of black and Hispanic markets for Avon. And then we were doing some innovations in the Avon sales field structure. And so I was involved with some of those innovations. Story_ID: 521746 Speaker 1: And then ended up taking over a small, essentially, in-house agency [at Avon Products Inc.], it was like a little in-house ad agency where my staff did the creative work producing brochures, training manuals, ancillary marketing materials for, that went along with product lines. And we, essentially, our clients were other departments, whatever other department had a creative project that was our responsibility. And so I had about twenty-five people working for me. And, and it had been a department that had been allowed to drift a little bit, morale was low when I, when I came in. And I worked hard to rebuild the morale, to build the quality of the work. We became a hot shop, and doing, you know, just tons of work. And then in maybe '82 [1982], because of some decisions that Hicks Waldron [Hicks B. Waldron] made about acquisitions, we acquired a lot of stuff. And Avon went from being a cash rich company to carrying a significant amount of debt and wasn't able to weather swings in the economy well. And was also in a little bit of an identity crisis in terms of was it a direct marketing company or was it a cosmetics company. Hicks Waldron did not come out of the cosmetics industry and didn't come out of Avon, so he wasn't part of that culture as, as Dave Mitchell [David W. Mitchell] had been. And the result was that at that point, there was a 20 percent across the board layoff. So I had to lay off 20 percent of my staff as did everybody else. At that point there were some people who actually wanted to go freelance. There were, you know, a couple of people that, you know-- Speaker 2: Women? Speaker 1: No, not in, in my staff, it wasn't, my staff was mixed, male and female. So there were, but, you know, there were people who were copywriters, who wanted to go write the great American novel and, and were willing to do some, pick up some freelance work to pay the rent. So we were able to manage the layoffs in a way that wasn't going to be horribly painful. And, and able to actually bring some people back on a freelance basis. We were assured that this was never gonna happen again, that, you know, things were going to be fine. I got morale back up, we were, you know, cranking and rolling and doing good stuff. And, and exactly a year later, it happened again. Speaker 2: Twenty percent layoff? Speaker 1: Twenty percent across the board. And my feeling was if there is a dollar amount that the company is looking for, tell your management team, tell us what you need and let us figure out how to get that dollar amount as opposed to dictating layoffs. And so I was not comfortable with the strategy. And there were a couple of cases where I was told who I was to lay off. And, you know, one person in particular I was prepared to promote or see that she made, was able to move maybe out of my department but into a higher position, you know, in somebody else's marketing team. And, you know, was told no, that, you know, that wasn't an option. So I was feeling fairly powerless in terms of managing my own staff. And, and then my team, one of its projects right after the layoffs, layoffs were in October, was to do the chairman's Christmas card on which we spent an extraordinary amount of money. And that was one of the moments a, a, pivotal moment when I kind of felt like this isn't working, this isn't the company that I had signed on to, you know, in 1972. Story_ID: 521747 Speaker 1: And it's now the early 1980s? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And are you finding that your colleagues and friends in other corporations are having the same experience, and do you think it's because there is a change in social and political and perhaps economic culture in the '80s [1980s] that makes sort of equal opportunity less important? Speaker 2: It wasn't a question of equal opportunity, it was a question of the country is in a recession. This was, you know, the early '80s [1980s], the early Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] years. The, the pickup in the economy didn't start occurring until a little later. But I think there, in an economic crisis, let me back up. In the '60s [1960s], during the height of the Civil Rights Movement, during the time that my father [Whitney Young] was making inroads in terms of equal employment opportunity, we were in a boom economy. When the pie is large, there is less resistance to inviting others to the table. When the pie is small, then people become insecure about well, am I gonna get my piece if I invite other people to the table. And, and that, there's a cyclical phenomenon. So, so the environment with regard to women and minorities was not as open as it had been in the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s]. That said, I think there was also beginning to be what really emerged in the late '80s [1980s], an awareness on the part of women in particular, well, actually both women and minorities, that there were opportunities to be had being entrepreneurial, owning their own piece of the pie, having some control over their destinies. In some cases, you know, being laid off created the impetus. In other cases and, and I, I was certainly an example, I wanted to feel more in control of my own destiny and, and so I began doing consulting work around work family issues. Story_ID: 521748 Speaker 1: And who did you, can you give an example of the type of consulting work you were doing on work family issues? Speaker 2: I did workshops in, at several companies ranging from law firms, Brown and Wood, which has since merged with some other big, gigantic law firm. Liz Claiborne [Liz Claiborne Inc.]. I'm trying to think of some of the others. Speaker 1: And as a suggestion towards work and family what type, what type of information were you providing in these presentations? Speaker 2: Strategies for, for workers, for women. Again, I'm gonna back up a moment. When, at the end of the time that I was in public affairs at Avon [Avon Products Inc.], one of the things that we did was bring people in to do parenting workshops, for example. Because we recognized that women and men were dealing with the challenge of balancing work and family life. And, and what was fascinating was that the, the attendees at these things, you know, if you have a workshop on raising a twelve year old, vice presidents, you know, people from the mail room, anybody that's raising a twelve year old showed up. And, and so, you know, there was clearly a hunger for information about how to manage this new environment that we were in, which was no longer the Dick, Jane, Sally, you know, mom's at home, dad goes to work, dinners on the table at five [o'clock], you know. Story_ID: 521749 Speaker 1: Well that leads to my next question. You said that as women are leaving corporations, they're finding that there are these entrepreneurial opportunities. Can you give us just an idea of sort of the arc of, of the work on American women, you know, I'll presume that they're in the home initially. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then they go to work for corporations, how does that work? Speaker 2: It was interesting, my, some of my college classmates [from Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] and I were just talking about this, this past weekend because we, we were right at that cusp, the class of '68 [1968]. And, and the options typically on the table for us, were graduate school or marriage. And most of my classmates went the graduate school route. There are now some who are in corporations and have, have moved up the ladder. But the places where women began to make inroads often were what characterized as the soft areas, human resources, marketing, places where the perception was they were touchy, feely, they were kind of about feelings and relationships. Writing, you know, so communications areas, public affairs. And-- Speaker 1: And what are the hard, what are considered hard topics? Speaker 2: Sales, finance, operations. The differentiation is, is what's called staff and line. Line refers to the bottom line, contributing to the bottom line. Staff support those who contribute to the bottom line. So staff is in fact, a, a drain to the bottom line because of its support. Whereas, the people who are in line positions are the ones who are, you know, doing the manufacturing, selling the product, managing the financial health of the institution. And it was really in the '80s [1980s] that women began to break into more line positions. But an irony was also that they were in the pipeline in the marketing positions at about the moment that people suddenly woke up to realize that if you don't have customers, you don't need a finance department (laughter) and that marketing is really important. And all of a sudden, women began to have more power because they were in those positions. Also human resources areas became more important, again, recognizing that people as a human resource are also critical. And so the management of that resources, that human resources has to do with not only the management of people making sure that there are people on leadership tracks, but also benefits, which are a huge cost. So there are many aspects of, of human resources that began to be recognized as, as important. So, so women began to have more and more leverage. What began to happen interestingly is that women, like me, and I was at director level, I was just below vice president, also kind of looked at what was going on, you know, in the higher reaches of, and saying, you know, that doesn't look like they're having any fun. And, and so either opting to stay where they were or opting out, forming their own businesses or going to smaller firms. Story_ID: 521750 Speaker 1: So working at your own consulting business, how did you enjoy that? Was that working for you? And what did you decide to do after doing some consulting? Speaker 2: It was, well, I wasn't making as much money as I wanted to make for, there was no question, and fortunately I was married to someone [Francesco Cantarella] who was earning enough to, to sustain us. But, but I liked feeling that I was carrying my own weight. And, and, and I wasn't doing that to the degree I had been. And so I wanted to get back to that in some way, shape, or form. But I hadn't figured that out. And one of my consulting assignments was at Avon [Avon Products Inc.], was at, at NYU [New York University, New York, New York]. And because I had kind of stumbled across this emergence of women and entrepreneurship and had begun to look into that and, and engage in advocacy on that, I was asked to do a project at the Center for Entrepreneurial Studies [Berkley Center for Entrepreneurship and Innovation] at the business school [Leonard N. Stern School of Business] at NYU. Now, going back, bearing in mind that everybody in my family had been an academic, this was a really comfortable environment, it really felt like I was, you know, at home. And, and I decided at that moment that what I wanted to do was to work in academia (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In academia. Speaker 2: And so I stayed at NYU, I took an administrative position and I earned my doctorate there. Story_ID: 521751 Speaker 1: Are there other, in New York [New York] perhaps, women who are working on, women in entrepreneurship who are perhaps writing about it or speaking about it, who you're working with? Speaker 2: Well, I'm on the advisory board for an organization called the Women's Leadership Exchange. Speaker 1: Actually, I mean at the time that you're-- Speaker 2: Back then? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yes. Then, well, there, there is an organization called (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And who else is in the field? Speaker 2: Well, the woman who, who started the Women's Leadership Exchange was at that time, Leslie Grossman, who was at that time the head of the New York chapter of the New York Association of Women Business Owners [sic. National Association of Women Business Owners]. She was then doing public relations, had her own public relations firm but she was head of NAWBO New York. The Women's Bureau of the [U.S.] Department of Labor, Mary Murphree who's still, Leslie and, and Mary are still among my, my best friends. Mary was doing some work on this, there was work happening in Washington [D.C.] in the [U.S.] Department of Commerce where they were looking into women in entrepreneurship and trying to look at the impact on the economy of women, that women owned businesses. Things were really beginning to take off and there was, in fact, a fair amount of attention that was beginning to be focused. Story_ID: 521752 Speaker 1: So what are you focusing your Ph.D. on? How long are you at NYU [New York University, New York, New York]? What's that process like? Speaker 2: My Ph.D. is in American studies. The focus is on American business drawing from several aspects of my life, certainly my corporate experience but having been my father's [Whitney Young] daughter and the experience I had knowing corporate leaders and my husband's [Francesco Cantarella] background and experience. I had always been fascinated as a child with people's stories, with biography. And, and so I was interested in two things, one had to do with leadership, having seen the difference that leadership made at Avon [Avon Products Inc.] when we switched CEOs, but talking to colleagues in other companies and, and hearing similar stories, so I was interested in leadership, founders, you know, what happened when people found companies and how do they become different when the founders are gone. As well as the relationship of business to American culture, how we experience the business world. One of my advisors said that the, the two most dominant institutions in American society are business and religion which I think is true. And while at NYU, I, after I was ABD, all but dissertation, I have taught courses at the Gallatin School [Gallatin School of Individualized Study, New York, New York] on consuming and working in America, for example, because we are all consumers and we all work. And, and so what do we, how do we react in those circumstances. I looked at a lot of film, a lot of literature because that's where I think you kind of see, the, the human voice in, in that context. Frank Norris' book 'The Octopus' ['The Octopus: A Story of California'] written at, at the turn of the, the last century, the, in, in that book, the protagonist, the narrator, is a poet and, and feels that it is his mission to, to write the story of, in this case it was the railroads and, and the wheat industry, but to write this, you know, to write this story of those industries as they emerged from the standpoint of the voice of the people. And, and so I found fictional narrative very important to kind of understanding those stories. So, so that was, my, my dissertation ended up being called 'Participatory Capitalism' ['Participatory Capitalism: Individual Self Actualization in the Evolution of American Business,' Marcia Young Cantarella]. And what I was interested in was individualism as something that is central to the American character and always has been. And tracing the ways in which the desire to maintain individual identity and the belief in individuality as part of the American culture, influenced different trends in American business as, as business evolved. And that at the moment that I was writing, which was the early '90s [1990s], the trends that were being influenced had to do with employee empowerment, employees, again, you know, in a wealthy environment, we were in a boom economy at that moment, employees insisting on being valued, and then appreciation if you value the employee then you're probably going to do better. Consumer empowerment that, you know, if you don't treat your customers well, then you don't keep them. The, at that point there was a lot of entrepreneurial, a huge amount of entrepreneurial activity occurring everywhere. And, and what were termed the gazelles, small companies were doing gangbusters, you know, the-- Speaker 1: The early 1990s? Speaker 2: Early 1990s. You know, the, the upstarts, the Googles, the, you know. Everything that was happening in Silicon Valley [California]. Story_ID: 521753 Speaker 1: Is there anyone or can you cite anyone important who's influencing you at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] while you're there? Speaker 2: My two primary advisors. One was a wonderful guy by the name of Paul Baker [Paul R. Baker] who was an intellectual historian and head of the American studies department at NYU then when it had one, it's no longer there. And Dick Sylla [Richard Sylla] who's an, who is an economic historian in the business school [Leonard N. Stern School of Business, New York, New York]. The other, there were a variety of other people because I took courses in literature and history and American culture, and in all of my coursework I focused in on, on what was happening in terms of the economic or business issues and, and they were all wonderful in kind of letting me do that. Story_ID: 521754 Speaker 1: Do you feel that your work is a continuation of the work of your father [Whitney Young]? Do you feel that you're opening doors for people and trying to hold them open so that they can move comfortably into a, a place of self-empowerment? Speaker 2: Yes, in, in a different way. What happened for me at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] was when I started I thought I was going to, you know, go down the tenure track path. But I was working in administration and I was working on student related stuff. So in the College of Arts and Science, I ran what was called the Academic Achievement Program. And it was a, when I started in '92 [1992], I think, it was a small program with about fifty students, black and Hispanic. It wasn't sure if it was a remedial program or a program about excellence, so there was this little identity crisis about this program. And when I took it over I decided it was going to be about excellence. And even though any student who had been, any black or Hispanic student who had been accepted to the College of Arts and Science could be part of the program, the mission of the program as I characterized it was that we were about busting the myth that they cannot succeed in a predominantly white institution. And that if they had been accepted they were obviously smart and there was no reason that they couldn't do really well and we were just gonna deal with that issue. And by the time I left NYU in '99 [1999], among the things that I had accomplished, and I'll mention some of the others, but because my portfolio increased while, while I was there, but the Academic Achievement Program had grown to over two hundred students. And we had five out of nine graduation valedictorians, essentially, for the university coming out of that program. Story_ID: 521755 Speaker 1: What kind of things did you do to empower- to support students in the Academic Achievement Program [at New York University, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: One of the things that was really important to me was not so much what I did but what they did for themselves. And, you know, I believe that, you know, students can learn by doing. And that actually came as a little bit of a shock to them that I was saying, now, well, you, if you wanna do that then you go do that. But we had peer tutoring. We had groups of students who were mentored by upper classmen who had a similar academic interest, so science students were mentored by a science student. We had a program committee that was student driven, in fact, they'd meet on Wednesday afternoons at five [o'clock] in my office and so I would be told to leave so (laughter) that they could hold their meetings. We had various events but they were events that the students pretty much created and ran. So there were lots of leadership opportunities for the students. But there was, you know, this focus on absolutely being the best you could be. Speaker 1: So is there for you a correlation between women being empowered through entrepreneurship and the manner in which you were supporting students in the program? You said they were shocked at the idea that they would do things on their own but it sounds like with women and the students of color the issue really is around powerfulness-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --and the ability to exercise yourself on the world. Speaker 2: And some of that I think also derives from my personal belief system. I was raised Unitarian Universalist. And my father [Whitney Young] was one of the few, early (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you explain just a little bit-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --for the listener about what that is? Speaker 2: Unitarianism began in the early 1800s and is associated with people like Ralph Waldo Emerson and Thoreau [Henry David Thoreau] and so early giants in American history. But throughout, particularly in American intellectual history, it's had a larger influence than its numbers would suggest. And including people like Louisa May Alcott who was also Unitarian and, and a, a protege or, or was mentored by, by Emerson. And Unitarians believe, Unitarian, one god, one higher power. My religious education and the way that Unitarian religious education functions, is that you're introduced to every religion. You learn about Native American faith and tradition, Judaism, Confucianism, Islam, Catholicism, visit churches, visit mosques, whatever, and learn to appreciate and value, you know, all faith traditions as having, as contributing to our society. And, you know, not only is there one god, there is one world. And that we have the power and ability in ourselves that, that is one of the gifts of our higher power to change our condition and our circumstance. And so that's part of what I believe. I've seen people change themselves, their lives, their circumstances, their, you know, the universe. And so I, I believe that, you know, the students could take on the challenge of destroying this myth that they couldn't succeed. And I think, you know, women as entrepreneurs taking hold of their own destinies in their own hands, it's all part of a, valuing our capacity. Story_ID: 521756 Speaker 1: After the Academic Achievement Program and your--achieve your Ph.D. at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], do you decide to stay at NYU and what do you do in addition to teaching there, and what all, what do you do next? Speaker 2: Well, while I was, I mean, the, when I started at NYU I was, I took on the Academic Achievement Program. And then my portfolio expanded and I was responsible for advisement for the sophomore class and the, while the junior class theoretically was advised in its department, I engaged with the junior class. I, I proposed to the dean that there be advisory boards, that there be a dean's advisory board so that he could have access to the voices of student leaders. And then that there be an advisory board for each class so that there was-- Speaker 1: And who was the dean at that time? Speaker 2: There were three while I was there but Matthew Santirocco is the one who was there for the longest period that I was there and, and who's still there and a good friend. And, and Matthew gave me a lot of latitude. And so we had a freshmen advisory board, sophomore, junior, and senior advisory board. I was responsible for the sophomore and junior advisory boards. So the sophomore class, the big issue for sophomores is around what am I gonna major in. And my belief is that it doesn't matter as long as you do really well, that your GPA [grade point average] is really what's gonna carry you forward and open the doors for you. If there are specific career goals, there may be specific courses that you may need to take along the way but the idea is basically to, to follow your own path and interests and what's gonna make you strong. And so I counseled sophomores but I had the sophomore class do a majors fair, and so that was their activity which they did. Again, you know, I guide and push and they do. The junior class we, NYU used to have a graduate school fair coupled with the annual fall career fair, and the graduate schools would sit there while, you know, everybody went running off to Goldman Sachs' [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.] table or whatever. And, and so I decided that it made more sense to have the graduate school fair be affiliated with the College of Arts and Science and we moved it to the school of arts and science, the College of Arts and Science, and, and the juniors ran that. So that was a project with the junior advisory board. The students in the College of Arts and Science seem to have a belief that careers services was for the Stern School [Leonard N. Stern School of Business, New York, New York] students and not for them. So I brought in an outpost, created a little outpost of career services in the College of Arts and Science so that our students would have access and be able to do that. So those were some of the things that I did while I was there. And, you know, a lot of personal advisement of students, I'm still close to a number of my NYU students (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are you lecturing at all? Speaker 2: I was also teaching at Gallatin [Gallatin School of Individualized Study, New York, New York] and, and advising some Gallatin students, both undergraduate and graduate. So I taught consuming and working at Gallatin. I taught a graduate seminar on, on work to an incredibly diverse, it was a very small seminar and there were about six or seven students but one was from Kenya, two were from Colombia, the country, maybe what, one American, somebody from Australia, I mean, it was just this amazingly diverse group with really different perspectives on, on work. And, and so we had a, a really marvelous time. It was a, it was a fun seminar. Story_ID: 521757 Speaker 1: And do you, how long do you stay at NYU [New York University, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: I was there until '99 [1999], I finished my-- Speaker 1: And where (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Ph.D.-- Speaker 1: --did you go? Speaker 2: --in '96 [1996] and stayed until '99 [1999]. And at that point I was making the decision about, you know, do I now do the tenure track or do I stay in administration and, or can I continue to do both. I was reasonably sure that given the structure in the College of Arts and Science, I'm not sure there was a place for me to move to as I was a director. And my mentor, a woman by the name of Pat McPherson [Mary Patterson McPherson] who had been president of Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania], she was a grad student at Bryn Mawr when I was a freshman, and so Pat and I have now known each other for forty years. She was the president of Bryn Mawr when I delivered my stepdaughter [Maratea Cantarella] into her hands (laughter) as, as a freshman. But Pat and I had stayed in touch over the years and, and when I was trying to decide what I wanted to do next, she and I had a chat at my husband's [Francesco Cantarella] instigation, you know, he just kept saying, you really should call Pat, you know (laughter). And, and she said, well, one person who's managed to keep a foot in both camp is Nancy Weiss Malkiel. Well, Nancy is one of my father's [Whitney Young] biographers. I hadn't talked to Nancy in a long time and she was then dean of the college at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: What's the title of the biography ['Whitney M. Young, Jr., and the Struggle for Civil Rights,' Nancy Joan Weiss] that she writes about your father? Speaker 2: I just forgot (laughter). It's there on my shelf. We'll come back to that. Speaker 1: Come back to that. Speaker 2: Okay. But Nancy was dean of the college at Princeton. And Nancy and I had lunch and caught up with each other, 'cause it had been a good fifteen years I think since we had spoken to each other. And, and she offered to be helpful and, you know, seeing what opportunities might exist and, and among, you know, her colleagues in places and other schools. And, and then she called one day and she said I've got an opening at Princeton (laughter). And, you know, I think we'd like you to come talk to us. And so I ended up taking a deanship at Princeton. Speaker 1: And so were you the advisor for the junior class there? What were you there at Princeton (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I was the, the dean for the junior class. And I was also responsible for postgraduate fellowship advising which is guiding students on Rhodes [Rhodes Scholarship], Marshall [Marshall Scholarship], Fulbright [Fulbright Fellowship] and other array of, of fellowship opportunities. Speaker 1: And how long did you stay there and do that? Speaker 2: I was there for about three years. My late husband became ill while I was there and I was commuting from New York [New York] and at some point that just stopped working. And so I, I tendered my resignation. Story_ID: 521758 Speaker 1: What did you decide to do after you, you returned to New York [New York]? Speaker 2: Well, it, a fortunate set of, of circumstances, and it's a little strange, I guess. There was a school, the Audrey Cohen College [Metropolitan College of New York, New York, New York] had been founded in 1964 with the mission of serving primarily adult learners, primarily women, and helping them to get a college education while working, and, and helping to bridge the idea between college education and their lives so as to make college less intimidating. Audrey Cohen who founded it, created a phenomenally unique curriculum in order to do this. And my husband's [Francesco Cantarella] best friend served on that board and another of our friends served on that board. And, and the mission of the college really kind of resonated with things that my [paternal] grandparents [Laura Ray Young and Whitney Young, Sr.] had done, and, you know, certainly the family belief system (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So can you just remind us a little bit about your grandparents' academic achievements? Speaker 2: Well, my, my grand- my father's parents were head of a school, Lincoln Institute in Lincoln Ridge, Kentucky, which was a vocational school for black students in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s]. And, and it's now the Whitney Young Job Corps Center [Whitney M. Young Jr. Job Corps Center, Simpsonville, Kentucky]. Speaker 1: And so did Audrey Cohen approach, sort of education from a vocational purpose driven stance? Speaker 2: Yes. And, and, in fact, purpose driven was a term that she used. That was part of the vocabulary of the school. When I, Audrey died in, in 1996 and, and there was a transition of, into, they were on their second president after Audrey, the third president after Audrey, when I began to explore what my options were so that I could be back in the city. And since we did know people there that was obviously one of the places where I wanted to, to explore. And an opening appeared, unfortunately due to a death in, at the college but an opening appeared for a vice president at the college. Story_ID: 521759 Speaker 1: It could not have been more different than Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]. You know, at Princeton I had been dealing with the best and the brightest students because grooming students for postgraduate fellowships, it was not only Princeton students, it was the best of Princeton students. And, and I probably left there at, at exactly the right moment because my, we're, for a while Princeton hadn't had a lot of Rhodes [Rhodes Scholarship] and Marshall [Marshall Scholarship] scholars. My last year there I had four Marshalls and three Rhodes so, so that was the time to go (laughter). I wanted to get out. But, you know, so I went from, from a, a resource rich environment with extraordinary students, and again, I'm, I'm close to, you know, a number of my former Princeton students, but to an environment where resources were very slim, and, and the students were deeply needy. So it was very different (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and at this--at this point have you decided to commit to administration and so you've sort of let go of the tenure track? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes, yes. But I did teach at Princeton. I taught in the American studies department. And, and the reason that Pat [Mary Patterson McPherson] had suggested I talk to Nancy [Nancy Weiss Malkiel] is because Nancy as dean of the college continued to teach a course periodically in, in the history department. And so I was able to teach, you know, a course a year at, at Princeton and kind of at least keep a foot in that arena and the brain cells going a little bit. I taught one course when, at, Audrey Cohen [Audrey Cohen College] became Metropolitan College of New York [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: And is that a city, a part of the city college system [City University of New York, New York, New York]? Speaker 1: No, no, it is a private institution. And it struggles to raise money, it's, it's having a rough time. It's very much tuition driven. And so there I was responsible for marketing, including internet marketing, so going back to what I had done at Avon [Avon Products Inc.] and the marketing experience there. Student affairs reported to me for a period, admissions reported to me, and institutional research, and sort of general communications. Speaker 2: How long did you stay there? Speaker 1: I was there three years. And I built an extraordinary team of people, very, a very good team of people. My frustrations there were that it was, because it was so heavily tuition dependent and so, oh, career services also reported to me there, it was not always possible to do the things that I think needed to be done on behalf of the students. And, and so there was just a constant sense of frustration that we could have families to serve them better than we were serving them. Story_ID: 521760 Speaker 1: Well, I was feeling that I wanted to make a change. And again my, my mentor Pat McPherson [Mary Patterson McPherson] steps in and mentions to Jennifer Raab [Jennifer J. Raab] at Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York] that maybe I might be someone that she'd wanna talk to and so I'm now at Hunter. Speaker 2: And Jennifer Raab is the president of Hunter? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Do you have any anecdotes about working with her? Speaker 1: She is a very powerful and very high energy woman. And, you know, most of us have trouble keeping up with her, keeping up with her energy. And, and she never forgets names of people and where she's met them and, and so she's dizzying, you know, to, to, to keep up with. So, you know, it's a, it, people, you have to move fast. Speaker 2: And what's your position there and what, what have you brought to Hunter? Speaker 1: My position there is, it's an acting position, I'm acting associate dean for student opportunities. And I've done a few things, tried to bring together some, some pieces that were disparate. Hunter has a number of, for a long time has had a number of enrichment programs, the federally funded McNair Program [McNair Scholars Program] which helps to guide students on to, minority and, and, and economically disadvantaged students on to Ph.D. tracks. It has a Mellon Mays Program [Mellon Mays Undergraduate Fellowship Program] which also serves some, one of the same function but it's privately funded. The MARC [Maximizing Access to Research Careers], MBRS [Minority Biomedical Research Support] programs which are NSF [National Science Foundation] programs trying to get students of color into the sciences and, and on doctoral tracks. So there are, there are several of these programs, which never connected with each other. So having the same mission, the directors didn't talk to each other, the students didn't know each other existed, and so I've pulled them together and tried to create, we're trying to build a community of them. We'd like to have an event this fall that brings, welcomes all of those students back together so that they can see how many of them there are. And so that's been one of the things I've done. Working towards a culture of excellence, working on communications for example, both the prelaw advisor and the pre-health advisor report to me. And neither of them had a presence on the website that was particularly useful to students and so the prelaw site is now up, the premed site will be up in the next couple of weeks. And I've encouraged the, the other programs that report to me to, to build their own websites which the McNair Program which reports to me now has its own presence. So trying to increase student awareness of, of the opportunities at Hunter. Trying to increase faculty awareness of the things that they can do and offer and extend to students to help them move ahead in their lives. Story_ID: 521761 Speaker 1: You said that your work was different from your father's [Whitney Young] but that he was one of your most important influences. So I'm interested in how your work is different and what opinion you think, important opinions that he might have about what you've done in terms of women entrepreneurship and for students being closely connected? Speaker 2: My work is different in that, for the moment I'm in the academic world. I think ultimately we were about the same things. And, you know, there seem to be some themes that run through the family. My [paternal] grandparents' [Laura Ray Young and Whitney Young, Sr.] work, my father's work, my sister [Lauren Young Casteel] in Denver [Colorado], who's vice president of The Denver Foundation and particularly deals with community based programs and, and empowerment in that way. My son, Mark [Mark Boles], who's on the National Urban League board [Council of Board Members] and, and in a recent speech quoted lots from my father and is himself an entrepreneur. My stepdaughter, Mara [Maratea Cantarella], who's a fundraising consultant, I mean, there, you know, we're all about the same stuff, the values seem to permeate. Speaker 1: And those values are community empowerment? Speaker 2: Personal empowerment, appreciation of the importance of being part of the economic system, and the importance of education to getting you to be part of the economic system. My stepdaughter for a number of years worked on homelessness and she also worked for the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights [Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights; Human Rights First]. So, you know, kind of helping people have, live better lives. Story_ID: 521762 Speaker 1: I took my husband's [Francesco Cantarella] seat on the board of the Trickle Up program. Speaker 2: Can you tell us about the Trickle Up program? I was going to ask next about some of the external activities that you participate in-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: --to provide support, and specifically the Trickle Up program. Speaker 1: Okay. Trickle Up was founded by Mildred [Mildred Robbins Leet] and Glen Leet [Glen F. Leet] in 1979. Millie was in fact one of the people who was on the board of, of Metropolitan College formerly Audrey Cohen College [Metropolitan College of New York, New York, New York]. And she is an amazing, amazing woman. And our, our paths crossed for, forever. It was her, her mentor, she at one point headed the National Council of Women [National Council of Women of the United States]. Millie is now about eighty-five. Her mentor, Sophie Jacobs [Sophia Yarnall Jacobs], headed the National Council of Women and Millie took that over when Sophie retired. Sophie Jacob wrote my recommendation for Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania]. One of Millie's best friends, Chet Burger [Chester Burger] served on my father's board of trustees [Council of Board Members of the National Urban League]. Millie's daughter, Jane [Jane Marla Robbins] and I were at Bryn Mawr together. Millie and I didn't meet until the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: And that was when my husband became involved with Trickle Up. And to this day Millie is one of my dearest friends. But in the, in '79 [1979], Glen and Millie were traveling, Glen, her, was her late husband, were traveling in the Dominican Republic and beginning to appreciate that trickle down wasn't working. And using their own money, they began to give small grants to the poorest of the poor. The grant size is initial fifty dollars and then once the entrepreneur has demonstrated that they've got a business plan and that the business is in fact going, then they get an additional fifty dollars, so it's a hundred dollars altogether. Speaker 2: And these are Dominican, people living in the Dominican Republic? Speaker 1: That was where they started-- Speaker 2: Initially. Speaker 1: --initially. Trickle Up has been at, at various points in time, all together, it has been in a 129 countries. It's now scaled back significantly, we will be in maybe thirteen countries and focusing on the poorest of the poor. So we're doing some amazing work in Mali, in India and some other countries where there are profoundly poor people. Story_ID: 521763 Speaker 1: So just for clarification, if you could describe what trickle down economics are-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --when contrasted particularly with the Trickle Up program? Speaker 2: Okay. The Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration tried to theorize that if, if you generate more wealth at the top it will trickle down to those at the bottom. It doesn't seem to work that way (laughter). So, so Glen [Glen F. Leet] and Millie [Mildred Robbins Leet] decided that they wanted to start at the bottom and, and raise the level and--from there. And, and that does seem to be working. And there has been a huge surge in, in the category of what's called microfinance which really has to do with loans and the differentiator for Trickle Up is that Trickle Up is about grants to the poor, not loans. And so the people that Trickle Up tries to reach are people who are below the bankable level, below the loan level, even in, by microfinance terms which can be very low loans. And, and the objective is to hopefully move people to a level where they can become bankable and participate at that level if that seems appropriate for, for them. Story_ID: 521764 Speaker 1: Now in 2007, what do you feel is the future for women in en- entrepreneurship? Speaker 2: I do serve on the advisory board for the Women's Leadership Exchange. And the Women's Leadership Exchange is, was created by Leslie Grossman who used to head NAWBO [National Association of Women Business Owners] in the late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s]. And it is meant to support women entrepreneurs primarily although we are now looking at, at doing, opening up a little bit to, to women who are aspiring at higher levels of, of manager- management in, in corporations as well. But the trend I think is going to be that we will see women's firms growing to, you know, I'm not gonna say that they are necessarily gonna grow to be the level of Fortune 500 firms, they could, but one of the points I made in my dissertation is that women owned firms tend to stay small scale because women like to be more hands on, like to stay closer to the employee and the customer. And, and scale gets in the way of that. Once you scale up substantially, then you begin to lose control. So, so I think women will continue to be a force in the economy, a significant force in entrepreneurial activity but that will be by numbers and not necessarily dominance of industries. Speaker 1: And what do you think about that? I mean, do you think that this idea that women want to be more hands on in their businesses is a, a benefit or is it a detriment? Or neither (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I think, I, I tend to like smaller institutions, I think there is, there is more agility. I think there, there is the greater ability to hear the customer, to engage the employee, for the employee to feel more part of what's going on. Thinking of, of Leslie when she had her, her communications firm and she hired my son [Mark Boles], who had just graduated from college, for a period. And he was maybe the only guy in the, in the company. But he did everything and he was a college grad, now just out of college, and he answered the phones and handled the fax machine and if he needed to put on a suit and go to a presentation because they were talking to a car company, that's what he did. And learned an enormous, enormous amount because he was able to move around and be flexible. So I think, you know, the potential for people's personal growth and development and to really kind of see what they are doing is more likely in, in smaller scale organizations. Story_ID: 521765 Speaker 1: Now, on the educational front, do you think that students of color, particularly, who carry the stigma perhaps of not being as capable, do you think that as time passes that that's going to become an obsolete myth? Speaker 2: I think it's an ongoing battle. I think many of these, the, these battles are ongoing battles. I was talking recently to students that I had known at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] back when they were freshmen, you know, fifteen years ago, and a couple of them are, are practicing attorneys. And, you know, to their shock and horror, they're finding that, they sit in meetings with guys, you know, who aren't taking them seriously. And who, you know, take their ideas and when some other guy comes up with the same idea, the guy gets the credit and, you know, and my student who had the idea in the first place, you know, isn't given the credit. And this is a gender issue 'cause they're, they're seeing that it's not just ethnicity, that it's white women who are also having the same experience. And, you know, we like to think that oh, well, that was, that was true back when I was starting in the corporation and, and we were this new phenomenon and they just hadn't gotten use to us yet. Well, you know, fifteen years later, these young women are still bumping up against it. So it's an ongoing process. I mean, these attitudes are deeply, deeply, deeply ingrained. And I think it will get better, I think, you know, and, and there has certainly been progress but we can't give up, we can't say okay, that's done, now we'll move on. You know, there has to be a constant sensitivity to, to just educating people. And, and as long as, I mean, the, the downside of, of women opting out of the senior most positions in the Fortune 500 for example, is that the senior most positions remain dominated by white males. And, and so the behaviors and practices, you know, may then continue. There may be a rising generation of young men who were raised by people like me, who are also more centered on work family balance. I mean, I certainly see in my own kids and my son [Mark Boles] and my son-in-law [Barry Stelbound (ph.)] for example, my son-in-law could be bringing down huge bucks [dollars] at a law firm. He is legal counsel at J. Walter Thompson advertising [J. Walter Thompson Worldwide, New York, New York], they love him, he gets home at 6:30. He's there to give the kids a bath, put 'em to bed, and that's a choice. And I know that those are the choices that many, many, many other young men are making so that they can lead more balanced lives. There was a news report just this morning, I think it was CBS Radio that was saying that parents today are spending more time with their children than their parents did. So there are signs that that change is happening and I think the change is the result of women entering the workplace. Our management style is a different style, we lead differently and that's having an impact. But we need mass, we need numbers, we're not at a tipping point yet, we're getting there. Story_ID: 521766 Speaker 1: I think the other thing that's making a difference is, is, is globalization. And I don't just mean, you know, sort of the international trade, I mean globalization from the standpoint that we are seeing far more mixed families. I mean, my family is a great case in point. But, you know, if you walk around New York [New York] and you see couples that are white and Asian, white, Hispanic, black and white, whatever, and multiracial adoptions. And, and so families are getting to be much more interesting looking. And when that happens then people start behaving differently about certain discriminatory practices. I remember back, you know, in, in my earlier Avon [Avon Products Inc.] days and Dave Mitchell [David W. Mitchell] who was then the CEO, was raising the, the question of corporate childcare which we didn't end up doing because of New York City regulations and space and stuff, but, but we looked into it, we did a serious study. The impetus was that his daughter was discovering in her work life that she needed childcare, that's what opened his eyes. I remember moments where my son, Mark [Mark Boles], would go visit Francesco [Francesco Cantarella] at his Bloomingdale's office and get followed around by security. Well, yeah, that got paid attention too. So, so when this stuff hits home and, you know, then things begin to change. And, and there was a report in The Economist recently talking about the fact that gay families are becoming more Middle America. They are much more in the suburbs for the same reasons that everybody else, you know, they want decent schools for their kids, and they want fresh air and, and nobody's blinking, you know, okay. So there is change happening but there is a need to, to remain constantly vigilant. Story_ID: 521767 Speaker 1: And as a final question, do you feel that your work is a part of the legacy of your grandfather [Whitney Young, Sr.] and your father's [Whitney Young] work, and what do you want, what would, would you like your legacy to be? Speaker 2: There is no question that, you know, my work flows from the influences of the people that I had around me growing up, absolutely, without any question. And, and as I said, we see it in the next generation. And hopefully we'll see it in the next generation. You know, Mara [Maratea Cantarella] takes Sophie [ph.] to the voting booth and, and Sophie has a little T-shirt that says, you know, vote. So, (laughter) so we hope that, you know, this will continue. So, yeah, that's, that's important, I, you know, keeping, keeping that legacy alive. And so I do see myself as an extension of what's come before and hope that I'm passing it on and Francesco [Francesco Cantarella] passed it on. In the future, it was interesting, last weekend I had a most extraordinary weekend. One of my Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] classmates in the class of '68 [1968], is the new president of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And so about seventy of us got together in Boston [Massachusetts] for a little ad hoc reunion before Drew gets totally sucked into the life of Harvard. And-- Speaker 1: His full name is? Speaker 2: Her. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Her full name is? Speaker 2: Drew Gilpin Faust. Speaker 1: Drew Gilpin Faust. Speaker 2: Right. So she's the first woman to be president of Harvard and the first non-Harvard graduate to be the president of Harvard. And this is a really big deal, this is a huge deal. Now, half of the Ivy [Ivy League] presidents are women. And, but this is the big one, this is the big one. So, so about seventy of us got together from all over the country, actually all over the world, people came from France and Alaska and Arizona and stuff to, to hang out together. And, and the topic of conversation was what are we doing next because we're at an age where that's a really, you know, reasonable question to ask. Looking around the room, we were all pretty impressed at how well we've aged. We're all sixty, sixty-one. And, and we're looking pretty good. And so we recognize that, you know, we're not hanging it up, it's what do we do next. And so I'm certainly, you know, among those asking that question. And I am feeling that I may consider leaving academia, whether to go into philanthropy or some aspect of the not for profit world, you know, but to continue in terms of the same values and, and things that I believe in. But, but I wanna try to synthesize the things that I've done over my career and in a way that I feel empowered to continue to make change. Story_ID: 521768 Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my husband, Francesco Cantarella, on our wedding day which was in my mother's backyard in New Rochelle, New York on May 24, 1980. We were just getting ready to leave for our honeymoon in Upstate New York. Speaker 2: I cannot do that anymore. This is my husband, Francesco with the Nassau County [New York] executive, Tom Gulotta [Thomas Gulotta]. My husband was senior vice president for public affairs at Abraham and Straus department stores [New York, New York]. And they discovered that they had a severe overage, like 200,000 of Abraham and Straus the mouse teddy bears at Christmas time and asked Francesco to come up with a solution. His solution was to ask every major political figure in the area around any of the A and S stores what their favorite charities were and that they would deliver teddy bears, Abraham and Straus the mouses, to those charities to be given to children in hospitals or orphanages or senior citizens and, and there would be a photo op for that politician. So this was a win, win solution for the store's publicity, for the politicians, for the community organizations that received the teddy bears at the holiday, it was a brilliant idea (laughter). Speaker 1: This is taken at the March on Washington and if you look to the right and below Reverend King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] you will see my father, Whitney Young. And if you look to the right of my father at the very edge of the photograph, you will see Mildred Robbins Leet, who became the founder of the Trickle Up program. Speaker 2: Can I stick my finger on that? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 2: Whitney Young and Mildred Leet. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Just in and out. Only half of the person? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. I got it. Speaker 2: This was taken at my mother's home in New Rochelle and so that would have been in the mid-'80s [1980s]. It's Francesco, my husband, and my mother. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. (Unclear) do. Speaker 2: This is me, I believe, at age four wearing my very favorite yellow dress (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And where was it taken, do you know? Speaker 2: I, my guess, is it would have been Omaha, Nebraska. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my mother, Margaret Young [Margaret Buckner Young]. I'd say it was probably taken ten years ago, I'm not sure of where it was taken. Speaker 1: Is your mom still alive? Speaker 2: This was taken at my college graduation from Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] in June of 1968, May of 1968. My father was the commencement speaker and I am hooding him for commencement. Speaker 1: This was taken at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York], May of 1960--I'm sorry, May of 1997 when I completed, when I graduated from NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and received my doctorate. And my mother was with me and Francesco. Speaker 2: This was a picture taken of my father, Whitney Young, in his office at the National Urban League, I would say probably around 1969 or '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And where was the office? Speaker 2: New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): New York City. Speaker 2: This is Ellie Levine Boles [ph.], the four year old daughter of my son, Mark [Mark Boles], and his wife, Kate Levine [ph.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Thank you. Speaker 2: This was taken Thanksgiving of 1998 and it includes my husband's late mother, Helene [Helene Paquin Cantarella], myself, my daughter-in-law, Kate Levine, Francesco, on the couch there is my son, Mark, my stepdaughter, Mara [Maratea Cantarella], her husband, Barry, in front of Barry is my stepson, Mick [Mick Cantarella], and his wife Kat [ph.]. Speaker 1: The lowest lady? Speaker 2: My stepson's wife. Speaker 1: Okay. He looks just like her. It's wonderful that people become to look alike or just do anyway. Speaker 2: This is Chase Levine Boles [ph.] being held by her mommy, Kate. And Chase will be a year old next week. Speaker 1: This is Sophie Stelbound [ph.], she's the daughter of my stepdaughter, Mara Cantarella. And Sophie will be six next week. It's taken, I believe in, on a weekend in Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 2: This is Sam Stelbound [ph.] who is four and he is the son of my stepdaughter, Mara Cantarella, and her husband, Barry Stelbound [ph.]. Speaker 1: This is Ava Cantarella [ph.] who is the daughter of my stepson, Mick, and his wife, Kat. And Ava will be a year in three weeks. Speaker 2: This was taken here in this apartment in New York in 1997, the morning after my stepdaughter, Mara's wedding. And my niece at, at the front is, is my niece, Francesca from Italy, Francesca Ferace [ph.], my son, Mark, my sister, Lauren Casteel [Lauren Young Casteel], and behind Lauren is my late mother-in-law, Helene Cantarella, next to her is my mother, Margaret Young, my sister-in-law, Nelda Ferace [Nelda Cantarella Ferace], also from Italy, my aunt, Arnita [Arnita Young Boswell] from Chicago [Illinois], and me..