 Story_ID: 97600 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is June Victoria Cross, J-U-N-E, like the month, Victoria, like the Victoria Cross, V-I-C-T-O-R-I-A, Cross, like the Red Cross, C-R-O-S-S. Speaker 1: All right, now, is there a story behind your name with the Victoria before the Cross or is there-- Speaker 2: The story behind the name is both my--no, I don't know what the Victoria Cross is about. My mother [Norma Greve Storch] wanted me to be a performer. She had seen Gypsy Rose Lee, and there's a line in it, "Hi, my name is Baby June. What's yours?" Yeah, and so she named me June 'cause I was supposed to be Vicky June, my name was going to be Vicky June. That's the story that she told it at one point. Then later on, I got another version of the story which was that both her mother and my father's mother had the first name, Rose, and there was something about a Rose June. So they chose June. I'm not quite sure. My grandmother's name on my mother's side was Rose June. And I don't know about what, I don't know if it was June Rose on the other side, on my dad's side. I don't know. It was some weird thing like that. So that was a different--my mother was fond of telling different versions of the story as time went on, which made it very challenging as an adult when I went back to try to figure out what was the truth, which version of the truth was I going to buy then, as it was mostly all very difficult to parse out. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in New York City in Bellevue Hospital on January 5, 1954. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and position? Speaker 2: I am a documentary filmmaker and I'm a professor, associate professor--hopefully, soon to be a full professor, (laughter) at the Graduate School of Journalism at Columbia University [New York City, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today-- Speaker 2: Occasionally, I write a book. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And, well, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Is it the 30th, July 30th, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Is this to test whether I'm still, got all my faculties? Speaker 1: No, it's oral history. Speaker 2: Next question, what is, who is the president (laughter)? Speaker 1: I hate to say this. It's just oral history. Speaker 2: The president is Barack Obama. I know that too (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, it sounds like that, but it's just oral history. And so you have to slate everything like this. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So what is--oh, where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're doing this interview in the news studio at the Graduate School of Journalism at Columbia University, which we now call Columbia Journalism School. Story_ID: 97601 Speaker 1: Okay, now, here are five, lightweight questions-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that I'm asked to ask of everyone. Speaker 2: I understand. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Five of them. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: It depends on what day it is. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Probably fall. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts, in the vineyard, on Martha's Vineyard. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I couldn't repeat it on camera (laughter). Speaker 1: You could. Speaker 2: "Give me a fuckin' break" (laughter). Story_ID: 97602 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's [Norma Greve Storch] side of the family and your father's [Jimmy Cross] side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We always start with the mother first. Then we'll put 'em together. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Norma Catherine Storch is my mother. Norma, N-O-R-M-, as in Mary,-A, Catherine, C-A-T-H-E-R-I-N-E. Her birth name was Greve, G-R-E-V-E. Speaker 1: Okay, and then Storch, S-T-O-R-- Speaker 2: Storch was her married name. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Now, what is her date-- Speaker 2: But she was a, in between there, she had about three or four other ones too, so it depends on--(laughter) Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: It throws me whenever I do the, what is your mother's maiden name thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sorry, I know I'm supposed to be short. Go ahead. What else do you-- Speaker 1: No, you don't have to be short. I'm just-- Speaker 2: What does he want me--what is the rest of this? Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: April 7, I believe 1921 [sic, 1922]. And is she the baby that was born in Arizona? I believe she was born in Flagstaff, Arizona [sic, Pocatello, Idaho]. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your mother's family history? How far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side, and what were they doing? Speaker 2: My mother is descended on her father's, grandfather's side from Danish immigrants. Her grandfather was a, a horseback rider, a trick rider in the Barnum and Bailey Circus. He immigrated from Copenhagen [Denmark], some time in the late 1800s. I used to know all this much better. I've forgotten some of it. And he worked for Barnum and Bailey and then he, when he retired, he became a foreman for the Union Pacific Railroad in Idaho and built the section--was the foreman in charge of the section from Blackfoot to Pocatello, I believe. There's really nothing out there except a Shoshone-Bannock Indian reservation. And that's where my mother grew up. She, when I did this interview with her--your version of the interview with me with her, she said she was the only white child on the reservation. So all the Indians were her playmates. As far as she knows, her biological father was one of the workmen on the railroad. And her mother, my grandmother, who I actually never met, was eighteen when she gave birth. I know little about my--well, I know a little bit about my mother's grandmother, who's a Mormon. They were both Mormons out there in Idaho. And I know that she is descended, I traced her back on one side to the captain of the Mayflower, not the first journey, but the second, the second trip that the Mayflower made over from England. They had ancestors in Rhode Island. There was an ancestor that fought in the Revolutionary War. Somehow, they must have converted to Mormonism fairly early because I know they're, they are chased out of Ohio during that massacre. Speaker 1: Well, what was her grandmother's maiden name? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: I mean her mother's maiden name, I guess? Speaker 2: Her mother, my granny's maiden name-- Speaker 1: Or your grand, okay. Speaker 2: --would have been Stephenson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Rose, Rose Stephenson. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's your grandmother. That's your mother's mother? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Rose Stephenson, and-- Speaker 2: I don't remember, I used to have all this, but (laughter) I don't. I used to have it on the top of my head. But basically, I never knew any of these people because my mother married, met and--well, she never married. My mother ran into my father, who comes from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], backstage at the Paramount Theatre [New York City, New York], back in like 1950 or something. And because she was a white woman and he was a black man, both sides of the family basically had, wanted nothing to do with me. So everything that I know about my family are things that I've researched myself. And so depending on what day it is and how old I am that day, I can remember it (laughter). But they're my family in a biological term, and a, you know, I've done sort of that documentary about me that goes through all of this. But they're not the family that I claim as my family. So I don't--their names, I sort of know some interesting things about them, but I've never really considered them my family since they didn't consider me part of their family. Speaker 1: I understand. You say your mother's father was a workman on a railroad, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And what was his name? Speaker 2: Roy Greve, or Greeve. She never knew how to pronounce it either. G-R-E-V-E, Roy Greve. His first name is Roy. Speaker 1: So did he, did she grow up with him or did-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Story_ID: 97603 Speaker 1: My mother [Norma Greve Storch] didn't raise any of her children, and when I went back to look at it, I realized she had never been raised really either. Her mother, my grandmother, Rose [Stephenson], decided that she wanted to be like Mary Pickford, and left Idaho some time in her early twenties to go seek her fame and fortune in Los Angeles, in Hollywood [California]. Speaker 2: So she wanted to be in the movies? Speaker 1: She wanted to be in the movies. And she left my mom to be raised by her parents, my mother's grandparents. And so my mother lived with them basically from the time she was six until she was about eleven or twelve. She would go back and forth to California on the railroad, which I find an amazing thought (laughter), that she traveled by herself on a train at that young age. She would go back and forth to see her mama during the summers. But basically, she was raised by her grandparents in Idaho until she was about twelve. And then her mother got married to a German whose name I'm totally, escapes. You need to give me my book back so I can (laughter) remember all this 'cause I don't remember any of the names. Her mother married a German immigrant, and then they brought her out there, and they moved to Long Beach [California]. She moved to Long Beach. By then my grandmother had started a hair salon. Speaker 2: Okay, your mother was about twelve--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I'll remember it in a second. I just-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I'm having a brain drain. I'm like, I'm up to my eyeballs in my latest documentary, and like, nonessential information gets pushed to the back here. Speaker 2: Okay, so this is like three locations for your mother, I guess, the Shoshone reservation-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --in Idaho. And then-- Speaker 1: And the Long Beach. Speaker 2: --then Long Beach. Speaker 1: Well, the Shoshone-Bannock Reservation is in Idaho. She was born in Flagstaff [Arizona]-- Speaker 2: Okay, so it's--okay. All right, Flagstaff, but then she-- Speaker 1: Hold on, am I confusing that? No, my granny was born in Flagstaff [Arizona]. Mom was born in Pocatello [Idaho]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, I confused that. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: No problem. Speaker 1: Granny's from--Granny was born in Flagstaff. Mom was born in Pocatello. I actually have that story written out, somebody gave to me. Sorry. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Okay, and there was--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So, yeah, she--but she was raised by her parents in Idaho for a while and then she, by her grandparents in Idaho, and then she moved to Long Beach. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: She was a traveling child. Speaker 2: Okay, so did your--was your grand--did your grandmother get involved in the movie industry? Speaker 1: No, she never did. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Don't know what happened, but she ended up owning a hair salon in Long Beach. Speaker 2: Okay, now, did your mother like finish high school there? Speaker 1: Mom says she graduated from high school (laughter) in Long Beach [Los Angeles, California]. I don't know the name of the high school. I did know once upon a time. She graduated, and then she decided she wanted to be in movies. But then she fell in love or became smitten by a guard. She was quite an athlete. She used to, she was a swimmer. And she fell in--was smitten by a lifeguard at this pool where she used to go swim. And she ended up getting pregnant by him when she was eighteen--same age that my grandmother (laughter) had gotten pregnant, and gave birth to my oldest brother [Lary May] at that point and never went to college. She said she took some courses at community college, but then the war broke out, World War II, and she never quite--she spent a while trying to make it in either Hollywood--she wanted to be a stage actress. And she was actually in the Actors Studio--we all thought this was an old wives tale. We, me, my brother--my brother and I always thought that she used to make this up 'cause she used to say that she had been on stage with Marlon Brando. And then, damned after she died, we're going through her stuff (laughter), and there's--she actually had been in the Actors Studio, and she actually did, was in a play with (laughter) Marlon Brando. So, you know, I never quite knew when what she was telling me was wholesale, just made up and when there might be some shred of truth in it. That's probably why I'm a reporter (laughter). I grew up to become a reporter. It was so difficult trying to parse out the fantasy from fiction. Speaker 2: Okay, so she was involved in, so she was studying to be an actress? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Story_ID: 97604 Speaker 1: Okay, so what did she [Norma Greve Storch] end up doing during the war [World War II] and after the war? Speaker 2: During the war, she was a secretary for some naval admiral or something in Long Beach [California] 'cause Long Beach was a big [U.S.] Navy town. That was when she was pregnant, I think. And she--or at least the guy that had impregnated her, who was my father's--my brother's father. My grandmother [Rose Stephenson] was so infuriated that she reported him, he--she reported for having stolen a typewriter. And he ended up in the brig. He served like six years or something for having stolen--this was my grandmother's way of allegedly getting back at him for ruining the flower of my mother's youth (laughter). And so she reported him to the military for having stolen this typewriter. He served six years, and then that--nobody ever saw him again after that. We still don't know. I spent a long time trying to find him just for my brother [Lary May]'s sake. But we've never been able to track him down. Speaker 1: Six years for a typewriter? Speaker 2: His name was Jack May, yeah. Speaker 1: Six years for a typewriter. Speaker 2: I know, isn't it crazy? Yeah, and just the vindictiveness of my grandmother. You know, what she did, and then she disappeared. She left my mother on her own with an eighteen-month old child in Long Beach and went somewhere. My mother never knew where she went. She disappeared for like six years, and then she said later that she'd gone to San Francisco [California] and taken up with some fellow, and then came back, and (laughter), it's a very chaotic family (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, your mother, so she's got a son, she's raising? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: She has a son, a daughter--she has a son and two daughters. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: The two daughters--I'm the youngest. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 97605 Speaker 1: I was trying to lead up to the point where she [Norma Greve Storch] meets your father [Jimmy Cross]. So she's got a daughter, I mean a son when she, before, and older--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: She's got a son [Lary May], and then, so then after the war [World War II], she came to--I'm actually not quite sure of the chronology of this. She met Larry Storch, the man she ultimately married and lived the better part of fifty years of her life with, in San Francisco [California] in 1948. So that would have been right after the war. She and Larry sort of started an affair almost immediately that lasted, the time during, when he was doing this gig in San Francisco [California]. She discovered some time after he left that she was pregnant with my sister, Candy [Candace Herman]. She called Larry and told him she was pregnant with his daughter. He refused to believe that it was his. She ultimately put that child up for adoption, and--you want the short version of this or the long version of this? Speaker 1: Well, tell, just tell the proper version where we can get some sense of it. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, so Larry Storch was then, you know, he was coming out the military, had just come out of the [U.S.] Navy himself, and was just beginning his career. And mom [Norma Storch] fell in love with Larry immediately. Larry was just playing around (laughter). She got pregnant with this child, and she told Larry that she had this baby. Well, Larry had a mama that was, could only be called a Jewish mother, in the bad sense, in all of the bad senses of the world--word. Larry's mother was a Jewish mother. And the mother ultimately, basically, paid my mother to go away and said she would give her a year's worth of rent and some other cash or something if she would put this child up for adoption and never bother Larry again. And my mother was so, sort of destitute at this point that she did do that. And, but, and I'm not quite sure how she hooked up with Larry again. At some point, Larry had introduced her, I think she was coming back to New York. At some point, she was in New York after the War. So it was like, maybe '49 [1949] or '50 [1950], so that would have been--it must have been some, both of them say there was sort of some--it wasn't like he just like left. But like she came to New York trying to chase him, and he was sort of seeing other women. And he would see her and whatever, blah, blah, blah. Larry and my dad were both comedians. My dad was named James ["Jimmy"] Cross. James came from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. His father was a laborer, and his mother cleaned people's houses. Story_ID: 97606 Speaker 1: Now, let's do this properly. Let's go back to--okay, so-- Speaker 2: Okay, so you want me to lead up to where my mom [Norma Storch]-- Speaker 1: Give me your father's [James "Jimmy" Cross]--well--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --met my dad or do you want me to go back and-- Speaker 1: --we're already there, I think. Speaker 2: --start Jimmy (laughter). Speaker 1: I think we're already there at the point where we need to introduce your father. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter) Speaker 1: So, what is your father's-- Speaker 2: James Cross. Speaker 1: --full name and can you spell it for us and-- Speaker 2: Yes, I can. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: James Arthur Cross, J-A-M-E-S, Arthur, A-R-T-H-U-R, Cross, C-R-O-S-S. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Oy vey. Is it June 7th or June 14? I get it confused 'cause my sister's is (unclear) (whispering). June 7th is Flag Day, June 14th. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Year, 1922, and he was born in Ocean City, New Jersey, but grew up in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: His parents--Rose Wilkes or Wilkinson, depending on who's doing the writing (laughter) is his mother. And his father's name was Percy. Speaker 1: So Percy Cross? Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know if Percy had a middle name. He might have. Speaker 1: Now, well, what did his parents do for a living? Speaker 2: Percy was a laborer on the Philadelphia Shipyards. And Rose cleaned houses at that point in her life. Later she went on and owned a speakeasy (laughter), but at that point, she was a, she was a domestic. Speaker 1: Okay, so the speakeasy, I assume it had something to do with prohibition, I guess, the prohibition days? Speaker 2: Philadelphia, I don't know. Speaker 1: Yeah, a speakeasy would be--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, no, 'cause there're still people-- Speaker 1: --would only make sense because-- Speaker 2: --when I went back to hunt down that area in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], there were older people there who remembered her. It was like a after-hours joint, was what people would, was how people characterized it. So, it might have started during prohibition. The story is that she used to take Jimmy around--well, this would have been post-prohibition 'cause she would take him around to the bars. He was a talented dancer. He's, he knew how to tap from like six years old. People would like watch him dance. And so she would take him around to the bars and give him--like late at night, and give him sugar to keep him going. And he would tap dance on the bars and get change to take home. I guess this was during the Depression. He was making more money than his father made at the shipyard for which his father--for which he earned his father's undying hatred. He remembers being beaten a lot by his dad. And finally, his mother and his father split up, and I don't know how far ahead you want me to go, but- Speaker 1: Well, that's an interesting dynamic. I'm, I guess that would be a source of tension because he could not-- Speaker 2: As a six-year old, he was making more money than his dad. Speaker 1: --influence his wife as much with his income because-- Speaker 2: The child was making all the money. Speaker 1: Yeah, the mother can take the child around to make more money with the child. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Plus, she was making money at bars,-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and I assume without him being there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Without the father being there-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --which can lead to all kinds of-- Speaker 2: And then he--from what I gather, he was a drunk and not around a lot anyway. So, Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: --yeah. Speaker 1: So, okay, so that's-- Speaker 2: It was not a happy situation-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --which is odd because his, Percy's grandmother, from what I've been able to dig out through the census, in 1890, Percy's grandmother, my great, great, great grandmother, Caroline owned land in Virginia. She owned 200 acres of land in 1890. Speaker 1: That's remarkable, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, but then by 1900s, she's moved to Philly. And somehow or another the sheriff owned the land. I'll leave that to the, those who know the story of Jim Crow (laughter) to figure out how that happened. Speaker 1: Okay, so is there a story? Speaker 2: I, not one that I was ever able to really dig out. I've been able to trace that Cross family--my paternal grandfather's family line back to 1837. There are Crosses in Virginia. Speaker 1: Is there a rumor about what happened? Speaker 2: No, 'cause I never knew that side of the family-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --again, 'cause, because of the fact that my father was dating a white woman, she didn't, my grandmother, my paternal grand--my, yeah, my father's mother didn't wanna have anything to do with me either. So neither grandmother wanted to have anything to do with this mixed race child (laughter), half breed that they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Do you think, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --had been brought into the world. Speaker 1: You have a sense though that the loss of that land had something to do with racism and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I do, just be--from what I know of what was going on in Virginia at that time. I mean she had, she was with the family. A, she was listed as mulatto. She's freed in 1865. By 1870, she already has a hundred acres of land, so somehow between 1870 and 1890, she got enough to buy a second hundred acres of land. Black people freed from slavery, she's listed as mulatto--she was somebody's relation, obviously, that she's getting land. I mean there's no way that you come out in 1865 and by 1870, are owning property. So it's pretty clear that there had to some kind of relationship between her and the family that was pretty close. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then by 1900, it's all gone, and she's in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], working as a domestic. Story_ID: 97607 Speaker 1: So then did your father [James "Jimmy" Cross]--was he able to go to school or finish school or did he just (unclear)-- Speaker 2: They moved around a lot. Jimmy was in six, Jimmy did, was in six homes during his elementary school. I actually sort of charted this at one point. It was sort of amazing. I think he had like fourteen addresses in his entire high school (laughter), his entire academic career. So it almost made it impossible for him to really stay in one place. I didn't get a sense of any stability in that house at all. And then by the time he was fourteen or fifteen, he had developed, I think he was fourteen, he had developed an ability to do a imitation of Louis Armstrong that the "Philadelphia Defender--the "Pittsburgh Courier", the "Pittsburgh Courier" wrote him up as this sort of wunderkind child who could do the spot on Louie Armstrong imitation. And he began doing this thing, and then he started dancing to go with it because he still had the dancing talent. And then by the time he was fifteen or sixteen, he was performing--in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], they had a colored kiddie's hour, Colored Kiddies of the Air. It was a radio show. It was like the Amateur Hour, only for black kids. And he was a regular on that. And then at some point, he was partnered with another, another kid, and they became a group, a duo that was called "Stump and Stumpy." And-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard of Stump and Stumpy-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so my dad was Stump. Speaker 1: --they performed in Chicago [Illinois] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they played the entire-- Speaker 1: --all over the country. Yeah. Speaker 2: --they played the chitlin' circuit. They played, and then they grew beyond the chitlin' circuit, actually. They started playing--during the war [World War II], Irving Berlin wrote a play called, it was a musical, as part of the effort to support the military, called "This Is the Army." And Jimmy closed the show. Jimmy had the opening, the closing number in Act I. And it was called "What The Well-Dressed Man In Harlem Will Wear," and he did it with Joe Louis. And that really traveled all around the United States. Jimmy had--not only, around the world. He performed for Stalin [Joseph Stalin]. He performed in pretty much almost every, every European country. But even before then, I just recently actually found a steamer ticket that he had been Europe even when he was sixteen. So that would have been what, 1938? Speaker 1: So he [Jimmy Cross] was over there with the USO [United Services Organization]? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was over there, he was in the military with the USO. But that wasn't the first time he'd been in Europe. He was in Europe as, even as a teenager performing for somebody 'cause I have the, I found the steamer ship receipt just recently, that he was coming back from Liverpool [England] in 1938. So that's before the war [World War II]. He would have been, what sixteen years old then. So, you know, even--it wasn't his first time then. Story_ID: 97608 Speaker 1: Anyway, I'm jumping ahead, so jumping ahead and jumping back. He [James "Jimmy" Cross] came to New York, and was opening at The Cotton Club. And he had, it looked at that point, you know, I mean he was in his, you know, late teens, early twenties, it looked as though he was gonna have a pretty bright career. And he was opening at the Paramount [Theatre] for Glenn Miller, I believe, the night that my mother [Norma Storch] met him. And they met backstage. Now, my mom knew that Jimmy Cross and Larry [Storch] were friends. Basically, all the show biz people were friends in those days. There was a bar down on 58th Street. It's sort of, it's, it used to be, I think it's called "Charlie O's". And at that point, it was the place where all the--not 50th, 56th and Seventh, all the show biz people used to go there and hang out and tell lies, they used to say. They used to go there and talk about (laughter) how much they were working, and nobody had a dime. And Jimmy and Larry sort of knew each other from there. And then they were both playing Las Vegas [Nevada] 'cause in those days Larry was playing the white side of town and Jimmy was playing the black side of town. It was the Moulin Rouge. There was one black club called the Moulin Rouge. The way Jimmy tells the story, he got into--he and Eddie got into the bus station in Las Vegas, and opened up a, opened up--Larry said, I'm gonna leave something for you in the locker. And Jimmy opened up the locker and there was an ounce of marijuana and a picture of my mother (laughter), with a note that said, these are for you (laughter). And I went back to Larry some time later and told him that Jimmy had told me this story and asked him was it true? And he sort of just said, you know, shook his head, yeah, and I just like, oh, my God, my poor mom, just passed around (laughter). Story_ID: 97609 Speaker 1: All right, now, okay, so Larry [Storch] was tired of your, he was trying to-- Speaker 2: Larry was trying to get rid of this dame [Norma Greve Storch] that had been nothing but trouble as far as he was concerned, you know, she had this baby and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: We subsequently know that he marries, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, was it because of his mother or what do you think it was that he didn't-- Speaker 2: I think he was immature. Larry was an alcoholic. He was an alcoholic even then. I've learned subsequently that he was always known as the family wino, even when he was young, especially when he was young. He just could handle it better then. Yeah, my mother could be a very determined woman (laughter) if she decided she wanted something--very persistent. Yeah, I think he was just, at that point, he just wasn't ready--I mean it was, so what? This would have been 1950 when my mom and my dad [James "Jimmy" Cross] met. So Larry and Norma got married in '64 [1964]. So it was fourteen years later that they bumped into each other again. And by then I was born. Speaker 1: And so at this point, is there a story then about how your mother [Norma Storch] and father met, actually met? Speaker 2: The story is they met backstage at the Paramount Theatre [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And with your father already alerted to the fact that he's-- Speaker 2: I'm not sure. That's what I've never quite figured out, but-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --I've never figured, like pinpointed that day. Both sides say it happened (laughter), and people who knew them have heard the story and say it happened, but nobody can tell me when, you know, like when exactly was the date that this, you know, alleged, "get this dame out of my life." You know, do me a favor and get this woman out of my life, kind of idea. The other complicating factor was that Larry was dating, Larry had a woman, a black woman that he was then very interested in, a woman named Josephine Permice (ph.) whose daughter, oddly enough is also a Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate and works in television. Now, how bizarre is that? Anyway, Josephine-- Speaker 1: How do you spell her last name? Speaker 2: Josephine Permice, P-E-R--was it "p" or P-R, Premice-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I thought. Speaker 2: P-R-E-M-I-C-E. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Larry [Storch] was then in a relationship with Josephine Premice. So part of what my mother [Norma Storch] was trying to do in her misguided youth was to sort of show Larry that if he could date black girls, she--and then Larry had also dated Pearl Bailey for a while, allegedly, I'm told. There were people who thought that I was Pearl Bailey's daughter, in fact, sometime later. Mom decided that if Larry could date black women, she was gonna show him that she was just as cool as he was, and she could date black men. So, she met my dad--they actually did seem to really hit it off from both sides. They remembered just, they would just talk and laugh and make up skits long into the night, and they sort of inhabited this fantasy world together. Oh, God, what was the--Tara, oh, I don't--they had like this fantasy for each other. Oh, God, what was it? I can't remember. (Unclear) I should have looked this up. It's in the book. It was sort of a play on "Gone With the Wind" that they were sort of, like the idea that they were flaunting every last rule. And Jimmy's career at that point seemed fairly assured. Everybody that knew Jimmy told me that the role that Sammy--the place that Sammy Davis, Jr. held in American culture was the place that my dad should have held. And the reason that Jimmy didn't hold it was, two reasons. One, the alcohol ultimately got the better of him, and the second was that he didn't suck up well enough to Frank Sinatra. I obviously have picked up that gene 'cause I don't do very well in diplomacy either (laughter). And, but supposedly, Jimmy, you know--Frank Sinatra was fond of telling people how to do things, and Jimmy just wouldn't. Jimmy just had this contrary thing to him. It was probably fueled by the alcohol, no doubt. But Sammy, Sammy Davis did and Frank ended up helping Sammy. Frank could have helped Jimmy, but Jimmy didn't want his kind of help or something. I don't know. I'm not quite sure what the--I'm sure there was some kind of weird dynamic going on there that just never worked out. So literally, my mother met my dad at the peak of his career, but like on the peak and the curve is already going down. Television gets invented in 1952, and blacks aren't allowed on television. And the comedians of the United States are running television at that point 'cause you think about what television is, it's a--at that point, it was all live. There was no such thing as taped. So you need somebody who's quick on their feet, who can be funny, who can sort of keep the banter going. And comedians are those guys. And, you know, Jimmy, by virtue of being black could never really be the--he was more of a comic than he was a dancer. He was a dancer, but he was a comic dancer. So his whole persona was wrapped up in being, being smart and funny and satirical about American society. And there was just no room for--there was no room for that. I mean that was, you know, Milton Berle had that role, and that was who had it. And Jimmy just began to drink more and more. There's a really touching letter that I found that my mother wrote to the woman who ultimately raised me and what she describes Jimmy lying on the bed crying when he was thirty-five years old saying that he was a has-been. And he was only thirty-five, and he didn't know what he'd ever do with the rest of his life. Story_ID: 97610 Speaker 1: And she [Norma Greve Storch] knew she wanted to leave him [James "Jimmy" Cross] at that point. So if he was thirty-five, I guess I would have been about three years old at that point. She wanted to leave and she felt so guilty for leaving him while he was in that state, but then the more he drank, the meaner he got. And he started beating her, and she ultimately just fled for her life. She basically planned the exit like Katie Holmes and Tom Cruise (laughter). He told--they went to see a movie. The movie was a Marilyn Monroe movie, which I'll think of in a second, if I can remember it. Speaker 2: "Some Like it Hot", "Seven Year Itch"-- Speaker 1: "Seven Year Itch", yes--(laughter)-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: You remember that (laughter), okay. And she walked out of the movie and said she was going to go to the bathroom and just never went back. And what's how she left. And she had a, a girlfriend had helped her, you know, stake out a place. She had made money on the side, actually, working as a prostitute for a while. And she was able to get an apartment, and she paid, she gave--left Jimmy with one month's paid rent, moved into the place with me, called him at the bar, Charlie's, where all the--everybody hung out, told the bartender to tell him that she had left and he was never gonna see her again. And that's basically how that ended. I skipped over the part where I'm born. I guess I should backtrack-- Speaker 2: Yes, right. Story_ID: 97611 Speaker 1: During the years that she [Norma Greve Storch] was with Jimmy [James Cross], he was (unclear), and her eyes would light about it even years later. She just said, yeah, he was just so talented. He was playing Atlantic City [New Jersey]. Atlantic City at that time was not the place it is now. It did not have casinos. It was more of a, what kind of resort would I call it? Well, it was a resort where you would go for the summer. People sort of had summer homes, actually, not unlike Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] now. And Jimmy would play 'Stump and Stumpy' had a gig at the Club Harlem in Atlantic City which was 'the' black nightclub, that basically, the season would run from May 31st to Labor Day. So you'd get a contract for the three, for the three months. And so they rented a basement apartment from a couple on Indiana Avenue. Their names were Muriel and Paul Bush. And I was, let me see, I think one summer when they got there, mom [Norma Storch] was three months pregnant with me, and Peggy was the only black woman that she knew or really had any close contact with. She always said about Paul that he sort of just came with Peggy (laughter) and--but anyway, she and Peggy grew very close. Peggy was a teacher. She'd graduated from college. I think my mother looked up to her in a bunch of ways. And they would just sort of sit and talk a lot. And Peggy did this with everybody that rented that basement apartment. I remember this even from when I was living--years later after I was living there and was old enough. You know, people would come up and sit down for tea and, over, you know, over a cup of tea in the kitchen and just, they'd just talk. So mom and Peggy became very good friends. And then after, after I was born and mom and Jimmy's relationship began to go South, she began parking my older brother, Lary [May], with Peggy for a while. Now, Lary is white, my brother, my older brother is, his father was white. So for a while, Peggy was taking care of both me and Lary, and Lary really wanted to stay with Aunt Peggy, and (unclear) on Peggy. And she just, she thought it would be too complicated to have a white kid living on the black side of town. And at that point, Atlanta City, like everywhere else, was segregated. And so she just didn't want to, she didn't want the hassle. So Larry ended up actually in foster homes. He'd been in foster homes before, but he ended up in another foster home. And then Peggy took me while my mom was trying to get herself back on her feet after she left Jimmy. And then ultimately, I ended up living with Peggy just because as I grew older, I got darker (laughter), even though people now, people tell me now (laughter), they look at me. I'd had this happen to me just last week. I was in South Carolina, and somebody said to me, you could pass--you look like, you could pass. You look like a white woman, and I was--I actually took it as an insult. And I think even to this day, it's just such a--I feel like if I was going to pass, I should have been able to pass when I was a kid, but I didn't. And so, if I'm gonna be a black person, just let me be--I'm black, you know. I owned it, I owned that side of the roots. Story_ID: 97612 Speaker 1: Okay, so we--you're here--now, your mother [Norma Greve Storch] and father [James "Jimmy" Cross]-- Speaker 2: I was born on January 5th, 1954. Speaker 1: Yeah, so they never got married, right? Speaker 2: They never got married. Speaker 1: Okay, and they split up--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He disappeared for three days while she was--he was not, my dad was not there when I was born. He had gone a drinking binge. And this is the, the other story about my name. She was in the hospital. She had decided throughout her pregnancy that I was going to be born light enough to pass. I mean literally, this was like her determination. She just determined that I was going to be born light enough to pass, period. So she gives birth to this child. She's in the hospital, haven't heard from Jimmy for three days. He shows up on day three and she doesn't, she told the nurse to send him away. She didn't even want to see him. And he came in, and he started singing a song. It was a Bing Crosby song that was popular then called "June in January." And so that was it. It was June (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so that's a third-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's the other version of the story. There're several versions. Choose one. Speaker 1: Now, what color is your father? What, you know-- Speaker 2: He's a brown-skinned, probably the color of your shoes, brown-skinned black man. Speaker 1: Okay, I've got like medium brown shoes. Speaker 2: Medium brown. So a little bit darker, like the darker shade of brown, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, was. He died in 1981. Story_ID: 97613 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Oy vey. My earliest childhood memory is of being in a crib, and there's some kind of disturbance. I have to try to separate what I actually remember versus what the adults around me have told me, must have been going on. I remember there being some kind of blue light in front of the crib. And there was some kind of--I was rocking back and forth, like this and hitting my head on the crib. My mother [Norma Greve Storch] remembers this, when I told it to her some time later. She's like, oh, my God, I remember that night. It was, she and Jimmy [James "Jimmy" Cross] were having a huge argument, and they were screaming in the other room. They had a, they had rented a suite in the Hotel Wellington [New York], which is down on, right across from the, over on the 55th and 6th, I think it is. It's still there. And they had a, it was like a bedroom and a kitchen, a kitchenette. And she says, well, the blue light would have been the TV set. There was a TV set, and everybody had black and white TVs in those days. So it was like a blue light. And she's like, and you used to rock back, when we got into these arguments, you would start hitting your head against the back of the crib (laughter), you know. That's my earliest childhood memory. I have sort, it's hard from then because I've done so much work on excavating my own childhood that it's hard to know, like what do I really remember and what were impressions that have been bolstered by the adults. Story_ID: 97614 Speaker 1: I remember being very young, and we were living in New York then--this is before I moved to Atlantic City [New Jersey]. So from ages one to five, I lived with my mother [Norma Greve Storch] in New York [New York], after she left my dad [James "Jimmy" Cross] in this apartment that she had rented on West 67th between Columbus and Central Park. This was back when that was a Dominican--this is before urban development. This was a brownstones, Dominican neighborhood. Lincoln Center had not yet been built. And my brother [Lary May] had made friends--he was living with us by then. She, he was, by then, I guess he was sixteen or seventeen by then. He'd come back from the last foster home (laughter) and was staying with us. And he was basically my caretaker 'cause my mother was working at night. And so he and his Dominican friends would come home, and they were all practicing salsa. So they would put me on their shoes. I remember standing on their shoes while they were trying to practice the salsa steps, and then they would teach me how to do the salsa. And to this day, I'm actually still a pretty good salsa dancer (laughter). And people ask me, you know, mentors, Dominican mentors, say, how did you learn how (laughter) to do these steps? And I just say, oh, I was a kid. I was the practice. I was little sister being practiced on. So that's an early childhood memory. I missed them dearly when I went--when my mother did finally send me to Atlantic City. And I frankly don't remember the day. I don't remember the actual moment. I have a picture of the day. But I don't remember anything about that day when she took me down there. And there's a picture of me wearing a little--she'd bought me some, it was a velvet coat, I think, with a little white fur. And I had a little muff, you know. I looked very cute. But I don't, I remembered nothing of that day, but I do remember an almost a visceral longing for my brother and his Dominican friends and sort of the sound of that language and the music after school. And there were no Dominicans in Atlantic City at that time (laughter). They had Puerto Ricans, as Aunt Peggy [Muriel Bush] used to call them, which I thought was really funny, even as a kid (laughter), 'cause nobody in New York called 'em Puerto Ricans, Perta Ricans, I can't even remember how they used to say Perta Ricans (ph.). And, you know, I would say, no, it's Puerto Ricans (laughter). It's not Perta Ricans (laughter). So anyway, her, I remember sort of asking her always, you know, like take me over to the, to--there was one, like a two-block area where there were some Puerto Ricans in Atlantic City. And she was like you don't wanna go over to that low-class side of town. She had bigger plans for me. Speaker 2: Okay, well, we always ask this question in this way. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And, you know, just come to think about, we've all seen a Monopoly board. So some of the streets, we're familiar with. Speaker 1: Um-hum, I was on Indiana. Speaker 2: (Laughter) What, right-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Red (laughter), Indiana, Illinois, and what the next, Kentucky, all three together, for in a red block. Speaker 2: Those are the lower rent streets and stuff. Story_ID: 97615 Speaker 1: But what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oy. Atlantic City [New Jersey] in the summertime, the smell of the ocean, cotton candy, the peanut guy--what's that guy? They still make, Planters, Planters peanuts. There was a Planters peanut guy, that's a life-sized guy. He wore a peanut with a top hat on the Boardwalk in Atlantic City, salt water taffy, going to the steel pier. That horse would jump down, that poor horse (laughter), jumped, had to jump like what, fifty feet into a little tub, into a big tub of water. Speaker 1: A real horse? Speaker 2: Yeah, a real horse, yeah. I think there was a woman named Sally Ride, Sally--no, that's the astronaut, Sally somebody, who rode him. Story_ID: 97616 Speaker 1: What else do I remember about Atlantic City [New Jersey] in the summer? Well, all our cousins, I mean the great gift of Aunt Peggy and Uncle Paul [Bush] was that they were both well-educated, within the black community, upper middle-class black folks, and not upper-middle class 'cause we didn't have, nobody was rich. But if you were educated, you were a step above. And so through them I met the family that I would continue to call my family and who I still think of as my family, which was the Gregory family. And so Mr. and Mrs. Gregory, Hugh Ella Hancock Gregory and Thomas Montgomery Gregory lived around the corner from us on Ohio Avenue in the yellow block (laughter) of the Monopoly board. Thomas Montgomery--T. Montgomery Gregory was a 1910, I'm gonna say--it's either 1910 or 1912, I'm gonna say 1910 graduate of Harvard College [now Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. His older brother had been in the class of 1895 in the dental school. Hugh Ella Hancock had been--I know this isn't my family, but this is just to tell you and show you how much better I remember that side of the family story than my own. Hugh Ella Hancock had been, came from Texas, and was a student at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], and T. Montgomery was her professor--was her teacher, her professor and in something that would never have been allowed today, the two of them fell in love, and they got married and had seven children. And their seven children were my aunts and uncles. Uncle Hugh, Uncle Ernie, and Aunt Minyon and Hugh and Silvia, Ernie and Minyon, Uncle Monty. Speaker 2: So the Gregorys were--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Aunt Yvonne, Sheila (laughter), you know. Speaker 2: So are the Gregorys related to the Bushes or-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Not at all. They just-- Speaker 1: Well, the relationship was that T. Montgomery Gregory who everybody called "pop pop" (ph.) we called him pop pop, Gum, Uncle Gum. She called him Gum, Peggy called him Gum. He had, he had, in between going to Spelman--between Harvard and Spelman, he did a tour as a professor at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. Now, Peggy graduated from Miner Teachers College, which was part of Howard University in 19--it is now, wasn't quite then. It was just beginning that affiliation, 1928, '27 [1927], '28 [1928], she graduates from Miner Teachers College. And she knew Uncle Gum there. So when she was looking for a job, he told her about this job in Atlantic City. And she ended up teaching, being a second grade--she got, applied for the job and was accepted to be the, this second grade teacher at Indiana Avenue School, which is also the school that I attended. It was the black elementary school in Atlantic City. And a few years later, I believe, Uncle Gum, himself, came up, and was, became the supervisor. I may have the time, the chronology backwards on this. Uncle Gum ultimately became, was the principal of the black schools in Atlantic City. There were two. There was Indiana Avenue and New Jersey Avenue were the two black schools, and pretty much stayed in that position up through the advent of the "Brown" decision [Brown v. Board of Education]. So through that, through that family, I had an entree to a whole other, I mean the fact that I'm a professor at Columbia University, the fact that I graduated from Harvard [University], I owe all that to the Gregory family, not to--I mean my mother [Norma Greve Storch] obviously--and my dad [James "Jimmy" Cross], gave me some innate gifts, but I was nurtured and able to take advantage of them through avenues that were extended to me by the Gregory family. Speaker 2: Okay, for-- Speaker 1: I've gotten way ahead of myself now, and I should go back. Speaker 2: From what I understand, and this is just to clarify if I'm understanding this right, that the Bushes didn't have any children, right? Speaker 1: Right, right, Aunt Peggy and Uncle Paul never had kids. Speaker 2: And so they took you on-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I was informally adopted. Speaker 2: And then their mentors, I guess, in some ways, or their sponsors, I guess, were the Gregorys? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, well, Peggy was godmother to--and it was, there was an argument going to at least three of the Gregory children. She was their godmother. So I'm (laughter), I got included in the batch (laughter), you know. Yeah, relationships among, within the black community were much different then, and we had a much tighter sense of community. So, you know, everybody was sort of family in a way, you know, even, you know, you could--your mother's neighbor could see you doing something wrong (laughter) on the street, and you were gonna catch it when you got home. It was a very different environment and different place than we live in now. But I went to live with Peggy and Paul the year before I started kindergarten. So that would have been 1959, and I lived in Atlantic City from 1959 until I graduated high school in '71 [1971]. Story_ID: 97617 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And I was asking you about some of the sights and sounds and smells-- Speaker 2: Oh, the sights and sounds of Atlantic City? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: There was a group of guys--well, there was a group of old drunks that used to hang out, by the Gem Liquor Store on Indiana Avenue between Atlantic and Baltic. And they were sort of fixtures. They were almost like those guys in that Spike Lee movie, "Do the Right Thing." Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, they (laughter) were sort of, they were like a set piece (laughter), that every time you went by, they were having some kind of argument. Then there was Mrs. Gambrel's (ph.) store. She sold Breyer's ice cream and candy that was, it wasn't in wrappers. It was candy that was in bowls, and you would ask for, I want a jawbreaker and a gum drop and a piece of chocolate. And like no bigger, like that, a Hershey's candy bar was a huge extravagance in those days. You just, you bought things individually for like pennies, penny candies. And then across from Ms. Gambrel was Jack's Supermarket. They were Italian. They'd been there from the old days when the community was Italian. And it sort of grad--that area of North side had gradually become a black area. It used to be the black folks were all down by the inlet. Oh, what else do I remember about Atlantic City, sights and sounds? Oh, my gosh, the smell of the salt water. I would spend, I went to school, lived with Peggy and Paul [Bush]. And then on school vacations, I would come, my mother [Norma Greve Storch] then was living in New York, and I would come to visit mom because the deal she made with Peggy was that she wasn't willing to give me up totally. She wanted to maintain a relationship with me. So they way they worked it out was that I would go visit her for like long weekends. And so I would get on--Peggy would put me on the Greyhound Bus, and, or the (unclear) with Greyhound then. It was Greyhound, Public Service, and Trailways. It wasn't Greyhound. It's Greyhound now. It was Public Service and Trailways. There were two buses. One left on the half hour and one left on the hour. And so usually, she put me on the Public Service Bus, and I would, you know, like right behind the driver. Do not talk to anybody. Driver, this is my niece. She's going to New York. She's going to be met by her mother who is a person of Caucasian persuasion (laughter), take care of her. And it was the express bus. And usually, the driver was a black driver, and usually, it was somebody that she'd either taught or she knew. And she made sure that she connected, you know, what's your name? Okay, and your family name is? And okay, yeah, I know, I taught that person. This is my niece. She's going to New York. Her mother's gonna meet her (laughter). Make sure that she gets off this bus and goes to her mom, right. So it was pretty much, that was the way Peggy operated. And then I would get to New York. Mom would be waiting for me, you know, at the bus stop, and then I would spend the weekend. That was actually how I began to learn to tell time because I would end up, usually, I would get on, I would get off the bus at like 8:30 on a Friday night, and then I would get back on the bus either at 10:30 on Sunday morning or at noon. It would depend on which bus we got back on. And I would began to start to count down the number of hours I had until I had to get back on the bus and go back to Atlantic City when I was with mom. Story_ID: 97618 Speaker 1: Did you like going to New York? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved New York. I missed New York terribly-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for the first couple of years. I began to, there reached a point when Atlantic City [New Jersey] became home. But I think, you know, if you look at the trajectory of my adult career, I left Atlantic City. I went to school in Boston [Massachusetts] and stayed in Boston a couple of years. Then I got a job in New York. I stayed in New York a couple of years, and I got a job in [Washington] D.C., (laughter). Then I came back to--then I got another job back in New York. I went back to Boston. I came back to New York. I've been like a homing pigeon. This is like, you know, I keep waiting for myself to get over New York. I think I'll get over it by the time I retire, go somewhere else (laughter). I mean it's really been--I still powerfully feel that sense of place that New York, you know, I could--I knew the number of cracks on the sidewalk from Central Park to my apartment, you know. I knew the shape of the little guard rails on the trees, the smell of the leaves in Central Park, the smell of the dirt, and I wrote I don't know how many poems about just lying on the ground, looking up through the leaves in Central Park. So there's, you know, I have powerful images and the sensations with both places in different kinds of ways. New York is sort of a visceral connection, and Atlantic City is familial connection. Story_ID: 97619 Speaker 1: Okay, now, I know you said that Peggy Bush went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Can you tell us a little bit about-- Speaker 2: No, Peggy went to Miner Teachers College [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Minors Teachers College, that's right. Speaker 2: It was Hugh Ella Hancock--I know it's a lot of characters to keep track of (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, you're right, you're right, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, but she went to Miner Teachers College which is attached to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. It's part of Howard. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's now part of, it's now Howard Teachers College, I think. Speaker 1: Okay, but where was she from originally? Speaker 2: Peggy came from Long Island [New York], and I've been very bad about tracking down Peggy's roots. I remember she came from Long Island. Her father worked as a milkman, and he had a horse-drawn cart, and he would deliver the milk. And she loved her dad to death. And her mother died in childbirth. Her father's name was Thomas Fortune. I've never been able to substantiate that he had a relationship to the Fortune who had the newspaper, the black newspaper. Speaker 1: Yeah, T. Thomas Fortune. Speaker 2: T. Thomas Fortune, but I don't think it was the same family. But my Gregory side thinks it was the same family, but I've never been able to document it as being the same family. He was very fair-skinned. He lived with us. When I first moved to Atlantic City, he was living with us. He was very old by then. He had worked as a construction foreman for a while, after he stopped delivering milk. Peggy's mother had died in childbirth, and she had been raised either by her aunts for a while, and then she was put in a boarding school in Baltimore [Maryland]. I used to know the name of it and I've forgotten. It's run by the sisters who come from New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So she, and she went to school there. Speaker 1: Yes, there's a black order of nuns-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the black Order of nuns. Speaker 1: --in Baltimore [Maryland]. I think it was the first black order of nuns in the United States, that run a school there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 97620 Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, we were talking about the Thomas Fortune, who was Peggy Bush's father. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: He was a milkman, and-- Speaker 2: Let me make sure that it was Thomas. I (unclear) or Thomas--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --whether he was related or not to Timothy Thomas Fortune-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the black journalist. And you said by the time you met him, he was senile. Speaker 2: He was old, yeah. It was literally the last three or four years of his life, and, oh, God, I--it was so terrible. When he died, I remember saying, "Good" (laughter). I used to have to be so quiet, and I was like five or six years old, and, you know, if you've got a old, sick person in the house, all you're told is, "Be quiet and don't make any noise". And I think about it now, and I can't believe that I would have been so insensitive. Speaker 1: It'd interesting though if he was related, Timothy Thomas Fortune was called the dean of the black newspapermen in those days, the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --more illustrious and all that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, and the only thing that makes me think maybe because Peggy [Bush] wanted to be a photo journalist, and where would she have ever gotten this idea from. I mean, you know, where would a black woman, even conceive of the idea. And she became a photographer. She was a photographer. She and her husband ran a photography business on the boardwalk in Atlantic City [New Jersey]. And I have boxes and boxes which I've donated to the Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture] of pictures that they took of people whose names I will never know. And the folks in Atlantic City wish that I would get them back from the Schaumberg and give them to them (laughter), but I told them, they have to take that up with the Schomburg now. I've already made the donation. But they had pictures of people on the boardwalk, the Easter Parade. It was like this, they ran this little specialty photography shop on the boardwalk in Atlantic City. And then Paul [Paul] wanted to start a, what do you call it, carpentry business. I guess he learned carpentry in the [U.S.] Army or something. But he never quite figured out what to do with himself either. All the men in my family just all seemed sort of lost, never quite-- Speaker 1: So what did he do for living? Speaker 2: He ended up driving a cab and then he worked as a clerk for the county. There's an infamous Senator in Atlantic County, a Republican senator who handed out jobs. And-- Speaker 1: Patronage. Speaker 2: --Paul got one of those, yeah. So he was a clerk. It was patronage, yeah. So he worked as a clerk, and then he had this job as a cab driver. And he smoked six packs of Salem's a day, and he ultimately died of emphysema when I was twelve. So it was just as we were beginning to develop a relationship, he died. And then it was just me and Peggy and the Gregorys. Story_ID: 97621 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So where did you start school? Speaker 2: I started school in Atlantic City [New Jersey] at Indiana Avenue in kindergarten. Mrs. Dempsey was the first kindergarten teacher I had. She scared me, the bejesus out of me on the first day-- Speaker 1: What did she do? Speaker 2: --'cause we had to, in those days this was the way we started school. So it was like, you know, row of row of black children, and we're all sitting. She had us organized by height, so the tallest students sat in the back of the class. And I had a,--actually, my best friend, Regina, was--and we were about the same height at that point. But then I remember her separating us. She's like, oh, no, I've heard about you two (laughter), 'cause we were like inseparable. And we were inseparable cut-ups. And so I remember her saying, oh, no, I've heard about you two (laughter). I'm not letting you two sit together. And so she put Regina on like that side of the room and me on this side of the room. And then we had to, we had to each stand up and say our name and where we were from and one thing that we had done during the summer. And we were not allowed, you know how kids stand up and put their hands behind their back and sway. And if we wiggled at all, we had to sit down and stand up and do it again. So we were like to stand up straight, not move and utter three declarative sentences, was basically what the assignment was. I was six or five, actually, I was five 'cause they'd gone through a huge battle to get me into the school because I'd gone to the Little Red School House here in New York, and had a high recommendation. So they said, even though I was a year, I should wait a year because my birthday was in January. And they want you to not be socially whatever, socially retarded (laughter). They wouldn't--you were supposed to wait a year. But somehow Peggy went through some big battle and managed to get me in. So anyway, that was the first day of school at Indiana Avenue with Ms. Dempsey. And then we had a huge--and then I mentioned that I had come to live the previous summer with Peggy and Paul [Bush]. And Mrs. Dempsey said, "who?" (Laughter) And I said, "Peggy and Paul" (laughter). And she's like "who are Peggy and Paul?" I was like "Peggy who teaches second grade." She said, "You'll not call adults by their first name." It's Aunt Peggy and Uncle Paul (laughter). I'm just like, "Yes, Mrs. Dempsey (laughter)." I remember sitting down and just sort of trying to hide and trying not to say anything for the next couple of months (laughter) to avoid her wrath. But I found out later that everybody who was in my class and that, the crew of us because it was a, you know, because the schools were segregated. It was basically the same crew of us came together. And we were like a posse from kindergarten through high school almost. Definitely, kindergarten through sixth grade, it was almost all the same kids, every--all of my classes. And then junior high school, they put me in Quaker School. I was in a Friends school for two years. Speaker 1: What was the name of that? Speaker 2: Atlantic City Friends School. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's now in Pleasantville [New Jersey] for some reason. They moved it off finally, and after the casinos came. And then in high school, we were all, a lot of us were all back together again. And a lot of them are still there. Story_ID: 97622 Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: English. Speaker 1: English, okay. Speaker 2: It was by accident. When we were in, would that have been--that would have been second grade, I contracted measles during the period--we had just started learning, we were doing arithmetic. And I was doing fine with two plus two, and four and four and six and six, (unclear) seven. And then I got the measles. I think it was in October, and I was out for like ten days. And on the day I came back, they were doing, they had a test, an arithmetic test. And I was like, I was terrified because I hadn't been there. I had no idea what it was, and it was a test about subtraction (laughter). I had no idea what the hell is subtraction. I don't even know what that word means (laughter), you know, and the teacher just said, do the best you can do. And I flunked the test 'cause I had, I just, I was clueless, you know. And I developed a fear of arithmetic that, sort of from that day. And then it happened again in, with long division in fourth grade. I managed to be sick on two key days (laughter), and although many years later, I sort of had a, what I think of as my epiphany moment with math. When I was in grade school, at least, I wanted nothing to do with arithmetic. I think between that and the fact that I was outwardly a well-adjusted child, but sort of the inwardly dealing with the trauma of having been separated from my mother [Norma Greve Storch] and my brother [Lary May] in New York and this whole trying to absorb this going back and forth craziness. I hid in fantasy a lot. So I would take out these fairytale books from the library. And I went through, you know, like they had the red fairytale book and the blue fairytale book and the yellow fairytale book, and a lot of different (unclear) (laughter). I had, I went through every fairytale book I could find. And I would sit during the arithmetic and the science classes and read these, you know, we had these desks that the books--it was like a desk with a hole in it, and you'd put your books in there. And I would pull, I would be pretending, and I had the arithmetic book open here. But in my lap, I had the fairytale book. So while everybody was doing their lessons in arithmetic, I was, had my head in the fairytales. So as a result, I never did very well in arithmetic. But I did do very well in English and sort of writing, and I think words and books and stories became an escape for me in a lot of ways. Story_ID: 97623 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, now, did your--I imagine the Bushes, I guess and the Gregorys too, probably kept up with the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And what was going on. So-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the--in 1964, the Democratic Party Convention was held in Atlantic City [New Jersey]. And the Mississippi Freedom Democrats came up and, until then, Peggy [Bush] was very ambivalent about me and race. She wanted powerfully to avoid any--she didn't want me to get confused was what she would call it. I think, you know, this whole idea of mu--the confused mulatto, the tragic mulatto who doesn't know where she belongs in society. And Peggy had a, was mounting a full defensive action to make sure that didn't happen to me. So she would really try to avoid talking about race almost, under almost any circumstances. I don't remember any early conversations about the Montgomery Bus Boycott, say, although I would have been two or three at that point. But, and I don't remember too much about [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Hr.]. It was sort of like I knew who King was, and it wasn't until my Uncle Hugh would come down with his kids, and he didn't care whether Peggy wanted me to be (laughter), wanted to not have, to have me talk about this or not, he was gonna talk about it. So I do remember some time, '64 [1964], I would have been ten years old. So around the time, I'm seven or eight or nine, I'm beginning to sort of realize that, you know, there's this connect--there's this thing about skin color, and it's not just about me and my mother [Norma Greve Storch] and I was too dark to pass 'cause she'd said, mentioned things to me, a couple of points about my being too dark to pass. And if I had been lighter, if my hair had been straighter, I could have lived with her. And I just thought it was this sort of secret that my mother and I had. And then I found out that it was this larger, there was this larger battle going on. And I was able to situate myself in it, and it, it actually was a powerful moment for me. I remember Peggy taking me down, finally when the 1964 convention happened, and the Mississippi Freedom Democrats who had been denied seating on the convention floor were demonstrating outside on the boardwalk. And Peggy took me down there to see them. They were all staying at the--the Gem Liquor Store had a hotel that was attached to it called the Gem Hotel. The Mississippi Freedom delegates were sitting--were staying at the Gem Hotel, and then she took me to the boardwalk to see the demonstration. And the car that Goodman, Schwerner and Chaney [Andrew Goodman, Michael Schwerner, James Earl Chaney] had been killed in, they had brought the car. And they were singing. I remember seeing Fannie, I remember Fannie Lou Hamer, her pointing her out to me. And so I do remember, and they had the bell from the church that the four little girls had been blown up in, and she told me what had happened to them. And I just remember it was, it was a powerful moment of connection for me, moving from a sort of existential isolated "I" to a, existential "We," you know (laughter), that there was this connection between me and this other movement. Story_ID: 97624 Speaker 1: It helped me brace, I think, against this--my mother [Norma Greve Storch] was neurotic about race. That's just the only way I can describe it (laughter). You know, she'd had this relationship with a black man [James "Jimmy" Cross]. She'd given birth to this child, and then she didn't want anybody to know that she had this child. So I mean, it'd been an issue for her. She was trying to find another husband or some man to take care of her 'cause she didn't have a high school diploma. She, well, she had a high school diploma, but no college education. Speaker 2: She really knew, no-- Speaker 1: What-- Speaker 2: --she had no way of really caring for herself. She was working, you know, working as, selling her body to make money. And so she was always trying to find somebody. And for a while she had found this sort of sugar daddy, older guy, who I came to call Uncle Bill, and it was like years and years and years. I was an adult and in therapy until my therapist one day said (laughter) to me, do you seriously think (laughter), that this older man [coughing], [excuse me] would come play with you every day and your mother wasn't giving him something, you know (laughter). And I was like, no, he just did it 'cause he liked me (laughter). And then finally I took that back to mom, and she was like, yes, he was one of my tricks, and he just liked you, and he came and he would take you out to play to the park every day (cough), which was a godsend for her 'cause she needed somebody to help take care of me. And she was always, she told me she was always worried that she would get arrested one night, and there'd be nobody to take care of me 'cause she kept--she had a very, a core group of maybe about five people that even knew I existed. And then everybody else, she had various stories about her family. We lived a very isolated existence. I had no childhood friends, while I lived with my mom. I didn't really begin interacting with other children socially until I started school in Atlantic City [New Jersey]. And so then as we, as I grew up, even though I was going back and forth, I would visit her on the weekends. But when we were together, it was a very insular and isolated experience. And then when she met Larry [Stoch] again, I was about eight years old, and she began to be very worried--well, she had been worried all along about this whole idea. She refused to--like Charles McBride's mother did, she refused to cross North of 96th and become part of the black community. She wanted to be, she wanted the status and the privilege that being a white woman gave her. And she was determined to hold on to it, and if it took telling me to keep my identity as her daughter, as her legitimate daughter a secret, then that's what she was willing to do. And that was basically what I was told from the time I was four or five. And Peggy [Bush] would help reinforce this. I mean Peggy had a different way of sort of reinforcing it. She didn't use the, she didn't play the race card, but she would say things like, you know, your mother, your mother travels a lot for business, and, you know, it would be very, it would be disruptive if people knew that, you know, you weren't really my daughter. So just tell everybody, you know, it's--you're my daughter as far as everybody is concerned. Story_ID: 97625 Speaker 1: Here's a question I didn't ask, and I'm sorry I didn't ask it earlier, but how did your mother and Peggy [Bush] meet, and what was their relationship? Speaker 2: They met because my dad [James "Jimmy" Cross] and my mother [Norma Storch], when they were together, used to rent the basement apartment. And Peggy and mom became friends. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's really the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Over that, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then she relied on Peggy--yeah, she knew she was gonna be giving birth to this half black child, and what kind of half-black child, she didn't know. But she was asking about what was it like to be black 'cause her, her whole experience--she had not had any experience with African Americans up until the moment that she met my dad. And he was an entertainer, which is not (laughter), it's not quite the real world (laughter), you know. So she, my mom only had this sort, les this sort of charmed life with Jimmy and knew nothing about what day-to-day life was like for a, for an African American, for a Negro, colored person, as she called them in those days, in the world. And so Peggy was her guide through that world for many, for a long time. And she very much respected and admired, and I think envied the life that Peggy and Paul had. I mean they owned their own house. They had, you know, a front and a backyard, you know. Peggy was a teacher. She was well respected. And my mother is, you know, scrambling on the margins, even though she's a white woman and has a certain amount of status and privilege because of that, she's on the margins of society, twice on the margins, yeah. You know, and she's like, sort of, she was, you know, in a way--and this is a coarse way to put it, but when she left me with Peggy, it was like you had a pet and you wanted to put it in a good home. And Peggy and Paul's was the best good home that she could come up with to put me in, you know. And plus, she was able to make an arrangement with Peggy where she could still maintain a relationship with me, which she wouldn't have been able to do if she'd say, put me in foster care or whatever. I mean it's a harder thing, and she knew what my brother [Lary May] was going through. My brother lived in seven foster homes from the time he was four until he was fourteen. So it was, she knew, you know, she didn't want me to have that experience. And she wasn't willing to put me up for adoption altogether as she had with Candy [Candace Herman]. She said years later, she'd already sort of felt like she lost two children, and she couldn't bear to part with a third. So she really wanted to hang onto me even if it was a tenuous relationship. It would be better than no relationship. But the price of that was, I had to learn to keep my mouth shut. So I was pretty much brainwashed by both her and Peggy in different ways to keep this thing a secret and not go blabbing all over town. A, if you're black, and you start blabbing about the fact that you have a white mother, then everybody's gonna think they're better--that you think you're better than them, you know (laughter). So we don't want that, 'cause then you'll come off as arrogant, and that's to be frowned upon, especially in a good Episcopalian household like Peggy's (laughter). And then, you know, then after mom met Larry [Storch], Larry was a successful comedian, and then Larry was on TV, and then, you know, then it was even more so. Then there began to be actually an economic cost associated with this if I went around blabbing. Then Larry could lose work, you know. My gravy train of dance classes and summer camp and the piano lessons and all that stuff that I liked to do would go away. No more Barbie dolls, no more all of this. I mean the way it was said to me was that everything--the family's economic existence, and really both families 'cause, you know, Peggy was getting a monthly stipend from my mother to take care of me. So, but it was a lot at stake to figure out some way to train me to keep my mouth shut while trying, at all costs, to minimize the psychic cost to me. And all things considered, I actually think Peggy did a pretty good job. Story_ID: 97626 Speaker 1: Okay. I know, so your mother [Norma Greve Storch] and Larry Storch were married, what-- Speaker 2: In 1964. Speaker 1: --1964. Okay, same year as-- Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963], actually, '63 [1963], no, no, no. Let me back up, back up, back up. Speaker 1: I know our outline said '62 [1962], but I don't-- Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962], yeah. Speaker 1: Is that about right? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'll go with your outline because I-- Speaker 1: You'd have been about-- Speaker 2: --should have reviewed my own life story before I came and sat here today. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) There's too many families to keep track of. It's not like it's one linear thing, you know. Speaker 1: There's a story about hair that is interesting, I think because, you know, I'm natural fan myself. I see your natural hair, which is good. But there's a, what were the dynamics of the hair thing. There's was a story about it in the book. Speaker 2: Well, there is a story about, well, there are several stories. The first story that I ever remember was my mother coming home from work, and she had some friend of hers who had offered to take care of me, and decided--my mother kept my hair cut very, very short because it was, you know, it would be at sort of the half inch mark. It was curly, and then at the inch mark, it sort of went to frizzy, and at the inch and a half mark, it became nappy (laughter). So it was sort of like--and the longer it grew, the more obvious it was that there was no way that this child was ever gonna pass in any--even though that was a tenuous dream in the first place. But anyway, she comes home one day, and this woman, this black woman who was supposed to be taking care of me had decided she was gonna do my mother a favor and straighten my hair. And I was on the floor screaming, half my hair was pressed with the Dixie Peach (laughter), and the other half of it was sort of standing on end, and I was screaming. She had burnt me with the hot comb trying to burn the thing, and, you know, my mom was furious and sent the woman home without paying her. And it was like awful, you know. She was like, you know, and then at the same time she would say things like, well, she could pass if it just wasn't for her hair, you know. I guess at that point I hadn't, I guess I hadn't, my skin color hadn't, you know, whatever, burnished itself or whatever. So she, you know, it was a very, the hair thing was very--I think at one point in my life, I felt that it, either hair, even more than skin color, is the defining factor between people of African descent and the rest of the world (laughter), you know that there's this nappy hair that you can never quite deal with or get over. It's never straight. It's never gonna act straight. I never acts right, you know. You can do whatever you want with it (laughter), you have to--you can buy other hair (laughter). You can try--although I never, I always refused to do the weave, but, you know, this is sort of my accommodation to the hair. It's gone through many, it's best seen--the whole hair thing, all I can tell The HistoryMakers is, (laughter) you should just get that sequence out of the film where I sort of start out with a fro. Then I was in twists. Then I got it straightened, and it, you know, I mean it's been through every permutation under the sun. It, you know, when I did on-air work, for a while, I did straighten it. And I had a Jheri curl. Then I cut it all off, and I went back to a short natural again. Then I had twists, and now I sort of discovered locks. I went, I decided to lock it right after 2001. I'm not quite sure. That was sort of my reaction to 9/11 [September 11, 2001], and I still can't figure out what that's about, the--or working at Columbia [University, New York City, New York], one or the other. I guess I finally felt secure enough that it didn't matter what the white people I was working with thought about my hair. But I mean it is a powerful--you do get treated differently, depending on whether or not you have straight hair or nappy hair or locks for that matter. I mean locks are considered a political statement almost everywhere. And it's just hair. I could shave it off tomorrow and (laughter), and I'm still me. But perception of the society at large varies greatly. And with black women being so, in such a tenuous position even though, I mean, you know, look at Beyonce, right? So as beautiful as Beyonce is, Beyonce's not really beautiful unless she has half blonde hair. You know, her skin tone gets lightened up at least three stops, whenever there's a picture taken of her. And she has to be a size eight. So, you know, I mean there's--black women are always sort of fighting with this image of what is beautiful, and how do you meet some standard of beauty, and what's the easiest thing to do deal with is, you know, buy somebody else's hair, buy some poor Indian woman's hair (laughter), who thinks that she's giving it to the gods and instead, it's sitting on your head (laughter), you know. Story_ID: 97627 Speaker 1: So, anyway, I don't know if that's--I don't know if that's the story you were looking for? Were you thinking-- Speaker 2: Well, I, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --of the story about the perm and the number of times I got it permed as a child. Well, when Larry [Storch] and mom [Norma Greve Storch] got married, first, they were living in New York. Then they moved to California. And they bought this house up in the [Hollywood] Hills in Nichols Canyon. Speaker 2: Now, this is when he becomes a television star, right-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --'cause he was a stand-up-- Speaker 1: He was a stand-up. Speaker 2: --for, now, that's where (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: He actually had his own show even during the '50s [1950s] 'cause he had the Ed Sullivan replacement show nineteen fifty--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, 'cause I know I first saw him on the Ed Sullivan Show, yeah. Speaker 1: And then he did another--he did the summer replacement for the Sullivan Show. Speaker 2: There's where he did the finger (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: He had his own, yeah, he had his own, his own show for a minute. And then after they finally got married--I'm still not sure. They, the story I've heard is that they ran into each other on street and it just sort of started up again. And then when they did get married, they finally--and he got the "F Troop" show, well, in between there, actually, there's an interesting story just so that it's not all about black people trying to look a certain way. Larry's people, Larry's mother, I think, his people are from--it's not Kazakhstan. The other--Kazakhstan or menistan (ph.), the one that's closest to Mongolia. I think it's Armenistan, Ar--it's one of the stan's. Speaker 2: Armenia? Speaker 1: Not Armenia, Speaker 2: Tajikistan? Speaker 1: Tajikistan. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So he had these, he had that oriental fold in his eye. I think that's what they call it, the oriental fold, the Asian fold. Speaker 2: Epicanthic eye fold, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, and he, it used to give him the ability in movies, he always would play like the Japanese or the Chinese guy. And then when he trying to sort of break out from the character roles and become a mainstream star, he was told that he was not gonna be hired because he looked too oriental (laughter). And he went and got plastic surgery and got the fold done away with, and so that he would look more Caucasian. And shortly after that was when he was offered the job on "F Troop." Story_ID: 97628 Speaker 1: So anyway, then at that point, they bought this beautiful house up in the Hills, in Hollywood Hills, and it had a pool. And, of course, you know, at that point perms weren't as safe as they are now. And I was--and generally, people didn't like to perm a child's hair anyway. But I was going back and forth, and the whole thing with the pool was just not working. I had long, fairly long, shoulder-length hair that was pressed and combed in dutiful style every other week as all black women did. And but when I went to California, it just became--there was not a bathing cap that was going to keep (laughter) the water out of my hair. And it just became crazy. And I finally got this perm. And the perm never quite worked the way that perms were supposed to work. And my hair is very delicate. It was both sort of nappy at its outer edges, but also very delicate. Peggy [Bush] took me to some Dominican place in Brooklyn [New York] which was supposed--or the Bronx [New York], that was supposed to be like "the" place. Dominicans can do some hair now. That's all they do, not all they do, but Dominican women can handle some hair. And at that point, Dominican women, it was really, you know, if you had a certain grade of hair that was sort of soft, not really nappy, not like coarse nappy, not the kind of Brillo course nappy, but nappy enough so that it wouldn't sit right on your head, you would take your child to a Dominican hairdresser. So Peggy took me to this Dominican hairdresser. She put this stuff on my head, and I thought I was going to die. It was like that scene in the Malcolm X movie, where they're putting the lye on the brother's head, and he goes and sticks his head (laughter) in the toilet. It was that same kind of burning sensation on my head. Anyway, I came out, hair was beautifully straight. I went to California, I don't know, like two days later, after getting this perm. I mean when I think about it now, it was totally ridiculous. I just had like this, like these chemicals put in my hair, and I'm jumping in a chlorine pool and sitting in the sun, day after day in California. And my hair started falling out. Basically, I got back to Atlantic City [New Jersey], and it was coming out in clumps. I mean it was clumps of hair coming out. And we finally had to cut it all off. And I sort of didn't mind. I was never really attached to it. Peggy was always very attached to the hair. I have a lot of hair. Everybody who's ever done my hair says I have enough hair for two people. But Peggy kept all of that hair in a Valentine candy box (laughter). I remember coming down one night and she was just sitting there sort just like, like it was gold that she had lost somehow, these balls of hair. Poor thing (laughter). Anyway, yeah, so anyway, that's hair. Story_ID: 97629 Speaker 1: Okay, that's quite a story (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: That's quite a story. Speaker 2: The things we do in the name of, you know--Peggy [Bush] always used to have this saying that she would tell--she tried to brainwash me with it, and it never took. The saying was, "You have to suffer to be beautiful--Women have to suffer to be beautiful", and my comeback from the time I was a child was, well, then I guess I'll never be beautiful 'cause I am not gonna suffer. I did not add that last part 'cause I would have been slapped. But I was thinking that (laughter). So I said it, you know. I guess I'm not gonna be beautiful then, you know, and she was like, yes, you will, yes, you will. You're gonna have to suffer, but you just have to suffer to be beautiful. And she, this was about everything from the hair to trying to force me into a girdle when I was developing. I was pretty much fully developed by the time I was twelve, much to my embarrassment, and much to Peggy's chagrin. So she kept trying to put me in these clothes that would cover me up. It was like living in a Muslim country even (laughter) though I was in Atlantic City [New Jersey], I mean all clothes were to--there was to be no cleavage and no butt, and, you know, put me in a girdle and just like stop all that stuff from giggling (laughter), just like make it stop. She's only twelve. She's a little girl (laughter), you know (laughter). So that was, that left more scars actually, probably than the whole thing with having to say to everybody that my mom--my mother's not my mother. She's my aunt, (laughter) I mean, you know. Story_ID: 97630 Speaker 1: Okay, high school. Now, where'd you go to--what was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: Atlantic City High School [Atlantic City, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't know--is there only one in-- Speaker 2: There's only one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Atlantic City at that time was a town of 60,000 people year round, and 120, swell to 120 [thousand] in the summer. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: And the high school had about 4,000 students, and my graduating class had about 800, 760-some. Speaker 1: Okay, what about the demographics of it? How many black students of the 4,000, do you think? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: What do you think, twenty percent, ten percent? Speaker 2: No, it was more than that. Speaker 1: More than twenty percent? Speaker 2: Yes, I think so. But I may be totally wrong on this. I'm gonna guess and say thirty, thirty to thirty-five. Speaker 1: Did you have any black teachers? Speaker 2: Mrs. Carter,-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Mrs. Carter is the reason I got into Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I had gotten all the way to high school and I knew how to write, although I did have a teacher in junior high school who thought that I wrote way, I was way too verbal and way too accomplished a writer to actually be writing--I was accused of plagiarism basically, in junior high, by a white teacher. And it sort of-- Speaker 1: That story's been told in this project at least three or four times. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I remember Peggy [Bush] having to go down there with me and the teacher still didn't believe, you know, I showed her all my footnotes. I showed her what I had written, and the teacher still didn't believe I had written it. And I remember Peggy taking me home and she said, she took me to a White Tower to get a hamburger, and it was my favorite. It was better than McDonald's--this is pre-McDonald's. We didn't McDonald's. We had a White Tower which is like White Castle, the--you know. She said, people--you're gonna run--in your life, you're going to run into people who will never believe that you're actually as good as you are. And you just need to let their doubts roll off you like so much water off a duck's back. And that was sort of the end, and then we never spoke of it again. But the way she said it, I realized that she was telling me a life lesson, not a--it wasn't just a, don't worry about it; it'll be okay kind of thing. But she was like, you know, she was like, yeah, this woman is fuckin' racist. I know it and you know it. I'm not gonna call her a racist. But this is bullshit (laughter). You know, we both know you wrote that report (laughter). And so just like, that's the way she is, just go on, move on with your life, and, you know, the way to get around it is to just be twice as good so that you don't give people an in to accuse you of that. Speaker 1: Okay, so in high school, now, did you have a--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So in high school, black teachers, Mrs. Carter was English, and I had gotten to high school. And I was very talented with the English language, but I did not know a noun from a verb or a subject from a predicate or (laughter) any of that stuff. And I remember Mrs. Carter one day we'd had some test, and I didn't care, and I did really bad--well, I was a very indifferent student. I could be, if I was really interested in it, I'd like ace it. And if I decided I wasn't interested in it, then it'd be like, you know, "C" all the way. I'd be getting like 75s and (unclear) skating. Ms. Carter, I got a 75 or something on this. It's probably a 67 on this one test, (laughter) and Ms. Carter said, I remember her slamming her hand down on the desk and saying, I am going to teach you the English language if it is the last thing I do (laughter). You are not graduating sophomore year of high school without knowing what a noun and a predicate are. And she made me come every day after school until I learned my grammar. And Mrs. Carter had been, when Atlantic City finally did begin to desegregate the schools, what they decided to do was move the best black teachers out of the segregated schools and into the high school. So Mrs. Carter had been the first black teacher into Atlantic City High, into the white high school at Atlantic City High. And Mrs. Nelson, who was actually also very, very fair-skinned, and you wouldn't know she was black unless you knew she was black, was the second. And she taught geometry. Mrs. Carter--Mrs. Nelson and I never quite hit it off because of my fear of math and she kept insisting that I could figure this out. And I just by that time had a total mental block. And then I had Mr. Perkins, he taught Algebra. I loved Algebra. It was sort of like unlocking a puzzle. And let me see, who else did I have. I didn't have any languages. So those are the three I remember, those are the three who made an impression. Story_ID: 97631 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, any other teachers make an impression on you that, besides the black teachers-- Speaker 2: Mr. Lindblad (ph.) was my, I took AP English. By my senior year--I had a great senior year. And everybody else, I remember people started talking about senioritis, I had not a clue what they were really talking about. My senior year was like the best year of my life (laughter), you know. I took AP English, AP biology and AP French. So I had three AP courses I was carrying. And it was just great. I just felt like the whole world opened up. That previous summer I had gone to Europe with Larry [Storch] and Norma [Greve Storch]. I visited them in Rome. I was with them in Rome for like three weeks, and then my brother [Lary May], who had just gotten married. He and his wife were on their honeymoon, and they invited me along. So I traveled with them in France, Germany and Amsterdam [Netherlands] for another six weeks. So I basically spent the summer between my junior and senior year in high school in Europe. And I came back and I was just like a sponge. I just wanted to learn--all of a sudden, all this stuff that ordinarily feels so dry in high school, meant something. And I just wanted to learn as much as I could. So anyway, teachers, Mr. Lindblad was my English teacher. And I had always loved English, and I was always a writer. And at that point, I thought I wanted to be a poet, still have days when I want to be a poet (laughter). And Mr. Lindblad was very encouraging. All my English teachers were always very encouraging, but Mr. Lindblad really more so than others. We had a really close relationship. And I became the editor of the literary magazine. I was such a frickin' overachiever, it's sad. But, so that relationship was pretty close. Story_ID: 97632 Speaker 1: Now, this trip to Europe sounds really like something that, I mean did you, did you anticipate this? Was this a spur of the moment thing or what happened? By this time, like Larry Storch is a, he's in this "F Troop"--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He's--so this is '70 [1970]-- Speaker 1: It goes on for several seasons. Speaker 2: F-Troop was '67 [1967] and '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Just two years? Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967] to '69 [1969]. It was only two years. Speaker 1: Just two years, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There's a story though before we, skip out of that, that I want you to tell about the photo. There's a photo-- Speaker 2: My God, the photo. Speaker 1: --a cast photo. Speaker 2: The infamous photo. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: So, as I've explained, my mother [Norma Greve Storch] tried to keep my existence as her biological daughter a secret. And I was instructed from time to time to call her Aunt Norma or just, I was introduced as my--actually, no, that came later. It was Aunt Norma at that point. And then there came a time, I guess this must have been at the end of the first season of "F Troop," they pulled all the families together to have a group photo that they were gonna release to the PR machine, and I was--happened to be visiting at this time. And she invited me, you know, me and Lary [May]--my brother's name is Larry also. Larry, one "r", and Larry Storch is Larry two "r's" inside the family. So anyway, we're, you know, it was a big to-do. What am I gonna wear for the picture? And what am I gonna do with my hair for the picture? Blah, blah, blah. And Lary, my brother, Lary, many years later said, he watched all this, and he's thinking, what? Has she lost her mind? Doesn't she know that there's no way that she's ever gonna be able to keep this a secret if this child appears in the picture. We take the picture. And I was very, I don't know. I was just, I was twelve. I was just twelve--I was eleven actually. I was getting ready to be twelve. And we took the picture. I was very shy and very, sort of just feeling very awkward and gangly and, you know, not knowing what to do with this adult body that had somehow managed to find me. And anyway, there I am in the picture. I go back to Atlantic City. The picture gets published, somebody from Warner Brothers calls my mother and said, the, whatever the Hollywood magazine was, wanted to know who is this Negro child in the picture, at which point it seemed to dawn on my mother that she might have made a mistake. Speaker 1: So then they began concocting these stories. And the story they finally settled on was a variation, was a combination of what had really happened and some fantasizing of my mother's which was what she usually did. So the story she came up with was I was the daughter of the couple across the hall from their apartment when we lived on 67th. And that the couple used to fight, the father would beat the mother, and that as a child, I had sought refuge from the noise and argument by coming to her apartment across the hall where she and Larry had this loving home. And they had fallen in love with me and taken me in. So I was therefore, and then that Larry, out of the goodness of his heart, had agreed to adopt me. And so I was now--but I was never, and the last name was never Storch. I mean I was never adopted (laughter), yeah, just like any reporter with like thirty seconds could have poked about ten holes in the story, not to mention that there was a whole community of show biz people who knew my dad and knew Larry and knew Norma and who had seen Norma and Jimmy [James Cross] and knew when she was pregnant that she was with my dad. I mean there's, it was no way that this story would have--knowing what I know now, as a reporter, there was no way that that story would have ever held up. But anyway, the magazine came out. Peggy [Bush] went from end of Atlantic City [New Jersey] to the other buying up all the copies of the magazine so that nobody in Atlantic City would find it. And I was instructed literally to not answer the phone for two weeks. I was not allowed to answer the phone, and I was sort of thinking in the back of my mind that this was just stupid anyway. But, you know, I was like twelve. I was sort of getting to that age where everything is stupid (laughter) anyway, and so I'm like, okay, okay, you know. And then I remember that was the day she took me aside and she said, look, this whole house of cards could come falling down. Larry will, "F-Throop" will be taken off the air. Larry will never get work. You know, all of these, you know, these things that you love to do, you won't be able to do anymore. You know, no more piano lessons, no more dance classes, no more summer camp, no more, you know, no more trips to California. No more, you know, you won't be able to do any of that unless you learn to keep your mouth shut about this and do not answer the phone. If you meet a reporter, you know what the story is, stick to it. So I was like, okay. I got it, I will, and sort of still thinking it was pretty stupid. But I did. So anyway, yeah, that's the story around the picture. And then I had one classmate who somehow got the damn magazine before Aunt Peggy had gotten to it. She bought it at the A&P. She lived a block from the A&P. And she loved this magazine, and she had it already. And I remember her calling me up, and she's like, I just saw a picture of you in this magazine, blah, blah, blah, blah. Is this true? And I was like, yeah, it's true, but I'm not--and I tried to explain to her that I really, I could not tell anybody, and I had to swear her to secrecy. And then she ended up sharing the secret with me about her father having committed a murder that was also equally secret, and she--and the two of us sort of bonded over that. I remember, and we still are pretty good friends. She still lives in Atlantic City. And it was sort of one of those weird things. Story_ID: 97633 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it was sort of a community of people. There were people that sort of knew, but didn't say--and a lot of the adults knew, but just would never say anything. And much to my chagrin, my dad [James "Jimmy" Cross] who I never saw from the time--I saw him once when I, I met him once when I was four with my mother [Norma Greve Storch] in the Sculpture Garden at the Museum of Modern Art. And then I didn't see him again until I was seven. He just sort of popped in, into the house at Atlantic City [New Jersey] to say hello. And he visited with me for a couple of hours or something. He taught me to play "Body and Soul" on the piano--"Heart and Soul" on the piano. And then I didn't see him again until I was twenty-nine. And then it turned out when I was working on the, doing the research for what became the documentary "Secret Daughter," I would run into people, and they'd say, oh, yeah, I knew your dad. I knew who your dad was. Your dad, I would go and hang out with your dad or, you know, so I--it made me so angry (laughter). And I would say, then why didn't, you never told me. And they'd say, well, that was grown folks' business. It wasn't for children to know, you know, so. It was like this conspiracy of silence that was all aimed at maintaining the status quo. Story_ID: 97634 Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's go back to high school now. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: We got you at senior year and taking-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Advanced Placement courses. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: You're, I guess your grades are really high and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I did get good grades. Speaker 1: --you've got a, your English teacher suggest you go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. That's who suggested you go to Harvard or did you--or how did that happen? Speaker 2: I don't quite remember anymore how the whole Harvard thing came up. I remember him, he wrote me an amazing letter (laughter). I remember Aunt Peggy [Bush] thought it was just over the top. Or he told, basically, told Harvard they were out of their mind if they didn't take me. But the Harvard thing came out, I was pretty, I was aiming pretty low. I mean I think my top choice initially, I was thinking Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York], maybe Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey]. I was looking at University of Rochester [Rochester, New York]. And then I had a girlfriend who was going to, wanted to go to Bennington [Bennington College, Bennington, Vermont], and I went with her. Then I fell in love with Bennington. So then I really wanted to go to Bennington. And then one day, I'm in the house, and a neighbor from around the corner had a grandson who lived in Trenton [New Jersey] who would come down. His name was Ripper, James Henderson, called him Ripper. And I'm in the house alone. This knock comes on the door. I go to answer the door. It's Ripper. Ripper says, hi, my name's Jim Henderson. Everybody calls me Ripper, and I'm a freshman at Harvard, and they've sent me around to promising students. And you've been identified as a possible candidate to apply to Harvard. And I must have laughed for about five minutes. And it's still funny now (laughter), the idea that I would ever get into Harvard, the idea that I could even go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I was just like, you're out of your fuckin' mind (laughter). I'm like, what are you smoking. I want some (laughter). And I, you know, he tried to insist that I could do it, and I just like, I just basically laughed him out of the house. And it was like, you know, good-bye. You can close the door. And then I think I went to school on Monday and mentioned it to Mr. Lindblad. And he said, I totally think that you're Harvard material. And I looked at him again and started laughing. And he said, no, I'm serious. You are Harvard material. And then I went to the guidance counselor, and the guidance counselor was a little less encouraging. But at those days, guidance counselors would sort of play the odds, you know. Atlantic City had had students that had gotten into Harvard before. So she was like, well, it's been about twenty years since (laughter) anybody from the school got into Harvard, but they're looking for--you know, this is 1971. So we've gone through the riots. You know, King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] has been assassinated, you know. California, Los Angeles has blown up again. They're looking for affirmative action candidates, you know--affirmative action then was a good thing, not a bad thing. I don't even know if we had a name for it. I don't know if the name "affirmative action" had been thought of, but they were looking for promising black candidates. And at that point, Harvard was looking for, Harvard was recruiting anybody who had a certain IQ level. When I came in, we had gang members, we had gang leaders who hadn't even graduated high school that were accepted into that class. They didn't graduate, but they got accepted (laughter), the cultural-- Speaker 1: The Ford Foundation program, I think-- Speaker 2: No, was that what did it? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was, there were a couple of them there, were real tragedies, the cultural gap was just too big. And the thing about having grown up with all those, with the Gregorys and having gone to Europe and, you know, even though my mother [Norma Greve Stroch] hadn't gone to college, she had--she was a very genteel, polished and sophisticated, you know, as close to Jackie Onassis [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] as you could be without having been Jackie Onassis (laughter). So she was very, you know, I had been trained properly (laughter). I could blend in well. But senior year in high school, I don't know. So what? So that's how Harvard came up. Speaker 1: Okay, so you hadn't applied until you had that conversation with your-- Speaker 2: (Nodding). Speaker 1: Okay. And so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and never thought I was gonna get in. I was sure, I mean I was planning on, you know, Douglass College at Rutgers or Syracuse, you know, best world, maybe, Syracuse Journal, you know, go to school in journalism at Syracuse 'cause there was somebody I knew that lived a couple of blocks away, had gotten into Syracuse. Story_ID: 97635 Speaker 1: So, so, is there anything special about graduation from high school that we need to mention that-- before we-- Speaker 2: I don't know 'cause I'm not quite sure we--what is the trajectory of the conversation. I mean I remember the day that I graduated. I remember the morning after. Five of us, there were five of us who were sort of the clique, the close group. And I remember going out on the jetty. We'd all sort of that night gotten high on the beach and I remember walking out on a jetty and wondering what my life was gonna be like, while I watched the sun rise. And it's like seriously wondering like, what, what is the future? What is my future gonna be, and having no idea, absolutely no idea. I was the only person in my class that got into Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. It was like this huge, huge, big deal. I had this feeling that everything was about to change and I had no idea what it was gonna mean. Speaker 1: So what did you do for that summer? Speaker 2: I worked at the Atlantic City Press-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the press of Atlantic, it's now called The Press of Atlantic City, which was the newspaper. And I had a job at a card store. I worked for them on the weekends in the photo morgue, which was the people that file all the photographs of (unclear) with the pictures. And then I had a job working in a card store filing in a, you know, the Hallmark cards, in that kind of card store. Story_ID: 97636 Speaker 1: Okay, so what was Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] like? Now, you're gonna major in journalism, right? You're majoring in journalism. Speaker 2: I wanted to be a writer. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I wanted to be a poet. I wanted to be Langston Hughes. And I ended up writing--my senior thesis was actually an adaptation of Langston Hughes' Simple Tales. I'm not quite sure actually did I want to be Langston Hughes. Did I even really know who--yeah, I knew who Langston was because part of Harvard was actually learning about the canon of black literature and a lot of--this whole idea of a canon, which I never even knew what it was (laughter), until I got to Harvard, you know, this idea that there are these things, that if you are a well read, civilized person, you need to know. That idea had never, somehow never quite crossed my brain's threshold until I got to Harvard and realized that. And there were all these other--I just felt so inferior and insecure and not worthy and questioning why I was there. My professors questioned why I was there (laughter). They didn't think I was so--I have a student--I actually remind myself. I have a student like that now. You just, you see all this promise and all this potential, and the student themself [sic] can't see it 'cause they're so locked inside their little box of insecurity that they just can't even perceive their own raw talent. And I think I was probably that kind of student when I walked into that, definitely became that student that first year at Harvard. Everybody else came from very wealthy families or, I mean like seriously, like wealth from five generations ago wealth. And I had never even--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, who were some of your classmates from there that-- Speaker 2: Classmates? Oh, God, I don't remember names. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember going to a party freshman, early freshman week up at Marblehead [Massachusetts] in somebody's house, and it was like the family had had this house for like three generations. And it's like, Marblehead, I mean like on the beach at Marblehead (laughter). No, I got drunk as a skunk. That's the first time I ever had moonshine. And I ended up on the floor crying, crying and begging for my mother (laughter), so embarrassing. I tried to get on the Harvard Crimson. That was probably what you're talking about, the journalism thing. Speaker 1: So your major was-- Speaker 2: Everybody that was in my class who was black was a first-generation Harvard admit, pretty much. I mean there hadn't--there was no such thing. I had, my extended family, the Gregorys, four generations, but I mean it wasn't a usual thing. There were pretty much--we were all pioneers in a way. And I've learned later from people that I know that a lot of my classmates were fourth and fifth-generation Harvard people, but I don't think we ever really talked about that amongst ourselves. You have to remember, this in the middle of Vietnam, and so even if it was Vietnam and hippydom and in the middle of this social, this huge social upheaval. So nobody would have been bragging about that kind of stuff in the way that they do now. It just would have been un--totally unseemly. And we were all, we were all about revolution and ending this war and, if we were black, we were trying to start a black studies department at Harvard, which we didn't get until thirty years later when [Henry Louis] Skip Gates [Jr.] came (laughter). Speaker 1: There was a department there in the '70s [1970s], yeah. Speaker 2: There was a department, but it was, it didn't have degree--I guess it did have a degree, but it wasn't well respected. And part of what my involvement at the Harvard Crimson was, to try to document the attempt to make that a true degree, (unclear). You couldn't major, you couldn't graduate in Afro-American Studies. It had to be Afro-American Studies and something. So it didn't have full credibility. Speaker 1: I remember Eward Grenier (ph.)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --was the director, and Martin Kilson (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Eward was running it, and I took, in fact, I learned about jazz from A.B. Spellman [HM]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And Geneva, black English, Geneva-- Speaker 1: Smitherman? Speaker 2: Smitherman. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I did an Afro-American Studies course with her, literature. And [Robert] Bobby O'Meally who became the chair of the English department--not the chair, but the first black, tenured member of the English Department here at Columbia [University] was my thesis advisor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was then a Ph.D. student in English there. Story_ID: 97637 Speaker 1: It was a traumatizing experience. It took me twenty years to recover from those four years. Speaker 2: Well, what was, what was traumatizing about Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 1: [Sigh] Not feeling, feeling less than. And the whole situation with the [Harvard] Crimson. There was something that was expected of me as a black American, and I didn't know what it was. I didn't know what it meant to be a black American. There was no name for it at that time. We'd just come through this, we just had gotten the Civil Rights Act passed. And the housing, and the Voting Rights Act passed, and the fair housing rights had passed. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]had been killed in '68 [1968]. The Black Panther Party was sort of on the ascend--by '71 [1971], certainly on the ascendancy. I got into school, and I got admitted to a graduate-level poetry seminar as a freshman. And then did terribly in it. I remember sitting in one of the classes, early in the semester. And they were all talking about John Berryman and E.E. Cummings. I knew E.E. Cummings, but I didn't know Berryman's work. I didn't know Sylvia Plath's work. And I just sort of felt like, like totally out of depth here. I'm just totally out of my depth here. And I don't belong here. And then I remember, and I did terribly in that class. And then at the end of the class, the professor said to me, he was expecting me to bring the black experience into the class and he had been very disappointed that I hadn't. And I didn't even know what the black (laughter), I had no frickin' clue. What are you talking about, the black experience? What black experience was I supposed to bring? You know, he wanted me to bring, you know, Lucille Clifton who I'd never even heard of until he mentioned her name that day, Langston Hughes who I had heard of, you know. I mean I knew the old black poets, but I mean like within the Gregory family, the people that we revered as poets would have been like Walt Whitman (laughter), you know, Robert Frost. I mean that, that was sort of the, you know, when we talked about poetry, that was who we talked about. And then there was just this whole other conversation of post-modern, or I guess, modern poets that I just knew nothing about. So it sort of started there, and began feeling sort of less. And then I was smoking too much drugs too. That's a whole other thing. Story_ID: 97638 Speaker 1: But, and then I started trying to get on the Harvard Crimson, and I got cut the first time I tried. Can you--you, the way the Crimson worked was, you would, you came onboard as a reporter. And then you went through a period of about six weeks where you were considered to be, what we call "comping." It was really a competition, "comp", short for competition. And then at the end of the six weeks, the people who were already members of this club would vote and decide whether or not you were good enough to get in, based on the articles you had written. So the first comp, I was cut, and it was like, all right. I failed once. I'll try again. The second comp (laughter), I was cut (laughter). Actually, it was longer than six weeks. It must have been the semester 'cause each one of these was a semester, and then by--it was now in the sophomore year. So then in the beginning of the sophomore year, I try again. Actually, it was the end of the sophomore year. I'm trying again. And I actually thought I'd made it. I did a lot of articles on the fight to get Afro-American Studies in, sort of covering the department, covering with, from within the department. And I had a benefactor or a guy who was really working with me, a guy named [Douglas] Doug Schoen. He works for Schoen & Penn, the political, they do political polling now, Doug Schoen. Doug was sort of, you know, walking me through the ropes and, you know, I would get all these weird things like people would say, oh, go sleep with the president of the Crimson. He thinks you're cute (laughter), and it's like really stupid. And then I had one nemesis, who I'm not sure if I should name. But I guess since this is for history, this is--who was, oh, Peter, what was your last name--Shapiro, who just didn't like any of my work at all. And I remember getting a phone call at home that last night, and I was on pins and needles. Was I gonna make it? There were no blacks on the Crimson, I should mention. Henry McGee, who's now on the--later became a member of the Op-Ed, the editorial board of The New York Times, had just left. He'd graduated in the class of '71 [1971]. And I came in, in the fall of '71 [1971]. So at that particular moment, there did not happen to be a black person on the board of the Crimson. And so I was going to be like the first person within our four-year cohort. And Doug called me and said I think it's gonna work. You've been, you've been voted in on this first round. And so I was elated. And so I walked back in the next day, expecting to get the handshake, congratulations, welcome. You're a member of the Old Boys Club, and I sit down and Peter Shapiro says to me, well, June, I'm sorry. But you just didn't make it. And I'm like, you're--really? And I'm like what happened? And he said, you just--we measured your stories against the average length of stories that appear in the Crimson, and the average length of stories was, I don't know, seven inches. And yours was five. I mean it was like something like that. And I was like (laughter) what is this, a penis measuring contest (laughter)? What are we talking about? And I'm thinking to myself, I was so shocked, I didn't have the guts to say that to him then. I would now, but I didn't then. And I was already sort of feeling less than. There'd been some other things. I'd had a teacher make a comment about my not being prepared, even though I'd taken AP English, she didn't feel I was prepared for AP work, and I almost flunked out of English. But that was more, I was cutting classes 'cause I was doing too many drugs, and working at the Crimson. And anyway, so I'm reeling. Shapiro goes, runs me through this whole penile measuring contest in the name of stories. And he said to me, finally, you know, you just don't have what it takes to be a journalist. You should find something else to do 'cause you're not gonna make it as a reporter. You just don't have what it takes, which was the single-- Speaker 2: Okay, we're gonna pause-- Speaker 1: --best thing he could have ever said to me. Story_ID: 97639 Speaker 1: At some point in my sophomore year, and I was trying to--you have to pass sophomore, a sophomore core course, English 10 in order to become an English major. And I was in danger of not passing this class. And I had this tutor. They finally gave me a tutor, assigned me a tutor who was an Indian, East Indian, Brahmin, very proper, who asked me one day what was--she was talking about something in terms of the epiphany. And it must have been we were reading James Joyce or something. And it was something about an epiphany and asked me. And I looked at her sort of puzzled, and she said, "You do know what an epiphany is?" And I said, yes, it's the feast of the day when the three wise men found the baby Jesus (laughter) twelve days after Christmas." And she just looked at me, and like slammed the book down and went down the hall. And I could hear her saying to her, I guess her--she was a graduate student. So whoever her person was, you know, why do we let these black students in? They're not, totally not prepared to do college-level work. She doesn't even know what an epiphany is. Yeah, and then I remember her coming back to me and, you know, she's sort of started to try over again. But I could tell she was so exasperated with me, and I honestly was too stupid. I'm still trying to figure out, well, what was wrong with that answer? As far as I--that is a perfectly good answer, and it happens to be a correct answer (laughter), you know. It just wasn't the answer she was looking for, and I wasn't familiar, I must have been smoking dope on the beach in Atlantic City [New Jersey] (laughter) on the day Mr. Lindblad covered epiphany in English class. But-- Speaker 2: Was that, what you're describing seems to be sort of a mean type of attitude in terms of-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah, well, that and then at the [Harvard] Crimson, being told, you know, you just don't, you know, "Chick, you just don't have what it takes. Get out of here." Yeah, and then I'd heard that over and over again. And I think up until I got to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], no one had ever told me I'm incapable of doing this. I had sometimes told myself that, like with the arithmetic thing or with math or--even with chemistry, I remember this. I had taken, I was taking, it wasn't AP biology, it was AP chemistry. I was taking a chemistry class, and my MO [modus operandi] in high school was I would always get three A's and a C, three A's and a C, three A's and a C. And the C was always in chemistry. And I finally decided that I was gonna ace chemistry one quarter. And I just, I was gonna do it. And I aced chemistry (laughter). I got C in everything else (laughter). And so I got one A and three C's (laughter). So at that point, I decided, all right, my brain is not constitutionally set up for math, and I'm--obviously, I'm a literary person. And that's the direction I'm gonna go in. But then when I got to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to have first my, the poetry teacher tell me I wasn't gonna cut it there. And I wasn't doing well--there was a core course in natural sciences, Nat Sci 10 and I didn't do well in that. And I got a C--meaning I got a C. It wasn't, it didn't--meant not doing well. I just was floundering that first year, and I wasn't sure I really wanted to go to Harvard. I had put up a terrible fight about even going to Harvard in the first place. And I think, so there was some, there was a mixture of resentment and teenage angst and not quite knowing what I was doing there, not really feeling like I belonged there. You know, had I just been let in because they needed a geographical--they hadn't admitted anybody from Atlantic City High [School], so they let me in. Story_ID: 97640 Speaker 1: And David [L.] Evans who's the storied, the legendary admissions officer at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] who-- Speaker 2: He's a black man. Speaker 1: Yeah, despite his best assurances that I had been admitted because, you know, aside from whatever the grades were, that there were all these other things that I was involved in that made me among the best students in the United States, and worthy of that class, I still just didn't, I didn't feel it, I didn't get it on a fundamental level. So I was really, by the end of my sophomore year, pretty disenchanted and depressed really, probably clinically depressed and smoking more and more dope to try to make up for it (laughter). Hello, HistoryMakers, gained a lot of weight, but then the following fall, I discovered television. And I had a, there was a guy named Topper Carew who had just been given the producership, the producer of a show called "Say Brother," which is now called "Basic Black," is produced by WGBH-TV, had (unclear) drowned and the real producer, the--oh, God, what was his name? Oh, John, John--anyway, Topper was the new producer. And Topper needed an intern. Two classmates of mine had been interning for Topper in his previous job as a film animator, and he wanted an intern, but neither one of them wanted to go work at WGBH. And they asked me was I interested, and I said, sure. And I became Topper's intern. And it changed my life. It changed the entire trajectory of my life. I loved the collaborative effort of television. I was in, even though "Say Brother" was sort of ghettoized within WGBH as a local show, it was a community of black, smart, black people who were putting out a product. They all thought I had talent and promise. I once again felt as I had when I was in Atlantic City [New Jersey], that there were people who were nurturing me and willing to teach me what I didn't know as opposed to criticizing me for what I didn't know. And I just sort of thrived in it. And then for like--I began to try to figure out, well, how can I spend more time here. At first, it started as a work-study gig. And, 'cause Harvard had given me a work-study gig, and work study and a full financial--it was a full financial-aid package, including work study and a loan. And then my mom [Norma Greve Storch] thought it very important that I be responsible for my own college education (laughter), so she was trying to not, she didn't--they tried to keep their income out of it as much as possible. So I was pretty much fully responsible for my own education. Peggy [Bush] chipped in, mom chipped in some, but--and paid living expenses, but I was expected to take out loans and be responsible for my own education. But anyway when I got into, once I figured out that I could--beyond the work study, there was a thing called independent study, which they tried to discourage by only making it a quarter credit instead of a half credit. And so I figured out a way to put four quarter credit courses (laughter) together, I cobbled together. I'm doing, like one is on black history and one is like, you know, the visual something of (laughter) culture, and I made up all these different classes that I figured out ways to cobble together. At the end of the day, I was probably spending forty hours a week at the television station, by the end of my senior year at Harvard, just to get away from there. It just wasn't, I didn't find it a nurturing place. And I have lots of classmates who will tell you different and people who loved Harvard and keep going back, year after year. I've gone back for, gone back for reunions occasionally, but I never quite feel comfortable there. And I still don't feel like I belong--really belonged there. Story_ID: 97641 Speaker 1: It seems like, that the department really didn't-- Speaker 2: The English department? Speaker 1: No, the African American Studies Department didn't seem to really-- Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't considered a real department, again. Speaker 1: Well, that's a technical thing, but did the people there have anything to do with making you feel better about being at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I mean, you know, frankly,--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --teach you something (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --I think I was also a different student. I remember Geneva Smitherman writing on some paper of mine, I would like write a survey. It was an encyclopedia, and she would say, if you had just taken this one thing and focused on that, you would have a great paper here. I never really felt like I was cut out to be the kind of academic who, like digs into this one little field thing. And I think my, Peter Goshen (ph.), who was my sophomore, was my tutor, English tutor, at some other point said, you know, you write really well in a journalistic style. But you don't write well as an academic. And I was like, well, that's fine 'cause I don't intend to be an academic (laughter). I intend to be a journalist. So, and I had pretty much hardened by then. I decided I wanted to--back in--and we skipped over this, but back when I was in seventh grade at Atlantic City Friends School, a reporter from the Philadelphia Inquirer had come to talk to the class in one of these sort of gymnasium things, you know, everybody goes to the auditorium and the guy gives a talk. And he said that he had a credit card from the company that allowed him to travel anywhere in the United States, and ask anybody any question that they wanted, and that was what reporters did. And from that day on, I wanted to be a reporter. And I went home and announced this, and Peggy [Bush] said, well, you know, whatever (laughter). Then they tried to encourage me. They sent me to Glassboro State College [now Rowan University, Glassboro, New Jersey]. They had a summer program in journalism. So I did that, and then I started working for the Press of Atlantic City, sort of part time on the weekends. So I had pretty decided by the time I got to Harvard, I was gonna be a reporter. And I didn't quite know what that meant, but (laughter) whatever it was, I was going to be it. And then it was just like, how do I work my way into this sort of mainstream world of journalism that was represented by the Crimson, which I could not seem to do. And oddly enough, ironically enough, the dean of the Columbia Graduate School of Journalism was at the Crimson the same time I was and actually was cut on that first cut that we went through, was cut the same as I was. But, and he went back and made it the second time. And I got an internship at the Boston Globe when I came out of Harvard--I've jumped ahead a little bit. I came out of the Boston Globe and got that internship, didn't do well at the Globe. Again, I never seem to, I couldn't quite figure out how to make that flip from working within that sort of nurturing black environment to- Story_ID: 97642 Speaker 1: So that was my, that first--my internship when I came out of Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for that first summer, it was at the Boston Globe, and again, I didn't really do that well. There was something about being thrown into that mainstream environment. But I did well enough so that I was able to get them to commit to hiring me on a freelance basis. And I was working freelance for them, and freelance for the real paper and freelance for--then I started working for the Bay State Banner, which is the black newspaper. And then I got a call from Marita Rivero, who is now actually the general manager at WGBH. She had taken over from Topper [Carew] to be, as producer of "Say Brother," [now "Basic Black"] and she called me and said, I have an opening for a PA [Production Assistant]. Do you want it, because I was sort of the star intern (laughter) when I was there. And I was like, hell, yes (laughter). I said, if I can stop living on rice and beans, and actually, you know, have a real paycheck for $120 a week, I'm in. So I started working with Marita. "Say Brother" went national, I think that summer--no, that--yeah, it was that, during that year. And then for a while, I was working for both "Say Brother" and still freelancing, and then for a while I got a job at the Bay State Banner, at the black newspaper that's run by HiatoryMaker[Melvin] Mel Miller, still run by Mel Miller. And that was when I made entry into the community of black reporters of African American reporters, many of whom had been pulled into mainstream newsrooms, the same way I'd been pulled into Harvard. The National Association of Black Journalists had just begun. I was able to, I think the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had their meeting in Boston in 1976 or seven [1977]. And I had been befriended by a writer at the Christian Science Monitor named Luix Overbea. Luix died a couple years ago. Luix saw talent, was helping me with my stories for the Banner, and when the NAACP convention came, every black reporter for every newspapers in the United States was there, and he made sure I met all of them and introduced me as somebody who was a talented writer. And so, again, I was taken in by--and nurtured by a community of black folks who saw promise and talent. So I really relied on, relied on black folks, (laughter) you know, to sort of help me get through and it's, you know, the struggle that has always come, sort of making that mainstream switch. I met Charlayne Hunter-Gault [HM] as a result of, who had a huge influence on my career 'cause she saw to it that I got hired at what is now the [MacNeil/Lehrer] NewsHour, but was then MacNeil/Lehrer Report in 1978. So that was, I've jumped over some time there, but you can go back if you feel- Story_ID: 97643 Speaker 1: Well, well, MacNeil/Lehrer Report, that's a, that's a big deal, now. Speaker 2: There was a woman named Crispin Campbell who had just resigned. You know, in those days, it was still, you had one black reporter, right? It still seems the case 'cause we now have one black professor Columbia Journalism School (laughter). Actually, now, we have two, Howard French has just come on board. So Crispin Campbell had just left the Report. I had a couple of years earlier applied to get, well, The Ford Foundation had a grant for minority journalists, minority training program for journalists. And I had applied for it. Charlayne [Hunter-Gault, HM] had been one of the judges. And Charlayne, at the time, called me after the interview and said, "I'm not going to vote for you to get this." And I said, "why not?" (Laughter) I was hurt to the core of my heart. "Why not?" (Laughter) And she's like, "'cause you're gonna make it with or without this fellowship. And this grant, this fellowship is for students who need a leg up. And you already have that leg. You graduated from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. You already know Luix [Overbea], you know, Les Payne [HM], you know, Vernon Jarrett [HM]. You know all those guys. They're gonna, we're gonna make sure that you make it, and this fellowship is for people that don't have that opportunity." And so I don't know who got it. But it wasn't me, and I was really pissed at her (laughter) for a couple years, but then she called me in '78 [1978] and said, a black reporter here is moving on, and we're gonna have an opening for a reporter. Do you want it? If so I'll recommend you, and she did. And I did, and I got it. Speaker 1: Okay, so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And that was the beginning of my journalistic career. Story_ID: 97644 Speaker 1: Okay, this is--all right, so all of this is the beginning of your journalism career is what we're talking about (unclear)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter)-- Speaker 1: The one-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --hire. You know, so, okay. So, well, you want to tell us about MacNeil/Lehrer. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I think, was it the Jim Lehrer Report when you started or-- Speaker 2: No, it was the MacNeil/Lehrer Report. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: MacNeil/Lehrer at that time was run in New York and Washington [D.C.]. And I worked in the New York office. I covered, I think it literally was called the Minority--I think it was Minority Affairs. It was the Minority--they literally had a beat, Minority Affairs. But Minority Affairs, it wasn't--I chose not to just take it as black folks. So I spent a huge amount of time learning about the Latino community. And in those days, we didn't have tape. The news hour was a half hour show, and it was all talk. It was like Charlie Rose is now. And so there would be, the format was, you would do what we call the little stories. So there would be some story that was happening somewhere that was a local story. And you'd have the two, the protagonist and the antagonist from that place. And then you had to branch out and make it the larger, national story. So the conceit was that you choose a little story that had national implications, and then federal policymakers and politicians would come on and argue the merits of whatever the issue were--was, based on whatever this local thing was. So, I spent, I got fascinated with the Latino community, well, Hispanic political power, which was just beginning to make its muscle--beginning, Hispanics were just beginning to flex their political muscles in Texas at that time, '79 [1979], I guess this is. I must have spent two months (laughter) researching, talking to every Hispanic politician I could find in the United States. And I remember Charlayne [Hunter-Gault, HM] coming back one and she's like, what are you doing? (Laughter) (unclear) I was like well, I'm trying to get to know these people, you know. And she's like, well, but you're not proposing any stories. And I was like, well, I've got this one story that I'm really interested in (laughter). And she was trying to explain to me that I had to be juggling more than one thing at a time. And she's like, people don't know all these phone calls you're making, and I was literally coming in at seven thirty in the morning and staying until eight o'clock at night. And I was sort of just like this little shadow that was like in the newsroom. And she was like, oh, you've gotta come out and start pitching stories and, you know. So I did, and after a while, I became--well, I'll tell you about what happened with that Hispanic story. So what I did was, I used a, oh, God, where was it in Texas. It wasn't a bordertown, not--the issue was they were trying to get--there had just been a Hispanic elected mayor, and they had just, they were still trying to get paved roads on the Latino side of town. I even argued with [Robert] Robin MacNeil over why we were still using Hispanic, and it should be Latino, and I lost that one (laughter) (unclear) stuck with the Hispanics. And, you know, and we sort of--then we had MALDEF, the Mexican American Legal Defense [and Educational] Fund, and then we had somebody from the National Council of La Raza. So I believe were like the first times that any of these organizations had ever been on national television, sort of all talking about the kind of things that Hispanic communities were fighting at that time, and I remember MacNeil turning to one of the folks from El Paso [Texas] at the end of the show and saying, you know, so what is the--you know, do you agree that, you know, having a cabinet-level secretary is something that really, you know, you really want to strive for and use? Like, no, what we're trying to get is a paved road. (laughter) And Robin was really tickled by that, you know. So that sort of, you know, began to crack the ice about, you know, like what, was this a good hire or not? Speaker 1: And then I went on to cover, I went from minority affairs, I began to cover urban mayors and governors, urban affairs. So it was, but it wasn't urban, it was urban and regional, urban and regional affairs. So it was like literally a beat that just covered the conference of mayors, the governors' association. Your job was to stay on top of all the regional stuff that was going on. And I really liked that beat. I got to cover, I got to visit most of the major cities in the United States while covering at the, or at least called, talked to people. The "NewsHour" was a great place to be a policy wonk, and I have a wonk-ish side although I never wanted to be an academic. I really enjoyed digging into the policy implications of any particular story. And I sort of had a knack for finding that little nugget, that could expand. So I was on urban affairs for a really long time. And some point I began to chafe. I began to feel like I'd sort of been ghettoized in this thing, and I began going to Robin and saying, "I really want to get out of this." Story_ID: 97645 Speaker 1: My dad [James "Jimmy" Cross] died at some point. And this is '81 [1981]. By then, he died, yeah. My dad, and my--and Aunt Peggy [Bush] died the same year. Jimmy died in January and Peggy died that December. And it had been a sort of--Peggy and I had always had a fraught relationship. I digress but I'll come back. Peggy had never really wanted me to be a reporter. She always felt--she wanted me to be a wife and mother. That literally was, A, she wanted me to be a concert pianist. That was her first goal of my life. I had played piano for the better part of eighteen years. So I, it wasn't like--she tried (laughter). And I just, I never wanted to play in front of people. And then she wanted me to be a wife and mother. I was not having the wife and mother thing. As far as I could tell, it did not come out well (laughter). I was looking at my own background. I, you know, Peggy had never had kids except for me, but her relationship with Paul [Bush] had been, you know, they were always arguing about money. You know, looking at my own upbringing, I didn't see anything that said, you know, that I wanted to visit this on some other poor child. You know, my granny hadn't been able to raise my mom. I actually--although I didn't know that then. It was, I was just sort of reacting to some sort of, there's some genetic predisposition in my family that mothers can't raise children, and I'm not having it. And I really interested, I--my career came first I think at that point. And Peggy just wanted me to get married and have a kid. Please get married and have a kid. Get married and have--and it's just like, it was like a conversation--I felt I was a Muslim, living in a Muslim household. Like when are you gonna get married and produce an heir. And it just, it had been really fraught. But then she got really sick, and she got really sick right around the same time that I got out of the urban affairs beat at the NewsHour. I was finally able to get there. I wanted to do economics. [Robert] Robin MacNeil had enough sense to see that I did not have a head for economics, even though I kept saying I wanted to cover economics. The reason I wanted to cover economics was because the guy who had economics, it was the star beat at that time. This is late '70s [1970s]. So, you know, we're in the Carter [President Jimmy Carter] administration, and there's sort of an econo--the malaise. Robin comes to me one day and says, how would you feel, we're losing a reporter in Washington [D.C.]. He's moving to CBS. How would you feel about covering national security in the Middle East? I'm like, sure (laughter). I had no clue. Did I have to, like my next move to go look on a world map and figure out where the hell is Middle East (laughter), you know. I sort of knew it was over there somewhere. It was like, so where are we talking exactly, that section that's below Italy? No, it's over that way, next to, and above Africa, over here, over to China. Okay, got it. So I was gonna cover the Pentagon, my beat, the Pentagon, U.S. Soviet relations, nuclear security, which meant the arms race at that point. I was, you know, I had to learn about, you know, (unclear) rates and MIRVs you know, multiple independent reentry vehicle warheads [multiple independently targetable reentry vehicle] and then I also was responsible for covering U.S., Israel, Palestine, Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, that sort of part of the world. And that became my beat. I actually went over there. They did send me over there. I didn't, didn't come back with a good story, but I got sent over there. Peggy got sick around the same time, terminally ill. And I was trying to go back and forth to sort of take care of her a bit, but every time I went back, we'd have this conversation that went in a circle about, you know, no man is gonna want you 'cause you're gonna be so hard and (laughter). It just never got resolved. And then she died in December of '83 [1983]. Speaker 2: But I had this, you know, meanwhile, I'm like covering stuff. It was like a graduate school in journalism. And, you know, where else would I have ever gotten that opportunity. And covering the Pentagon was really tough. I had to get to know the Generals and get to know all the stuff that I had never--you know, Condoleezza Rice was then the Number Two to Brent Scowcroft, got to know her a little bit. So I was sort of like in this other world that I had, I mean, you know, when I talk about being, standing on that jetty when I graduated high school and trying to figure out what, where was my life gonna end up, I would never have guessed (laughter) that I was gonna end up in the E-Ring of the Pentagon (laughter), you know. I mean it was, but it was great. And then, again, I began to chafe 'cause I wanted, I wanted this producer title, you know, the, anybody--we were basically glorified bookers at the MacNeil/Lehrer Report. And they were getting ready to move to an hour format. And I wanted to get this promotion. And I'd been, I just felt like I was never gonna get it, never gonna get it, never gonna get it. Story_ID: 97646 Speaker 1: And then finally I took this thing, there was thing called the est Training. I think it's now Landmark. They call it Landmark training [Landmark Education]. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, so I did est. There was this guy, Werner Erhard--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: E-S-T, yeah, Werner Erhard. Speaker 1: Werner Erhard, so I came back to--I took this thing, and I had this epiphany (laughter) that-- Speaker 2: That word again (laughter). Speaker 1: --that I could, if I just changed the way I was thinking about what I was doing, I could be, achieve what it was I wanted to be. And I had been thinking of myself as this reporter. And I was, and I kept thinking, they won't give me the producer title. They won't--what do I have to do to prove that I'm the producer title? And I remember having this moment, where I say, all I have to do is act like I'm a producer. It doesn't matter whether I get the title. And so shortly after I did this thing, I was working with one of our correspondents on a political story, and I, I didn't like the way--I didn't like the approach she took to the story. So I went, and I did my own version of it. And not only did I get the producer title, they gave me an on-air correspondence job (laughter). I was like, okay (laughter). Here I am. But I was undone by my own little goblins again. This whole thing about being my mother's [Norma Greve Storch] secret really began to gnaw at me in some way. I mean I think it came out at the time as just I was a grade A bitch to everybody. I think everybody there probably thought I had just gotten full of myself. And I think I was really struggling with how to be, how do I be who I am? What do I say if people come to me and start asking me--it was the question from when I was twelve. And I'm in the Hollywood magazine, you know. So I'm an on-air correspondent on a national television show. Sooner or later somebody is gonna come to me and say, what is the story of your life? And I could not tell them the story of my life. I had a version of my life that I was, had been orphaned and Peggy [Bush] (laughter), a variation of the Hollywood magazine story. I just couldn't figure out how to work my way around that thing. And I think I began to undermine myself in ways that showed up as real bitchiness and just not doing the work as well as I should, I think. I just began to fall down on the work 'cause it really began--I would like come home and just--I was insecure. I wasn't sure what I was doing. I thought Jim should--by that time, I had transferred to Washington [D.C.]. And I thought Jim Lehrer would be of more help than he was. He told me later, he thought that I should have come to him more often and asked for help. That's always such a weird thing, you know. I've learned it, I've seen it more now that I'm a professor myself. It's like this dynamic of the student is waiting for you to give them the help, and the person whose in the position--you know, I'm the professor, like, come to my office and ask me, you know (laughter). You know, it's like when to--the same way, Jim and I were in this sort of unholy--now, I'm waiting for him to tell me something. He's waiting for me to ask him to tell me something. So anyway, it ended up not ending well. And ultimately, I followed the reporter who had gone to CBS, cleared a way for me to come to CBS. And we'd actually both been in the same class at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. So the connections began to all come together, Robert Hershman was his name. He died of AIDS in that, during the '80s [1980s]. But he had been, he had had the beat I had at the [MacNeil/Lehrer] NewsHour. I won a couple of awards. I actually won two awards of note while I was covering the Pentagon. So I really came into my own as a reporter during that time. Speaker 2: Now, you won an Emmy in '83 [1983]? Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983] for the Grenada Invasion [Invasion of Grenada], yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, and that's when-- Speaker 1: That happened--so the Marines were blown up in Lebanon. I had just, I had come back. I had been Lebanon earlier that year, and that day I was in charge of taking in the feed, in the--logging the tape. And that was like one of the worst days of my life. It is actually worst for me than the World Trade Center attacks, and in many ways, the PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder] sort of came back after the World Trade Center attack. But that was a really bad day. Story_ID: 97647 Speaker 1: [President Ronald] Reagan invaded Grenada, I think it was that Sunday night, Sunday night. It was definitely night because I remembered jumping out of bed and running to the Pentagon. And they said that these students had been endangered somehow, these medical students had been endangered. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so we sent in the Marines to save the medical students. Speaker 2: Now, had you ever interviewed Maurice Bishop on the [MacNeil/Lehrer] NewsHour? Speaker 1: No, I had not, un-un. Well, I'm sure he had been, he must have been on, but I don't remember, I don't remember--it wasn't my--the Caribbean wasn't part of the beat (laughter), and so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause he was the-- Speaker 1: --I don't know who had that part, and that would have been foreign affairs. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the Prime Minister of Grenada, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Maurice Bishop. Speaker 1: Yes. That was somebody else's beat, but I do remember, I got to the Pentagon, and they were telling the story about the medical students. And I called Charlayne [Hunter-Gault, HM], and I said, this is the story they're floating. And I told her where the medical students were supposed to be. And she got, managed to get one of them on the phone or several of them on the phone. And they're like, we're fine. We've been, you know, the Marines arrived and locked us in our room and told us to stay here. And we ended up sending Charlayne down there. I stayed in Washington [D.C.], and Charlayne went down with one, I think it was with Mike Masetic (ph.). And they found the medical students who swore they were fine the entire time, and we basically undid the chronology, the story that the Pentagon was trying to run by everybody, which was that they were trying to save these students, these U.S. students, you know, the pretext that somehow U.S. citizens were in danger, and therefore, that called for the invasion and the--of the country and the assassination of its prime minister. And that went on for like a week. I did a much better job on that than I did on Lebanon. Now, I'm not quite sure--and I was at the Pentagon pretty much every day. I no longer quite remember all the details of this. I guess I should for a HistoryMakers' interview, but it was like, what, '83 [1983]. What is that? Thirty years ago? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 97648 Speaker 1: Lucky I remember my name. I remember when we won the Emmy, I didn't think it was mine. I thought it belonged to Charlayne [Hunter-Gault, HM]. And Grenada was the lead story on the News Hour every--'cause it totally bumped Lebanon off the front page. And Charlayne was there, and she was filing reports back. And when we won the Emmy, I was like, well, it's Charlayne's Emmy. She was on the ground there. And it was some years later, seven or eight--I didn't even used to put on the--I never even claimed that Emmy. And I didn't want the certificate, and I didn't want the statue or any of that. Of course, I don't deserve anything, right? Somebody said to me, "I was on the panel that chose, that chose that Emmy, and we chose it on the strength of the in-studio interviews, not on the strength of Charlayne's work in Grenada," which totally floored me 'cause then that meant it was mine, you know, at least it--you know, I mean Charlayne and I were working together, but I did deserve it (laughter), you know. So I started claiming it (laughter). I was like, okay, I'm gonna claim it now. But it took me a long time. I think I suffered, I still suffer from this feeling of the legacy of my childhood of feeling like I'm not worthy somehow, that there's some fundamental character defect that makes me unworthy, or makes me have to accept and put up with situations that I find, that other people would find unacceptable. And probably anybody that knows me in this building would laugh at me (laughter), laugh at you if I'd said that. But really, I wrestle with things and try to find a way to justify and maybe this is something I did, as to where is my responsibility? If my students aren't doing well, where have I not--it's something I haven't done, you know, and I still tend to think that the fault somehow is mine. And the only thing I ever did was get born too dark to pass (laughter), you know, and it's still been this, like a shadow that hangs over everything that I do almost, just because of the, the way that I've had to, the way that I was processed to deal with it as a kid and sort of how I've, it's how I've carried it growing up, you know. And then the alcoholism that ran rampant everywhere else (unclear) also helped. But it's been a lifelong process for me to accept that I might actually know what the fuck it is I'm doing. Story_ID: 97649 Speaker 1: Now, have you ever sought out help, I mean counseling about that? Speaker 2: Oh, hell, yeah (laughter). I've been in counseling most of my adult life (laughter). Speaker 1: I would guess. I just thought I'd ask you, you know. Speaker 2: It started when I was in Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. In addition to everything else I was raped in, while I was at Harvard, twice (laughter). I'd been so sheltered and so naive, so sheltered and so naive when I was Atlantic City [New Jersey]. Aunt Peggy [Bush] just, like the word "sex" was not uttered. I had no idea how to deal with or even recognize signals from men and therefore, could not, also not recognize when I need to get the hell out of there. So I got, put myself in situations twice where I shouldn't have been and paid the consequences twice. So and in addition to everything else that I'm telling you that dealing with, I was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So this is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --also dealing with that. Speaker 1: This is like date rape type activity. Speaker 2: Yeah, date rape. One was date rape and one was, I was hitchhiking home. And everybody used to hitchhike then, but I picked up--I got in a car with the wrong guy. And so I, it was, you know, there was a lot of stuff that I had to deal with while I was Harvard [University]. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, what got you through it? Speaker 2: I don't know. I just have some innate--my mother [Norma Greve Storch] always liked to say that she had that sort of hearty pioneer stock, you know, that Mormon (laughter), those Mormon pioneers that went West (laughter), you know. I think it was combination of that and the foundation of love that Peggy and Paul and the Gregorys gave me, and actually, even my mother in her own way. I had fundamentally a strong center, and I wasn't--you know, very often people hear my story, and I get this look of pity and it's like, oh, you poor thing. Your mother didn't raise you (unclear). If my mother had raised me, I would be a neurotic mess, you know. She was so neurotic around race. She neurotic around skin color. She was neurotic around my hair. I mean what about me would have ever been good enough for her? Nothing. I mean I grew up and the day that I was able to say to that editor, to Peter Shapiro, the editor of the [Harvard] Crimson, you know, to myself, the day I got hired at CBS News, and I walked in the front door, and I thought to myself, "Fuck you, Peter Shapiro." I had what it takes. And what are you doing? (Laughter) You know, he was the County Executive of Bergen County, New Jersey (laughter). I literally had kept up with him all those years (laughter) just so I would know. The day that I walked in the front door of CBS News, I'm like, okay, I'm a freaking reporter. What are you? Speaker 1: Yeah, we stayed in Bergen. You don't have to explain anymore. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. So, you know, I ran for a higher office and never made it. But I think even through all of that, I, you know, it was, there was just a--I had a strong sense of self, you know, although my mother would say I had it from the day I was born. You know, she just--I was just very insistent about things that her, she doesn't remember the other children, during the period of time that she had us, had. But, anyway, who knows? I don't know. It's some kind of intangible thing. I laugh at things. I think-- Speaker 1: And it seems--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --laughter has kept me. I was talking to somebody about that today, earlier, 'cause I'm working on this film now about women who are dying of AIDS in very large numbers in the South, largely through lack of access to medical care, one way or another or structural barriers to medical care. And, you know, I said it's, you know, it's like one of those films, you come home and you just need to spend the day in bed afterwards. You just can't move. And literally, the only thing that does sort of keep you going, or keep me going, is my ability to find something to laugh at in the situation. If I hadn't done that, I'd either have killed myself by now or somebody else, most likely myself 'cause the anger always turns--I always turn the anger in. Story_ID: 97650 Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: So we were at Grenada [1983 Invasion of Grenada] (laughter). Speaker 1: Grenada, yeah, well, just after Grenada, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --shortly after that you went to CBS or-- Speaker 2: So that was '83 [1983]. Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983]. Speaker 2: I became a correspondent myself shortly after that. I think I left the [MacNeil/Lehrer] NewsHour" in '85 [1985] or '86 [1986]. We started, we tried to start a union, and Jim [Lehrer] and Robin [Robert MacNeil] hired some pretty high-powered union busters. And then after that I was sort of persona non grata 'cause I'd been--and they perceived it as biting the hand, you know, like, how could you? You, who we gave so much to say you want to start a union? You know, I didn't, just like, well, you know, we're reporters. We work really, really hard, and we don't get paid shit (laughter). We think we deserve a union, you know. But at the end of the day--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, what was the rationale that they, was it that it was a not-for-profit-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and they couldn't afford the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --and they couldn't afford the pay you the same salary-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they weren't really union, they were those--they had a name for them. They were like people, like--I forgot I also covered the labor beat. I left that out. That's what happened between--I went from minorities to unions to labor, and then I wanted to go from labor to economics. Instead, I went from labor to national security and Middle East (laughter) relations. So isn't that quite far, a stretch. So anyway, I covered a breadth, was able to cover a breadth of stories, and then I was assigned sort of the coup de grace, so to speak, was I covered the 1984 presidential campaign for the NewsHour. So that was my first, but that was the campaign that Jesse [Reverend Jesse L. Jackson, HM] ran. Speaker 1: "Run, Jesse, run", yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a great summer. That was a great campaign. There were three of us from my Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] class who were producers on that campaign, me, Claudia Pryor who was then with NBC, and A'Lelia Bundles [HM], who was then with ABC. And we were all on the, you know, I was going in and out 'cause the NewsHour didn't have the same resources as the network, but we were all sort of on the bus together. And we all ended up at the Convention together. There's a great picture of the three of us at the Democratic Convention. And then I just sort of decided I just didn't want to, this, on the one side--on the one hand, on the other hand, style of reporting was--I just found it not truthful. There's more than two sides to every story. I had my own life of evidence, as evidence of that, you know. I mean, and I just got really, I just couldn't do it anymore. And then I wanted to do more original reporting, and Jim didn't want to do original reporting. It's like, that's not what we do here. And it was just crazy. And I'm saying, well, why am I here? And I wanted to go, I just wanted to be a reporter. Story_ID: 97651 Speaker 1: We ask this question from time to time, and it's a good--I think you're a good person to ask it of, and that's just, what is your journalist philosophy? I know when you were describing the even-handed--I hear Public Radio trying to do that. And I think they-- Speaker 2: On the one hand and on the other hand? Speaker 1: Yeah, and sometimes, it seems--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Public Radio usually tries to put some nuance in it-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --but it leaves out, most stories have not one or two or three, but more like five or six or seven sides to be honest. And reporters, journalism doesn't do a good enough--does a lousy job. I won't say doesn't do a good, it used to not do a good enough job, and now it just does a plain lousy job of explaining nuance to anybody. And we've gotten so polarized that it's almost gotten--the idea that the students that I teach here will ever be able to practice what I teach them is a fiction that I maintain so that I can keep doing my job. But my theory about it is that a reporter goes into a place and tries to bring as much research into the history of the place and the history of the players in the place as possible, and then communicate the reality that the people in a particular place are experiencing to a larger audience. And there is nothing about that, that is objective. It's a very subjective thing 'cause I'm gonna look at it through my prism and my experience and my obligation--this is the lesson I picked up from Jim Lehrer, my obligation is to be fair. He always also used to add to keep the facts in front of the story. I'm not sure that keeping the facts in front of the story necessarily helps communicate the story. I think sometimes the story does have to go in front of the facts, but we do our best to try to do both. I'm definitely, as I was telling a young woman that I met at a, recently at the Black Journalist Convention, she works for FOX, and she doesn't believe that news, that anything on news is true. And I was like, well, you've just confirmed (laughter) what I think about FOX because--yeah, she was describing how they just spin things and make it up so that they'll get more viewers. And I was like, well, I sort of thought that was what you do, but let me tell you something. If June Cross says that something happened, you--it happened (laughter). I ain't making up nothing, you know. And the lesson I received from one of my mentors, Les Payne [HM], who's a former managing editor at Newsday was, "It's the job of the journalist to tell the truth, and then let the bullets fly where they may." Now, I haven't always done that (laughter). I've tried my best. It's a, I think the best investigative reporters do it really well. But I think, I have a tendency to sometimes over empathize with one side or the other. So I gave up on objectivity a long time ago. And the best I can do is seek out the other side of the story and try to at least represent that point of view, at least say what their point of view is. I may not be able to be as fair to them as I am to the side that I empathize with, but I try. So that's sort of what I, that's where I come down. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I don't think it's, you know, I'm not on, I'm not, fortunately, not on NewsHour anymore, and I don't, and I don't work for the networks anymore. So I can afford to have more of a point of view now than I did then. Story_ID: 97652 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, so you left the MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour in '86 [1986]? Speaker 2: And I went to "West 57th," the show called "West 57th." Was there a show called "West 57th"? Yes, there was. There were four correspondents (laughter). Meredith Vieira was one of them, a guy named John Ferrugia who's now an anchor out in Salt Lake City, I think, Utah. Oh, God, what was his name. Ah, it just drained out of my--I never worked with him. Sacoca (ph.), Bob Sacoca [sic, Bob Sirott] and Jane Wallace, who is a legend, just an amazing interviewer and taught me everything I know about how to do an interview. She was not related to Mike Wallace, but she was an amazing--she did such good interviews that you would just sit down and watch her interviews for like, just for sport. She was part pit bull, part pit bull and part psychiatrist is how I used to describe Jane. So there were four of them, and it was a magazine show. And it was initially thought of as sort of the baby "60 Minutes." This is before "Baby 60" actually became a reality in the form of "60 Minutes II" (laughter). And the idea was that we were being, we were the next, we were gonna be the next generation. But the show never found its time slot. [Andrew] Andy Lack, who's now the executive editor of Bloomberg [Magazine Group], executive--he's the executive in charge of television for "Bloomberg," he was then the executive producer of "West 57th" at CBS. Andy had been producer for Bill Moyers and notably, I don't know if you remember this, when Ed Kennedy [Ted Kennedy] decided to run for president, there was a CBS news report where the reporter asked Kennedy, "Why do you want to be president?" And there was like a twenty-five second pause while he tried to figure out what the answer to that was. And Andy (laughter) was the producer, had been the producer of that show. And he, I often heard him tell it later, and he would say, I never thought--I thought it was just like, it was the softball question. It was the warm-you-up question, you know. And I just said, just asked it just to get it out of the way. And it turned out to be the question that he couldn't answer (laughter). And that was the end of Kennedy [Ed Kennedy] ever wanting to be--Kennedy running for president again. He withdrew shortly thereafter. But anyway, Andy was very charismatic. I don't know if he still is. I haven't seen him in a long time, so I'm just using the past tense 'cause I haven't worked with him since, executive producer. He had gotten into an unfortunate affair with Jane Wallace that ended badly, which it led to the end of the show (laughter), actually. Speaker 1: And then they hired, they brought Connie Chung in, who had, was then at NBC and had a huge Q-rating. And Connie must have been at ABC at some point. I remember A'Lelia Bundles [HM], my old classmate, telling me, when Connie came onboard, I called Lele (ph.), and I said, so Connie's coming onboard. What should I say? And she said--what should I do? And she said, tell Connie that Lele said to take good care of you and that you will. And I did, I walked into Connie's office, and I said, I'm a friend, I'm a classmate of A'Lelia Bundles. And she said, she told me to take good care of you. And I will. And Connie and became friends that day (laughter), and we're friends there ever after. Connie has her faults, had her faults, as a correspondent. I think she'd probably spent about ten years too long, and as a local news anchor in Los Angeles [California]. And it wasn't that she's not smart, but that she couldn't--the listening muscle had been underdeveloped (laughter). So she could not do a live interview or even a taped interview. It just was not her strength. She had a list of questions that she was gonna ask, and listening was not something that she was capable of doing. So I had to make her look good a lot. And, fortunately, I was pretty good at making people look good. I've always thought that my dad's, the fact that my dad [James 'Jimmy' Cross] was a dancer, he was a tap dancer, and I studied dance for a long time. There's something about the rhythm--I've always felt that if, if film wasn't film, if film was, had some other identity, it would be music or its rhythm. Music and rhythm, the rhythm of music is what drives good video, good filmmaking and it's the pacing and I'm good at that stuff. It's the talent that I bring to the craft that I have. And then I'm a good writer. So those three things together (laughter), I can pretty much, I can make up for most, for the shortcomings of most of the correspondents that I've ever had to work with. And I was able to do that for Connie (laughter). And so I like to think I made her look good on the pieces that we worked together on. And then towards the end, we worked on a piece on Arsenio Hall, which for some reason, everybody at CBS loved. And I just sort of like, I mean it was give-me. It was, you know, here's a black comic in Hollywood, you know, the first black comic in Hollywood to have his own talk show. I mean he's my dad, you know. Here he is all these years later, I'm finally, I'm doing the story on this guy who lived my dad's life and actually finally did get his own show. And he's the guy challenging Johnny Carson, and he was great. And I guess some of that, somehow came through. People still remember this piece, and I found it amazing. In fact, they used it on--there was this piece on Johnny Carson that just aired on-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --NET. And they had Arsenio in it, and it was my footage (laughter). It was like that whole chunk of Arsenio, that was all the stuff that I shot on my profile of Arsenio. So that felt good. Story_ID: 97653 Speaker 1: So anyway, but then, you know, they wanted to do more and more celebrity--I just never, I've had short patience with this celebrity profile. I think just being sort of the stepchild of Hollywood myself, the whole, the machine that goes--even though I experienced it at such a low, low and primitive level, I don't believe anything I read about any (laughter) about any celebrity. And I didn't want it--it wasn't the, it's not the kind of journalism I ever wanted to do. And the magazine "West 57th," it was going--Connie [Chung] was going more and more celebrity and fluff, and I finally ended, they sent me out to do a story about the most expensive hotel room in the world, which happened to be in the Bahamas. I don't remember what it was, $10,000 a night at the time. They've got hotel rooms that cost way more than that now. And I ended up having to hire--in order to do it, it was a hotel that came, the room came with a robot, and was in the Bahamas, doing this piece. I was working with this cameraman. And I finally decided, I was going--I had to hire a dancer, and a--I've actually used the sound man as the elderly guy with this young dancer. He wasn't that, he'll be very upset for me to call him old, but he was older than she was, okay (laughter). And, you know, so I'm like staging this thing. I'm working for CBS News. I am staging a scene so that I can have a piece to air on Connie's show, and I looked at myself--I remember looking at myself in the mirror and just thinking, this isn't what I signed up for. And I had to figure out a way to get out of there. And I did ultimately. It took a while, and I was able to get myself to CBS Evening News, where I lasted maybe about three months. And the reason it was three months was they had assigned me to do a story--actually, it was before I got to evening news. I had been assigned, it was a little interim on the way, a story called "America Tonight." It was a late-night show. It was supposed to be CBS's competition against the "Nightline Show," "Nightline," and I got assigned a piece on kids with guns. Gang violence was just becoming sort of the, everybody was writing about gangs. It was 1990, everybody, you know, the colors had just come out, and then all this gang violence begins. Speaker 2: They wanted me to do a story about kids and guns. And I went out to Brooklyn [New York City, New York], and I found a group of kids who were in a, worked in a program with Reverend Johnny Youngblood. And it took me six weeks to get them to agree to go on camera and talk about owning guns. And in the course of learning everything that I had to learn about them in order to get their trust so that I could get them to go camera, I realized that the guns were like at the end of the--the guns were the least of the problem. It's almost the way I feel about this, it's exactly the way I feel about this HIV story I'm working on (laughter). The guns were the least thing. The guns were a symptom of these, whole other issue of larger problems that deserved a documentary. And I remember I went back to Lane Bernardos (ph.) who was the executive producer, and I said, you know, I did the story you wanted, but this isn't the story. The story is how do they end up being kids with guns? And Lane said, that sounds like a really worthy documentary, but CBS is not investing in long-form reporting right now. So we're not gonna do it. And I ended up at CBS News, and I worked at CBS for, you know, like three months or so. And I still had this story in the back, like, 'cause I had gotten to know these kids really well. And I'd gotten to know one kid in particular who had been, he'd gone up on a murder charge. He'd stabbed somebody to death. They didn't even have guns then. This is how primitive his life was. And I just kept, these kids were haunting me. Story_ID: 97654 Speaker 1: And I ran into, at an airport one day, ran into David Fanning, the executive producer of Frontline. I had applied for Frontline twice before when I was still at--once, when I was still working at [W]GBH before I ever got to the MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour, and then I think once in the interim when I was at the NewsHour, I applied. And then Jim [Lehrer] and [Robert] Robin [MacNeil] really fought to keep me there, and made me a better offer. And I ultimately decided to stay. But then on this occasion, I ran into Fanning in the airport, and I said, I've got this story I want to do about kids and guns, and I told it, I gave him my three-minute elevator pitch. And he said, yeah, we, we're interested in that story. And, in fact, we're interested in you. Would you be willing to come to Boston [Massachusetts] and talk to us about a staff job? (Laughter) I was like, I felt like somebody had just like, it was July and somebody just said, it's Christmas tomorrow, you know. So I went up there, and I got offered the job. And then when I told C--I was trying to be like I'm thinking like, you know, guilty me. I'm gonna give CBS time to like find another person for my job on "Evening News", and they were like, if you wanna go, good-bye. You're fired, effective next week", you know (laughter), so. It was during this, the [Laurence] Larry Tisch time at CBS so they were in the middle of cutting back all the, you know, cutting--they had basically eliminated every bureau. We'd been forced to cover, the first Gulf War, I was like a coordinating position. But we had no bureaus. We had nothing. We had, we were blind. We were, like we just decapitated ourselves, and then somebody told us to go out into battle. And, yeah, but literally, we were watching ABC's coverage to figure out what should we be covering. It was insane. And I just felt I had arrived at the tiff of the network, you know at the precise moment that it was turning to rust. And then David offered me this job. And I'm like, I'm outta here. Goodbye. So I took off, and I went to "Frontline," and that was my next nine years. Speaker 2: So this is 1991? Speaker 1: So that is 1990. Speaker 2: Ninety [1990]? Okay. Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991], '91 [1991] 'cause the first Gulf War is '90 [1990], right? Speaker 2: I thought it was '91 [1991]. Speaker 1: Okay, so then it's right after that, so it's '91 [1991]. It's that summer. It must have been that summer 'cause that was like a hundred-day war. And that was January. I'd just met Waldron [Ricks], the man that I ultimately married. So, yeah, it was that summer. It was later that summer. I was at "Frontline" by September-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --of '91 [1991], yeah. Story_ID: 97655 Speaker 1: Now, what are some of the highlights of your time with Frontline? Speaker 2: It's a whole other world 'cause when you're doing long-form documentary, they sat around, and they talked a lot. And that's what I remember. I used to call them their naval-gazing sessions. They would sit around for three or four hours and talk about a subject. And I would be like, can we just like do something (laughter)? This is driving me crazy (laughter), these three or four hour naval-gazing sessions. The highlight was definitely working in an edit room with David Fanning, who was without doubt, the most talented editor I have ever worked with. Andy Lack was a talented guy in an edit room, but Fanning, Fanning has done--I had sat--I would sit and watch Fanning. I would have gladly just sat and been David's apprentice and not even done any work. (Laughter) He just wanted somebody to go with him from edit room to edit room and just like, sit with me while I figure out how to make this scene. He could take mediocre scenes and pull meaning out of them. Then all of a sudden they just sort of became much more than they were. We worked together, I was able to go to South Africa, right after--when Nelson [Mandela] was elected, when Mandela was elected. I was in South Africa for the election. I went with Fanning. And we did the two faces of "The Two Mandelas," I think it was called. I did Winnie [Madikizela-Mandela], and he did Mandela. He did the old man, and I did Winnie and sort of the two trajectories their lives had gone on since he was first, since he was put in prison. Let's see, I did the--"[The] Kid Kills" won an award for--the film about gang violence was called "The Kid Kills," and it won a Robert F. Kennedy Award. So that was like my first one out of the box. And it was about gang violence in Boston [Massachusetts]. In fact, I still am in touch with some of them. That was '92 [1992], it aired in June of '92 [1992]. And, again, it was like, I mean, you know, I sort of began what has become my hallmark. I think, I see it now. I didn't see it then. As I was digging in, it was a story that started because a fifteen-year old kid had shot, by accident, he was shooting at somebody else and ended up killing a six-year old and a ten-year old--no, and a twelve-year old. And in the course, and then I went back to sort of do this archeological story about how this happened. And the shooter's name was Bynoe, and Bynoe is a very well-known name in Boston. Peter Bynoe is a part owner of the Utah Jazz. And I began to sort of look and see how this kid had--kid and his mother, who grew up in the Orchard Park Projects where Bobby Brown's, Bobby Brown grew up, how had this kid and his mom somehow gotten divorced from the rest of this very illustrious family that is, you know, they're all over Massachusetts politics and, you know, notable throughout, and, and then--so it was about family. And I think the best work I've done in my career as a documentarian has been work that looks at families and the dysfunction of families and--. Story_ID: 97656 Speaker 1: All right, so you were talking about the story "A Kid Kills"-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that you did for Frontline. Speaker 2: Right, so I sort of began to look at community and not just the family, not just this one shooter or even this one family, but then the impact on the community 'cause then it turned out that the mother of one of the victims and the mother of the shooter, used to party together and played cards together. And they all knew each other. So, you know, you're looking at not just this one, these two kids who are dead, but this whole community torn apart, community of friends, community of people. Everybody's taking sides, you know, so it was really sort of a public health examination, I would say, of the impact of the gang violence on Orchard Park [housing project] in the hillside there. And then, I don't know, I think the second one, I tried to go back and do something on the Pentagon, you know, sort of go back to my Pentagon, but it didn't, it was probably the worst thing I did (laughter) while I was at "Frontline". It was called "The Ashes of the Cold War." And then I think came the, think came the South Africa piece. And then David [Fanning] asked me to work on a, as a senior producer on a film called "School Colors" which was, which followed a year in the life of this senior class at Berkley (ph.) High School. And I was working with--it was a very difficult thing 'cause the producers would, you know, we would make changes in the daytime, and then the producers would come back at night and undo the changes (laughter). And then we'd have to start all over again. And it was like this sort of Sisyphean thing. But anyway, one of their characters was a young girl, a young mixed-race girl, mother white, father black. And she had a scene in the film. She was in a play, and she was putting green paint on for this play, and the line underneath it was, "Sometimes I wish I were green." (Unclear) And I, it just rubbed me the wrong the way, and every time I heard it, I would comment this girl drives me crazy. And she did, she was just annoy--I found her really annoying just for, she was sort of a neurotic mess, and she was just annoying. I found her annoying, and then I was mentioning it over dinner one night with David. And he was like, "well, why is it that she drives you, I think she's very charming. Why does she drive you so crazy, you know?" And I had probably had about two, too many glasses of wine at that point, and I said to David, "Because I never had that choice." It was not, it was never, you know, this idea of being green. It's like (A), I wouldn't want to be green, but (B) I've never had this choice about--her fundamental thing was if I choose black, I don't get to have my white mother. If I choose white, I don't have get to have my black father, so. And I said, "I don't, I've never had that choice." And he's like well, what do you--so then I ended up telling him the whole (laughter) family secret, the entire family secret, a shorter version of what we've been sitting here talking about. And his mouth sort of dropped onto the kitchen, onto the dining room table. And he said, have you ever thought about doing this as a documentary? And I was like, hell, no. Well, my mother [Norma Greve Storch]--I would never do it, and my mother would never agree to do it, and it's just sort of a dead--not gonna happen. And he wouldn't let it go. He just would sort of keep coming back to it, and he was like, you know, he would ask me some more questions about it. And then he started asking me about my dad [James 'Jimmy' Cross], and I started telling him that story. And he got more and more interested. He was like, have you ever thought about doing a story about your dad? I was like, no, I don't know where any of those people are. I'm not gonna, I'm not going there, David; stop it, you know (laughter). And he just wouldn't let it go. And then we had been talking about doing something on race anyway 'cause the Rodney King riots had been around the same time. I think those were the Rodney King riots. Speaker 1: That's right. Story_ID: 97657 Speaker 1: I wanted, they wanted to do something about race, and, of course, as the black producer everybody turns around and looks at you. And I said, no, I'm not doing, I'm not doing one more story about what black people think about race. If there's going to be a story done about what black people think about race, it needs to be a story that white people tell about why white people are so neurotic when it comes to race. And that began a two-year journey (laughter) that ultimately became "Secret Daughter." And it started, I don't quite really remember the chronology anymore. I remember that I spent a very long time reading through a lot of--I read through the history of like miscegenation laws and, you know, when the one-drop rule starts, and, you know. I spent a long time steeped in the history. And I, at one point, the woman who plays in "Imitation of Life," Freddi Washington, had died. And I was thinking about doing a film called "Freddie's Dead". And, but then I couldn't find everybody that knew Freddi Washington because she was ninety six when she died, everybody that knew her was already dead. So I couldn't do that. Then I was going to go to, I talked to Adrian Piper, who is a professor at--was a professor then at Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], who was a descendant of the Pipers in the Piper airplanes [Piper Aircraft]. So she has a whole secret clan. She's the black side of the Piper clan, where there's white Pipers and black Pipers (laughter). And she wasn't ready to out her white cousins on national TV. And then I started talking to Lisa Jones, Amiri, Amiri Baraka's daughter 'cause her mother [Hettie Jones] had been sort of shut out by their whole family when she married Amiri. Speaker 2: Right, she's got a book called-- Speaker 1: Hettie Jones, yeah, "How I became Hettie Jones." So basically, Lisa's story and my story are pretty much, not--without the secret part. Her mother had to endure the same kind of things from her family that my mother did. And the some time around in the conversations with Lisa, Lisa called me back one day and said, no, she wasn't ready to sort of go and confront her aunts on national television and this, that and the other. And, you know, even, her dad also had issues 'cause he always wanted boys and her dad, when he left Nettie, married the wife after Nettie. And she gave him sons, and he's always treated the sons better than the daughters. And she just didn't, it was more than she was ready to deal with at that time. Story_ID: 97658 Speaker 1: And so slowly it begins to dawn on me that I'm actually, I know a white person who might actually be real with me about why white people are so neurotic around race. And it's my mom [Norma Greve Storch]. But how am I gonna get my mom to go on television. I don't know. I haven't figured this out yet (laughter). You know, so I walk into to David, and I was like, David, I might, I might be willing to do it, but I need to tell my mother that I'm doing a story about the increase in biracial people. So I go out to California with my little camera, and I tell my mom, which is the beginning of the film, you know (laughter), out here in California doing this thing. And every day I would tell my mom, you know, I'm doing a story or biracial people, and I'm going out and I'm interviewing people. And I'd sort of, I had read Lisa Funderburg's book, "Black, White, Other," and I would randomly choose characters out of this book and describe them to my mother as if these were the actual people that I was interviewing (laughter). And I would go out every day for eight hours or nine hours, you know, and what I was doing while I was gone was, I was at the local, my Buddhist center, and I was chanting for eight hours a day to get the courage to ask my mother to go on national television and admit she was my mom. I had converted to Buddhism in '89 [1989] or '90 [1990]. I don't remember quite, which year it was. And this was really the first big test. I had sort of, you know, this Buddhism, it's a Japanese form of Buddhism and some people in Japan look down on it because it sort of perceived as materialistic. It's not the Zen, you sit in a corner and meditate on a piece of rice. It's a, you know, engage with the world, earthly desires lead to enlightenment, you know, blah, blah, blah, you know. So this was gonna be my test, all right. I was like all right, if this is true, I'm gonna figure out how to ask my mom. So, I don't know, after about five days of this, I go and I ask, I finally ask mom after lunch, and I took her across the street from the Kaikan (ph.), from the Cultural Center. And I said, I asked, and she immediately said, yes. And I kept talking. I didn't even hear it, you know, 'cause I've got this speech in my head that I've now been practicing for five days (laughter), hours and hours of chanting. And she's like, and she sort of interrupted me and she's like, "did you hear me? I said I would do it. I knew that that's what you were gonna ask me when you came out here and told me that you were doing a story on biracial kids." Mothers are the same, even if they're bad mothers. They know you in a way that you just don't know yourself, right? She's like, "I knew you were gonna ask me. I was just waiting for you to (laughter), just waiting for you to open your mouth and say the words." So we ended up, we do this interview. We decided we were gonna do it on a day when Larry [Storch] was--we were gonna do it while Larry was taking his nap. They took naps every day from like, I don't know, right after lunch, from like 2:00 to 4:30 or 5:00, they would take a nap. And so anyway, we decided we were gonna do this interview. I set up the camera. I do the whole thing. We do this three and a half hour interview. She tells me the whole story of her life, starting with, "What's your earliest childhood memory?" (Laughter) And I got the tape back and I'd forgotten to turn on the microphone (laughter). It was awful, it was awful. And then I called her, and I asked, I told her I'd screwed up the thing, and I screwed up the audio. We'd have to redo it, and she's like, okay. Let me get back to you, I'll think about it, and then she called me back and said, no, she wasn't gonna do it. And the whole O.J. [Simpson] thing had broken in the interim. And she'd gone to some dinner party, and whoever it was she was sitting next to, some white man had said that Nicole [Brown Simpson] had gotten what she deserved for marrying--'cause she had married a black man. And that's what happens. And she just said, it just totally shut my mom down, and she wasn't going there. It took me another year to get her to agree to go on camera. Story_ID: 97659 Speaker 1: And so in the interim, I did another story, which actually turned out to be a very key learning story for me about another family. It was about Rosa Lee Cunningham, and it was based on, it was "[The] Confessions of Rosa Lee." A reporter for The Washington Post, named Leon [DeCosta] Dash [HM] had done this story for the Post. It won the Pulitzer [Prize] that year. He'd spent four years following a totally dysfunctional mother. She was representative of the underclass, and when I say that, the underclass has a very specific meaning in that, it's people who have been in and out of jail repeatedly, who are second or third generation welfare, who are drug abusers, have had series of children by different men and are, have been in and out of jail. So there's a very strict definition that sociologists use to apply to underclass. And Leon had started to begin to look at this phenomenon, had met Rosa Lee in a jail, at D.C. [Washington, D.C.], and persuaded her to allow him to have access to her and her entire family, which he did for four years. And he had amazing access, which he was able to transfer to me. And, but then I spent a lot of time with Rosa Lee by myself, on my own. And I met Rosa Lee's, Rosa--one of the things that sort of most heinous, I guess, about Rosa Lee, three of the kids were drug, had been drug users and three of the kids--no, she had seven. Four of them were drug users were three were okay. At the end of the day, I ended up only being able to get four of the seven to go on camera which turned out to be a good thing because it sort of evened out the balance. It made the point clearer, that there was really no relationship between who your parents are and who you can become. Speaker 2: And one of the kids, one of the children had grown up to be a bus driver for the City of Washington, and another one had his own business, and there--and then another one was, she was sort of iffy, but she was not, she wasn't using drugs. And then there were three that had, just sort of, you know, one was a heroin abuser, one was in jail on crack, you know, it was a whole other thing. But anything [anyway], the worse was that Patty, Rosa Lee's daughter had--Rosa Lee had pimped out her daughter, beginning at the age of eight or nine. And the two of them had worked as prostitutes together and were heroin addicts together. Patty died of, I think Patty has since died of AIDS, if I'm not mistaken. I don't want to say anything on camera that's not true, but I'm almost certain that's true. But anyway, I went to the jail, I interviewed Patty. And I remember asking Patty how could you love your mother after everything she did to you. This is a question that I had been asked so many times in the intervening years since I did "Secret Daughter." But when I, not knowing that it was a question, asked it of Patty, she said to me, "How could I love my mother even though she pimped me out to all these nasty old men, and, you know, made me a drug addict, you know, blah, blah, blah, and she went down the list. She was very clear on like the list of things that she could use against her mom. And she's like, I don't hate my mom for all that. I love my mother. My mother--I didn't feel like she did it to me. I feel like we were in it together. Now, I understand the psychology behind all that. But the fact that she said it gave me permission to say it in a certain kind of way 'cause I don't know that I would have said it that clearly been willing to say it that clearly in "Secret Daughter" the way I did at the end of the film. And I say, you know, she's my mother, and I'm her daughter. And no matter what happens or what has happened, this is the conversation that we started that we're gonna continue. That is straight from Patty Cunningham, you know, and that was just the situation--that was when it sort of just like, I was like, okay, I got it, 'cause she said to me, I totally understood it 'cause it was the same thing. It was anybody could look at my situation and say how could you love a mother who treated you like this? She sent you to live with another family. She made you call her Aunt Norma. She denied you to her friends, you know, I mean up until I was working at CBS, she was still telling people, oh, this is my friend, June. And I knew that that was code. I wasn't supposed to say it, and from that moment on, the minute I heard "My friend, June", do not, do not say the word "mama." You know, it's like, Norma [Greve Storch], I had to call her Norma, you know. I mean it was like I understood what the code was. So I understood Patty when she said this, and it sort of unlocked something. And then getting to know Rosa Lee as both the--I knew the history of Rosa Lee, the awful mother, but then I also knew the Rosalie that I had gotten to know who was in end stages of AIDS, and who died before the film aired, actually. And Rosa Lee really changed my life in so many ways. I could not have done what I did with "Secret Daughter" had my compassionate heart not been opened by Rosa Lee. And I give her lots of credit--I still have her picture on my dresser at home, you know. I have mom's picture by my altar, but Rosa Lee's picture is on my dresser. And it was a huge, it was just, well, people would say God's grace. I'd say it was the universe. It was my, it was the Buddhist, it was the universe sort of opening a way for me to figure out a way to do this story that I was already finding so difficult that I had managed to not turn on the audio (laughter) on the key interview, you know. Story_ID: 97660 Speaker 1: So anyway, sometime after that, it took another six months after finishing "The Confessions of Rosa Lee", till my brother [Lary May] and I were able to sit down with mom [Norma Greve Storch] and Larry [Storch]--I remember Larry saying to me, if we don't get her, if we don't get her to agree on this one, I think we should drop it and leave it alone because she's just not going to agree. Mom was turning seventy-five, yeah, she was seventy-five then. And, no, she was younger. She was seventy. And she was so scared. I remember I could smell the scent of her fear. And I was sitting next to her and there was just odd aroma, and I was like, oh, my God, she is so scared. She's just like this is what the scent of fear smells like. And then she finally decided that she--she was like, give me one reason why I should? You know, people are gonna look at me and say--and at that time, I didn't know that she had prostituted herself. I didn't know that that was the fear that was underlying all the other fear. All I was hearing was, I was married to black man, and people aren't gonna respect me. And it wasn't, in hindsight, it didn't make sense at the moment at--it wasn't making sense with me, given the world that I grew up in. But it was somehow making sense in her world because that was the way things were. I didn't find out she had prostituted herself until we were on--I had finished the film which took me like six months to do. I thought I was never gonna finish it. David [Fanning], at one point, I just walked out of the edit room and told Fanning, (laughter) you go in there. You do whatever it is you need to do to it for two weeks, and then I'll come back. I can't look at it anymore. I had a white producer, male producer, who I've become very close to since. We've worked on every film I've done since, together, John Baynard, and then I had an editor Jon Boseco (ph.) who is Haitian. And I needed both of them to sort of be my, to be editors with me. And then David was from South Africa, so he sort of understood that weird, racial dynamic in a different kind of way. And so we all put it together, and I had an associate producer who was female. And we all sort of put it together, and it finally aired, and then I had lost my voice for the last two--the time leading up to when I was supposed to actually do the narration, I just totally lost my voice. I had laryngitis for about six weeks. And I went to acupuncturists, I went everywhere and couldn't get it together. And then finally, I went to, I went (unclear) one of my Buddhist seniors in faith kept saying this is film is about your claiming your voice. So, of course, I lost it. I finally decided to go to Jamaica, some accu--some Chinese guy said you had too much heat and energy in you (laughter), it's like sorry, I'm gonna go to Jamaica. I go to Jamaica for a weekend, and, long weekend. I came back on Tuesday morning. I told them to book the narration record for Tuesday morning at 8:00 o'clock. I walked in there, in the studio at 8:00 o'clock. I walked out at noon. By 2:00 o'clock, my voice had disappeared again. And it stayed gone until after the film aired. And it came back the morning after (laughter). It was just, it was such a perfect psychosomatic thing. It was, nobody has ever--I never, from now on when people say it's psychosomatic, I say, it doesn't mean it's not real 'cause I did everything I could to get rid of that damn thing. It was, my voice was gone. It was not coming back. So, anyway, I don't know. That's a long story. That is, I guess that film has become the film that defines me. Story_ID: 97661 Speaker 1: Now, has, was your mother [Norma Greve Storch] ever addicted to anything? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: Oh, I was on the way to telling you how I learned she prostituted herself. Now, there's a lot of women who've worked in prostitution who were never addicted. They do it, women do it for all kinds of reasons. Mom needed money, and Jimmy [James Cross] wasn't bringing any in, and she had a child to feed. And she had low self-esteem, obviously. We were doing the Tavis Smiley show, and the film hadn't, the film was gonna air on like a Tuesday night. And I think we were doing Tavis on Monday night. She hadn't seen the film 'cause I, being a reporter (laughter), don't show my work to anybody until it goes on the air. But I sent it to Lary [May], my brother, Lary, who was in Ireland that year, doing a, he was doing a Fulbright. And he called her--no, no, no. It's out, I'm out of sequence. Okay, so all I had was the press release. So I told, and I hadn't been really involved in the press release. I was like working on the film. I'm trying to deal with the fact that I don't have a voice. (Laughter) I'm like drinking honey and tea trying to bring my voice back so I could do this thing. And so anyway, the press release had been written. I had told them to just send her the press release so she'd know what was in the film. And I was like, she already knows what the story is about, and I'll see her down there. I get down there. Mom is a puddle of tears. She cried, she was like, I thought you loved me. I can't believe how you put this hateful press release out. All it said was the story of a mother who gave her daughter (laughter) away. And I was like, well, I read it, and I couldn't figure out what was wrong with it. And she's saying, you're making me look like an ogre. People are going to hate me. And I'm like, well, what would you have me say (laughter), Mother Dearest, yeah. She's like I didn't give you away. I always knew where you were. And I was like, yeah. So what would you say? And so she's like, I would say that I left you in the care of friends to raise you. Okay (laughter), yeah, she was just crying. I didn't think she was gonna be able to do the show. She cried nonstop the entire afternoon into the evening. We got into the limo. She's still crying, you know, what have I done? I've ruined her. I thought, she thought I loved her. I was like I do love you mom, honest. It's not that bad. I think they just, it's just this one phrase in the fucking press release. Get it over it, blah, blah, blah. She pulled herself together enough to go on the Tavis Smiley show. We got a bunch of calls. Most of the calls actually were at me, were like, you know, "I just think you wanna, love this white woman to love you so much that you'll do anything to debase yourself so that she will love you." (Laughter) That's the one I remember, you know. And then some guy, "You're not black. You're an abomination (laughter)." So those are the ones I remember, you know, and my mom is getting the, you know, like all into the, they're gonna hate me. They just hated her 'cause she was white, whatever, you know. So anyway, then we're lying on the hotel room that night. She's still crying, and then, I don't know, then finally, somehow it calmed down enough for me. And I asked her then about Uncle Bill, and she told me about Uncle Bill. And I was like, and then so it's like, so then it's true that, in fact, you were a prostitute. Now, Aunt Peggy [Bush], when I was growing up had often intimated that my mother was a less than, what's the word, a less than virginal person (laughter), you know. And when it, when, during the '60s [1960s], you know, when the whole sexual revolution was going on, she would say things like, "You're gonna end up just like your mother. You're gonna end up just like your mother." And I would never, I was like, well, what do you mean, you know. And then she would make these dark hints about my mother's friend, Alberta, who ran the house where my mom worked or was in charge of all the girls or whatever. And I sort of knew that there was some dark side to this. And mom always used to tell me she worked as a hat check girl at a night club. And that was the story she told me. And I had never bothered to really think it through. So anyway, we're lying there in the bed, and she says, yes, I was a prostitute. I worked for $15.00 tricks, but I never worked on the street. I worked in a hotel. And then she proceeded to tell me the whole story. So then I sort of had confirmation. So then it's like the day before--actually, no, you know, it wasn't the night before. It was the week before 'cause I had time to put it in the film. And I remember going back to John Baynard and saying, the producer, my producer, my co-producer who shot the film and saying, "My mother just told me this. Do you think we should put it in the film?" And he said, well, if you were to write a book, would you put it in the book? And I said, "yeah, I would" And he said, "well, then I think we should put it in the film," but I couldn't bring myself to do it. So I didn't. I did put it in the book though (laughter). But that took ten more years for me to get to the book. Story_ID: 97662 Speaker 1: What were the comments that you remember that were, I guess more in-depth than the few comments you just talked about? Speaker 2: Other than those? Speaker 1: Yeah, some of the real reflective comments? Speaker 2: The comments, you know, the documentary and the book are so now entwined in my head that I can't even--post-documentary, the astounding thing that happened, you know, I've talked about this daughter that was born of Larry [Storch]'s that her, his mother basically paid her to make disappear. Well, the morning after the documentary or the next morning, I was in the office after the documentary aired. There's a phone call. There's a woman named Candace June Herman has called and said that she thinks she's my sister. I call her back. I knew exactly who this is. This is Candy, the infamous, Candy (laughter), Larry's daughter that they have spent thousands of dollars looking for. And it turned--it was her, and, you know, so I literally, I mean there was this outpouring of, thank you for telling the story and all that usual stuff, you know. But what stuck with me was that I got another sister (unclear) I'm telling, (unclear). I already had one, you know, I found a sister on the way to doing it through, on my father's side. And now I had this other sister on my mother's side. So now I'd gone from being basically, being raised as an only child. I now had three siblings, none--didn't grow up (laughter) together, but I had three siblings, you know. So we all got together at mom [Norma Greve Storch]'s house. I remember, when she first came, she had an anxiety attack. We had to go down to the basement and get her. I actually did film this, and I never, I still have the tape. I never did anything with it. If it was today, I would have put it on the Internet (laughter). Back then, we didn't have the Internet. And then she had a whole family. So there was like that, and then integrating that family. And it like, literally, it was never--it happened all so fast that the whole process of integrating whatever people said about the documentary--I don't even remember anymore. You know, and then there were Hollywood and book and HBO and David [Fanning] wanted to executive produce the HBO film. And some psychic had told me that I should do it, but I just, I wanted to be in control of telling my own story, having discovered my own voice, I needed to express it a bit more. I wanted to tell the story my way. So when an opportunity came for a book, I decided to do the book. And I thought I'd get the book done in two years. It took ten (laughter). And it took ten in part because I did five more documentaries in between (laughter). But it would have been three and a half had I done it, I think, all in one, when I think about the time it took, it's probably three and a half solid years of writing. But anyway, it was, it was a process. It changed my life. That's for damn sure, and mom's. Story_ID: 97663 Speaker 1: In what way? Speaker 2: I had never realized how complicit I was in sharing, in holding the secret, not that it was my fault and not that I had any choice. A child doesn't have a choice in those kinds of things. And it wasn't my fault. But by holding onto it well into my forties, I mean I had a whole, you know, Hugh Ella Hancock and T. Montgomery Gregory were my grandparents. And Hugh and Sylvia were my parents, depending on whether I was talking to people from New York or Washington, either Hugh and Sylvia were my parents or Ernie or Minetta (ph.) were my parents. And I was capable of making up the story as far as it needed to go (laughter), you know. And I literally just sort of had this fictional family. They were fictional in that they were real, but they weren't, we weren't related by blood in this, you know, sort of this real, all of the digging that it took in order to not only just find mom, but to do the whole family history and sort of realize that we had roots on one side that went back to the Mayflower, and you know, and the depths of slavery on the other. And then there was even one ancestor, one ancestor had sold slaves. The one who was the Mayflower captain was actually killed in, by Indians in, I wanna say it was Jamaica or Aruba, somewhere, one of those, somewhere in the Caribbean, during an uprising 'cause he was selling slaves. He was selling Indians as slaves at that time. It seemed like fitting justice to me. But then I found out I had another one who had harbored runaway slaves. So I was the descendant of both a slave runner and an abolitionist and a slave and so here I am holding--this isn't the double consciousness. This is now, we're talking about I'm somewhere up in the quadruple consciousnesses. And I start looking at all the cousins and there's something, and if I go back to 1830, 20,000 people that I'm related to. So this whole idea of isolation and being alone, and there's nobody like me, just totally got blown out of the water. It totally changed my world, you know, aside from being the one with the camera in their face all the time, which had been my MO [modus operandi] as a reporter, you know. Just ignore this, act like the camera's not here. Have you ever tried to act like the camera's not there? Have you ever been on the other side of this thing? It's impossible. You could not act like that thing's not there. (Laughter) It changes how you act. It changes what you say. It changes what you think about, while you're saying it, you know. There's this other little voice that's back there. So. Story_ID: 97664 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So-- Speaker 2: Consciousness to say 20,000 cousins. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Pierces my (laughter), pierces my happy little isolationist (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, in terms of your father's [James 'Jimmy' Cross] family, I mean you met people in your father's family you didn't, you had never talked to before, right? Speaker 2: I'd never talked to anybody in my father's family. Speaker 1: Okay, so what was that like? What were they doing and-- Speaker 2: When we went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I went to her last-known address, my grandmother [Rosalie Cross]'s last-known address. It was the house that Jimmy had bought for her after he came back from Europe. And I found out, the first big house--well, I literally did door-to-door. I just knocked one door after the other. Do you remember, you know, Rose Cross used to live in blah, blah, blah, blah, you know. Some didn't, some did. I found some that did remember her. And they told me about her, what a good time gal she'd been. And I found out that she'd lived in a committed relationship with a woman for like twenty or twenty-five years, and then it was a long--like, who's the woman? Can you get me? I finally did find the woman, but she refused--basically, I got to the screen door, and I was like I understand you knew my grandmother. I'd really like to talk to you, you know (laughter) [door-slamming motion]. So that wasn't happening. You know, pretty much it was like that across the board. And then I ran into by accident a cousin, that I didn't know was a cousin. She was on tape because we shot her. She was like the first, I went looking--no, I did know who she was. I went looking for, her name was Pam, Pam Cross, Pam Brokenbra (ph.). What a name, right? She was also addicted. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: She was addicted to crack, and so I found her on the street. And after the documentary aired, some other cousins of my dad's called me and said, we saw you on TV with Pam. How in the hell you ever find her? (Laughter) We're your real cousins (laughter). You need to come visit us. And I never have. And I feel very badly about that, although I still have their names so I still have their name and number. I just have never gone down there. I said I would, and then we got called up in the Candy [Candace Herman] thing, and everything after that that happened was just crazy. So, but, yeah, so I never really found any relatives. They were first cousins. I found first cousins on my father's side. They were easier because I was able to go to my mother's first cousin who remembered her and then find that. But the road, because they weren't there on the day that I was there with the camera, and I wasn't able to make that straight connection, it was a different thing on my dad's side. Story_ID: 97665 Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about the book comes out in 2006, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, so that-- Speaker 2: Same week I got tenure. It was very bizarre. Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I got tenure. I was named a Kaiser Media fellow. I got a Kaiser Family Foundation Fellowship, and the book came out, all in the same, like same two-week period. It was a very bizarre time in 2006. Speaker 1: Okay, now, well, tell us about how you started teaching at Columbia [University, New York City, New York]? Speaker 2: I was working on the book ["Secret Daughter"]. I did this one film with [Henry Louis] Skip Gates [Jr., HM] at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] called "The Two Nations of Black America," again, in--family, the family of black Americans split apart by class. And I was supposed to be working on the book. I kept trying to avoid ways to working on the book. I think I was, I had started writing it. I had like twenty-four legal pads of long-hand writing, and I was slowly pumping into the computer to try and make sense out of what all this was. And I realized I couldn't, my contract with "Frontline" was that I had to produce one documentary for them a year and I couldn't produce, again, I can only obsess about one thing (laughter) in my subconscious at a time. I couldn't do the book and keep making docs. And so I, I ended up--I took a leave. Skip gave me a fellowship at the [W.E.B.] Du Bois [Research] Institute, graciously. I had a year at the Du Bois. And then I was offered an adjunct position here or a visiting, I think it was a visiting, yeah, I was offered a visiting professorship. And that came about through--the dean here at the time was named Tom Goldstein. Tom and Sharon Tiller, who was then the, a senior producer for "Frontline" and is married to Lowell Bergman, the "60 Minutes" producer who was the star, the subject of the "Inside Story," [sic, "The Insider] the film with Al Pacino about the tobacco story. Anyway, Lowell, Lowell Bergman, the legendary, probably most, best investigative television producer in my generation. Anyway, Sharon is married to him. Sharon knew Tom. Tom had tried to get me to come out to Berkeley a couple years earlier. I didn't wanna move to California. I had this man that I was in love with, and I wasn't--he didn't want to go to California. He wanted to come to New York. So when Tom became the dean here, he called me and said, would you be interested in coming to Columbia? And I was just like, well, my, by-then husband wants to come to New York. So this may be good timing. And it would give me, the way he said it, it was like, you know, it was gonna be like two days a week teaching. And I'd have the rest of the time to write. That was a fiction (laughter). That is a fiction. There is no world in which a professor at Columbia Journalist School works two days a week. I want that job; soon as I find it, I'll get you know (laughter). On a good week, it's three and a half, you know (laughter). On a bad week, it's seven, and more often, it's six, you know. It's just, it's crazy. Story_ID: 97666 Speaker 1: But anyway, so I came here initially so that I'd have time to do more writing. And ultimately, it was through connections that I made here is that I was able to find somebody, the woman who ran the DuPont Center, Johnette Ablus (ph.) had a house that she allowed me to use during the summer. We did a reverse commute. I worked--I lived in it Monday through Friday, and they would come out on the weekends (laughter). And so that was the way I did it. I finally got the book done sort of doing that. I just had to go be by myself and figure out--the large part of it, a book is an internal thing. A documentary is an external thing. You know, you sit there, you ask me questions, I tell you something. You have no way of knowing what I'm really thinking. And I'm probably not gonna tell you (laughter). You know, I might if we get to know each other, you know, well enough. When you're writing a book, you can't hide behind the shallow, the easy shallow words. You really have to dig into so, what did I really feel about the fact that my mother tells me when I'm seven years old, and we're taking a bubble bath together, that if I had been lighter, that I would still be living with her, you know. And I can tell that story and do sort of pretty pictures of close-ups of bubbles in 8-millimeter film in a documentary. But if I'm writing about it in a book, I've got to grapple way in some more honest way. And it took me a long time to even, to get there and sort of reach that. So that's part of the reason why it took ten years, and then mom got, mom [Norma Greve Storch] was diagnosed with cancer and died, 2003. And I think, frankly, that liberated me. She hadn't wanted me to talk about the prostitution while she was still alive. She'd made me promise that after the film aired, and I said I was working on the book, and we--it came up again. So then I sort of had this thing that I couldn't really talk about. And then I didn't know how to end it. I didn't have an ending for the book for a long time, for like a year, I didn't have an ending. My editor was going crazy. She's like, how is this book ending? And I'm like, I don't know. And then mom died, and that sort of gave me an ending in one way because I was sort of in the process of missing her and missing her presence, and, you know, it's like I spent so much time away from her, but we would talk almost all the time, or talk, you know, probably more--not more, there might be two weeks that would go by that we didn't talk. But I relied on her counsel, and I relied on her advice. Even my husband [Waldron Ricks] relied on her advice (laughter) for what to do on stage. I mean she was a student of performance and what it took to make a good performance. And she was smart as a whip, and very perceptive, and brutally honest. And so she could bring all of that to the work of sort of, and he is a jazz musician. And so, you know, she would give him advice. She would give me advice. Most often it was advice we didn't want to hear, but we both sort of relied on her in a certain way. And then she was gone, and she was gone like literally, I had been working on this--and we sort of left out a chapter, but I had gone, after, I went--I left "Frontline" sort of, I think I wasn't quite sure. You'd have to talk to David Fanning if we ever do a HistoryMakers for David Fanning about what happened. He, so I was--he said at some point, I don't want you to be staff anymore. I want you to be freelance and work as a producer. I sort of took it as being fired. He maintains he wasn't firing me. He just wanted, he couldn't afford to keep me on staff. We can argue about the semantics of this. But what happened immediately after that was I ran into Henry Hampton--it wasn't immediately after. I had been talking to Henry Hampton, the founder of Blackside Films about coming to work with him. Henry had just started a series that was going to be called "This Far By Faith." And Henry and I met at a barbeque the July before he died, July 4th, it was a July 4th barbeque. Story_ID: 97667 Speaker 1: What year is that? Speaker 2: This would be 1999. Speaker 1: Ninety-nine, [1999] okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I said, Henry [Hampton], you know, I've always wanted to work with you. And he said, well, I've always wanted you to work for me (laughter), and, you know. So he told me about this series he was doing on African American religious faith. And I said, well, I've--it's not something I know a lot about, but I'm, it's, I'm intrigued by it, and I need to get out of "Frontline." I just sort of feel like I've--nine years is a, nine years is sort of the longest I ever lasted anywhere. And I was sort of ready to move. David [Fanning] was, you know, David wanted me to move, and so anyway, then we had a second conversation about my coming onboard to work as a senior producer. And then he died. It was, he died of an infection. He'd been, he had lung cancer, and he'd been taking chemotherapy, and he died of a secondary infection from the medicine that they give you to cure the cancer. The cure was worse than the disease. And so I ended up working at Blackside [Inc.] for "This Far by Faith." I was the senior producer. Henry died. Henry's two sisters, who I would call crazy and crazier, (laughter), I will, (laughter) [Judith] Judy Hampton and Viva Zimmerman. Viva is certifiable and she's gone now, so I can say that. She was certifiable, and she was a psychiatrist, a crazy psychiatrist, stay away. They had the bright idea that they could somehow mine Blackside's archives for millions of dollars and that Henry's problem was that he didn't understand how to monetize the Blackside archives. They understood nothing about the economics of making documentary films, let me tell you (laughter). They were convinced that they were just sitting this on this treasure trove, and all they had to do was go sell it. And the world was just waiting to buy it. So they tried, and, of course, nobody, there was no, there was no (laughter) people knocking on the doors trying to get twenty-year-old footage (laughter) of Julian Bond [HM] talking about the Civil Rights Movement. That was not happening. So the company ran out of money, and there had always been, even in Henry's day, he was sort of robbing Peter to pay Paul, and he would be working on three projects at once, and the money was all commingled and it was, oh, my God. It was a nightmare. And the series ran out of money right after we finished shooting, and we all disbanded. And we all thought--this was the year 2000, and I was coming to teach at Columbia [University, New York City, New York]. Story_ID: 97668 Speaker 1: So you were at Blackside [Inc.]. This is 2000. Speaker 2: This is 2000. Speaker 1: The interim between you going from Blackside to-- Speaker 2: To Columbia [University, New York City, New York]. Speaker 1: To Columbia, right. Speaker 2: And I was starting as an adjunct. I was doing adjunct work down here, starting in January 2001. Speaker 1: So is there anything else about Blackside in terms of the, what happened? Speaker 2: Well, they had, basically, we had to move, we moved out of the old headquarters on, over in the South End to these, this new loft space that they spent close to a million dollars renovating. We moved in. We didn't have any phones. We didn't have any internet. We had nothing, basically. And we were all going out on shoots. I was the senior producer. Fortunately, from my days at the MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour, I remembered (laughter) how to do research without the Internet and how to report without phones (laughter). So I made every--I bought everybody phone cards, and told them to use either their cells or go to a pay phone or work from home 'cause we didn't--weren't really cell phones then. And I taught 'em how to go to the library and do research the old-fashioned way. And somehow, we got it all done, and there was a huge debate between me and the executive producer who was convinced that Judy [Judith Hampton] and Viva [Zimmerman] were stealing the money. And I have never thought they've stolen money. I think it was just the economics of, and Jon Else is actually writing a book about this. So there'll be more about it, but, you know, Henry had bad economic--the economics of documentary filmmaking are such that it is a losing, a money-losing proposition almost from the giddy-up. And anybody who's looking for corruption can find it. But the reality is that nobody's making any millions of dollars out of this profession. So finally, they basically came and put locks on the doors. I found out that there was an eviction notice coming, and that they were gonna come and put locks on the doors. And I was adjuncting here, I think, by that time. I'm losing the--the time thing has gotten crazy. I wasn't here full-time yet. I was working as adjunct, and somebody called me and said there's gonna be, they're coming to evict. They're gonna lock the doors and seize all the equipment. Well, Blackside's entire archive was in there, and all of the equipment and the Steenbeck that Henry cut on and the Nagra. And I basically did an intervention, and me and about three of us rented a van, went up to Blackside. I still had the key that got us in, and we just took everything (laughter), put it in the van, brought it back to New York. Some of it is still sitting in my storage facility, and some of this we went and, when the archive, the Henry Hampton has an archive out at Washington University in St. Louis [Missouri], we put it out there so that it wouldn't fall prey to whoever it was that ended up with this--and I don't finally know whatever happened with that. The next part of the story that's sort of, I don't know if I got--we should probably end with this, just sort of get us out of this part of it. But the, it was 2000, when 2001, September 11th, 2001 happened, I had been thinking about just taking the project over. And the previous executive producer and I were sort of at odds with each other. He thought they were stealing all the money, and the best thing that we could do is just walk away and let it fall, and all the foundation--there were $7 million of foundation money in it by then, just let them, you know, let the foundations chase them for the crooks they were. And I wasn't persuaded of that. And so I decided to, I had been trying to get the foundations, I'd been talking to some people about what to do, and I didn't know how to do it. And finally, I called right after the second tower fell. I was here. I walked into my office, and I called Woody Wickham who was then a foundation officer at the MacArthur Foundation. He's since died of cancer. He was sitting at his desk watching TV, like everybody else was (laughter). And I said, Woody, I've got this problem with this Blackside series. I want to figure out how to finish it. What do I have to do? And he and I sat on the phone for two hours while we watched the coverage of the World Trade Center, and he gave me a strategy for what to do, which I was then able to execute. And the thing ["This Far by Faith"] aired in May, 2003. Story_ID: 97669 Speaker 1: That's "This Far by Faith." Speaker 2: And that was "This Far by Faith." Speaker 1: And the subject was the black--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The subject was the African American spiritual journeys. It, you could probably think of it as the religion--it's not really a history story, but it sort of is. It's, a chronicle--chronologically arranged story. I would have done it differently, but we won't go there (laughter), chronologically from the beginning of the African American experience on this soil to present day, where has our faith in some higher power, brought us, whether it's a Christian, a Muslim or a Buddhist faith or the faith that, in our own innate abilities or faith, yeah, however you want to interpret faith. Speaker 1: Did they deal with African religion in this? Speaker 2: No, I forget, it starts in 1622, so with the arrival of the first African on this soil. I really wanted to dig into the, not only the existence of African religions that are still here. And there was actually, there was room for that, and it was dealt with in, we went to the Gullah Islands in part of Part I. And I was really interested in, not only African religion, but the interplay because of the exchanges between slaves and Native Americans. Now, how had Native American traditions and African traditions and Christian traditions sort of all melded together (laughter) in some kind of way. But anyway, that's a whole other story. So, I don't know. Now, I know we have to leave, I don't (unclear), I'm feeling whatever. So that aired on May, 2003, and the day before, two days before it aired, I got a phone call from my mother [Norma Greve Storch]--my mother was diagnosed with stage four colorectal cancer, and she died two months later. I was really furious at her when I got the call. I was like, why is this always about you? (Laughter) It's like, two days from like the biggest thing I have ever done in my life. Story_ID: 97670 Speaker 1: Do you think the book and the documentary was kind of cathartic in some way as to try to-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --put some of this in order or some kind of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It wasn't cathartic, but, yes, it did help me put it in some kind of order. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Catharsis isn't the word I would use though. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I don't know what is the word, but I was talking about this with someone recently. It's like people always want me to, you know, it must have felt--it's not, there's no Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] moment where you just sort of throw all this out there, and you cry, and you feel better. It doesn't work like that. It's like a, what's that thing called? Speaker 1: Spiral? Speaker 2: Spiral (laughter). It's like a spiral, and you keep going around, and you come by the same things and the same patterns of behavior and the same beliefs. And you think about--and it's different each time, but you recognize that it's still all coming from the same root. And it's, you get easier, and you're able to walk your way through it or talk your way through it, and some ways, reason your way through it, but it's still all based--you still recognize--you know, I'm able to recognize where the bad behavior comes from. Okay. Speaker 1: It's a, it sounds like, from what you've said, this has been a learning experience, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a life-changing experience in that way, more than, maybe not a catharsis, but-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --there's no way you can throw it away and then-- Speaker 2: It's given me a way to frame my own life, which I don't think I had before. I think I was sort of living rootless. Story_ID: 97671 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer with The HistoryMakers today, and our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: June Victoria Cross, J-U-N-E, like the month, Victoria, like the Victoria Cross, and Cross, like Red Cross, Blue Cross, why the chicken crossed the road. Speaker 1: All right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Do you need me to actually spell it? (Laughter) Speaker 1: Well, I think we've--yeah. Speaker 2: (Laughter) J-U-N-E, V-I-C-T-O-R-I-A, C-R-O-S-S. Speaker 1: Okay, well, we don't wanna, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes, you never know. Speaker 1: Cross anybody up, you know. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right. Speaker 1: So what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born January 5th, 1954 at Bellevue--in Bellevue Hospital in New York City [New York]. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm currently a professor of journalism at the Graduate School of Journalism here at Columbia University [New York City, New York]. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is April 8--very good, I--(laughter), April 8, 2014. Speaker 1: Right. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're doing this interview in the news studio at Columbia University on the fifth floor of Pulitzer Hall, formerly known as the Journalism Building. Speaker 1: Okay, now, we're completing an interview that we started on July 30, 2012. Speaker 2: My gosh, two years ago. No wonder I feel so old. Story_ID: 97672 Speaker 1: So before we go forward, is there anything we need to clear up from the last time? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I gave, and I don't even remember, I remember, did not have names. So my grandparents, because of the way I was raised, neither side of my grandparents are people to me. They're names on a chart, on a genealogical chart. So on my mother's side, my grandparents [sic, great grandparents] are Peter and Clara Steffenson, S-T-E-F-F-E-N-S-O-N. Peter Steffenson was a, came from Denmark as a immigrant. He was converted to Mormonism in Denmark and left Copenhagen. I've actually been able to find the ship's manifest for him since then, and my brother [Lary May] has gone back. And I'm going to say it was in the late 18--late, late 19th Century, during the 1890s, ended up in Idaho as a missionary. Actually, no, he ended up, he was in New York State first. He was working for the Barnum and Bailey Circus. He as a horse, trick horseman. He married a woman named, whose last--Clara, whose last name I've forgotten now, again. Clara was also a Mormon, and her ancestors had actually been part of the famous, the, sort of the holocaust against Mormons in Ohio. And they had retreated back to New York State in a long-standing Mormon family. So they both ended up in Idaho Falls, Pocatello, Blackfoot, Idaho, near, the sort of one little, liberal, left-wing corner of Idaho there. And he ended up becoming, he injured his back and went to work for the Union Pacific Railroad. And my mom [Norma Greve Storch] was born--well, they had a child named June--no, Rose June [sic, June Rose Steffenson]. I was named after June--I was named June, after my mother's grandmother--my mother's mother's mom. No, if I get it straight, screwed up. I'm going to get this right. Rose June Steffenson, who got married to Roy Greve is my mother's mother. And I actually never met her either. Again, these were all sort of names on a chart. Rose married at nineteen, gave birth to my mom, seems to have gotten separated two years later. And my mother never saw her father again until she was very late in life. And by then my grandmother and my mom were both living in Long Beach, California. And my mom tells the story about her mother coming home drunk last night 'cause--one night because her granny was a bookie and compulsive gambler and a heavy drinker. And she came home one night, and she's sort of, on the way to falling out in the bed, says to my mom, "Oh, I saw your father. He wants to see you." And she fell asleep, and she named a bar in Long Beach. And my mother went down there, and sure enough, there he was. And she had a conversation with him. That was the only time she ever met him. And that was, that was that. So my mother was raised in Long Beach, and grew up most of her life in Long Beach. Story_ID: 97673 Speaker 1: Now, on my father [James "Jimmy" Cross]'s side--I don't know. Did we get into my father's side of the family in the other interview? I don't remember. Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: So I think when I had done that interview, we had gone back to Caroline. He talked about Caroline Crosby in his early--okay, so if I did all that and you read it, and I think it's fine. I think I've got it. It's Caroline Mary Scott Cross. They owned land in Southern Virginia, and then--but his father was actually named Percy. Percy was the son of Caroline's middle son. And Percy worked at a shipyard in Philadelphia. So I think I've now got all this straight. And oddly enough, Jimmy's mother was--also had the name Rose. I think her name was Rose Cross. So both of them, I think my mom and my dad, when they met, must have had something about this name with Rose and June 'cause I remember there was a big debate over how I was gonna be named. And he finally settled it by naming me after a song. So, hopefully, I've cleared up something. I'm not sure if I just made it more complicated or not. (Laughter) But we'll see. Speaker 2: Okay, did you ever just, I guess from, since we talked last, did you ever talk to your father's first cousins? I think that you-- Speaker 1: I haven't. They were in Philly [Pennsylvania], yeah, no. I still haven't talked (laughter) to them. I'm bad, no. No, it's too many family (laughter), you know. I have the family that I'm actually descended from which are the family that everybody's interested in, but the family that I actually call family, which is my extended Gregory family, you know, who are the ones that will come care for me when I'm dying are, I consider my real family. So I always get into this very strange thing when I'm talking about family 'cause I don't know, you know like, when I--the people I actually think of as my mama and pop-pop were, are not, in fact, biologically related to me. But because of the sort of informal adoption connections in the African American community, they're more my family than the family that I actually have DNA from. So. Story_ID: 97674 Speaker 1: Okay, well, we were, we had discussed the documentary "This Far by Faith"-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --and some of the problems in trying to finish the project. Speaker 2: Oh, boy, yeah. Speaker 1: It was in 2001, the same day as 9/11 that you had a phone call--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --someone on the phone about (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, the second tower has fallen, and I was sitting with one of my colleagues, E. R. Shipp [HM] in the student lounge. And she thought that they were replaying the loop of the first tower falling, when the second tower fell. And I said, no, Shipp, that's the second tower. The World Trade Center doesn't exist anymore. And she at that moment, got up and left the building and didn't come back for several weeks actually. I think she, I don't--she'd had a very hard year. Journalists are trained to go to work when disaster strikes. It's one of the weird things about us. We--and everybody else is running from the fire. We're running towards the fire, you know. If there's an earthquake, we're running towards the rubble. There's a war, we're in the middle of the war. So I didn't know what else to do, but I did--it sort of occurred to me 'cause I didn't wanna go--I wasn't moved to go down there and cover it necessarily. I'd sort of knew what I was going to find, and sort of spent enough time in Lebanon some years earlier. I got on the phone, and I called the MacArthur Foundation. And the program officer there, who was actually--I'd figured he'd be at his desk watching TV which he was. And he and I worked out a strategy to help figure out how to get "This Far by Faith" Finished. We had done, by then, there were six series. We had three of them done. All of them had been shot. Three of them had been edited and three were in various stages of either post production or still in the edit room. And I needed some help trying to figure out a strategy. I'd never raised a dime. (Laughter) I had been the senior producer for the project, and was in that role, coaching and mentoring younger producers. But I had to figure out, you know, how am I gonna raise this money? I mean we're out of money. There's no credibility left in Blackside's [Inc.] name because they'd basically been spending the money for the next series on the series that was then in production (laughter). It was somewhat of a Ponzi scheme, but one that I've learned many, many producers use in this business. So it wasn't peculiar to Blackside, but nevertheless, I had to figure out a way to persuade the various entities to come back to the table. And I ended up being able to get, oh, I believe it was Ford [Foundation], Pugh [Family Foundation], Annie [E.] Casey [Foundation], and MacArthur came back in with enough, close to a million dollars, which helped us finish the series and get it on the air. And it did air in March--not March, May, May 26, 2003. And my mother was diagnosed with terminal cancer on May 23rd, 2003. So it was a pyrrhic victory. Story_ID: 97675 Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, yeah, we discussed that, and at the time, you were working on the book too. You had started to work-- Speaker 2: Yes, I'd started working on the book, and I didn't have an ending for it, and I didn't know how I was going to finish. And it was a bizarre thing that all through the making of "This Far by Faith", we were sort of, it became a, almost a stereotype that if somebody dies, then it frees you up to do something. And mom [Norma Greve Storch] died literally, almost three months and a day after the series aired, August 27, 2003. And I, the minute she was diagnosed, my entire attention sort of left the series. And I was absorbed in her care and trying to figure out how to get her the best care. And then one day I was going--I thought it was a couple of months later, I was walking down the street. I was on the East side, and they had a lot of dark mirrored buildings and stores over there. And I was walking down the street, and I saw, I saw a reflection of someone that looked strikingly like my mother (laughter), walking towards me. And the closer--I am enough so that I was like, you know, when you're in that space where you're grieving so deeply, you're not really in either world. You're sort of in another world. And then, and I literally thought it was her. And then I realized it was me, that I was walking towards my own reflection. And so that ended up providing me the ending for the book, which my editor--I had literally been stuck for a year trying to figure how to (laughter) end this book. And my editor kept saying, what's the end of the book, June? What's the end of the book, June? What's the end? So that became the end of the book. Speaker 1: That's interesting. I mean, yeah, to-- Speaker 2: 'Cause the book starts with me thinking I look nothing like her, and then-- Speaker 1: There are a lot of good stories that, beg for an ending, I mean, you know, that people really don't know how to end it or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and then I'm always telling my students, you know, stories have beginnings, middles and ends, and, you know, how would you (laughter)--you have to end it somehow-- Story_ID: 97676 Speaker 1: And I've been struggling with doing, I wanna do a, been wanting to do a documentary about Detroit [Michigan] for years. And I can't figure out what's the end of that story is, like it keeps getting worse and worse (laughter). You know, and I don't know. I was like what would the end of the story be? And it's beginning to be that the end is the beginning again 'cause surely, it can't go on like this. I've been reading Charlie LaDuff's book about Detroit. Oophs, a little stomach--about "Detroit: An American Autopsy" where his point is that Detroit--if what's good for General Motors is good for American, does--is it also true then that what happens to Detroit ultimately happens to America? So I don't know. People, the friends that I have who are from Detroit are begging me, please don't go there because I won't have a--you won't escape with a--I won't escape with my camera or my, and possibly, not my life or my car. It's becoming like Nigeria used to be, I think. But anyway, so. Speaker 2: Yeah, I lost a car there. Speaker 1: Did you lose a car in Detroit? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, this is--so, so are you--this is in the idea stage to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it's still in the idea stage. It's been in the idea stage for a while. Story_ID: 97677 Speaker 1: I'm currently working on a film about HIV in the rural South. The rural South has become--the South, in general, is the new frontline in the United States in the battle against AIDS, in the rural South in particular. And African American men and women are forming 80 percent of the new cases. And a large part of this--so these are also the states that are eschewing the expansion of Medicaid for the Affordable Care Act. So you've got a population--and it's also the area where most of the African Americans in the country live 'cause we've mostly moved back again. So you've got a situation where those who are most vulnerable are least, getting the least amount of help. And I've been following a family there that has about five family members living with this, living with HIV. Speaker 2: So you're working on this one? Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm in the middle of it, yeah. It's in the middle of me at this point (laughter). I'm still, I'm in the money raising phase. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I had raised a fairly sizable amount from the foundations, but at the moment it's--foundations have a trope of the hero or heroine who takes on the establishment and wins. That's born from the Civil Rights Movement, but also it's, it's a way to get--they call it in social justice movement. And how do you inspire action through film. And while very often journalists tell stories--we have a thing here, "Flick the comfortable and comfort the afflicted", you know, we very often tell stories that fall under the social justice cover. The idea that I want to inspire people to action with the story I tell is somewhat anathema to me. So, and this family doesn't actually quite lend itself to that. There are populations in the world, and there are populations in the American South that have been beaten down for so long that the idea of getting up and fighting just isn't--not only is it not ingrained in them, there's literally--there's no support there. So how do you fight, how do you fight when you're living in a town of 2,000 and you're one of three people who are living with HIV. You know, and it's actually--there's way more than that, but nobody will come out of the closet. I mean it's a much, it's a very difficult story to tell. And I have, you know, I have a nineteen-year-old who did finally, after some gentle encouragement from me and her grandmother, go to a rally in Atlanta [Georgia] and speak out. And she came back home, and the next day because--you know, she'd gotten all this attention, you know, she was shamed on a slut-shaming page on Facebook, and, you know, had signs in her yard, you know, "Die HIV bitch", and that. So it's a very delicate, it's a very delicate thing. You know, I have to include that in the documentary (laughter), so how do I explain my role in both initiating it and deal with my own guilt in having initiated it, really. So it's a, there's a reason why reporters don't like to make something happen in a film. We can make little things happen, but when you make big things happen, sometimes it comes back and bites you on the butt. Story_ID: 97678 Speaker 1: Okay, interesting. I was just thinking about "This Far By Faith", and I was just wondering to what extent does religion play a part in ignoring HIV, I mean in-- Speaker 2: It's gotten a lot better. The church, largely through the efforts of Pernessa Seele who's not--if she's not a HistoryMaker, needs to be. The Balm in Gilead. She founded an organization called the Balm in Gilead which began by getting pastors to pray for people with HIV, just to have one day a year where they prayed for people living with HIV 'cause everybody in their congregations knew someone who had either died or was living AIDS. And so she started there, and then over the last twenty or twenty-five years, she's really taken this is a whole other level. And she's gone to Africa and worked with people in Uganda. I mean Uganda is, I mean it's sort of reverting now, but it had reached a point where it had reversed the infection rate. And it was, the infection rate was actually dropping. And now they're having-- Speaker 1: But now, it's started climbing again? Speaker 2: Well, they're having this huge backlash against homosexual rights in Uganda. So it's--that means that people will be driven back into the closet. One of the things I've begun to understand, now, there was a couple of years ago, this whole thing about the "Down Low", and, you know, and, you know, black men are on the Down Low, and that's what's going on, yeah. And what I've come to understand is there is no--there is no social space for gay, black boys, for gay black teenagers to come out in the same way that there is for white gay boys. And I think it's partially resources--and it's, I don't know whether it's necessarily money 'cause it's not all about, it's not all about sort of having the money to get up from wherever you are in an isolated part of the country and move to Atlanta [Georgia] or Houston [Texas] or New York or San Francisco [California]. But it's the losing family, losing face in the church. I mean, you know, there's--it's almost the stereotype about the choir director or the, yeah, (laughter) in the black church being a gay man. And nobody even talks about it. I mean it was like, it's--it was so, I remember when I was working on "This Far By Faith", and I made a crack about it at some point. And I was like should--oh, you don't--you're not allowed to say that (laughter). And I was like, but it's true (laughter). I mean have you ever been in a black church where the choir director wasn't gay (laughter). So, you know, but, you know, so if you--but if you come out of the closet, if you are a gay, black man in the black church, and you come out, you will lose all of that. You lose your church family. You lose your center of support. You lose all that. So there's an incredible amount of pressure that keeps black men from coming out as teenagers. They tend to come out later, either in their late twenties or early thirties. And I thought, it's true. Actually in this family, there's a man who's about forty. He's in his early--mid-forties now. He's got two kids and a former wife, you know, and he, literally, he was thirty-five years old before he told his wife. And by then he had two children. And, you know, and then the first lover--the first man he fell in love with after his wife had AIDS. And now he's got HIV. His partner died of AIDS, and he's now living with it. And I asked him, you know, how hard was that, and he said, well, you know, to be honest with you, living with HIV isn't as hard as having to watch my younger daughter die of cancer, which he had to do a couple of years back. So, you know, we tend to think about these things in silos, you know, like your, people living with AIDS, you're living with this and, but, you know, they have families and there's connections to this, to the community and exploring all that has been, that's been the really difficult part about this, the documentary that I'm working on 'cause it's easy to sort of--the family's willing to talk about it sort of in isolation. But you don't really see what's happening until you can show them in relationship to their communities, and this is a town of 2,000 people. Everybody in the town now knows what I'm doing. Story_ID: 97679 Speaker 1: But, yeah (laughter), you know, here comes the black woman with locks again (laughter), you know. Speaker 2: Does anybody have locks there? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter) No, I've stopped by the state police two or three times, driving while locked (laughter). Yeah, no, there's no locks in South Carolina. Speaker 2: So what you're describing-- Speaker 1: Men wear locks. Speaker 2: Do they? Speaker 1: Yeah, men do. But it's a, it's seen as a sign of rebellion among young, black men, like young-- Speaker 2: I know it's starting to become a fashion in a lot of cities in the North, you know. A lot of people wear locks that did not wear them previously. Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: And have no association with--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It has nothing to do with Bob Marley. Speaker 2: Reggae music-- Speaker 1: --or Rastafarians, yeah. Speaker 2: Right, right, they just wear locks. A lot of football players now. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Everybody, but so this--what part of South Carolina are you-- Speaker 1: I'm filming in Willis--the Williston-Aiken area which is sort of a South Carolina is like a diamond. I can't make the shape, there we go. And Williston is sort of over there. Charleston is there. There's the Atlantic Ocean. There's Charleston. Columbia is up here, and Aiken and Williston are over here. It's about twenty minutes from Augusta, Georgia actually. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: It's right on the border, but where Wilhelmina lives, it's forty minutes outside of Aiken (laughter), so, yeah, they're really in the middle, and it's an hour and a half to Columbia. So, and two hours to Charleston, so there's a huge belt there in the middle of the state, which people who live in South Carolina, are referred to as the armpit of the state, which is a (unclear) talking about South Carolina. I'm not going to go there, but anyway. You know, it's a fairly isolated state, and they already have something like fifteen percent unemployment. Unemployment is outrageous. And one in four people is on Medicaid now, and if they expand the Affordable--if they expand it to Obamacare, it would be one in three. And it does have huge budget implications for the state. Speaker 2: So, as an outsider, looking at this problem, HIV problem, do you think the--well, you say they have a little, they're not used to organizing, you know, around anything. That's-- Speaker 1: No, no, no. This is the birthplace of the [Ku Klux] Klan (laughter). Speaker 2: Not the birthplace? Speaker 1: Reconstruction ended, Ben Tillman (laughter), Ben Tillman is the one that ended Reconstruction back in 1871, you know, which begins the whole movement, you know, that results in Jim Crow thirty years later. I mean that all comes out of South Carolina. It's, you know, the, the Articles of the Confederacy were written in Abbeville, South Carolina. And this is, they're not playing (laughter). The South will rise again, and if it doesn't rise, they're sure the North ain't coming to South Carolina, except oddly enough, it is. Because it's so isolated, the land has become so cheap, although not cheap by people, by the standards of people who live in South Carolina, but someone who wanted to retire from New York could move down and get a pretty nice spread. And that's actually happening. There are a lot of people who have, people. There's a--because of [Interstate] 95 [I-95], there's a connection that goes back to the Great Migration North between people in New York, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Trenton [New Jersey], Newark [New Jersey], and the whole corridor and South Carolina. So a lot of those descendants are now moving back, and even white folks are moving back. And so what's happening is they're bringing their liberal ideas with them. So my prediction is, it's gonna probably take another fifteen or twenty years, but that state's gonna change because there's too many people from the North that are moving back down and they're not all, they're not all, red, you know, red state people. Speaker 2: Okay, okay-- Speaker 1: You know, but it's gonna take a while, and there is no, you know, and that everybody who's involved in organizing lived in the North at some point. I haven't met anybody (laughter) in South Carolina--they might have been born in South Carolina, but they were raised in the North. And then they came back. I mean it's been very difficult for me to find anyone, homegrown South Carolinian who's a leader in the movement around the HIV down there that just--you don't talk about it. It's not something done. There's not even a thought that you could do it. The idea that you could sort of rise up and, you now, the Freedom Riders didn't go through South Carolina (laughter). You start--think about it (laughter). You know, that state, you know, South Carolina and Mississippi at the other end, are sort of the bulwarks against progress. I shouldn't say this on television-- Speaker 2: It's true. I think everybody knows that. Speaker 1: (Laughter) The people in South Carolina will probably be very upset. I will not be getting any interviews with Nikki Haley, but hopefully, she won't see this. Speaker 2: Yeah, those are the states with the largest black populations in the country. Speaker 1: Yeah, and the most recalcitrant, white authoritarian governments, yeah. Story_ID: 97680 Speaker 1: So, and there you are. Anyway, we've gone--you keep trying to go back to "This Far by Faith", and I'm in the film I'm working on now. So, I'm trying to-- Speaker 2: Well, "This Far by Faith", so, well, you know, were you satisfied with it? I mean, you know, I don't know-- Speaker 1: I was, I--had I been the executive producer from the beginning, I think I would have done it differently. But I wasn't. I took over in the middle, and it became, it was one of those things where you learn what you can do because you didn't know it wasn't supposed to be possible. You know, I'm in a huge fundraising struggle right now on the film I'm working on. And I think to myself, God, when I raised $900,000 to finish the series, twelve years ago, thirteen years ago, and I didn't know that I wasn't supposed to be able to do it. Everybody kept telling me that I wasn't supposed to be (laughter) able to do it, but I didn't believe I wasn't supposed to be able to do it. And now, it's sort of become more of a--I've gotten more no's. There's more--the documentary field has democratized to the point where everybody who has an iPhone can basically make a documentary. So there's exponentially more people that I'm, you know, going against when I go to apply for grants. And there's an expectation that documentary is supposed to be somehow cinematic like a movie. And because I deal in the realm of facts and information, it gets much more, as I'm getting older, I'm finding it much more difficult to think, how do I do this in a way that makes it feel cinematic? I mean even Alex Gibney who is sort, when you think of documentarians, is at the top of the pyramid right now. He has a very cinematic way of relaying information. He even has narration, but if you look at the budgets he has, you know, (laughter) I mean they're huge. If I had that much money, I could, you know, hire great animators too. You know, so it's gotten more and more difficult on both ends 'cause there's, you know, you've got on the one side, sort of the Gibneys and the Errol Morrises of the world, and on the other, my students (laughter), who can come out of here and, you know, they have beautiful C100 cameras, and it used to be you had to learn how to shoot before you could get a decent picture out of a camera. And now, pretty much anybody that has a, you know, even a DSLR can, you know, just a plain, still camera, can--that shoots video, can come up with a beautiful picture. So, and it's gotten a lot more difficult. Story_ID: 99303 Speaker 1: Okay, what's your process for making a documentary? Speaker 2: Until this one, generally, they come to me. I don't mean they. I mean the ideas come to me. I'll get intrigued by something. I have a question in my mind. There's a homeless guy on--who lives on my corner. And all the cab drivers take care of this guy. They buy him food. They bring him blankets, you know. He's always got a book to read (laughter), you know. He's sort of a cared-for homeless person. He's a drunk, and he probably uses drugs too. But, you know, I look at him all the time, and I think, now, how does he come to be the guy that everybody takes care of, you know. And then lately he, he got drunk one night about a year ago and took a swing at a cop and ended up spending like six months--three months in prison. And while he was gone, another homeless guy came and took his place. So the cab drivers don't care about that homeless guy. They take care of, they care of Paul. They could give a shit about the other guy (laughter). He's like off to the side, you know. Paul sort of every once in a while will share something with the other--I don't even see, I don't even know the other homeless guy's name. That's the way it is, right. So why? You know, that's how, that's usually how the story starts. I'll start thinking, well, why? Why does this happen? With the HIV film, it began--I didn't want to do it for a long time because I had covered HIV back in the '80s [1980s] in New York, and I knew what the story was going to be ultimately. I mean I knew what the end of the story was going to be, and I thought I knew what the beginning of the story was going to be (laughter), but it just turns out the context is so different. The grandmother at one point sent me a picture of her daughter who died at age forty-seven in a nursing home, one of the worst nursing homes in the state and had been very poorly cared for and was emaciated and had been taken off her AIDS drugs. And the pictures are just awful, and they look like the '80s [1980s]. I mean they take you right back to that place. And you ask yourself why? You know, how is this happening, how can this be happening in the United States of America in 2014? With the [Hurricane] Katrina film ["The Old Man and the Storm"], again, it was, I found this eighty-five-year old man who was sleeping on the studs of his house waiting for the neighborhood to be rebuilt and there's this huge political debate about whether to rebuild. You know, so why isn't anybody communicating this to this guy or how can it be that they just decide to allow whole neighborhoods to lie fallow. So it usually starts there. Then I start researching the answer to the "why"? And usually the answer to the "why"--and I'm very much like a public health expert in that I explore it from several different sides. So I'm looking at the governmental role, the individual's role. At some point, I'm gonna get involved with family, I think because my own family is so complicated, I find it impossible to do simple stories. I wish I did. My career at the networks would have been much easier if I had just found a way to do simple little stories. But I always see the complexities in the stories. So it's like the interplay of the government, the healthcare system, the transportation system, the utility system, the family itself, the dysfunction within the family all sort of play a role in how these things get done or how they end up. So I spend, it usually takes a couple of years to go through all that. I develop a chronology, sort of a master chronology of what's gone on so, it's just probably--well, with the HIV story, it's been very difficult 'cause you have many different things that play. So we have the Ryan White Act, which is, and goes back to what, '86 [1986]. But then, so I need to understand federally, the development of the Ryan White Act and all the times that it had been extended and then one of the root causes of the problem in South Carolina is that the Ryan White Act apportions money to cities in the North which have the largest numbers of people living with HIV. But most of the new cases of HIV are occurring in the South. But the urban centers are getting the money and not the rural Southern areas. And there literally is--there's no expansion. That's program's not going to expand in the current climate. So I need to understand that. Then I need to understand, how did South Carolina respond to this crisis. Well, it turns out that South Carolina basically did nothing until 2005 when they had 500 people who were getting ready, who were waiting--who were on the waiting list to receive AIDS drugs through a federally-funded program that's part of the Ryan White Act, called the AIDS Drug Assistance Program. And 500 people waiting to get drugs, and some of them are beginning to die because they didn't have access to drugs. Finally, South Carolina stepped up and said, all right, we'll put some money into this program so that these people can get--it's a matching program. So the feds have to put in their share, and South Carolina had to put in their share. South Carolina was refusing to put in its share because they couldn't afford it. You know, and these people got this disease because they were doing things they shouldn't have done. Therefore, let 'em die and let God sort 'em out, was sort of the attitude that you run into. Story_ID: 99304 Speaker 1: So then I have to understand South Carolina's role. Then there's the family that I'm dealing with themselves. So, you know, who were they? Where did they come from? We're talking about sharecroppers. Daddy was--the grandmother's father was a sharecropper and a laborer, and mom worked in a sewing, was a sewer, worked at a textile industry. South Carolina actually used to be the textile capital of the United States, one of the--the raw materials would go up to Pennsylvania and there they'd make the cloth, but the cotton was spun down in South Carolina. So, you know, then I'm trying to develop their chronology, how to, you know, where was Wilhelmina at whatever point in time. And then you're--so then you begin to try to match these chronologies and figure out where are, at key points, what's going on within the life of the family, within the state at the federal level. And you begin to develop the story out of that. It takes a long time to do that (laughter) 'cause it's like you're digging down into a web. And then the more you're doing that, you're also finding out new information about the family and what's going on and, you know, and it's--so it's a long process. And then trying to develop relationships and contacts with the family. There's a nineteen-year-old, Wilhelmina's granddaughter, who is the daughter of the woman who died in the nursing home that originally got me to ask why, who's now been dealing with us since she was fifteen. And she's just about done with us (laughter), you know. So maintaining a relationship with her. She's now sort of where the story is, and she seems to be, you know, everybody's sympathetic to a teenager who did nothing. The only thing she did wrong was be born in South Carolina. The year she was born was the year they discovered that if they gave moms anti-retroviral drugs during pregnancy, the children would not be born with AIDS or with HIV. It never made it to South Carolina (laughter), or didn't make it to South Carolina until like three years later. So, so here we have a girl who's born because of the basic failure of the healthcare system in her state. She's grown up with this thing. She's trying to figure out--she's nineteen. How do you negotiate being in a relationship with a boy? How do you even explain that? The first boy she tried to explain it to, you know, rejected her and, you know, sort of spread lies about her all throughout the school, and, you know, so she's sort of been, you know, she's basically chosen to have relationships with women even though I don't think initially she thought of herself as gay because she finds women more accepting of her health status. So she's in an awful situation, and I'm in an awful situation because to the outsider (laughter), you know, just looking at her behavior, the camera--unless somebody's willing to express all these things, which she's not so far been willing, being a teenager. What teenager talks about their feelings, right? (Laughter) I'll get a teenager to talk about their feelings on camera, you know. So what I, what you see is her dating boys. She dates girls, she dates boys, she dates girls. It sort of looks awful just to the observer. So trying to get her to open, be willing to open up has been a waiting game. It's like a waiting game in a--you try to seduce, and then you back off, and you seduce, and you back off and you (laughter). It's like trying to develop a relationship, you know, with her and her grand--you know, and then keeping the rest of the family in the loop is sort of hard too 'cause there's four other family members in the, in this family that also have HIV, who--some didn't, you know, there's the uncle. Actually, there's two uncles. And there's the--her stepfather, and I think one other cousin who are all living with HIV, who all got it in various ways. I, there's no--it's not like they were all drug addicts. One was, had the misfortune to be married to a drug addict and didn't use protection, got it from her. One was gay, one was using needles. One was just like, you know, doing what you do in college (laughter), you know, and it's unfortunate. So anyway, that, yeah, it's sort of--I don't know. Does that explain my process? Do you have questions about my process? (Laughter) Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 99305 Speaker 1: Well, at a certain point, you decide you have enough or you-- Speaker 2: This is actually going on while I'm shooting usually. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I do all this at the same--I don't wait until--I probably should. Now, I tell my students, this is what I teach, "Wait until you have done all this before you start shooting." (Laughter) I, myself, do not do that (laughter) in part, because I like the discovery. If you do, if you know everything you're going to get before you set out to shoot, there's no journey of discovery in the film. And I find it makes sort of flat films. It's what I call "PBS documentaries", you know. We are now going to tell you about the Civil War, and here is everything that happened, you know. There's got to be, I mean good--really good people, like Ken Burns can figure out how to do it 'cause he's doing mostly history. Well, he doesn't do things that are unfolding in front of him, but when you're doing a journalistic documentary, there's two ways to go. You can either script the entire story and then go out and shoot the script, you know, or you can shoot sort of as it unfolds and do it with interviews. Or you can sort of do the total verite which is what [Frederick] Wiseman does. Nobody's got that kind of money except Wiseman anymore, and nobody wants to watch four hours of something that unfolds because one of the things that happens when you're not using narration or interviews, is you have to let it play out long enough so that you can--so that the audience can understand what's going on. That takes a very long time in order for people to sort of walk into the context. So anyway, that's, you know, it's a messy process, and it costs a lot of money (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I went to go talk to a founder, a new network that was starting, and he wanted to, he was interested in having both a news channel, a 24-hour news channel and a documentary channel. And he wanted the documentary channel to have commissioned films by, for and about the African Diaspora. And I said, that's going to be an incredibly expensive undertaking. And he's like, well, why? And I said, well, do you know how much it cost to make a documentary? He like, no. I said, well, an HBO--and he was saying, he wanted like HBO-level docs. And I said an HBO doc costs somewhere, a million North, you know (laughter). And he was like, why does it cost so much money? I was like, 'cause that's the amount of money it takes to do it (laughter). You know, you need a team--you're either gonna hire a team of five people or you're gonna have two people doing the work of five people or you're gonna have one person doing the work of five people. Speaker 1: But whatever it is you do, it's about five people's worth of work for a good three months to however, depending on the doc. But I've found that you really can't do them in less than three months. My own experience, even if I do the scripted version, I need at least three--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Creating the script and outlet? Speaker 1: Yeah, creating the script beforehand, shooting the thing and editing it, just takes a lot of time. I know the BBC, which has a well-oiled machine, has a show called "Panorama", and they now do them in three weeks, when they research everything beforehand. They write a script. They go out, they shoot the script, and then they cut it. And it's cut to the script. So there's no deviation, and they have a three-week turnaround. But that's like three weeks of no sleep. Story_ID: 99306 Speaker 1: Okay, "Frontline" (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's not three weeks of working 10:00 to 6:00. Speaker 1: --"Frontline" from time to time would do some topical story-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that you just heard about last week. And they'll have-- Speaker 2: Well, you heard about week before last, yeah, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, week before last, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's--I've never been able to cut a "Frontline" in less than three weeks 'cause there's a fair amount of story narrative that goes in. I think I did one in two weeks one time and almost just killed myself. Speaker 1: And those are amazing for me to watch, as a-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --you know, 'cause I realize that if this just happened a couple of weeks--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I did a film when President [Jean-Bertrand] Aristide of Haiti was overthrown the first time. I covered the story for "Frontline", and I came back with the footage. There had been a showdown between a ship that was coming to guarantee his safe return and a group of--I don't know what I would call them, miscreants (laughter) had been paid by the government to sort of stage a riot to stop the Marines from coming into Haiti. And I was in the middle of that 'cause at that time I was sort of--I was halfway fluent in Creole and I looked just on the (unclear)--I didn't wear my hair in locks, and, (laughter) you know. I was close enough to looking Haitian that I could almost get away with it. So I was filming it. And so I got back, and I wanted the film like in two weeks. I just couldn't--it wasn't possible to do it in a week. I got back on a Monday, and it aired a week later on Tuesday, and it was still a week late. It needed to have been done in a week, but it was humanly impossible to do it shorter than that. It might be better now because of the non--I was shooting on tape. So that was like the, one of the--that was in 1993. We still were shooting on tape, which was one of the reasons it was harder to do 'cause you had to literally go through all that tape and transcribe all that tape. And it was a very difficult film. There was another film. I had three characters in my film that died during the making of the film, I mean not died--were murdered while I was making it. And I was there for like six weeks. Speaker 1: What was that--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What film was that? Speaker 2: It's called "Showdown in Haiti". So Aristide's, the man who had funded Aristide's run for president was dragged out of a church and shot while I was there. The justice minister who was charged with figuring out who had shot (laughter), who had shot the guy, was murdered while I was there. And then the spokeswoman, for the sort of anti-Aristide side, was murdered in recrimination for the other two murders. It was an--it was insane, it was insane. And then I got back, and I had to have the film on the air in two weeks. So that was one of my rougher ones. David Fanning kept wanting me to go back and do a Part II (laughter), just like--I didn't realize it then. I had PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder], but I wouldn't have had a name for it then. I just did not want to have--not going to Haiti, not (laughter), not doing Haiti anymore. I'm sorry. I'm done, been there, done that, and not going back. So, anyway. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That would have been '93 [1993]. Story_ID: 99307 Speaker 1: So you say it takes about five people to do the job? Speaker 2: I'd say it takes five--it takes five people, three months worth of work. You can have one person, but the one person (laughter) is like a gerbil in a cage laughter), you know. It, you could probably do--I mean people do it now with three 'cause they have one person shooting and editing, you know, and no sound person, and, you know, maybe a producer and an AP or a producer and a PA, PA slash AP, a producer and a production assistant slash associate producer. So, like one of me, plus somebody who helps me research, helps me line up the story, helps me like do all this stuff. And if it's only two of us--and I've done it with only two, but at some point, you've gotta pull a third person in, I find. I mean you need--I just can't (laughter), at the level of the documentaries I'm doing, I can't do a two-person thing. I think you can see in the final result the difference between like two people working by themselves and like a, you know, three to five. Story_ID: 99308 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, of all the documentaries you've made, what's your favorite? Speaker 2: "Confessions of Rosa Lee". "Confessions of Rosa Lee" was done 1995. "Secret Daughter" came out in '96 [1996], yes. Was it '96 [1996], "Secret Daughter"? No, '95 [1995]. I had started "Secret Daughter", the film that became "Secret Daughter", and I'd done an interview with my mom [Norma Greve Storch]--at first, I thought I was going to try to shoot it. And I was shooting myself, and I--this is one of the reasons why you need a crew (laughter). I did an interview with my mother and forgot to turn the mic on. I had done mic check. I did everything (laughter), the mic worked, I hooked her up (laughter), and I was really, really nervous about doing this interview. I never turned the microphone back on. So I did a three-hour interview with her that was silent. I was rolling tape, and I had the, I hadn't turned the battery on, on the mic, so I had three hours of tape. I just didn't have any sound to go with the tape. So this has created a scene in the film that people have written thesises [sic] about, which I find hilarious. There's like women's studies things who've talked about--women's studies, PhDs, who've done entire papers about me, about me appropriating the voice of my mother and, you know, all this stuff. And it's very simple. I forgot to turn on the mic. And I needed to do something, and there was this thing that she talked about--'cause my dad, Jimmy [James Cross], was an abusive drunk. And there was one story that I grew up with, from the time that I was, ever since I could remember. It was like "the story", you know, about my dad, which was that he used to beat her all the time, and there was this one very famous story that I almost knew it by heart. So she's telling the story, and I'm parroting--I'm speaking over her, using her words, while she's talking and there's times when our mouths are exactly in the same place at the same time. So anyway, people, women's studies groups always want me to talk about this (laughter), and I just say, I forgot to turn on the mic. It's really not that deep (laughter). But I guess if you're looking at it, you can find, critics can find something deep in it. It wasn't deep at the time. Most of the time, the things that we do in the edit room are the result of invention, borne out of necessity, not because you sit around thinking about, how can I be more creative today? So anyway, mom, wouldn't agree to sit down a second time for an interview. She thought, she said "it was the gods protecting me when you forgot to turn your mic on." And that was like in December. Story_ID: 99309 Speaker 1: Well, I was under contract to "Frontline". I had to do a second--(laughter)--I had to do a story, at least, a story a year. And they preferred two stories and I had nothing to show for myself. So I spent the entire Christmas party looking for a story. And the other story that had sort of been on the radar was something about welfare. Bill Clinton at that time was going to remake welfare as we know it. And I found a story that had been done by a reporter for the Washington Post, named Leon Dash [HM], and the story was a five-part series, I think, called Confessions of--"The Story of Rosa Lee Cunningham" was how it ran in the Washington Post. And Rosa Lee--Leon had gotten interested in the plight of the underclass and who was the underclass. And there was a lot of conflation about folks on welfare being the underclass. And there's actually a very--sociologists use a very strict definition to define members of the underclass. It's people who are third generation welfare recipients or in extreme poverty, are illiterate, have had lives that take them in and out of prison, are drug or substance addicted and have multiple children--on the mother's side--multiple children by different fathers. So Leon was interested in exploring this sort of, that subculture, I guess, I would call it. And he spent several weeks inside D.C. jails speaking to something like twenty-two or twenty-five people. And he discovered Rosalie. And, yeah, he told Rosa Lee that he wanted--what he was doing. And Leon is incredibly, just a straight shooter as a reporter. I learned so much from him, just sort of watching him work. He told her he was--what he was doing, explained why, told her that everything she said or did was going to be on the record, and he was not gonna pay her (laughter). And was she willing to do this, and she agreed. So he spent four years following her. And then I read the story--it ran right before Christmas, I think, in the Washington Post. And I was reading the story during the "Frontline" Christmas party--and "Frontline" never saw me at that Christmas party. I just never came out of my office. I came out at the end of the party, and I walked up to [David] Fanning, and I said, "I've just read the most incredible story ever. You've gotta read--(laughter)--you've gotta see this", you know. So I decided I was gonna try to do--I called Leon, and I said, do you think that Rosa Lee would be willing to take part in a documentary. So she did. She was, and I did. And Rosa Lee actually--if I had not done the story of Rosa Lee, I could not have done "Secret Daughter" 'cause I learned so much about--well, part of it was the craft of reporting from Leon, but the other part of it was Rosa Lee as a human being, having done--even though she was a despicable person. I mean she had prostituted her own daughter. She was a drug addict who had three of her own children who were also heroin addict. She was literally--she also was living with HIV. I think she was like the third, third person (laughter) I'd done a story with who was literally--she had AIDS. She was heroin addicted. She was going for her methadone every day. And she was the kindest, most giving grandmother that I had ever seen. I remember she had a--she wanted me to do a story at that point, she kept pushing me to do a story about how the teenage girls, because of all these blended families, women hooking up with different men, that every often, they would bring male children with them into the households, and then there was a sexual abuse of young girls going on, if there were female children in these households because they weren't supervised properly. And she kept pushing me to do this story, pushing me to do the story, and I was like, Rosa Lee, I can't do the story. And then she introduced me to her, to a granddaughter of hers, to whom this had happened, and this granddaughter had a baby. And at one point, I remember she said to me, "June, take that child, I wish you would take that baby and run away 'cause that boy's not gonna have a chance", you know. She said this in front of the child's mother, couldn't believe that she did that. But anyway, so Rosa Lee, even though she was, she was illiterate, but she had an incredible emotional intelligence. And I could never quite figure out whether she was performing for me or performing for the camera. And then one day we were in the doctor's office, and I had left the camera in the car. And she got up and she started testifying right in the middle of the doctor's office. She just got the spirit, you know, and then she was talking about how God had kept her alive today, and, you know, I didn't have the camera (laughter). You know, it was like my--I was getting ready to go run out and get the camera, 'cause I needed to have this scene. But it was poorly lit. There was no way I was gonna get it. I would have missed it. So at that point, I sort of decided she was both. And in deciding that she was both able to be this sort of horrible mom, but a most generous mom, and a person who performed for the cameras and wanted attention and yet, incredibly genuine about her own faith, it gave me space to allow a certain ambiguity that I needed in order to approach my own family story, I think. Story_ID: 99310 Speaker 1: I was able to interview her daughter, Patty [Cunningham], who is the one that she had prostituted. She [Rosa Lee Cunningham] prostituted Patty when she was, I wanna say she was eight. I, it was, it was pretty awful. And I remember talking to Pattie, and I was like how could you love your mother? This is a question that innumerable people have asked me since I did "Secret Daughter", and I asked it of Patty. And she's like--in fact, I couldn't even get the question out. I was like, after what your mom did to you (laughter), you know--and Patty was, herself, by then, a drug addict, and was in prison actually for attempted murder. And Patty said, "How could I love my mother for, you know, after she turned me out and gave me drugs and, you know, smoked crack with me, you now, how could I love her? I, how could I love her after what she did, and more stuff that you don't even know about, I do love my mother. You know, I would die for my mother. I don't feel like she did that to me. I feel like we was in it together. And when she said that I recognized myself in her. And I needed to recognize myself in her so that I could talk to my mom about our story because that was also the way I felt about my mother's situation and I. So when she--when my mom would tell me to call her Aunt Norma or to, you know, pretend I didn't know them or sent me down to live with Peggy [Bush], I felt like it was a thing that we were in together. So I really did understand where Patty was coming from with that. But I don't think I could have understood it in the same--I was able to observe my own emotions by doing Rosa Lee's story which allowed me to then, go do "Secret Daughter", and do it in the way that I did it, in a nonjudgmental way 'cause at the end of the day I think--and this is the biggest difference I have with documentarians working today, I know we're all supposed to be telling every, you know, give, sort of reveal what we think. But I think we do it best when we're nonjudgmental. It's not our job to judge the people that we're doing our stories about. It's our job to tell their stories. And we can't do that if we're sort of constantly thinking, making comments or, you know, about what they've done. You can--arrive at your judgments in the edit room. But while you're out there (laughter) with them, you need to be as nonjudgmental as possible. So it's a listening skill, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, we interviewed Leon Dash [HM] about that story. And he seemed to have a similar take on Rosa Lee--well, he did. But one of the things I couldn't--the story I heard of her daughter, her prostituting her daughter, I mean he felt that was despicable. Speaker 1: I did too. Speaker 2: But, yeah, I heard that, but the-- Speaker 1: But she didn't. Speaker 2: --but the thing I've wondered, you know, I mean, it seems to me that she was on crack, you know, and--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: At that time, she was on heroin, and they were, they were both on heroin. Speaker 2: Yeah, and if you're on drugs then, are your decisions really based on morality or, you know, I mean--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, they're based on getting your next high (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, so can we stand back and say, well, she's doing something that's actually wrong? If it's wrong--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: He's gotten more judgmental about that since he's gotten older, I've noticed because at that time, he really was, he really did withhold judgment about it, which I think was the only reason she was able to talk to him about it. And she talked with me about it on camera. Now, they both did. Speaker 2: I mean well, when everybody who looks at it, they know it's wrong, but at the same time, can you really say that somebody who's on-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --drugs is really doing something despicable? I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yes, you can (laughter). People on drugs do despicable things (laughter). Speaker 2: Are they doing it out of being despicable or are they doing it because they're on drugs? Speaker 1: Well, I mean there's so many, you know, where do you--where does that line get drawn? So if you're illiterate and you do things because you can't read, so you steal or if you (laughter), you know, I mean where does that line--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --where does that line get drawn, you know. Speaker 2: And I've never been on drugs, but I, you know, being on drugs is a lot more powerful than, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --than say (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, you do what you have to do, as the saying goes in the community, yeah. Speaker 2: I mean if I was compelled or driven to get high again by this-- Speaker 1: I don't forgive her for that (laughter). You know, that's not a reason to forgive her, but it's a mitigating circumstance. But I don't, I don't think--I think she still gets to be--we still have the right to call her to account. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know if she can come to account though, for that. Speaker 1: She did. She was sorry. Speaker 2: I'm sure, she probably--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: She was regret--she deeply regretted it. You know, this was one of the moments when I wasn't sure whether she was performing for the cameras, but I thought afterwards that she really did 'cause she talked to me about it again later. I'm sorry my stomach is so noisy today (laughter). She, she talked to me about it later, and I did really sense that she felt like she'd done something awful, that she would never be able to get back. But all parents do something awful that they don't mean to do at the time that they do it, and I mean that was a real extreme case (laughter), you know. But I think every parent has done something that they didn't mean to do at the time or else they did mean to do it, and the kid took it a whole other way. I mean parenting is hard. And that's just an extreme case of very bad parenting, not even parenting. That's just child abuse. Story_ID: 97899 Speaker 1: She decided that she had some social security money--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: This is Rosa Lee [Cunningham], right? Speaker 1: --that should be--Rosa Lee, yes, Rosa Lee decided she had some social security money that she was not getting, and she wanted to go obtain it. And she got me. She roped me into going with her to the, to the Social Security Administration, and we were sitting there waiting and we were waiting, and we were waiting (laughter). And Rosa Lee decided she was tired of waiting so she got up and she started a performance. She was, I don't mean like--not testifying. She was just screaming. She was throwing a hissy fit, like why the government treat people like this. You all (unclear). Then she was saying, calling these people everything but a child of God, and shortly, in the middle of this, she was called to the back (laughter), and I was trying to get her to sit down. And Rosa Lee is saying to me, "Oh, you just one of them go along to get along, niggas" (laughter). "You think, you think 'cause you educated the system gonna listen to you. The system don't give a shit about you. These people don't give a shit about none of us, blah, blah, blah." And so she was, she got, her turn was taken. I learned something from Rosa Lee that day, that sometimes you do have to just raise your voice and yell and say vile things in order to get heard. It turned out that she had never paid taxes, and therefore, did not have any (laughter) social security money coming to her 'cause she'd paid under the table her entire working, working life. So, anyway, that was my Rosa Lee story. Story_ID: 97900 Speaker 1: There's so many documentaries being made today by--I guess, for want of a better word, well, independent documentaries-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --even homemade documentaries--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, um-hum. Speaker 1: --or (unclear) made documentaries, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I have, there's a student coming to, former student of the school coming to my class today who's got her second documentary. She graduated thirteen years ago, and she's already made her second doc. I've been in this business twenty years before anybody gave me a camera and trusted me to do anything long than ten minutes. Speaker 1: And I'm not referring to the ones that are, you know, shown on public television or in film festivals. I'm talking about a lot of things are on the internet that give-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you, like the version of how--well, there's one called "Loose Change", a fellow did out, I think out West some place, about the 9/11-- Speaker 2: Oh, right. Speaker 1: --and his version is very different from--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a lot of conspiracy docs and then there's a whole crew-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --of them about the Fed, the Federal Reserve and Treasury and how the bankers have manipulated. Boy, don't get into a discussion with any of those folks about, any of the people who watch those films about the facts. They don't wanna hear facts (laughter). Their minds are made up. Don't confuse me with facts (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, so you said it's been democratized to the point where almost anybody with-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --who wants to bend the facts or add new facts to make documentaries--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's true, yeah. Speaker 1: How do you feel about that as a journalist? Speaker 2: It's hard. I mean it's hard. I mean I just, you know, I had a really scary conversation a week ago with a woman who was on medical--she writes medical studies. So she takes the raw data and distills it and has to figure out how to write it for the journals that it appears in, very smart woman. She works up at the medical center here. And she said she totally distrusts the news 'cause it's all spin, and I'm just (unclear), what are you talking about (laughter)? She's like, well, you know, you got, you know, take this 7 million people that have applied for Obamacare, you know. So MSNBC takes that and says that, you know, the President more than--the President beat his goal. He's got 7 million people, you know. FOX takes it and says it's a failure because he really needed 10 million people, and he's only got 7 million, so which is it? And I said, it's both (laughter). Can't it be both? Can't it be both? Do you have room in your head for both, you know? She didn't want both. She wants a version of something, you know, and she was, and she said, you know, in medical research, when we write these studies, what we're writing isn't fact. It's, we've done the research to prove a hypothesis. So her whole worldview was that words basically mean nothing and can be shifted to support an argument, whatever argument you want. And it's different than in the old days. I remember pop pop used to be on the--I remember the debating team, and he used to have his debate over--when we were at the dinner table, we had to take a position and defend our position. And to come up with facts for our position, and, you know, and then the other person would debate against it. But that notion of debate that you have an honest debate, using the same facts (laughter), it seems to have been lost. It's, it's all become spin. And it was very scary that somebody that smart would feel like the news was, had lost that much credibility, that there was no point to news. And I kept saying, well, why do you watch MSNBC and FOX? (Laughter) You know, there are, there's CNN, there's the three networks, there's, you know, other places to get your news. And she said, well, I like the--they're more emotional. I like to hear people yelling at each other. It makes it entertaining. And I said, well, it's news. It's not supposed to be entertaining. Story_ID: 97901 Speaker 1: So this idea that somehow you have--I mean that's what's driving documentaries to be more like movies, is this whole idea that you have to be a cinematic movie teller. Well, I'm not trying to be a movie. If I wanted to be a filmmaker, I'd have moved to Hollywood when I was nineteen like my mom [Norma Greve Storch] wanted me to, and I'd be working now in Hollywood (laughter). I'm in New York because I want to be a journalist and because what really happened, really happened. If the audience thinks--you know, my colleague, Jon Else at [University of California, Berkeley] (laughter), has this great line, and it says, "If the audience thinks it happened, it happened." You know, if the audience believes it's there, it needs to have been there, you know. There's just, there's no--that's what separates documentary from movies, from fiction film." I mean now you would have to make the distinction. Are we talking nonfiction or fiction film? But nonfiction, and finally now we've got, you know, you've got "The Act of Killing" and "The Imposter", two films that have come out in the last three years. In one instance, the characters in the imposter are actually engaged by the filmmaker to take on the roles, to play the roles in events that happened ten years ago. So they literally play themselves and the thing unfolds like a movie as they're playing the role--they're actually reenacting events that they, themselves, did. That's sort of okay. I'm dancing on the line, but I might allow that as long as the filmmaker's transparent about it. And he is, actually, transparent about what happened. Then you've got on the other side, "The Act of Killing" which I consider to be a snuff porn film (laughter), which is this filmmaker goes to Indonesia and finds a thug who was a participant in the genocide there in 1965. And he reenacts the killings. He hires a makeup person and a, you know, sound person, and he really reenacts, you know, sound--special effects does the whole thing, you know, reenacts the burning down of villages. He reenacts everything except the most heinous things that he did, shows us how to kill somebody with chicken wire about five times. And, just like, what was the, what was really the purpose of this, really? And it's supposed to be a meditation on how people kill. I don't, I wasn't meditating on how people kill. I'm meditating on how do I get out of here (laughter). When is this thing gonna be over so I can go home? I don't know. And, but "The Act of Killing" is being pointed to as a, you know--because of the close collaboration with the filmmaker and the fact that the character in the film is somehow creating the scenes that the filmmaker documents, and because the filmmaker is transparent, that makes it a documentary? I, I don't know. I have problems with that. That's not journalism. It is a, it's a film. I wouldn't call it a nonfiction film. I don't know where it stands. It's somewhere between fiction and nonfiction, but it's not journalism. Story_ID: 97902 Speaker 1: So, well, so real journalism is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Calls people to account. You have to hold somebody accountable. You cannot, it's not just, oh, here's this poor guy who feels sorry that he killed 5,000 people thirty years ago. And believe he really felt sorry. I think he was acting for the cameras because nobody wretches that long and doesn't finally produce something (laughter), you know. And there were other things. I felt that the, there were scenes that were manipulated. He, there's this scene--I (unclear) poor Joshua Oppenheimer isn't here to defend himself so it'd be a bad--but there's scenes where he's wearing the same clothes that were obviously shot at the same time that are spread throughout the movie which led me to feel that the filmmaker or the editor was trying to make me feel a certain way about this character. So, you know, and there were a number of--there were like little things like that, that I was critiquing while I was watching the film. And I'm just like, you know, I don't really--it was just sort of dreadful. It didn't explore the United States' role in the entire thing. It doesn't really call them to account. It's just a--you know, my colleague, Nick Fraser, who works for the BBC, wrote a piece in the Guardian, the weekend of the Oscars saying that, you know, this is--it's like if you took the Nazis and had them, a Nazi commandant and had him reenact how he killed Jews and then presented this as a meditation on killing, we wouldn't accept that. So why are we accepting it from this weird guy in Indonesia? And I have to admit, I agree. I have--it crystallized, that article, his column crystallized for me a lot of my discomfort and dis-ease with that film. Speaker 1: Well, I think you've covered it sort of, and can you give us maybe an encapsulation of what your journalistic philosophy is? Speaker 2: Oh, boy, do I have a journalistic philosophy? I don't know that I've ever thought about it in that way. Amplify the voices of the unheard, tell the stories, go where the rest of the cameras aren't, and tell the hard stories. Story_ID: 97903 Speaker 1: And you're, one of the projects, the ideas that you're thinking about for a next documentary is Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And why Detroit? Speaker 2: I was a labor reporter for the News Hour, well, actually, it wasn't the News Hour. It was the MacNeil/Lehrer Report. Before there was "The News Hour", the PBS News Hour, and its earliest carnation [sic] was referred to as the MacNeil/Lehrer Report, and it was a half hour show. Jim Lehrer was in Washington [D.C.], and [Robert] Robin MacNeil worked out of New York. And Charlene Hunter-Gault [HM] actually was the person who helped me get this job. And I was labor reporter there for a long time, and one of the stories I covered was the Chrysler bailout during the [President Gerald] Ford administration. So I'd spent a fair amount of time in Detroit. Some years later, I married a man [Waldron Ricks] who was from Detroit, whose mother worked at Chrysler (laughter), and she had been one of those workers. And she, I remember when we first met, she sat me down, Maxine, she sat me down and she told me about what it was--you know, how uncertain her life had been. I mean they had led a middle-class lifestyle until she was laid off from that job. And then all of a sudden, she was on welfare, raising five--well, she had seven children. So she had five boys and two girls. You know, so literally overnight, their entire lifestyle changed. And we actually never covered the story from that angle. And here's a whole city that's basically, I mean, we tend to think of Detroit as something that just happened, but Detroit's been this sort of downsizing of the auto industry and it repercussions began during the [President Jimmy] Carter administration when we first started talking about bringing robots on the floor, and, you know, so we began laying off auto workers. I mean it really is a, it's an autopsy now, but its death has been long foretold, and you could have seen it coming. And nobody ever really thought about it in those terms. We were covering it from, you know, end of--the automization of industry and, you know, labor versus executives and, you know, what is the UAW [United Automobile Workers] gonna do, and who can afford the pensions. Nobody was paying attention to what was happening to the Maxine Ricks of the world and her children. And then she told me that, she finally, she was laid off for like five or six years. She--during, at some point she decided she was going to go--she had to do something 'cause she couldn't stay on welfare. And this is the opposite of the Rosa Lee [Cunningham] story, right. She goes, she gets trained as a medical technician. She's decided she wants to be a medical tech. She graduates at the top of her class. She's got a job. The day after she graduates, she got the letter from Chrysler calling her back. The Chrysler job was gonna pay her--'cause she had seniority, she still had her seniority as a UAW worker, she was gonna get paid $18.00 to stand on an assembly line and punch a hole in the door that, where the door handle goes. That was her job. That was literally all she did all day. And she was gonna be paid $7.50 to take on her new career and her dream job, this thing that she'd always wanted to, as medical technician. She has seven children. She has no options. She goes back to Chrysler and she continues working another fifteen years on the assembly line. And I just thought it was so tragic on so many levels. And the whole city is like, sort of has that tragedy about it. They at one point, had no school buses to take the children to school. People were like hoarding coins so that they could put enough money to get enough gas to go from here to the grocery store. I mean it's like, you know, the rest of us are like saving coupons. I mean it's just--so anyway, I saw it up close and personal. Story_ID: 97904 Speaker 1: And I was just, it intrigued that it had--it still intrigues me. And then I was reading something, I was reading a novel actually. Somewhere I read that, so the--I figured out the first line of the film is that there was a Frenchman named Pontiac met an Indian--no it's the other way around. An Indian named Pontiac met a Frenchman named Cadillac on the shores of the Detroit River, and that was how that city began. And so that's the beginning of the story. But then, you know, then we get to the problem of the end (laughter). You know, so what happens to Pontiac and Cadillac at the end of this? Speaker 2: They try to Ford the river. Speaker 1: Right, (laughter) you know. Yeah, (laughter), yeah, so anyway, I'm really, I'm just--it is an American, it's an American story, and it's typically, it's American in some many levels and sort of tragic. And it's the, you know, whatever, I don't know. So, yes, I'm--I've got all these ideas about it, and I don't know how they'll play out. So that's one I've got in my head. Somebody's talking to me about Romare Bearden doing something. Romare Bearden is having a big, they're having a exhibit of his, is coming here to Columbia University [New York City, New York] in October, and there's a whole year's worth of events and exhibits and things going on. And the university is interested in having me document that. I'm not sure. I haven't quite decided to take it on because it's so big. And it doesn't have a storyline, like the all of the things that--I don't have the first line. I don't have, you know, Pontiac meeting Cadillac on the shores of the Detroit River (laughter). But on the other hand Bearden does deal in the, you know, these themes of migration and finding in oneself an identity are sort of all themes that I've explored during my career. I just have to decide do I wanna spend one more year at it (laughter) here, and then how would I merge all that. There's a lot of moving parts in that, and it's, you know, it's so- Story_ID: 97905 Speaker 1: Now, do you have another, I mean other than Detroit [Michigan], is there another big project in your head that you're--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Big project? Speaker 1: --I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The other big project that I've never done that I--because I know that no one will ever fund it, is the Black Power Movement, beginning with Stokely [Carmichael, Kwame Toure], Gloria Richardson and Stokely Carmichael and really ending when Russell Simmons [HM] sells Def Jam to Sony, and I end it there because hip hop was, in a way, the promise of a political movement by the next generation that was subverted by capitalism. So, but, I know nobody's ever gonna (laughter) fund--that's a book (laughter), gonna have to write that as a book 'cause I know no one will ever give me the money to do the documentary. But, you know, what--the anger that is seething in the black community now that's really become an anger that's turned inward, begins, I think, with Stokely. Stokely left, but then there's a lot of other--Gloria Richardson--I think Gloria Richardson now lives in New York. Is she a HistoryMaker? Have you gotten her? Do you know who she is? She started the, in the East, I think it was called the Cambridge Movement in Eastern shore of Maryland, when H. Rap Brown first burned down that courthouse. There was that huge, it started, like this is happening in Maryland. Well, everybody's fixated on Georgia, Alabama and Mississippi. Meanwhile, the Eastern shore of Maryland has got real issues, and Gloria Richardson became the leader of the Cambridge Movement on the Eastern shore and led the struggle for integration there. And I've always wanted to. She lives here in New York now. She must be about ninety years old. She was one of the speakers at the March--there were four women who spoke in the 1963 March on Washington when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s famous--and Gloria Richardson was one of the four. Speaker 1: I know the Eastern shore really has a special--it's kind of like--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's special (laughter). Speaker 1: --isolated from the rest of the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, it is special. Speaker 1: You know, it's the home of Frederick Douglass, Harriet Tubman, Maulana Karenga [HM]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum. Speaker 1: And Gloria Richardson. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yep. Story_ID: 97906 Speaker 1: So that's one I have in my head that I don't know that I'll ever--I just need to, I think I just, it's--I'm gonna have to write the book 'cause no one will ever fund it. Foundations don't wanna fund controversy and that would be a very controversial topic, and I wanna do the--and plus, nobody's funding historical documentaries anymore. You know, I mean you get 'em done on the History Channel or the Discovery Channel, and they have to have computer-generated graphics and all this stuff. And I mean in a way, I'm beginning to feel like a dinosaur (laughter). I feel like what I do, which is sort of based in the real--it's not that it's not valued, but it wanted--they want value added. So they're looking for computer graphics or some kind of visual enhancement or animation or actors to play a role or something, you know, and it's just--I can't. (Laughter) Speaker 2: Yeah, you were right, when you raise the History Channel, something you said, though, I think we need to chew on for a minute is, you said funders don't really want to fund controversy? Speaker 1: They don't. No. That's why we've seen so many stories about the Civil Rights Movement. They'll be doing the Civil Rights Movement for the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Because it's over with them (unclear)--or is that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I'm so done with the Civil Rights Movement. We have done the Civil Rights Movement ten ways till Sunday. We are still doing the Civil Rights Movement (laughter), and it's just like, I'm done. I'm done, I mean, you know, yes, we can all get along. We did for three, you know, like seven--three to seven brief years from 1957 to '64 [1964] or so, '65 [1965]. And then the thing blew up, and we've been fighting ever since, but nobody wants to explore what happened, sort of post--you know, what happens after Freedom Summer. I know Stanley Nelson [HM]'s been trying to get that film. He's been wanting to do--I think he actually finally did get it funded, a story on the history of the Black Panthers, which is another, it's another controversial one, and at one point, he just lost funding and he was trying to get the funding back. And then it's just difficult. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: The country's not ready to have that conversation yet. Speaker 2: Well, good luck-- Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: --on that project. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Thank you. Speaker 2: I hope it comes out. Speaker 1: I think it's gonna be a book, not a thing, but what is it? I don't know what the book is, actually. I mean there's been many books done about individual pieces of that whole thing, and there's no one through line. So it's not like I can do a biography. But anyway, I need to think--I go on sabbatical next year. I'll do some thinking about it. Story_ID: 97907 Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you reflect back on everything you've done to this point in your career and in life, is there any major thing that you wish you could go back and change or do over again? Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh. (Laughter) I would be a much richer person (laughter) if I had gone back--right after "Secret Daughter" was done, HBO wanted to do it as a movie of the week. HBO at that point was doing these movies of the week. And they approached me and David Fanning, and they wanted to take the film and make it a movie of the week. And in hindsight, I should probably have done that (laughter). I would have gotten a fair amount of money for it. At that point, I wanted to write the book, and I needed to tell the story the way I told it, and I needed to not have it through--so when you work on a documentary on a series like "Frontline", you have a executive producer who's sort of your interlocutor (laughter), between your story and how it gets out to the world. And I felt, I'd gone through a fair amount of--the hardest struggle in the edit room for me was taking Aunt Peggy [Bush] out of the film, even though I did a section on Atlantic City [New Jersey]. But it was very brief. And so I think a lot of people were left with me and this mother, this white mother who could not raise me and sent me to live with these folks in Atlantic City, and how did I survive her? Well, I survived her because of Aunt Peggy, and I needed to really sort of do an homage to Aunt Peggy. And now that I think about, I probably could have. In a movie, we could have hired somebody to play Aunt Peggy or whatever, you know, but I don't know. I just-- Speaker 1: Yeah, so many movies miss that part, I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --(unclear) the one of Petey Green, you know, missed his grandmother-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, they liked to, because the--(simultaneous)-- I Speaker 1: --there was a--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --the tension, the conflict, the narrative conflict from a pure storytelling point of view is between me and my mother [Norma Greve Storch]. Story_ID: 97908 Speaker 1: So I was really, I really wanted to write the book. I wanted to call the book, not "Secret Daughter", but "Two Mothers", and my editor put her foot down (laughter) because I said, for me the struggle was, I have two mothers. So how does a girl child (laughter)--dealing with one mother is bad enough. I had two mothers. How do you negotiate a sense of identity between these two separate mothers. That was sort of, and that was what I kept--that was for me, what the driving narrative of the book was, and I'm sort of inexperienced as a book writer. And I felt very humbled when I read [President] Barack Obama's "Dreams of My Father" [sic, "Dreams from My Father"] (laughter), several years later and how, not only at how good a writer he is, but how well he was able to observe things that had happened to him. And he was so much younger. And I finally decided, he must have been living in conflict all that time, whereas I wasn't living in conflict. So I'm now trying to go back from my, sort of middle age, and observe, try to figure out, well, where really was the conflict 'cause I wasn't experiencing conflict as I was growing up. It was, I was just growing up, you know. And it's only now, from the distance of adulthood, that I look back, and people say, oh, my God, she did what? (Laughter) And I try to find, I try to figure out well, where were the tension points. And it's a much harder thing to do because ultimately, I lived a very happy, normal life. I was sheltered. I was a church-going girl. I went to school. I got good grades. I mean, you know, and the, it's a very non--from my point of view, non-dramatic and very uninteresting story. And I kept the--my entire thing when I was working on both the, well, the film, to a lesser degree, the book. But the--'cause I sort of knew by then, was, is anybody gonna watch this? (Laughter) I couldn't imagine why it would be interesting to anybody, you know. Speaker 2: Well, the running theme through, at least 1,700 interviews that I've been a part of, is that most people that are successful have an Aunt Peggy or a mama or somebody-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that plays or father-- Speaker 1: Or a grandmamma, yeah. Speaker 2: --or grand--somebody who'll play that role-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --providing that stability and that-- Speaker 1: Yeah, including Obama. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: Yeah (laugh). Speaker 2: So his father was gone, but he had a family. Speaker 1: Yeah, he did have a family, yeah. Speaker 2: He had a family--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I think for him the conflict was, 'cause he's a black man in the world. He's--at home, he's this cherished, loved child in a stable environment. But then he's gotta come out into the world, and he's not. So he had to deal with it. He had to negotiate it on a constant basis. Aunt Peggy made sure to tell me (laughter) from the time I was whatever, that I'm gonna have to be twice as good to get half as far. That was the, that was the slogan that I used to hear all the time, "Twice as good to get half as far". I think it's changed now, so where I just have to be twice as good (laughter), and I'll get the same distance. So that's some progress (laughter). Now, when I get the right to be as mediocre as some of my colleagues (laughter), then I'll feel like we've made full progress, you know. So anyway- Story_ID: 97909 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: The devaluation of education, the fact that education has come to be seen as "acting white" when we struggled so hard for the right to be educated is a scary thought. I was able to, I bid on an auction and had lunch with Mayor Dinkins, former Mayor David [N.] Dinkins [HM] yesterday, and he was talking about the difference between himself and people like Al Sharpton [HM] or Jesse [L.] Jackson [HM] and sort of that Baptist preacher, political politician versus--he much more identifies with [President Barack] Obama because he's, you know, the educated statesman. And, oh, Lord, I lost my train of thought. Yeah, I was thinking, you know, but the idea that good grammar, dressing appropriately with, you know, without showing your underwear while you're out in public. I mean you may want to occasionally show your underwear while you're out in public, but not every day. Writing well, doing well in school, achievement that somehow these have become, you know, it is that these are not seen as things to be aspired to, really concerns me. The lack of black men, of home-grown American Negroes (laughter) in higher education and in graduate schools is of great concern. I mean we have, I think we have the largest class of, of African Americans in the school this year. And maybe two of them are from the United--I mean are not first generation, but like grew up here. Yeah, I mean it's really, it's--where do we, what is happening? What is happening to our boys in school that somehow they're not--they're somehow being turned off by the whole idea of education. And it's like, it's painful. Story_ID: 97700 Speaker 1: Yeah, just going back a minute to the whole movie version of a true story, do you think it's ever possible to--I mean I don't know. I mean in your case, I mean it's kind of disturbing to me to hear that, you know, your Aunt Peggy [Bush] was taken out of your story, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she was minimized. I wouldn't say she was taken out of it. Speaker 1: Yeah, minimized. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I didn't have any footage of her. I mean it was very simple. Television is a tyranny (laughter). If I do not have visuals, I can't talk about about. I cannot talk over a black hole. I had basically three stills, three or four stills. I mean I had various still pictures of Peggy. But there was no real way to bring her alive. And I had this interview with my mother [Norma Greve Storch], you know, and the narrative tension between Peggy and mom was over sort of how I was going to be raised. But I didn't have direct documentary evidence of that. I knew it existed. I had memories of it. I have, you know, sort of memories of long discussions, but, you know, like what would the scene as a narrative--as a fiction person, if I was writing the movie, I guess I would invent something. And I could invent a couple of places, actually. But I just couldn't, I just didn't have the visual material to tell the story. It's part of the tyranny of the--I call it the tyranny of the medium (laughter). If you don't have a visual, you can't tell the story. Somebody's gotta be there, you know. If somebody's dead, you know. I have somebody that came to me recently, a student from the film school wants to do a story about a terrorist, American-born terrorist who is now serving a life sentence in Dubai [United Arab Emirates], and I was like, can you get inside the prison to talk to the guy? (Laughter) Well, if not, you're gonna have a problem. You know, how are you gonna represent him in a documentary. You can do a fiction film about him, and you can hire somebody to play him. But, you know, if basically, your story is that he wrote a poem. And for the poem that he wrote, he's gonna spend the rest of his life in prison. Awful, so what's the story? And how do you tell the story? You can't tell the story without--you need some kind of access. Hopefully, his parents took videos. He's got, you know, something somewhere, that's some visual representation of him. Otherwise, you've got a pretty short story. Story_ID: 97701 Speaker 1: Okay, well--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So that's the-- that's the problem. And because African Americans--and Latinos are gonna face this as they mature in our industry as well, we have not been documented in the history of this country. When you go back and try to go before 1960, there's no black people on TV (laughter), you know. There is no Latinos on TV. There's very few Latinos on TV now, except for the stars, you know. So I think, I predict that as, you know, that, you know, the generation of Latin and Central Americans begins to come of age and wants to begin to tell their stories as documentarians, they're gonna face the same problems we faced because they're never--all the stories are about them as illegal immigrants. So where are their normal, everyday stories to be found? You know, there's no, like footage of, you know, people just, black folks walking on the Boardwalk, say, which was a great (unclear) I'd need it, you know. Now, I know that my aunt had a store on the Boardwalk where she and her husband took pictures of black people walking on the Boardwalk. I have seen dozens of their pictures. I had them at one point. I donated them to the Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture]. There is no, but in the archives, in the moving image archives, not to be found. So it's a real problem. Story_ID: 97702 Speaker 1: You know, I mean we've got a--and it's a different kind of problem now 'cause we have Vine and (laughter) YouTube and video, you know. The problem now is gonna be accessing as, you know, ten years from now--it won't even be ten at the rate that this, at the rate technology is moving. You know, say three to five years from now when these formats are old, how do you access them? Again, how do you find them? How do you index them? How do you ever find any of this stuff? You know, I was looking for, I was looking for a picture that a former, a cousin of mine had that I remembered seeing, and he had posted it on his Flickr account. He had 17,000 pictures just for this one family (laughter) on his Flickr account. And they weren't indexed in any kind of way. If you don't know what you're looking for, you're never gonna find it. You know, so, you know, I mean there's a whole, you know, there's library science has its hands cut out for it in figuring out how we're gonna document our lives in this age, you know, just, if you just think ten years ago that none of this stuff existed. And here we are in a different era, and you can find--there's more to be found now, but, you know, it's like for future generations, history is going to begin in 2005 with Facebook (laughter). Story_ID: 97703 Speaker 1: It kind of (unclear) me to the documentary, I should have thought of this before, but what are some of your legal concerns in terms of producing a documentary, in terms of releases and-- Speaker 2: It's just rights. You just have to get rights and releases. I don't, yeah, it's--I, it's--my students agonize over it. I've done it, been doing it for so long, I sort of know it cold, you know. Fair Use has opened up a lot. There was a period of time that we went through where the rights was crazy. Music is the biggest problem 'cause the music is held so tightly. But now that anybody can create music, you can sort of work your way even around that. You think about different legal things, like the film I'm working on now, there's a character who didn't want me to disclose his health status on the web that, website that I'm building to promote the arrival of the documentary. And then I discovered that the reason he didn't want me to disclose his health status was that he occasionally works as a prostitute. And I'm like, ohm, (laughter), you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: This is someone who's got HIV? Speaker 2: Yeah, this is someone who's got HIV. So, I haven't, you know, it become, you know, at first I'm thinking, well, he signed the--the first stop before I found out about the prostitution, the first stop was, well, but you signed a release, and I have you on camera discussing your status. Then the next thing is, you know, so I'm thinking, well, all right. You can be in the film. I won't put you on the web. Then I find out about the prostitution. So now, I've got a little bit of a more difficult problem 'cause ethically, as a journalist, do I protect the identity of somebody who may be having, may be engaging in unsafe sex practices. And there's a third complication. In the State of South Carolina, if you do--if you are intimate with someone and you do not disclose your status, you're eligible to be put in prison for twenty-five years. So this is like the guy in Dubai, right? He writes a poem, (laughter) and he's in jail for twenty-five years. I don't know that he's using condoms or not using condoms. You know, I haven't asked him. So, you know, I need to go back and ask him so, but that factors into the thought. So the, that's one that I'm dealing with right now, that I've sort of been, what do I do about this? I don't know what to do. What do you think I should do (laughter)? Speaker 1: I don't know. So-- Speaker 2: You don't know (laughter). Story_ID: 97704 Speaker 1: But, okay, well, another question we always ask is, when you look back over everything that you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: Well, this book ["Secret Daughter"] and the film goes with it, I guess. I'd like to come up with one more that's that good. I'd like to be more than one (laughter), you know, I'd like my obit [obituary] to say, you know, I did two or three that made a difference in whatever (laughter), you know, in people's lives and the way documentaries are told and stories that are told. Speaker 1: So the book and the film continue to provide feedback from people? Speaker 2: Oh, my God, yeah, yeah, it's amazing. I showed the film recently. I live in a Hispanic neighborhood, Dominican neighborhood. And we showed it at a community center, uptown, and Latin Americans, sort of like, very much like African And Caribbean immigrants come to this country and don't have an experience of being the minority "other", don't get this whole race thing in the United States. It's weird. They don't get it. They don't understand it. It's like, you know, Latino people have black and white folks in the same family. Every family has a range of skin color. What is it that we're all so uptight about? And, so, anyway, I showed this thing and all of the--and everybody just said, oh, my God, now we get it. We didn't get it. You know, I mean even though there's colorism. There's like the grandparents play favorites with, and they'll let--in Latino community, if, you know, you're the lighter child or you have the straighter nose or your hair is straighter or whatever, there's that kind of thing. But there's not really an understanding of the legal history, which I guess is one reason why we do need to keep doing films about the Civil Rights Movement (laughter) so that people get it. Like, what is it that, you know, we're talking about? It's not just that we're mad that we're not getting job, you know, 'cause, you know, they get here, and they have these stereotypes about black Americans being lazy and don't work, and they don't go to school. And they walk around with their pants hanging down, and, you know, they play this awful music. So there's that on the one hand, and then, but there's the history beyond that that they don't get 'cause they hadn't been exposed to it. And none of the movies that go overseas have black characters. So they never see that other side. Maybe now, Denzel [Denzel Washington], but, you know, Story_ID: 97705 Speaker 1: I was in Pakistan recently, and I was looking through--not recently, three years ago. I was looking through the DVDs of my host--that's another story that I've thought about that (laughter) (unclear), it's on my list of stories that I would do if somebody would give me money. Speaker 2: This is about Pakistan? Speaker 1: Yes, about illiteracy in Pakistan and what it means for the country 'cause all we ever hear about is the Islamic bomb, you know, the nuclear bomb or else we hear about the Taliban. But Pakistan as a country is poorer than Haiti. It has a 75 percent illiteracy rate, and the fact that it is so poor and so illiterate has huge ramifications for what we're dealing with right now. They don't speak Arabic and the Quran is written in Arabic. So that means they can't read. It's an Islamic state where the majority of the people cannot read the language that their holy book is written in, which leaves them open to the machinations of anyone who wants to come by and say this is what the book says, you know. And you don't know what the other book is inside that book 'cause you can't read it. They speak Urdu. They don't speak Arabic. They don't read Arabic (laughter), you know, so it's--it was really, it was scary actually. It was scary in a different kind of way, not scary because of the Taliban. It was scary because I realized, you know, the level at which the frustration of young men there is, what it's leading to. It's leading to the Taliban. It's not like they started out Taliban and just--they're frustrated. There's no way to make a living. There's no way to, there's no room for advancement. You're constantly--there's no justice. You know, the Quran sets out a way of living and sets out the way that justice is to be meted out, and there's a law that, at least is written down and makes sense as opposed to what they're living with now, which is none of that (laughter), you know, in a society which has no justice unless you pay money to somebody or know somebody. You know, it's a very opaque place for being, even though they claim to be an Islamic society. It's not living, the rulers--it's really an oligarchy in which the very rich, that works for the very rich, and the very rich are living in the Islamic society. Everybody else is just like, peons who work for us. And they identify as people of color. And that was the other big thing for me. I'm quite astray from whatever your first question was. Speaker 2: It was about legacy. Speaker 1: So, yeah, to be able to go there and so I mean that's sort of in that same mode of amplifying the voices of people that you never hear from. And there's this whole country of people that you never hear from, and they're, as here, there is a South, North divide. And the other odd thing about it is that people who live in Southern Pakistan are darker skinned--that seems to be worldwide, no matter where you go. Dark-skinned people (laughter) get (unclear) shat upon, you know. So in Southern Pakistan, I was in--I happened in an area that the Pakistani Army had just cleaned out the Taliban. So we were meeting with the general who had done it, and, you know, he happens to mention that he's a, he comes from Sindh area in the Southern part of Pakistan. And one of the women with us is from that same area, and she was like, oh, my God. I've never met anybody who was a general. It was like Colin Powell [HM], from her point of view, she was meeting Colin Powell. And it turned out, he was, in fact, the only general from his ethnic group in the Pakistani Army. And he was, it was Colin Powell--he was the Colin Powell there, you know. I mean it was really amazing, and striking to me that, you know, that you still have this stuff that seems to afflict the human race. Where did this notion that to be light and bright was to be right, begin in the annals of humanity? I do not know. That's the documentary that needs to be done, and whoever figures that one out will get the Nobel Peace Prize. But it seems to be endemic in no matter what society you go through, you know. It's crazy. Maybe it starts with the people who work in the sun thing and, versus people who don't. My legacy. I don't know about my legacy. I don't--I'm too young to have a legacy. I'm only sixty, please. (Laughter) I have another, hopefully, I have another ten or fifteen years of making these. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: If I don't get--if I don't die from the struggle to raise money before then. So. Story_ID: 97706 Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have children? Speaker 2: I don't. My documentaries are my children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I have just fallen in love--I'm not sure. When did we talk last? I think I was going through--I had just gone through the divorce, and now I've met somebody else. And so I've just fallen in love so that's cool. Speaker 1: That's good, that is cool. So, now, we were talking about family. So how did you family like, I know you lost your parents. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And so my family now is sort of my extended--well, I have two sets of family. So I have my, sorry, so I have my two sisters, one on my father's side, and one on my--these are biological sisters, one on my father's side and one on my mother's side. The one on my father's side and I are a little closer than the one on my mother's side and I, partially because Linda lives in New Jersey and Candy [Candace Herman] lives in California. So partially, it's a distance thing. And then partially, it's a race thing. Linda, oh, no, I don't know, I can't even quite say that because there've been moments when it sort of crosses. It depends on what year it is. It sort of varies back and forth. So I won't say it depends somewhat on race. So Linda's my black sister and Candy's my white sister. And then they each have children, and Linda has seven or eight grandchildren. So I've got--I'm a great aunt. And then so I have them, and then I have within my Gregory extended family, the cousins. We call ourselves the cousins. There's nine of us, and I've lost track of the grandchildren. I mean (laughter), can't, it's like twenty-seven or thirty of 'em. And so they sort of pop in and out. And some of them I'm closer to than others. I'm godmother to about five or six of them, and so it, you know, I'm Auntie June. I'm Auntie June to my black, my black next generation and I'm Antee (ph.) June to my white next generation. I haven't figured that out. What's up with the ant? I'm not an ant (laughter). Saying, I'm an--an ant is an insect that crawls on the ground. I'm an aunt (laughter), you know, but it hasn't been very, I haven't been very successful in changing their pronunciation. Story_ID: 97707 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Is there anything I haven't asked you or we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: You haven't talked to me about, did we talk about Columbia University [New York City, New York] and my career here? Speaker 1: Ah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And I've been here fourteen years, and I'm the only black tenured professor here (laughter). Speaker 1: We did talk about the beginnings of it, and-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --we need to say more about it, I guess, in terms of your students. I haven't asked you about your students or what courses do you teach actually? Speaker 2: I teach Reporting, Video Journalism and Documentary. So Video Journalism is just, they're shorts, like two to four minutes. And then documentaries are twenty to forty minutes. Speaker 1: I know you told us last time that you were told-- Speaker 2: We changed the curriculum this year, so it's a little different, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and you said last time that when you were hired, you were told you would only teach three classes or something like that or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I'd have two and a half, three days off and that-- Speaker 1: Three days between--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and it evolved. Speaker 1: Yeah, and you said it's never happened (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's just sort of the mechanics of teaching. I was thinking more about the burden of being the black professor, that in the year 2014, I'm sitting in an Ivy League institution in the capital of--one of the capitals of the world, and I'm the black professor (laughter), you know. And it's very, it's just a burden in several ways. I mean there's no Latino professor, and there's no Asian professor. So when I say, I'm the black professor, I am the black professor--I am the professor of color. In other words, I have to represent--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: In the Graduate School of Journalism? Speaker 2: In the Graduate School of Journalism at Columbia University. So that gets difficult. I'm also the only visual-oriented professor. I'm everybody else. So there's twenty-two tenured faculty, and there's nobody else who works in visual arts, and there's no other people of color. So I'm sort of the (laughter), I represent a lot of different people in that room. And I've grown into asserting my--there's two things that happen when you're the only. One is you sort of--the first thing is you try to blend in, and in trying to blend in, you become so soft that you don't make a difference. And then the other thing is you get so angry that you then begin to blurt out (laughter), and then you hurt your own cause because you're seen as the angry black woman. So I've been here now fourteen years, and I think it's really just this year, just in the last--yeah, well, I got a promotion to full professor last July. And somehow or another that seems to have helped me figure out how to walk that middle line where I'm more assertive about maintaining my own ideas without making it a, you know, it's not--without being the angry black woman (laughter), you know, and without being so meek, where I'm trying to blend, you know, trying to blend in and not rock the boat. It's a very weird sort of--[W.E.B.] Du Bois called it the double consciousness, but I'm beginning to feel like I'm, it's full consciousness. And part of it just may be maturity. But I'm sort of feeling more at home in my own skin now, certainly within the institution. And then I've developed this documentary program, and the school didn't teach documentary before I came. And so I started a documentary program here when they're fifth year. And my students are doing really well. I mean they're coming out. They have jobs, they're working. So I sort of feel a legacy there. I mean that's probably more of a legacy than my--my final legacy is probably going to be the students that I produce, not the films that I make. And very often, I'm facing former students as I'm trying to apply for grants (laughter), which is, ah, (laughter). I know, but, you know, they're good, and I guess it's a testimony to how well I've taught them. Speaker 1: What are the students like today? I mean I was just thinking when you said you were the only black professor here in the Graduate School of Journalism-- Speaker 2: I'm the only black tenured professor. So I mean there are-- Speaker 1: There are other black associate professors--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: There are 145 full-time faculty and we're probably, we might be almost making 10 percent. I'd say it's more like seven to eight, if you include adjuncts (laughter), okay, include the adjuncts, and we may make it up to 10 percent. And the regular full-time faculty is forty-five and there are two black people, one Latino, one Vietnamese, one Filipino. So five out of the 45. That's one over 10 percent, right. In other words, Columbia is maintaining, trying to (laughter) (unclear), you know, they ain't stepping up to the plate, you know. We're not the, you know. Oddly enough, the most diverse department in the--I mean the whole university is like this. This is not just the School of Journalism. In the whole, I think there's probably enough of us that we could have a party. I think I asked one year, I asked last year, we were talking to the provost office. There may be not quite forty African American professors in the whole of Columbia University, including the medical school, full-tenured professors. So that's not a lot to be proud of in year 2014. I mean we're here what, you know, sixty years after the forty--seventy after the Civil Rights Movements, and here we are still having this discussion (laughter). Do I really still have to have this discussion? Speaker 1: I'm just asking about the students in the late '60's [1960s] or early '70's [1970s] students would have demanded more black teachers. I mean that was one of the demands-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I don't know. Speaker 2: I mean we have one-year program, so we have, we lack an institutional memory. Story_ID: 97708 Speaker 1: I've discovered, I was just talking with [Robert] Bob O'Meally, have you--is he one of your HistoryMakers? He should be. He started the English Department here. He's in the English Department here, but he also started the Center for Jazz Studies at Columbia University. Anyway, Bobby was saying that he had a class recently, he did a, he went to one of the Columbia global centers, and there was a, he taught a course on global jazz. And he had eight students who were all Columbia students, who were all black. And he said for several, and for more than half of them, it was the first time they'd ever had black friends 'cause they had gone to all-white schools or gone to boarding school and literally had never spent time in the company of other, of a group of other black people, other smart black people. That's just a travesty. Yeah, and just--I can't even imagine that, you now, I don't even--I mean how isolated are you that you go to an undergraduate, that in high school you're the only one and you come to a college where presumably, there's a couple of hundred at least, and you still don't manage to find your tribe because you've been so traumatized (laughter) in your high school life that you've just decided the black community, you know, doesn't wanna have anything to do with you. I mean when I was at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I came in, in '71 [1971]--I don't remember the exact numbers, but we were one of the largest classes of blacks that had come in. And it wasn't that many of us. It might have been 120, including the men. So maybe there was like fifty-some women and the rest were male. And we rejoiced in the fact that we had finally found--like we were a tribe of smart, smart-ass black people (laughter), you know, and we could speak Ebonics and Shakespeare and we did (laughter), you know. And it was something that we celebrated and the idea that that's not happening anymore, is sort of sad, you know. Yeah, that they're, you know, they have to--I don't know. It's--I don't know. I don't understand this generation. They spend their lives on their phones. I'm hoping that in the way that all things go, there'll be a rebellion against this living your life online thing. I begin to see it every once in a while in some of my students who really, they don't have Twitter accounts. They don't want to be on Facebook. It's actually a struggle. I try to get them to think about Facebook, Twitter and Four Square and Instagram as ways to report, another resource for reporting and not a place to reveal what you had for lunch or who your boyfriend is or, you know, like what you did last night at the party, which hopefully, you never reveal. So, but it's, there's a small group of them, small minority. And I keep thinking, well, maybe they'll grow. Maybe they'll (laughter), maybe there will be more of a reaction against this idea that we live our entire lives on our smartphones and in our computers or in our tablets. It's just, it's crazy. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So you plan to teach here another, how many years? Speaker 1: To be determined. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So you see yourself being here a long time? Speaker 1: To be determined (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 97709 Speaker 1: What about organizations you belong to? Speaker 2: The National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ], not so much anymore. But I was an active member at one point in my career. When I was working on Daily News, I was more active. There's less of a space there now for long form people and people who aren't in the news juggernaut. New York Women in Film and Television. You know, I'm so busy, I don't have time to do organizations. I wish I did. I just, you know, between mentoring the students and trying to get my own work done, I'm sort of dropped, I'm trying--I've made it--it's my New Year's resolution to get more involved and try to do more on the professional front. But, I don't know (laughter). Not this year, I don't know. The organizations, I'm a member, I can tell you the things I'm a member of, but I'm sort of--my name would appear on the membership list without any real participation on my part, which I'm trying to change this year (laughter). Speaker 1: Is there an institution that you're committed to, I mean that you really are, you know, your heart's really in, that you-- Speaker 2: An institution? Speaker 1: Or a cause that you-- Speaker 2: I'm so isolated now, 'cause I am, just like my students. It' sort of--and I'm still, I feel like I'm going to be permanently tied to New Orleans [Louisiana], and I'll probably keep going back and forth. In fact, I'm going next, two weeks. I may spend part of my sabbatical down there. I'm hoping this is the last film I do about HIV. I'm just, I'm done (laughter). I can't do another one. The cause of black people in the world--people of color. I won't even say black people anymore. I'll say people of color in the world, is a cause that I'm devoted to. And there's no organization for that. It's just a (laughter), it's a day-by-day battle, you know. So. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 97710 Speaker 1: Well, my last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, really? I don't know. I'm not old enough (laughter). How do I wanna be remembered? I don't know. If I look at my best work, probably--if I look at "Secret Daughter", if I look at, I guess I did, I did a film called "Ashes of the Cold War" that was before its time. I did a film called "A Kid Kills" that looks at gang violence that was sort of right before its time. I'd like to be thought of as a documentarian who broke stories that became issues, maybe a couple of years down the road that might have been premature at the time that they came out, but were prescient in their long-term impact. I don't know if, in fact, that's what I've done, but that's would be (laughter), how I'd like to be remembered. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Okay, alrighty, thank you..