 Story_ID: 6355 Speaker 1: Major funding for the following program was provided by Chrysler [Corporation]. Additional funding was provided by the Wyndham Chicago [Illinois] Hotel, AT&T [American Telephone and Telegraph] Broadband, ComEd [Commonwealth Edison]--an Exelon Company, American Airlines [Inc.], Walgreens [Company], the 'Chicago Tribune', Ronald McDonald House Charities, and Veranda L. Dickens. Story_ID: 6356 Speaker 1: An enduring couple, both on and off the stage, actors, writers, and above all activists. They are Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee. National treasures, their lives committed to the struggle. The HistoryMakers is proud to present 'An Evening With Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee. And now, to our host, teacher, author, and well-known activist, Angela Davis. Story_ID: 6357 Speaker 1: Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee have shaped, literally shaped the world we inhabit today. They have made it a better place for all of us. Through their art and through their activism, they have never let us forget that we all have a deep moral responsibility to continue to insist on freedom for every person on this earth. Speaker 2: He is an actor, writer, and director. She, an award-winning actress and writer. Both are collaborators, activists, stars of stage and screen and an inspiration to us all. Speaker 1: Please give a warm round of applause for Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee. Story_ID: 6358 Speaker 1: Our lives have intersected time and time and time again. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And if you'll forgive me, I want to start on a personal note because I never asked you to tell me the story about how you became involved in the campaign for my freedom? Speaker 2: Oh well, that's right. You know, I really--you, you--please start Ossie, I don't remember. The campaign started, you know--we're here--three Davis's, what are we gonna tell you? (laughs) Who knows? Speaker 1: In the course of our involvement I think Dick Gregory and I had been appointed chairmen of a committee to defend the [Black] Panthers and one thing led to another. I was involved with people who were friends of mine, who were friends of yours also. And it was they who suggested that perhaps Ruby and I should be further involved in your affairs as they came along--Esther Jackson, [James] Jim Jackson, William L. Patterson, Louise Patterson--various other people. And as part of the continuing struggle, we didn't know you personally at the time, but you were part of what was happening. Speaker 2: But I knew you. Speaker 1: Yeah. (laughs) You were a part of what was happening. You were a part of those young people who were on the front lines and really being exterminated by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], they campaigned to destroy--a real campaign to destroy the young people who had assumed some leadership role in our society was under way. And this was our way of participating and being of help. So I was asked to do what I do rather well, I was made the head of the committee and then told to sit down (laughs) and somebody else would do all the work. And it turned out that that was the case. And one of the most ardent workers in your behalf was your own mother [Sallye Bell Davis]. She was so wonderful. I--so I knew your mother much better than I ever knew you. But you were to us one of the causes that we held dear. Ruby and I have children and we consider, particularly the young people involved in the struggle, that we have an obligation to them. And when you came along it was a natural step for us to take to say, "Well, if you're going to come and get that Davis, you may as well line up the rest of us, because we're--." Speaker 2: And Ossie, do you remember we had a fundraiser at our house? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And as luck would have it we got a job and we couldn't be there. Speaker 1: You couldn't be there. Speaker 2: No, I couldn't be there. Yes. Speaker 1: Angela couldn't be there either for reasons which, you know. We had a ball--we raised funds and, you know, contributed to the cause. But one of the most important things we've ever done was to be involved in that particular phase of the struggle with you. We're very proud of that. Speaker 2: Well, I thank you. I thank you from the bottom of my heart. Speaker 1: And Ossie was that the time, one of the nights at Carnegie Hall [concert hall] when you had the bulletproof--you were surrounded by bulletproof protection, or am I mixing things up? Speaker 2: Now, you're not mixing anything up. When the struggle had reached the certain phase and Angela, you know, had been set free and was free to go, there was a big rally at Madison Square Garden [convention center], you know, for her, and the place was packed. And I was the Master of Ceremonies, but I had to do my mastering inside a glass bulletproof cage, you know? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I remember that. Speaker 2: You remember that? Speaker 1: I absolutely do. Speaker 2: But it was part of the madness of the times, you know? We went, "Well--," and I thought I looked pretty good in that glass cage. Story_ID: 6359 Speaker 1: Let's get back to the reason we're here. We want to, we want to talk about your lives. And we're asking you to tell the story of your lives together. For most of us where there's Ossie there's Ruby. Where there's Ruby there's Ossie. Speaker 2: Some of us of course. Speaker 1: But I know there was a time when you were not a couple, when you were not together. And as a matter of fact you came from rather different backgrounds. So let's, you know, talk about--. Speaker 2: Ruby, you're an expert on that. Speaker 1: Well, to an extent the assault on black people was pronounced, and so our values were similar although we came from different parts of the country, we both came from the struggle. You know, I don't know any other way--how do people be if they don't be from the struggle, you know? Because that's how much you come from it. I, I remember I wrote in my book--thank God--I think everybody needs to write a book so you can really try to remember what happened. And I remember my, my first thoughts, I was slow-thinking as it's getting on to the thinking part of it, but was--had to do with struggles and pickets and police and people getting beat in the street and furniture on the sidewalk, getting rained on and somebody going up the street on Seventh Avenue [New York, New York] where I lived and shooting themselves, and the roomers, and, you know, have roomers in your house, boarders, so that you could pay the rent. And, "Don't buy where you don't work!, Don't buy where you can't work!" And so, I mean, these are my first thoughts, like--imagine happy babies, remember, you know, if they can think back, you know, the joy of tickling and all that and being children, but this is what I remember. And pictures that, that shocked my sensibilities when I was, like, four and five years old. I don't think I deserve any credit for anything, you understand, because I didn't know any other way to be. I remember street corners and pickets and parades, do you understand? So that's what, that's what I got teethed on. Speaker 2: Well, when I came into the struggle, and that--you want to applaud Ruby? (applauds) Consider my situation--fresh out of the [U.S.] Army, got my first acting job and then--I know that was a part of the struggle because black folks had not at that time been fully accepted downtown. So I jump into the struggle and guess who was one of the first people I meet, struggling along side of me? Ruby Dee. That made the, that made the struggle all the more exciting. (laughs) But as Ruby said, "We were on the same wavelength," but that is not surprising. Because when we came into the theater there were luminaries out there who helped define who we were, what our objectives should be, Paul Robeson--. Speaker 1: Oh yes. Speaker 2: You know, I think there's a clip coming up. Speaker 1: A clip coming up? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It can probably do it better than we. Clip on! Story_ID: 6360 Speaker 1: For Ossie Davis, introduction to the theater occurred in the 1930s at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] where he was introduced to the singing of Marian Anderson and the works of Langston Hughes, Countee Cullen, and Sterling Brown, who was his teacher. But it was Alain Locke, the nation's first black [Cecil] Rhodes Scholar, who introduced Ossie to the richness and culture of the theater, steering him from black vaudeville to New York's Rose McClendon Players. After graduating from Hunter [College] High School [New York, New York], Ruby attended Hunter College [of the City University of New York, New York]. Her interest in theater was strong and she showed promise early on. Performances in the American Negro Theatre followed. Ossie would be drafted into the [U.S.] Army and stationed in Liberia, West Africa. After three years, Davis would return and coincidentally, was asked to play a part about a black veteran returning from the war. It was here in a play called 'Jeb' [1946], that Ruby and Ossie would meet. Story_ID: 6361 Speaker 1: Can you talk for a moment about 'Jeb' [1946]? Speaker 2: About 'Jeb'. Well, that was a strange time because when I met Ossie in 'Jeb', I mean I really didn't like him. I thought he was this very peculiar person. You know, he was about as big as a string bean and, you know, he had this adam's apple that sort of stuck out, you know, he was strictly (with emphasis) from the country. (laughs) I mean, I never--it was the first time I'd seen, you know, a picture of things that you'd read about. This tall guy, you know, with sleeves they--on his shirts that came in the middle of his arm and the pants came nowhere near his ankles, you know. And they had this tall, skinny man dressed, you know, in the well-worn apparel of a short, fat man, you know? And his understudy and I used to sit in the theater and we would talk about him. And we would say, "Where did he get his clothes?" And then [William] Bill Marshall was Ossie's understudy and he would--and I remember Bill said, "Well he probably got them, you know, from the--" Speaker 1: Goodwill [Industries]. Speaker 2: "--from Goodwill." Speaker 1: And he said things like that, remarks we would make about him. And I--but I do remember one day--and I'll just--you can stop me--but he was on stage--and I write about this in the book too--and he played the part of a returning soldier in the play 'Jeb' by Robert Ardrey. And he--at one point he's--put on the tie, slowly, you know, deliberately, tying his tie in this soldier's uniform. And I remember sitting with Bill in the audience and looking up at him and, and I--something very peculiar happened, you know, 'cause I hadn't been thinking about him in any particular way and I had no romantic notions about him. But, you know, as I watched him I felt something like a, like a bolt of lightning (laughs), like an electrical charge, you know, flashed between us. And I was so shocked, I'd never felt anything like that before, and it--I thought that was such a corny thing for me to be feeling. It was so strange because I really didn't even like him. (laughs) Speaker 2: And you were from New York, right? Speaker 1: I don't know what, what that had to do with it, or what--I don't know. But we agreed he was a good actor, you know. And then--what I do remember that, oh, sometime later I told him about this strange sensation I had as he was working and--because I was curious, you know, if he felt anything. I mean it was such a powerful thing, you know? And he says, and he says, "No, Ruby, I didn't feel a thing." (laughs) And I was shocked, but then we married anyway, you know? (laughs) Speaker 2: So, Ossie, perhaps you can tell your side of the story. Speaker 1: Well, everybody--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh my goodness. Speaker 1: --referred to me as 'Country' because of my peculiar clothes. I was aware of that, and look which one out of them all that Ruby married. I knew what I was doing when I put on them bad (unclear) clothes. You've got to make the woman feel sorry for you, you know? (laughs) So I looked so bad that Ruby took me as a life's occupation. Speaker 2: Oh my goodness. Speaker 1: And so you were married in 1948? Speaker 2: Yes. In 1948. We were both working in a play and we had one Thursday off, I believe, so we hopped on a bus and a subway and went to New Jersey and we found a minister and we got married. And Ruby's sister [LaVerne Wallace] was her best lady and I had my brother [William Davis] with me. I had borrowed the train fare from my brother, so he was coming along to protect his investment. But there we stood, and the preacher's--(simultaneously) What is it, rectory? Where was the preacher?--And the preacher was sort of a round man, he was extended this way and that way. And he two eyes, and they were sort of fickle one to the other--one eye went that way, one eye went that way. (laughs) So I was standing before him and he looked at me very seriously and he looked on the thing and said, "Ossie Davis, do you take this woman to be your lawful wedded wife?" And I looked--one of the eyes was on Ruby, the other eye was on Ruby's sister, and she was a good-looking child. (laughs) So I said, "Yeah, great, you know, two for the price of one!" Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: But we did marry and we came home and when we got around to it, we started a family and a life and it's sort of been going on ever since. Story_ID: 6362 Speaker 1: Talk about some of the people who were around during that period in your lives. I know you were very close to Harry Belafonte. Speaker 2: Harry was a member of the--also the American Negro Theatre. He and Sidney [Poitier] came along a little after I joined, and that was a time for all of us, you know? I think--at least the people in the theater--it wasn't an indifferent time. I do remember--I don't have one of those memories that soaks everything up like Ossie, you know, he remembers what happened in 1901, you know? No, not really. But you know, he remembers these, you know, long times past or he just knows about them. But--and he reads a lot too, so he, he really educated both of us. And--but we came from a time when--before unions were--the unions were solid and I remember Harry and--oh, so many--name some of the people--and like Marlon Brando, and (unclear)--so many people that you don't know now--Avon Long. And I remember all those kinds of people mostly from people's houses where we would be gathered raising funds for one thing or another. And a little earlier in that when we would be helping each--helping somebody pay rent because that was before--a lot of the things before the union--, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Funds--. Speaker 2: --funds, funds were heavy. And also the anti--the poll tax was up for there, and up around that time and the anti-lynching laws--I don't know whether they had been passed or not--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No. Speaker 2: Yes, and so all of that was a part of that, part of that movement. And you'd see all kinds of people, actors, singers, musicians, come to Harlem [New York, New York]. There'd be something at somebody's house most, most every weekend and especially if you were in a show. And if you weren't you'd just gravitate there anyway. There, there was a coming together around the issues is what I'm trying to say. And that I found so stimulating, not at the time because at the time it seemed just like what you're supposed to do, you know? I--only as I look back on it did I realize how remarkable and how wonderful a time that was. Speaker 1: It was a special moment for the theater on Broadway [theater district in New York]. Paul Robeson was there as we said Lena Horne, you know, and Canada Lee. And they took a leadership position. But consider for a moment what the times were like. We who had fought in World War II, fought with these expectations that the country was going to change its policy toward black folks. But when we got back home, we found that the country had no intention of changing its policy and went out of its way to let us know in many ways that that was not going to happen. There were certain cases where veterans were in serious trouble--young man, Isaac Woodard, down in [South] Carolina, you know, had his eyes gouged out while he was still in uniform on a bus [1946]. You know, two veterans in Monroe, Georgia, walking with their wives along a road in uniform, shot down by the Ku Klux Klan. A young man--Mapes (ph.), trying to vote in Georgia, you know, killed. And so the theater was always concerned about these things and as Ruby said, "Every night somebody would suggest a party somewhere,"--Rosalie Ingram, whose sons had killed a white man because the white man had molested her [1948], you know, and various other causes. Somebody being tried, somebody being lynched or somebody being put on the chain gang and we would meet to raise funds. Paul Robeson would be there and Orson Welles, and members of the theater. The theater took itself quite seriously. Speaker 2: Many of them felt the awful consequences of McCarthyism [extreme political opposition to communism]. Speaker 1: Oh, yes. But you see--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That was a little bit later on. Story_ID: 6363 Speaker 1: The [U.S. Senator Joseph] McCarthy period devastated many in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], and the rest of the creative community. Paul Robeson, the [Julius and Ethel] Rosenbergs and scores of others were caught up in a dragnet of suspicion and yet the '50s [1950s] were the decade of the Montgomery [Alabama] Bus Boycott, Rosa Parks, and [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. The '60s [1960s] would usher in a time of change. The March on Washington [D.C., 1963], the rise and fall of Malcolm X and the assassination of Martin Luther King [1968]. Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee's lives as activists were intertwined with their careers as artists. They joined the casts of 'The Jackie Robinson Story' [motion picture, 1950], the Broadway [theater district in New York, New York] production of 'Green Pastures' [1951], the musical 'Jamaica' [1957], and last, but not least, Lorraine Hansberry's '[A] Raisin in the Sun' [1959]. Speaker 2: [Motion picture clip from 'A Raisin in the Sun', 1961] "This is my time in life. My time. To say good-bye to these old tired walls. And these marching cockroaches--huh--and this cramped little closet which ain't now and never was no kitchen. When I say it loud and good, "Hallelujah!" Good-bye misery. I never want to see your ugly face." Story_ID: 6364 Speaker 1: I think about all those people who came out of Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] and that was the first time in my life where it was solidly wedded--the struggle and the arts, you know? And there were a lot of Jewish people who came from Hollywood. I'm still trying to put those things in perspective because they, they help--they added pieces to the puzzle. They, they spoke to artistic responsibility, personal responsibility, the people's part in struggle and they really gave, gave us things to think about. I got involved at a deeper, deeper level because of the [Julius and Ethel] Rosenbergs for example, and also--. Speaker 2: The defense of Paul Robeson. Speaker 1: And the defense of Paul Robeson and all those kinds of things. Speaker 2: I think the [U.S. Senator Joseph] McCarthy period is too important to gloss over 'cause I'd like to go back a little bit. As I said before, in the theater community we were very active in trying to secure the rights of African Americans after World War II. Not only were we involved in that, but we took a serious look at all the issues in the world. I remember having a big rally at Madison Square Garden [convention center], where the theatrical community took it upon itself to tell the United States government that we had no right to have access to the atom bomb on our own, we should share the knowledge with the rest of the world. And not only that, we took a strong stand on building a United Nations as an instrument against war and Robeson was particularly eloquent about the denial of freedom for the African continent. You know, it was a--World War II was for the Africans also a fight against colonialism. So all of these fights were there and all of us were--we were there. And we were on the streets and we were doing marvelous things and that is one of the reasons why the committees came to deliberately cut us down. We were the object of their ire and they determined that those actors and Paul Robeson and those people were not going to influence government policy, what the--America did to the colonies in Africa was none of the actors' business. What America did about not passing an anti-lynch law was none of the actors' business. We were supposed to be like children, do the plays, go home and forget about it. And those of us who didn't, they put on a list and they came and they subpoenaed us and they made us stand trial and to defend ourselves as if we were traitors, but there was a pattern to what they did. And they succeeded in cutting much of the manhood out of Broadway [theater district in New York] and Hollywood. And that's true to this day. And so the struggle for Paul's passport was for the actors also a part of our trying to vindicate ourselves to support him but also to support our own struggle. Now, Paul had to fight about eight years to get his passport, you know? And they succeeded in separating Paul, in a sense, from the mainline struggle. Not because Paul was not involved in the mainline struggle, but he also became a cause--getting him his passport became a movement of its own. Well, that split him and his group off from the middle-class black members of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] who were trying--and the Urban League and a lot of us who thought we could work with the [U.S.] Congress and with the President to get the anti-lynching law passed, you know. But all of this was a sign of the kind of world that it was out there and the kind of life that we lived, Ruby and I, waiting for the phone to ring. Waiting for somebody to say, "There's going to be a meeting," or somebody says, "We need somebody to raise funds," "We need somebody to be the Master of Ceremonies," "We need somebody to do this or to do that." "Ruby, you and Ossie, you can do it, so please come and do it." We considered that our serious responsibility and we always tried whenever the leadership called, or other groups, to do that job. And as the leadership matured and changed, and people like Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came on the scene and Malcolm X came on the scene, Ruby and Ossie were still pretty much in the same position, you know. Pass out the leaflets, raise the funds, make the speech, do the MC [master of ceremonies]--all of those various things. And to this--and we still do it. Story_ID: 6365 Speaker 1: You had a relationship with Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]--, Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --but you also had a relationship with Malcolm X. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: And so let's talk about that involvement. Speaker 2: Yes, Malcolm. Speaker 1: Well, we were able--part of it through longevity, part of it having been because we were in the struggle for such a long time, to see how the various threads of the black experience, you know, knit themselves together. And we could understand historically where Dr. King might be coming from as he preached integration and his middle-class background, his Southern background. And we could also understand Malcolm. From the Black Nationalist's perspective, and where he came from, speaking eloquently to the streets of the North. But we understood that those--that they both were part of the same struggle and Ruby and Juanita Poitier arranged a get-together meeting one Saturday at which Malcolm was invited, Martin was invited and the black leadership invited, and they came to that meeting for the purpose of discussing ways by which to get together. That was in February of 1965. In two weeks Malcolm was dead, so none of that ever happened. But it was a part of what we were trying to do to pull them together, because it was the struggle that was important, it was the fact that they related to our needs that was important, not what surface differences that they might've had. We felt that way about it. Speaker 2: I remember when we first had a party for Malcolm, we invited all--so many people, you know, in the arts, everybody we knew to meet Malcolm. He was--my brother [Thomas 'Edward' Wallace] had introduced us to him. One day--I'd love to tell you about that sometime because he changed my brother's life, he--at any rate we weren't taking pictures, Malcolm came to the house with his gun and his--with Ed--shotguns--rode shotgun, you know, in the jeeps, in the back windows and stuff like that. But when he came I told he could have--to please--I had to have the cameras and stuff, so I put those in the bedroom 'cause I didn't want anybody getting nervous, you know? Oh, God, I think about it now. And I missed all those pictures. Because, because I was intimidated too--this is what I'm saying. And now that I'm older, I feel that I'm no longer intimidated, I feel now I'm old enough to do anything I damned well please. (Pauses) And, and this is why I feel that there's hope for, for this, for this country, you know, we have much to protect, we have greatness in this country and we can't throw it away like toilet paper, we can't ignore these things and so I'm thinking now, "Um-hmm, we have to get back, we have to get back, we have to get the thieves out of the saddle." As so our young people--so those 65 and older, I don't know where that army's coming from, but, but 65 and older have a few brain cells left, a few dollars in the bank. You know, it's time to make a time again. We can't go down the sink hole behind, you know, behind those people who are not worthy of the virtues that this country still represents. We've got to save them. Story_ID: 6366 Speaker 1: I would like to say a word or two about the children, they may be watching. What we did, and I don't know whether it was because we were wise or because we were broke and couldn't afford babysitters, but we would take the children everywhere we went, so they were a part of the struggle too. They walked picket lines, you know, and handed out leaflets. They were always involved. They never had to ask, "Where is daddy and mommy." And when they were growing up we got all the kids together and said, "You know, this is the first time we've been parents, we don't know how it works, but this is the way it's going to work from here on in. Now, we're not going to allow you to do anything out in the world that you cannot do in this house. We may hate it--but you're going to do it here, or you won't do it out there. The one thing that we're going to abide by, one law, nobody can fall out. Nobody can leave, nobody can quit. You know, you are still a part of the family, we belong together, we belong to each other and that's the way it's going to be." And somehow that resolved what ever differences they might've had and they have been ardent members of the struggle, we've had no trouble with them as children ever since that time, you know and--. Speaker 2: Walking picket lines with us. I meant our youngest daughter [LaVerne Davis, later Hasna Muhammad], who is now a principal of a high school in Rockland County, New York and we were so proud when she--I have to just say this--joined the teachers in the picket line protesting because they didn't have a contract. And so then she was active in a movement and they all are, they have a political awareness. My son [Guy Davis], he went with the--our grandchildren walked with us in one of the--for Amadou Diallo was it? And so it was that kind of thing that I really appreciate in them, that they have a nice sense of value. Speaker 1: And we recommend that to all families, you know. And so take them to the struggle with you. Story_ID: 6367 Speaker 1: As far as 'Cotton Comes to Harlem' [motion picture, 1970], you know, I was happy that I directed that. It came along at a time when Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] was in serious trouble. They had made a big film called 'Cleopatra' [motion picture, 1963], it cost $30 million and everybody in Hollywood was crying poor. And United Artists [Corporation] gave [Samuel] Sam Goldwyn the money to make a film called 'Cotton Comes to Harlem'--Sam asked me to direct it, I didn't want to, but he insisted. I did direct it and it came out, and it so happens that it was a film which we made inexpensively enough so that if only African Americans came to see it the film would still make a big profit. You know, '[A] Raisin in the Sun' [motion picture, 1961] had not made money as a film, Gordon Parks's 'The Learning Tree' [motion picture, 1969] had not made money, but 'Cotton' made money with only the African American community giving it support. Hollywood, being broke, looked and they saw and they say, "Hey, come in." And they made--for ten years, you know, we were allowed to make films, which they called blaxploitation films and when the black folks got tired of that and they refused to come, they showed us the back door. Said, "It was nice of you to come and maybe some other day we'll get you back again." Speaker 2: That was blaxploitation, and they brought in a new kind of, one I call a stereotype as Spike [Lee] said he could get money to do a 'hood film, but he couldn't get money to do a family relationship film. You know, and that was the story from a number of the young Hollywood producers and directors. Speaker 1: You were doing a great deal during that period. There was 'Zora Is My Name!' [TV program, 1989], 'Countdown at Kusini' [motion picture, 1976], 'Roots [The Next Generations', TV mini-series, 1979], 'I'm Not Rappaport' [motion picture, 1996], and then you wrote 'My One Good Nerve' [1998], and you did 'The Court-Martial of Jackie Robinson' [TV program, 1990], how many years after you had done 'The Jackie Robinson Story' [motion picture, 1950] did you do-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I played his mother in those years. Speaker 1: --and originally you had played Rachel. Speaker 2: I played his wife. And then as his mother. Speaker 1: We're waiting for Ruby to get a chance to play his grandmother. (laughs) Speaker 2: But I also want to mention 'Eyes on the Prize' [TV mini-series, 1987]. Speaker 1: Ah, yes. Oh my lord. But in the late 1980s you met a young film director who had taken the industry by storm when he did a film called 'She's Gotta Have It' [motion picture, 1986]. Both of you appeared in several of his films, which meant that a new generation came to know you and love you and respect you. Story_ID: 6368 Speaker 1: In 1989, Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee appeared in the controversial Spike Lee film, 'Do the Right Thing'. Speaker 2: Hey, you old drunk. What did I tell you about drinking in front of my stoop? Move on. You're blocking my view. You are ugly enough. Don't stare at me. The evil eye doesn't work on me. Speaker 1: Mother Sister, you've been talking about me for eighteen years, what I ever done to you? Speaker 2: You're a drunk fool. Speaker 1: Besides that? The man don't bother nobody and nobody don't bother the man, but you. The man just tends to his own business. I love everybody. I even love you. Speaker 2: Hold your tongue. You don't have that much love. Speaker 1: One day you're going to be nice to me. We may both be dead and buried, but you're going to be nice, at least civil. Speaker 2: Two years later, in 'Jungle Fever' [1991] Ossie and Ruby give riveting performances as parents of two sons, one with a drug problem and the other with a marriage in trouble. Ruby expressed the despair of a mother over her wayward son. Speaker 1: Don't tell your father. Speaker 2: Lucinda, what is he doing in our home? Speaker 1: The he is your son, our son. Our first child Gator and I'm fixing him something to eat. Speaker 2: He is not allowed in our home. Speaker 1: But this is his home, too. Speaker 2: How much money did he ask you for? Speaker 1: None. Speaker 2: Gator did no such thing. Now, why don't you go on in there and listen to Mahalia [Jackson] while I get him something to eat. Now, go on back inside. Go on. Speaker 1: In 1996, Spike Lee dramatized the spirit of the Million Man March in the film 'Get on the Bus'. Ossie Davis played Jeremiah. Speaker 2: No. No, no, young blood, your hands are too flat like a pancake and you have to loosen up your wrists. Don't beat the drum, make love to it, you know what I mean? Speaker 1: Make love to it? Speaker 2: Make love to the drum. Speaker 1: Like Cathy. Speaker 2: Yeah, like Cathy, that's right. And easy does it. Speaker 1: Easy, okay, slow and easy. Speaker 2: Slow, easy, steady. Yes, sir, there you go. There you go. Speaker 1: Like this? Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, that would last you all night long. Yeah. Story_ID: 6369 Speaker 1: Tell us about your collaboration with Spike Lee? Speaker 2: Spike was a young man that came to our attention through our son Guy [Davis], who said to us, "There's a guy that I invested $500 in his film and guess what? He's paying me back." We were thoroughly shocked by this unorthodox behavior. But upon investigation it turned out to be true. Spike paid off his investors. And then we got to know him and he said that there were parts that he wanted Ruby and me to play in his film and he was true to that too. And he became our role model. No other director has given us so many roles to play. Speaker 1: Yes and it's very--and that directors--as you get paid back, you know, when you work for a percentage. I've not known this to happen but once before in my life. Because our son would say, "Hey, Ma, I got another check from Spike!" You know, so he is a man of integrity and he did so much to open up the unions, everybody worked for Spike, you know? Women, men, white, black, the physically handicapped--challenged, the--everybody works with Spike. Speaker 2: And what about the connection between art and politics, did you find that in your work with Spike? Speaker 1: Yes, we do. Speaker 2: And what he did. Speaker 1: And that there's an interesting thing and it constitutes a challenge for us. There are areas where Spike, for all of his brilliance, doesn't have any connection with the culture that came before. When we did 'Jungle Fever' [1996], for example, I did the writing of the part because Spike was not familiar with what went on in the church and how it would work out and various things like that. And even when he came to do the film 'Malcolm X' [1992] I had some reservations, even after I saw the film, and I said to myself and I hoped Ruby was listening. I said, "I like what Spike has done with the film 'Malcolm X', but I'd like to come back in ten years and see what he would do with it then." And Spike in a sense represents that area in our experience that we have to make absolutely sure that the materials of our lives are available to them. This material that we're doing now, the HistoryMakers, we do this in part to make available to Spike the material he needs to complete his education. Speaker 2: And also I say to complete our education because I learned a lot from Spike. I learned a lot--, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) So did I. Speaker 2: --I learned a lot because he, he fought the big boys. He got those unions open because he made them open the unions. You know, so I learned something from Spike. So that's what made me--and philosophically and all those other ways we're working together with each other. I thought because he was so young--and I'll just tell you this--and he only looked like a baby, you know? So from the part I was doing as Lucinda, you know, and the boys were named Gator and--Flipper and Gator. So I wrote him a letter because I knew he'd appreciate this if I told him in this serious film, he shouldn't name those boys Gator and Flipper. And I--and of course I wrote my ideas of how this boy could be saved. But you know, he was very nice, but he never answered me back. And I learned that we have to cross-fertilize each other in terms of thinking, and that the generations coming in do have something to offer. And the frustrations that they experience are not to be taken lightly, and that we can help, we can change, we can exchange ideas and we can help save them. You know, I think they're waiting for us to--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Do you think that 'Get on the Bus' [1996] was in a sense an attempt to represent that cross-fertilization, that conversation across generations? Speaker 2: Oh, I think so. It was Spike's courage to take a current event, you know, and translate it into a film event and present it, because he felt that the film would help explain the real events and complete the picture in the public's mind. Now, to use Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] in a serious fashion is unheard of almost, but Spike dares to do that. And also one of the things I'm waiting on Spike for now is--Ruby and I have a grandson and his name is [Abdul] Muta' Ali Muhammad and he too is a filmmaker. So we want him to get in touch with 'Uncle Spike' as soon as he can. (laughs) Speaker 1: I just have this one more thing to say about Spike and what he really does. He, despite all the odds, Hollywood turned him down, but he made that picture. And he made it getting a dollar here and 25 cents here and from credit cards and from his mama and from the Delta Sigma Theta sorority and other sororities and fraternities, and he did it anyhow. He did it. What's that thing that Malcolm always said? You know, not the best way you can. Any way by--"By any means necessary." "40 Acres and a Mule," yes, yes. And then, when he had his offering with the establishment--Hollywood turned around and looked at him and opened the doors to him and a number of other young filmmakers too. Story_ID: 6370 Speaker 1: The two of you have continually reinvented yourselves for generation after generation. And I know that now many people are aware of your involvement in the campaign against the death penalty and the struggle to free Mumia Abu-Jamal. And it seems as if you're always busy. You're working harder and harder. Speaker 2: Ruby and I are doing what we love to do and the way that we love to do it. We have been tremendously blessed in all areas. Not only by God but by the love of our own people. Speaker 1: Often times young people and not so young people ask, "How one becomes an activist?" "What causes one to develop this commitment to justice and equality and freedom?" And I think your lives indicate that it's not about a particular moment, it's about learning to live one's life in a particular way. Speaker 2: Hear, hear. Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Learning to live one's life in the struggle. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yes. And it's the struggle in a sense that teaches you what love is, you know? Speaker 2: So what are some of the contemporary struggles you're interested in? And I read an interview with both of you, and I think you were talking about the campaign against globalization and the campaign against the prison industrial complex? Speaker 1: Well, in the '60s the countries in the third world and in Africa shed colonialism and stood free and clear and raised their flags at the United Nations, equal presumably to the rest of human kind and we all were inspired, we all cried as the old colonial flag came down and the new flags went up. We had such high hopes and expectations that that would be a turning point for the good of man and womankind in the world. Now--and particularly in Africa, because in Africa at that time, of all the countries there, only two were free. Every country in Africa except two were colonial colonies and all of that was over and everyone was free, what wonderful things were going to happen. And we look today and we see Africa in despair and the load on her back now, is not the chains of colonialism, but debt which she cannot pay. How did that happen? You know, what went wrong? What did they try to do and why did what they tried to do not work? What part did we play in what has happened on the African continent now, that in the southern part of Africa as we speak, you know, people are dying of hunger every day. Now, what part do we play in that? Africa has two commodities that she can offer the world, agricultural products and textiles. But Africa cannot sell her agricultural products and textiles in the markets that make the difference, why? She cannot sell them in Europe. She cannot sell them in America. And as long as the powers that be--the global market--keeps Africa at that disadvantage, she will always be in a position to be beggars and we cannot afford that the mother continent should be beggars anymore. We must, we must (pauses), we must first understand history. We must first understand how it came to pass. We must first understand the instruments--talents by which it came to pass, then we can fashion a strategy based upon our collective efforts here and with other people all over the world who are looking at the International Monetary Fund, who are looking at the World Bank, who are looking at the World Trade Organization and beginning to ask questions. We need to look too and to learn and to be able to go back into the streets one more time and raise again the flag of struggle and this time we're going to change it so that Africa will not ever again have to come before the world as a beggar. She is proud. She has produced kings, she has produced queens at one time. She can do it again, but only with our help and we can only do it if we know, if we study, if we take advantage of the information that's there. And there is knowledge to be had. Even our own experiences are eloquent to that point, so let's all study to make ourselves better fighters in the cause of freedom and equality. Speaker 2: So, now, we really are winding down. I really wish we could continue this fascinating conversation. Speaker 1: So do I, oh, my God, yes. Speaker 2: And go on for hours and days. But this has been such a wonderful evening and I'd like to thank you Ossie and Ruby for your infinite generosity, for your generosity this evening and sharing your lives with us. For your generosity over the years. This will always be a moment that I will treasure and I'm sure that--for all of us, this is an unforgettable evening. So thank you Ossie and Ruby. Story_ID: 6371 Speaker 1: The preceding program was produced by the History Makers, which is solely responsible for its content. Funding for this program was provided by Chrysler [Corporation]. Additional funding was provided by AT&T [American Telephone and Telegraph] Broadband, the Wyndham Chicago [Illinois] Hotel, ComEd [Commonwealth Edison], American Airlines [Inc.], Walgreens [Company], the 'Chicago Tribune', Ronald McDonald House Charities, Veranda L. Dickens and other participating sponsors. To order a VHS copy, please send check or money order for $29.99 to the address below or call 866-914-1900..