 Story_ID: 180013 Speaker 1: I'm an interviewer for The HistoryMakers, also present are Scott Stearns, the videographer and observing is Larry Crowe. Can you state your name please ma'am? Speaker 2: It's Miriam DeCosta-Willis. Speaker 1: Can you spell your entire name? Speaker 2: I use a hyphenated name, which contains my family name and my second husband's name; so it's capital D-E, capital C-O-S-T-A hyphen, capital W-I-L-L-I-S. Speaker 1: And so your first name is Miriam? Speaker 2: M-I-R-I-A-M Speaker 1: And you also have a middle name, as well. Speaker 2: Delores. Speaker 1: Delores. Speaker 2: Um-mm. Speaker 1: Can you spell that also? Speaker 2: Actually, I think on my birth certificate, it's D-E-L-O-R-I-S, but I use D-O-L-O-R-E-S. Speaker 1: Why the difference? Speaker 2: Well, I studied Spanish and the Spanish spelling, Dolores, and so I like that better and then from that was derived my nickname of Laurie. Speaker 1: And that was the next question, your nickname, Laurie? Speaker 2: Yeah. Um, mm. Speaker 1: Can you spell your nickname? Speaker 2: L-A-U-R-I-E. When I went to prep school, they felt that I should have a nickname because all the other girls did and I said, "Well, Miriam that didn't ring a bell, so Delores rang, Laurie. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you. What is your birthday? Speaker 2: On November 1, 1934. So, I'm presently sixty-eight years old, going on 69. Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born in Florence, Alabama, where my father [Frank DeCosta] was principal of a school and lived there for two years. Speaker 1: Um, mm. And what, how would you describe your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, most of my life, I've been a college professor and on my income tax return I put professor and writer. Now, I'm a full time writer, but most of my career has been spent as a college professor. Speaker 1: And finally, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today, I think, is July 31, 19--, oh, 2003. (Laughter) Speaker 1: And where are we, what is this particular location? Speaker 2: We're at 700 7th Street SW and we're in my condominium, here, which is Unit 205, Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 180014 Speaker 1: Now, we'd like to start with a few lighthearted questions. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: I like all food. I guess I'd probably say paella 'cause it's a combination of rice and chicken and crab and shrimp and seafood and a whole lot of stuff. I like things that are all mixed together; so paella, um, mm. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Actually, I like the winter, I like spring, I like fall, I guess those are probably the times that I like. There's something about the winter, January and February that is very nest like to me and it's a time when I regenerate and sort of go within and meditate and purify and all that kind of stuff, so probably January and February are my favorite months. And Christmas is over, you know, and all that excitement and everything, it's a quiet time, it's a time of reflection, so I like the winter. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Probably, red. I'm also partial to black, but I guess red is my, my favorite color. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Ooh-- Well, I've traveled to maybe, fifty or sixty countries, and I keep going back to the Mayan Riviera in Mexico and I like it there a lot, because the people are really warm and wonderful, but then I like the Caribbean too, but then the Mayan Riviera is on the Caribbean, so that general area. Speaker 1: Finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: What goes around, comes around. I'm saying that all the time cause, you know, stuff happens in life and you know, you throw out your crumbs and if they're good, you know if you give and it comes back to you, by the same token, if you're very negative, you know that comes back to you too; so probably that's my favorite one. Story_ID: 180015 Speaker 1: You said you were born in Florence, Alabama. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother [Beautine Hubert DeCosta]. Speaker 2: My mother is still living, she's ninety years old. Her family comes out of Georgia, Hancock County. She's the granddaughter of a slave and they're very, very proud of their family background. My mother's mother [Lillie Jones Hubert] died when she was nineteen and she was very close to her father [John Hubert]. She went to Spellman High School [sp.] and then graduated in three years from Savannah State [University, Savannah, Georgia]. She's a social worker, very warm, very people oriented person; very extroverted; unlike my father [Frank DeCosta] who was very serious and scholarly. But, mother has instilled in me a lot of her values; love of family, interest in history, storytelling, wonderful story teller, wrote letters to everyone and kept everything anybody ever wrote to her; and so she's kind of a repository of the family history. Speaker 1: What are some of her favorite stories that you grow up with-- (unclear) Speaker 2: Well, she talks about her father [John Hubert] was one of eleven children, I think by this former slave who came out of slavery and then bought a large portion of a county in Georgia and all of the, all of his offspring and all of their children would come back to Hancock County [Georgia] in the summer. So, she would tell us about things that would happen there when, you know, funny things that would happen when everybody came. And, I'm trying to think of a particular story, oh well, there was one. The Huberts were basically a white family that owned a lot of property and my great grandfather was a slave on the Hubert Plantation, and so there was a good relationship between my mother and her cousins and these people. And, so, they would go every year, every summer to visit the white Huberts and these two little old ladies and they would have tea and coffee, what not for them and all. So, one of her cousins says, "Um, mm, I'm not going over that plantation, all those white people and everything, just being nice to us colored people." And then my mother thought about it and she said, "But, you know, they have wonderful food, they have lemonade, they have all these good things," and after she started talking about them; then the other cousin says, "Hmm, that's a fact. Yeah, we gotta go over there and see the white Huberts." So, and then she would talk about my grandfat--, my great-grandfather [Zachary Hubert] and how all the kids would race down to get the newspaper. He came up at a time when education was denied to blacks and yet he learned to read through watching his master, who was also his same age and he loved newspapers and all, so all the kids would fight who was going to get grandpa his newspaper. So, she had a lot of stories that she would tell. Story_ID: 180016 Speaker 1: Now, is this great-grandfather [Zachary Hubert], is this as far back as you can trace back on your mother's [Beautine Hubert DeCosta] side? Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no. In fact, there's been a book done on that side of the family. We can, we go back, we can trace back to 1760 when my great-great-great-grandmother who was named Sally [ph.] was brought over from Dahomey, West Africa and she was brought into a port city in Virginia and then from there was sold to the Huberts and taken to Georgia, and we can trace each generation from Sally and her parents and her descendants on down to my great-grandfather; so, all of that is recorded in the book. Speaker 1: Now, you were saying that your mother's father [sic, mother's grandfather, Zachary Hubert] bought an, all most an entire county? Speaker 2: Um, mm. Speaker 1: How did this come about? Speaker 2: Well, he had a good relationship with the family that had owned him and other people. In many counties in the south, it was very difficult after slavery for freed slaves to buy property, but he was able to do so because he had good relationships with people. So he would buy, you know, an acre here, and two acres there and three acres there, etc. And so, actually when he died, I think in the late 1920s, my mother said he was a millionaire, but very unassuming, very low key. And he sent all, he had twelve children, he sent all of his twelve children to college, to Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], so very industrious. And he built a huge two- story house for his family; he built a school for the children in the neighborhood. He built a church, so it wasn't just about acquiring things for himself and his family. He was also interested in community development. So, that was, that was also a very important family value in the Hubert Family. But, he, he just bought property little by little until he had amassed this large amount of property. Speaker 1: So, can you tell me the names of your [great-] grandparents on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Zachary and Camilla Hubert, and our family has a foundation called the Zachary Camilla, Camilla Zachary Foundation, and we give scholarships to Morehouse and to Spelman; give scholarships to students at those colleges, as a result of having this foundation. Speaker 1: Do you know when they were born? Speaker 2: I do, but I can't remember right now. Both of, both of them were born during slavery. And I think my grandfather must have been maybe fifteen or sixteen when slavery ended and my grandmother would have been maybe thirteen or fourteen. So, let's see if slavery ended in 1965 [sic, 1865], they would have been born in the early 1850s. Story_ID: 180017 Speaker 1: How about your father's [Frank DeCosta] side? Let's talk about that side. Speaker 2: My father was one of eleven children, and his parents, well, we can trace his family back to about 1810 and that would be his great-grandmother. We know less about their origin than we do about my mother's [Beautine Hubert DeCosta] family. My father was the youngest of eleven and his father [Benjamin DeCosta] died when he was ten months old. And therefore, my, my grandmother [Anna Hamburg DeCosta] then had to support and care for a family of eleven children. And, that, you know, to me was a very inspiring story which I learned about once began doing family, researching my family's history. He went to college with very little money, he was able to get scholarships and then he worked at Lincoln while he was there. And then his brother also hired him in the summer to work as a carpenter, because hi--, their father had been a carpenter and then developed a construction company and died when he was very young. But, all of the boys had been trained as carpenters, so in the summer he worked as a carpenter and then he worked at college and was president of his class for four years, also won four letters in college, and just a really outstanding student. Then he and my mother married and they would take turns going to school, so that daddy would work on his Master's and mother had started on working on her Master's. They were both, both graduate students when they met. But, then daddy would go away in the summers and mother would go away in the summers and at one point my mother went to Atlanta [Georgia] to complete her degree, her Master's in Social Work at Atlanta University [later, Clark-Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and my father went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to complete his PhD. So, and then after that they kept going back and forth, you know, to graduate school in the summers. Speaker 1: Now, let me get the names; your father's name and your mother's name and also your father's parents. Speaker 2: Okay. My father's name was Frank Augustas DeCosta and his parents were Anna Hamburg DeCosta and her, his father was Benjamin Rhodes DeCosta. My mother was Beautine Hubert DeCosta and her parents were John Wesley Hubert and Lillie Jones Hubert. Story_ID: 180018 Speaker 1: Now, you said you lived in Florence [Alabama] for only the first two years of your life? (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: Uh-huh, right. Speaker 1: And you moved around a lot more, we're talking a little bit more about, can you discuss that further? Speaker 2: Okay, we lived two years in Florence. I was born there, my brother was born the following year. And then my father [Frank DeCosta] was offered a position at Avery [Normal] Institute [later, Avery Research Center at the College of Charleston, Charleston, South Carolina], which was one of the secondary schools founded by the American Missionary Association, and he had graduated from that school. And everybody in his family, including his mother [Anna Hamburg DeCosta], his ten brothers and sisters had attended and most had graduated from there. So it was really a privilege for him age, what would he have been, twenty-five or twenty-six to go back to the school from which his family had all graduated. So, he went, he went to Avery in 1936 and served as principal for five years, and during those five years, he was commuting to New York [New York] to complete his Master's at Columbia [Teachers College Columbia University, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Now, where is Avery located? Speaker 2: Avery is in Charleston, South Carolina. Speaker 1: So, for those five years your family moved to Charleston. Speaker 2: Yeah, um, mm. And Charleston was the--was the home of origin; it was the place of origin of my father. And Savannah [Georgia] was the place of origin of my mother [Beautine Hubert DeCosta]. So, and those two cities are quite close together, so we constantly went back and forth to Charleston and Savannah. And then after the five years, daddy went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to start work, I guess, yeah, to start work on his Ph.D. at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And mother went to Atlanta [Georgia] to complete her master's. So, my brother and I stayed with my mother for one year while she completed her master's. Then we moved to Philadelphia to be with daddy while he supposedly completed his doctorate. But that was the Second World War [World War II, WWII], times were rough, his money ran out. He got a Rosenwell, Rosenwald Fellowship and when that ended then he was forced to get a job, and at that point, we moved to Montgomery, Alabama, where my parents worked at Alabama State Teachers College [later, Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] and I guess we were there, maybe four years, let's see '43 [1943] to '46 [1946] and then daddy moved to South Carolina State College [later, University] in Orangeburg, South Carolina, And we were, there, I guess they were there about ten years and I left in 1950 to go to prep school and I was away then for two years and then went to college, that was in Connecticut. And, so, you know, we moved around. My parents taught at South Carolina State College, Alabama State College, and then they came to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. And, so, they were very much wanderers during those years. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: Let's talk about that. What was that like for you moving around? (Unclear) Speaker 2: Um, mm, it was exciting, 'cause I got to meet a lot of different people and I had a lot of very interesting experiences. One, I remembered Montgomery, particularly. We had moved to Montgomery [Alabama] from Philadelphia and in Philadelphia, I had all kinds of friends; White, Black, Italian, Jewish, whatever. And then suddenly, I went to Montgomery at age, what, maybe eight; and we belonged to Dexter, Dexter Avenue Baptist Church [Montgomery, Alabama], which was [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King's [Jr.] church. And I remember the first Sunday we were there, my mother would give me ten cents, you know, a nickel to ride the bus and a nickel or dime or whatever, for Sunday school. So, I got on the bus and I just flopped down in the first seat I saw and you know, just made myself comfortable. And my little girlfriend ran up to me and said, "You can't sit there, you can't sit there, you can't sit in the front of the bus." I said, "Why can't I sit in the front of the bus, you know, there's a seat here." She said, "No, no Negroes--" I don't know if we were Negroes or Colored at that time. But they said, "Negroes can't sit up in the front." And I thought that was the weirdest thing. So, I moved on to the back of the bus, but it was really incomprehensible to me. Speaker 1: Now, what year was this? Speaker 2: This would have been, let's see, we-- daddy finished in 1943; this would have been 1943, or '44 [1944]. And, so, then I really began, began to become aware of how different the South was from the North and understand, try to understand this thing called, segregation. Speaker 1: Was Dr. King or Dexter at the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church? Speaker 2: No, I can tell you about that later. He came to Dexter, let's see, was it 1950, 1955 because December of 1955 started the Montgomery Bus Boycott. And I can go into that, 'cause I was there at that particular time. Story_ID: 180019 Speaker 1: So, we're talking about your childhood, still. Speaker 2: Yeah, Montgomery [Alabama] was important because I was beginning to question a whole lot of things, not just segregation, but also sexuality; and I had a girlfriend, Yvonne Pettis [ph.], whose father was a doctor. And we began to share all of these medical books with all of these pictures of, you know, the genitals and all of that kind of thing. So, I became very interested in sexuality. I also began to do a lot of questioning about religion, you know. I didn't understand why I had to go to Sunday school and I would do things like my mother [Beautine Hubert DeCosta] gave me a dime or whatever to put in Sunday school, I would save my dime and buy ice cream. (Laughter) And I remember going to sleep and saying, Well, you know, does God really exist, and if he does, when I wake up in the morning, they'll be rain on this side of the sidewalk and not across the street, you know; and God always failed the test. (Laughter) So, I was a very questioning child. And, so religion, you know I had questions about religion, I had questions about sexuality, had questions about segregation and all of these kinds of things. Speaker 1: Were you able to talk with your parents about any of these questions? Speaker 2: I, I don't really remember. Actually, the sexuality thing had first come up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], this was during the Second World War [World War II, WWII]. And, you know, we were learning how to do different things, like artificial respiration, I think it's, artificial, whatever, not resp--but anyway, you know where you revive someone. So, I can remember, well, two things happened, one in terms of religion and one in terms of sexuality. My parents [Frank DeCosta and Beautine Hubert DeCosta] had first sent me to a Catholic school, and I think that lasted about two days, because there was praying in the morning, praying at lunch, praying in the afternoon. I came home and I said, "Mother, there is really entirely too much praying, I do not like this school;" so they took me out of that school. But back to the sexuality thing, I remember we were at a party and it was this little boy, he had friends, you know and all. And so I was going to do this artificial respiration, which involved sitting on the hips of the person and then sort of pumping their chest, you know, so they can breathe and all. So, I'm sitting here after the party performing artificial respiration, really, just doing my duty as an American citizen, because we were really into the war, you know, saving stamps and doing victory gardens and all this stuff. Well, the parents walk in, the parents of this little boy, and here is this little girl sitting on top of the boy, and she was just horrified, you know, "What do you mean, how, what have you been teaching this child?" You know, she was just irate. So, I think within a couple of days, my dad came in one day, and my dad was my teacher, my mentor. And he came in and he handed me this book about the birds and the bees. And, so I'm there looking at this stuff and it was really interesting. And so he says, "Okay, now, do you have any questions?" And I said, "Well, you know, the only thing is here's this picture, this round picture with all these tadpole looking things." Well, it was a photograph of sperm, you know, and so that was the only question I had. But at that point, my--I was trying to figure out what was it I was doing with this little boy that was so shocking to this parent. And it was only later that I associated that incident and the book that my father had gave me. In re-- response to your original question, I felt as if I could ask my parents anything, but they had been raised very traditionally and I was a very private person, so I didn't ask many questions. My father did something very important by handing me a book, because from then on I felt like anything I wanted to know, whether it was about religion, sex, you know, personal relationships or whatever; I can find a book. And, so that has really served me through life. I didn't ask questions, I tried to find out where the nearest book was. Story_ID: 180020 Speaker 1: Now, in terms of the questions you were having about segregation, you attended segregated schools, I assume in the South, (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And when you were in the North, (simultaneous) Speaker 2: No, uh-huh. Speaker 1: You attended integrated schools then? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: So, can you talk about that, and that difference? Speaker 2: After I got out of the Catholic school [in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], my parents [Frank DeCosta and Beautine Hubert DeCosta] were able to get me into something called the Stevens School [Thaddeus Stevens School of Observation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was, it was a public school, but it was a school that was designed for gifted children, with a lot of emphasis on the arts. Speaker 1: Where, where, is that-- (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: This is Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], while my dad was working on his doctorate. And I think it was through one of his pro--, 'cause we were, my brother and I attended there and we were one of the few black kids that were admitted to the school. And I can remember riding the transit system, the subway to get to this school, so it was far from where we lived. But daddy was taking classes at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so he was able to you know, effect that change. And that was a wonderful experience because I met kids from all different backgrounds, from other countries and it was a lot of emphasis on art and music and swimming, you know, it was really truly a tremendous experience. And then we went to Montgomery [Alabama], I was, I attended the laboratory school [Alabama State College Laboratory High School, Montgomery, Alabama] that was at, well, in all of these historically black colleges there were laboratory schools where the students who were in education could kind of practice their training and what not. And so, it was a segregated school, but it was a very-- Story_ID: 180021 Speaker 1: When we changed, when we moved to Montgomery [Alabama] even though I was attending segregated school, I really wasn't aware of much difference because I was at a laboratory school [Alabama State College Laboratory High School, Montgomery, Alabama] where there were excellent teachers. There were very small classes, the school there and also the laboratory school [Felton Laboratory School, Orangeburg, South Carolina] that I went to at South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] when we moved there. I was in two laboratory schools. We got to participate in programs at the college, in other words, I heard some of the most outstanding, Marian Anderson, Roland Hayes, I attended plays and so it was a very enriched kind of environment. And even though all of my classmates were black, and all of my teachers were black, it was very much, in a sense, like that public school I had been to in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], in terms of the cultural enrichment. Now, when we went to South Carolina, I was in a laboratory school and I remember the eighth grade, there were only four students. There were four classrooms and one teacher taught both the seventh grade and the eighth grade and I remember this big pot belly stove. Well, there were four of us in the eighth grade, of those four, three got a Ph.D.'s; so that just kind of indicates the quality. One of those became a college president, Benjamin Payton, whose still president of Tuskegee Institute [later, Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. So, you know, even though we were in segregated schools, we really were held to very high academic achievement and we got a lot of cultural enrichment; so, that I did not feel deprived at all. Story_ID: 180022 Speaker 1: Of all of your elementary and grade school educational experiences, what are your most influential teachers, which teacher stands out? Speaker 2: There was one named Alfreda James [ph.], and she was my teacher at Wilkinson High, when I was, when we were living in Orangeburg [South Carolina], the campus school went only to grade eight, so and from there I went to the segregated school, Wilkinson High School [later, Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. And I remember Alfreda James because we did not have courses on African American history, but she was our history teacher. And all around the room were photographs of Booker T. Washington, and Ida B. Wells, and Phyllis Wheatley and all of these people and she made sure that we got a good foundation and who we were and who our people had been. So, she was really instrumental in my own orientation toward history, and particularly, African American history. There was a Mr. Harper [ph.], there were all kind of, there were wonderful teachers there. And I remember the principal, Mr. Parlor [ph.], because I organized the boycott of the school. (Laughter) Speaker 1: And this in--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: This is in, this is in, I think I must have been in the eleventh grade then. But he was doing something that I did not like and therefore, I had all of the students to meet me down at the oak tree and we organized the boycott of the school. I think it had something to do with the junior, senior prom. But in those days--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: This is at the prep school, wasn't it? Speaker 2: No, this was at high school, I, I'd moved to prep school then, the next year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But all of the principals were what we called, Uncle Toms, you know. They were very ingratiating toward the white powers that be and I just felt that was not appropriate for us at a high school that he was not representing us sufficiently and so, we just took matters into our own hands and boycotted the school. Speaker 1: And what was the outcome? Speaker 2: We got our way. (Laughter) He decided it was better just to go along with these little upstarts and so, I guess that was my first involvement in political action and it turned out to be very effective. Speaker 1: So, so during this time which subjects are you gravitating toward? Speaker 2: I liked history, I liked mathematics, amazingly. And Mr. Harper who was the mathe--, who was the teacher of arithmetic and geography, geometry and algebra and what not, was also the football coach and I remember he gave me a grade of 99 1/2. He said, "I would not give anybody a 100;" he said, "But you made--I'll give you a 99 1/2." And then when he would to his football team, he would leave me to teach the class. And I think it was that experience plus my home life with my parents, both of whom were teachers that made me kind of gravitate toward teaching. But I like history, I liked languages, and we did not have, at that time, languages at our high school. I don't know why, there was no Spanish, no French, no nothing. And I had been to, I had attended a tennis tournament the summer before in, at Wilberforce, Ohio and all of the, a lot of the kids I was running around with started speaking French and I felt so uneducated and so outside of this wonderful system of communication that they had. So, I came back, and I told my parents [Frank DeCosta and Beautine Hubert DeCosta] I really want to learn French, so they talked to Fred Sheffield [ph.], who was the French teacher at South Carolina State College [later, University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and he permitted me to come over and take classes in French. And that really started my interest in language and I did very well competing with college students. And the next year I transferred to a preparatory school in Middlebury, Connecticut and you had to have five years, five units of languages before, five years of language I guess it was before you could graduate. So I went with, I think either, I think I'd done two years of French with Dr. Sheffield and so because I could not complete enough languages in that one year, they had me to repeat the eleventh grade, so I did two years in prep school. Speaker 1: I see-- Story_ID: 180023 Speaker 1: Okay, so, what I want to do is take a slight pause from the story you were telling about your high school, and just to, since you lived in so many different places--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um, mm. Speaker 1: To get our bearings, if you could start with your first school, elementary school and all the different places that you lived and all the different schools that you went to. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That-- Speaker 2: I actually started school in Charleston, South Carolina and Avery [Normal Institute, later The Avery Research Center at the College of Charleston, Charleston, South Carolina] where my father [Frank DeCosta] was the principal. And, I think I did, probably primer, they called it then which is like Kindergarten and then I started first grade there and that was a private school founded by the American Missionary Association, so I was there for two years. And then when we moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], no, we left there and went to Atlanta [Georgia] while my mother [Beautine Hubert DeCosta] was working on her Master's and I attended, I think it was the Phyllis Wheatley Elementary School for one year 'cause we were in Atlanta only one year. Oh, and at that time, my mother's uncle, Charles [D.] Hubert was acting president of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], so we actually lived on the campus in the president's house. My mother was going to AU [Atlanta University, later Clark-Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], I was going to the Phyllis Wheatley School and they separated my brother and me. They sent him to private school which was Oglethorpe [Elementary] School [Atlanta University laboratory school, Atlanta, University], so we were there for one year. The next year we went to Philadelphia and I think we were in Philadelphia two years in '42 [1942], '43 [1943], started at the Catholic school, lasted about less than a week and then went to something called the Steven School [Thaddeus Stevens Observatory School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was a culturally enriched elementary school, I think in downtown Philadelphia and that was two years. Then my parents moved to Montgomery [Alabama] and I went to the campus school [Alabama State College Laboratory School, Montgomery, Alabama], I don't know if it had a particular name, but it was at Alabama State College [later, University, Montgomery, Alabama] and it was their campus school. And I was there, let's see, '44 [1944] to '45 [1945], so I would have spent at least two, maybe three years there. And then the family moved to Orangeburg [South Carolina] and I attended seventh and eighth grades at Felton Training School [later, Felton Laboratory School, Orangeburg, South Carolina], which was the campus school at South Carolina State College [later, University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], so, I finished that, the eighth grade, then moved to the Wilkinson High School [later Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School, Orangeburg, South Carolina], in the ninth, tenth, and eleventh grade. Speaker 1: This is still in South Carolina? Speaker 2: This is still in South Carolina; Orangeburg, South Carolina. So, I was at the public high school there for three years. And, at that point, my parents sent me away to school to Westover School in Middlebury, Connecticut. Story_ID: 180024 Speaker 1: And I had to repeat the eleventh grade [at The Westover School, Middlebury, Connecticut] because I would not have enough credits in foreign languages to meet their requirements, so I did the eleventh grade twice. But, still finished at age seventeen and I actually finished Westover School [Middlebury, Connecticut]. Now, it was kind of interesting how I got to Westover, this was 1949 [1949] and we're, the Second World War [World War II, WWII] is over and to my way of thinking the Civil Rights Movement really started right after the Second World War because you had all these veterans coming back and really pushing for their rights and things began to open up, so I was kind of on the cusp of that movement. And my parents [Frank DeCosta and Beautine Hubert DeCosta] were very friendly with a woman in Charleston, South Carolina named Ruby Cornwell, very dynamic civil rights pusher, and one of her best friends were Elizabeth Waring, a white woman who was from New England, but who was married to a judge, Judge [Julius] Waties [Waring], J. Waites Waring, who was very important in the Civil Rights Movement in South Carolina. Thanks to Elizabeth's influence, her husband became a very outspoken proponent of civil rights, and did, made a lot of legal decisions that enraged people in South Carolina, so, they were a very progressive couple. And Elizabeth graduated from the Westover School, which had never had Negro students and she was very anxious to have someone, and she was looking for the right, she said, young woman. And so, she, she and Ruby [Cornwell] invited my mother and me to come and have lunch with the Warings. And so we, I didn't know what was going on, I just knew we were going to these people's houses. (Laughter) And what surprised me was they had finger bowls and I didn't know what the heck to do with finger bowls. So, anyway it was a very elegant lunch and she was a very gracious lady, et cetera. Next thing I knew, she had decided that I should be the one to go to Westover School. So, the following year, which would have been in 1950, in September of 1950, I went to Westover and by that time she and her husband had left New York, I mean had left Charleston [South Carolina], 'cause basically they had been ostracized by the powers that be there, and so, they were living in New York, and I stopped, she picked me up at the, at the station, train station there, and I stayed with them and then she put me on the train the next day to Westover. And so I kept in touch with them, found out many years later, maybe fifteen or twenty years later, that she had actually paid the scholarship that enabled me to go there, because my parents were teachers not making a whole lot of money and they could not afford to send me to a private school like that, a very exclusive school. When I got there, I found that there was another student from Haiti, who was the daughter of a Russian woman, white; and a black Haitian, and so she was the other girl of color, but she did not really consider herself one of us; and so I virtually was the only black student and it was an interesting experience. It changed my life in a lot of ways, because when I had lived in South Carolina, my ambition was to go to North Carolina State [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] and I'd been very active in basketball and sports, tennis and what not and I wanted to major in physical education, but after going to Westover and being exposed to a much more intensive academic experience, I decided that I wanted to go, I really wanted to go Radcliffe [College, later Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and so I made a trip visiting colleges in the area and I got a larger scholarship to Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], so knowing that my parents could not, you know, they needed all the help they could get, I decided that I would go to Wellesley. Story_ID: 180025 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into that, how did you feel about the original decision to be sent to Westover [School, Middlebury, Connecticut]? Speaker 2: I felt like it was an opportunity and I've always been a very adventurous person and because we had moved a lot, it was no big deal for me to change, to go somewhere else. I had always thought that my father [Frank DeCosta] was denied the presidency of South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] because he had opted to send his daughter to an integrated school. I've done a lot of research since then and found out that the decision, he was acting president of South Carolina State, but I found out that the decision not to name his president actually occurred before I went to Westover. But my parents [Frank DeCosta and Beautine Hubert DeCosta] got a lot of criticism from other people in Orangeburg [South Carolina], criticism because they would send a young fifteen year old girl off to New England by herself, you know. I got on the Atlantic Coast Line [Railroad] and went up by myself, and that was an overnight thing and, you know, I was there. In many ways, it was a very traumatic experience that those two years, (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Actually, that was my next question. Speaker 2: Yeah. I had very much a sense that I was a part of a new movement and it was, I felt like that I was representing my whole race and that put a lot of tension on me. I was the only student who did not have a roommate, I mean I stood out. (Laughter) First of all, because of color and then because I was solitary. I made a lot of friends, but I had some really strange experiences; like we would have these tea dances, which I hate and hated, where boys from the other prep schools, like Groton [School, Groton, Massachusetts], and Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire], and what not; would come to our school or we would go to their school; and they were called tea dances cause they were given at tea time, like four or five o'clock in the afternoon. And we would get on the bus and go to these schools or the guys would come there. And the first time that the young boys, young men came to our school, the headmistress called me aside and said, "Well, you know they don't have any Negro students and I would like you to watch the records," you know, do the record changing. So, I was sort of ostracized. I stood in the back and changed the records and I resented that. And then on another occasion, we went to one of the boys' school. We would stand up on the stage and they would call out the names of the escorts of the girls, which was horrible, you know. I had two escorts, so that one guy wouldn't get stuck with me, and it was, you know, I was acting a role, I was trying to be the nice girl, that the amiable person, the pleasing personality, and all of this and I hated every minute of it. So, the social part was bad, the other pa-- part was the parents. I was very popular, 'cause I was in all the clubs, the art club, I was captain of the basketball team, I was on the soccer team and you know, all of this. So, the other girls liked me. But when the parents would come, now they would have a thing where the parents could come on Saturday and take their daughter and their friends out, okay. So, there was one fam--, I think it was Mr. and Mrs. Esposito [ph.], Beth [ph.] was one of my best friends, and they came and they took us out to lunch and it was wonderful. We sat around talking me and about four or five girls and the parents, really, really nice. And Beth wanted to room with me, so when I got back the parents went to talk to the headmistress and then later on the headmistress called me in and she said, "Beth's parents do not want you to room with their daughter," and it was all I could do to hold back the tears; but I always made it back to my room before I cried. So, these kind of insults, the irony was after the first year, my par--, my mother came, cause she was visiting up that way and they have this thing where the parents come, you know and nobody spoke to my mother and me, none of the parents did, only the minister of the school and the teachers and all; so, okay. The next year (laughter) I won all the prizes, I think I won five out of ten. I won the French prize, the Spanish prize, the foreign language prize, art prize and something else. All the parents could hardly keep themselves away from me. (Laughter) And it was so ironic, you know, and I said, Boy, these people are hypocritical. I learned a lot there. The other thing I found out was, and this was between prep school and college, I found out that black girls got pregnant, the white girls got mononucleosis. (Laughter) And two things were important to me, when I was at Wilkinson High School [later, Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and I was on the basketball team and everything, there was a girl on our team that got pregnant and she kept playing, I think, until she was five or six months pregnant. I felt so sad for her because she was trying to keep up this front and yet people were just, she became a pariah. Once she had that baby, the guy was around, the father was around passing out cigars and saying, "Oh look, how what a man I am. I'm, a father now and all, you know." And I said, But what about the girl? Okay. Then when I went to prep school there was a girl who got pregnant, she was from a very prominent family, if I call the name, you would know it. Suddenly, like in January, she got mononucleosis and she dropped out of school. Next thing you know, she'd gone to Switzerland, cause in Switzerland you could get abortions and I found out that wealthy white people sent their daughters to Switzerland for abortions. They had mononucleosis, and then they came back cured. So, you know, there was a lot that I learned. There was a lot that laid the foundation for my later activism. Story_ID: 180026 Speaker 1: Now, before we leave your youth altogether, (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Let me ask you, which of all of your childhood homes would you consider most your home? Speaker 2: Definitely Orangeburg, South Carolina, I guess cause that's where I lived the longest and it was also where I had my formative years. I think we moved there when I was about eleven and I stayed there until I was fifteen and went away to prep school [Westover School, Middlebury, Connecticut], but I would come back every summer. And my friends and I worked at Camp [Harry] Daniels [Elloree, South Carolina], which was a 4-H camp in the summer, so, we, you know, we bonded. And I became very involved in tennis, and all of my friends and I played tennis, and it was jus--, I learned to swim there, I learned to play basketball there, I learned French there, you know, that was, that was home and it's still home. That's-- (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Can you describe the sights, and sounds, and smells associated with that place? (Unclear) Speaker 2: Sights and sounds, I think of the tennis court, I think of Dukes Gymnasium, I think of Golf Avenue [Orangeburg, South Carolina] where we lived at first, a little cracker barrel house. I think of--, I lived on the campus [of South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], you know, and I think of the campus buildings and the road coming into there, which is now infamous because many years later during the Civil Rights Movement the front of the campus is where those three students were massacred [Orangeburg Massacre 1968]. And so, the racial situation in Orangeburg was, was also something that's very much carved in my mind. Both how I had to live there, there were a couple of incidents, when I went back one summer I remember calling up a beauty shop, I've always had problems, you know, getting my hair done 'cause it's straight. And you know people didn't always know what to do with it. So, I just called a white beauty shop and they had been alerted (laughter), this black girl was gonna come down there to the beauty shop; and I understand they had planned to arrest me, but I got the word and I didn't go there. And I can remember walking along the main street, there was a railroad that went through the middle of town and basically the black section, the college, South Carolina State and Claflin [College, Orangeburg, South Carolina] were on the other side of the railroad and the rest of town was on the other side. And I can remember going down and having white boys in cars trail me, you know. So, I was very aware of the racial, sexual dynamics in that town. More aware, I think, when I went back in the summers; from leaving New England and going back in the summers. So, sights, I remember that railroad track, I remember the campus--the campus was kind of like an oasis. You always felt protected if you were there. You know your parents [Frank DeCosta and Beautine Hubert DeCosta] were there. The, the friends of your family were there, and all of that. So, the college was prominent to me. Sounds, the sounds of cars, the smell of the tennis court, the smell of the gymnasium, I was very much an athlete. And I, I remember that locker room smell, I remember the smell of the swimming pool, that smell of chlorine; cause I loved the swim-- I was in swimming every day. Those are the things I remember. Sounds, oh my mother (laughter), we were kind of deprived, Orangeburg was a nothing town. I think, at that time, there might have been 7,000 living there, but she was determined that I would get culture. So, she would drive me to Columbia [South Carolina] to the opera, ever since then I've hated the opera. (Laughter) But, I remember the sounds of the opera. We would have to sit up in the balcony, way over toward the end and usually it was a school night, like Thursday night that we would go to the opera. And I would so sleepy and the opera would be so deadly and it would go on and on and on. But, I do remember the arias and the things like that. So-- Story_ID: 180027 Speaker 1: So, now back to the years between prep school [Westover School, Middlebury, Connecticut] and college [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um, mm. Speaker 1: The decision to go to Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Yeah. As I said, I really wanted to go to Radcliffe [College, later Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because I liked, Westover [School, Middlebury, Connecticut] was a girl school and I very much wanted to go to school where I could meet and see young men, particularly, black young men, you know. (Laughter) And when I got to Cambridge [Massachusetts], and I saw Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Radcliffe, the young men and women in the streets. I said, Huh, this is where I really want to be, you know. And I did visit Wellesley, and that was interesting, but that was so far out and were there just all women there and I just felt that would be dumb. But I got a scholarship to Wellesley, much larger than the one I got to Radcliffe. The other thing was there was a system in the South and I don't know if you're familiar with it; where like I said we're on the cusp of integration, desegregation, you know. And the whites are very aware of it. So, what they came up with, because they didn't want black kids going to their schools. What they came up with was, Okay you go to Wellesley or Harvard or wherever you want to go, we will pay you, you know, what it would cost to go to University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina]. And I forgot what they called that, it was some special program. My husband, my first husband also got that. So, I got the scholarship from Wellesley, I got a small scholarship from the United Negro College Fund and I got this state aid. In other words, it was blood money, they were paying me not to stay in South Carolina and go to school. So, I got those three sources of income. Speaker 1: So, Wellesley and you've become socially conscious somewhat because, of your experiences, at this school (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: At this school, and at this women's school. Speaker 2: Um, mm. Speaker 1: Tell me about that experience. Speaker 2: Wellesley was much better than Westover, even though there were only three, three black students in my class, two other blacks and myself; one of whom I'm still very friendly with. And I guess, as a whole, there were maybe twelve; still twelve was more than the one at Westover. (Laughter) So, there was ending, you know, socially, it was just-- we had more freedom, we could go out, we partied at Harvard or we went away for the weekends; it was just a much more congenial kind of situation. As I said, there was more freedom, more comradery. There was also racism, when I got, I chose a small dormitory, it was like, like a two story, it was a building they had built during the Second World War [World War II, WWII] because on Wellesley's campus were WACs [Women's Army Corps] and WAVES [Women Accepted for Voluntary Emergency Service], you know, women who were, going into the army. So, they built these kind of like barracks things, wooden things. I chose one of these intentionally, because I wanted to be in a kind of community, a small community where I could meet people. I was the only one there who had no roommate again, the same thing. And--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: This was intentional? Speaker 2: This was intentional. Yeah. And there was a young woman from Austria, Hildegard Perconi [ph.], who want to room with me almost immediately. And she went to the Headmistress and said, "I want to room with Laurie [HM Miriam DeCosta-Willis], we want a room together." And the headmistress told her, "I would not advise it because the other girls would ostracize you." So, she did not permit her to do that, okay. The second, I think the second semester I did have a roommate. We chose and we said the heck with the system, we're going, we're gonna room with each other; so, that happened. The second thing that happened and my classmate disagrees over who said it; but, I'm sure the dean said it. I was sitting there knitting. In those days girls knitted to pass the time and to not be bored and all. And I heard the dean say something about a nigger in a wood pile. (Laughter) At that point, I dropped my knit, knitting needles and it was all I could do to keep myself from walking out of there. Well, they invited me back to Wellesley this year to talk about what it was like when I was there between 1952 and 1956 [1956]. The reason being, that Julia Roberts is starring in a film called, 'Mona Lisa Eyes [sic, Smile],' which deals with a Wellesley professor, in the 19--early 1950s. And the students at Wellesley got very upset because there were no blacks in the movie, you know. And so the administration told them, Well, that's the way it was. So, they wanted me to come and talk about what it was really like, well, I was getting ready to really do it. When I went to Memphis [Tennessee], I pulled out all my papers, I looked at my yearbook and I swear (laughter), you know, they talk about [Orenthal James] O.J. Simpson and that Time magazine, how they darkened him up; they lightened us up. I'm yellow brown, but had a classmate who was chocolate brown and she looks like she's white. I couldn't believe it, looking, because I hadn't looked at that yearbook in years. And I looked at--the three of us were looking white, you know. (Laughter) And we were invisible, all the--I looked completely through the book. Now, I was Phi Beta Kappa and I was active in ever--I was in the dance club, I was in the Turksecorians [ph.], I choreographed our junior show; I'm nowhere in there. There's one Indian girl, East Indian, that's the only woman of color in the whole book, okay. So, I was ready to do my thing at Wellesley and I was ready to agree with those students; however, something came up and I couldn't go. (Laughter) But, anyway, so that was Well-- but Wellesley was a very positive thing. Story_ID: 180028 Speaker 1: So, you were at Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] between 1952 and 1950--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: 1956 [1956] Speaker 1: The Civil Rights Movement is pretty much--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: It's starting up. Speaker 1: How is that affecting you at Wellesley? Speaker 2: Okay. When the Supreme Court decision came down in 1954 [Brown v. the Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas (1954)]. I can remember running up and down the halls just screaming and yelling, just, just, you know, in seventh heaven. I acted like a complete lunatic. Everybody in the dormitory knew that the Supreme Court had ruled that, okay. Let me back up, I could remember the [Army-] McCarthy Hearings [1954], cause I would, I worked, I babysat and I could remember sitting down in TV, at TV in homes where there were TV's and looking at that, you know. And then 1954 came, now in 1955 [1955] I married a guy [HM Russell Sugarmon, Jr.] who was finishing up the, at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and one of the things that brought us together was that we both wanted to complete our education and go back south to change things, okay. My senior--, we married the summer of my junior year. I went back to Wellesley to finish the senior year and although he'd finished Harvard in 1953, and had served two years in the [U.S.] Army; he came back to Boston and went to BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] to work on a Master's in order to be there with me, so we could be together, okay. That January we went to Tennessee, which was his home because he needed to take the bar exam. So, he--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Russell Sugarmon. Speaker 2: Russell Sugarmon, right, my first husband. We went there in January so he could take the bar exam and I went to Montgomery [Alabama] where my parents [Frank DeCosta and Beautine Hubert DeCosta] lived. They had lived in Alabama in the '40s [1940s] and they went back in the '50s [1950s]; so I went to Montgomery. And I was sitting there one evening, I guess about 9:30 pm or 10:00 pm and the phone rang, and whoever it was said, "[Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], King's House has been bombed," and my mother said, "Come on, let's go," and we tore out of the house. The Kings lived on Jackson Avenue [Montgomery, Alabama] in a small house and I can remember just standing in that yard. There were a whole bunch of people, just quiet, I mean it was like a funeral. And they said, Mrs. King is okay, she was in the back bedroom with her new born baby and the bomb apparently had landed on the porch, so the damage was to the front of the house, not through the back. And there were a couple of policemen, or state troopers, and what not, in the front and they were facing us. And they said, "Get back, get back." And I'm scared, I'm sort of inching back. My mother did not move and my mother is about 5'3"; she just stood there. And I have often told my mother that was one of the most important lessons in courage that she could possibly have given me, this was in 19--this was in 1956. The Montgomery Bus Boycott [1955] had started, I think, it that December, that December, 1955. And so, when I first went to, when I went to Montgomery that week; that Sunday we went to Dexter Avenue Baptist Church [Montgomery, Alabama] where Martin Luther King had just, he had only been there a few months, and Mrs. King was there, apparently it was her first time. She sang in the choir and it was her first time being there after the birth of their first child, so she was there. And, you know, Martin Luther King was talking about the boycott. And I can remember, while I was there, that my mother would get up every morning; she, she was on the faculty of Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama] and she and her friends and all; we'd go out in the morning and she'd go in her car, and pick up people, be standing on the street corners and take them to work and stuff. So, she was very much involved in what was going on. She was much more of an activist than my father was. My father was extremely supportive, would not ever stop her, would encourage her in everything. But, he always felt that as the breadwinner, working for a state supported institution that he did not have the same freedom that she did. But, she was very much involved. So, it was no accident that she said, "Let's go." And, I guess, I probably got there that Saturday, we went to church that Sunday and this might have been that Tuesday or so that their home was bombed. But, that was one of the most important lessons that I had. As I said, I was still in college, so I rejoined my husband and we went back to Wellesley. But, I was even more determined at that point, to come South and do my part. Story_ID: 180029 Speaker 1: I want to ask you did any of these issues come up in your classes at Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Heck no, heck no. The only reference I remember to race, I took a course in Sociology (laughter), you know how you think of things visually, I can remember the instructor putting two pyramids up there. This is the pyramid for the white people, you know. Here's and here up at the top are the elite, the very wealthy and here is the middle class--he was trying to show us the class structure. But then he wrote, did a separate pyramid, a little small pyramid over to the side, (laughter) these are the black people, you know. In other words, we didn't even fit in the big pyramid. We were over here in a separate pyramid. But he said we had the same class structure; we had the elite, the middle class, the working class, et cetera, et cetera. so I remember that. And I, at that point, I didn't know the questions to ask, you know. I just knew something was wrong and that I wanted to be a part of the movement to change it. Story_ID: 180030 Speaker 1: In 1956, you graduated from Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] in Spanish. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: How did Spanish become your major? Speaker 2: You know, I mentioned that when I went to this tennis tournament that I heard these kids speaking in French and I wouldn't, when I changed to Westover [Schools, Middlebury, Connecticut], I would not have had enough, enough language units. So, I re--, I took French and the Spanish teacher offered to teach me two years of Spanish in one year and I liked her a lot. I mean she would do things like take us to New York [New York] to see Jose Limon and have dinner at a Spanish restaurant. I just had a natural affinity. Oh, let me tell you one thing that happened funny in Westover and again, it's ironic because that I won the French prize. When I first went there, I spoke French like a southerner, you know, I'd say, cuh [ph.] instead of kier [ph.] and stuff like that; and the kids would laugh at me. And the French, Madame Macklin talk, who was French and all, she would put them down and everything, but then I ended up, you know, winning the French prize. But, anyway I liked people in Spanish, so I still intended on keeping up with French. So, when I went to Wellesley, I took French; but the French people were very distant and kind of cold and all. But the Spanish people were just so wonderful and there was a teacher there, Justine Ruiz de Conde who just died last year and she was just wonderful. You felt that there was no prejudice, whatever, they were just totally accepting of who you were. Speaker 1: What's her name again? Speaker 2: Justine Ruiz de Conde and she was Spanish, and she was a little lady with white hair and just full of pep. And during the Spanish Civil War [1936-1939], she had carried ammunition up under her clothes and crossed the enemy line, you know, just really a daring, wonderful, kind of adventurous person. And also, on the faculty, was a very noted poet, Jorge Guillen and he would talk, oh, just wonder--, he talked, tell tales about the Spanish Civil War and all of these people were living in exile, they were living in the United States. I just love the Spanish people; so, that is what really got me interested. And then in my sophomore year, I lived on, sophomore and junior year, I lived on the Spanish corridor where we had to speak Spanish all the time. And so, it was just, it was just a really good experience, and so I, I gravitated toward the Spanish as opposed to the French. Um, mm. Speaker 1: Now, were you, at any time, exposed to any Afro-Hispanic literature? Speaker 2: None, whatsoever; had no idea that there were ever any black Spanish speaking people in the world; that was through college and that was through graduate school. Now, graduate school, I worked on my Ph.D., I did the master's, '59 [1959], '60 [1960] and did the Ph.D. '65 [1965], '67 [1967]; went all the way through graduate school, did not know there were any black Spanish speaking people. It was only when I came to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in 1970 that I stud--, that I found out that there was not only an Jorge Guillen who is a Spanish court, there was also a Nicolas Guillen that was a Cuban poet. So, I had to completely re-educate myself, what is that Carter G. Woodson has that thing about the miseducation of the American Negro. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Boy, was I miseducated; so I had to really educate myself. But, really in fairness to my teachers, I don't think they knew. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Certainly, Justine Ruiz-- my last book, my book on Nancy Morejon, I dedicated to Justine Ruiz de Conde 'cause she was one of the major teachers in my life, I mean in so many ways and we kept in touch with each other through the years. And she was, but I don't think she knew. Story_ID: 180031 Speaker 1: I want to talk a lot more about that, your introduction to Afro-Hispanic literature. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: First, let's back up, graduated [from Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] in 1956. What did you--(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --do between 1956 and 1960? Speaker 2: Okay. In 1956 with my college degree and my husband [HM Russell Sugarmon, Jr.] who had just, you know, had worked on his m aster's at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], we went home, to his home, which was Memphis, Tennessee; where we always intended to go and live. When I got there, I guess I just thought they would welcome me. Here, was this Phi Beta Kappa from Wellesley (laughter), well qualified and everything, ready to teach and everything and I had an appointment with the woman, the Director of Personnel, for the Memphis public schools. And she practically told me that with a B.A. from Wellesley, there was no way that they would take me into the public schools as a teacher. She said, "We give preference to the students who graduate from LeMoyne [later, LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee], which is a historically black college there. In other words, you know, there was no way. Then somebody else advised my in-laws that I should go and talk with Blair T. Hunt, who was the principal of the Negro school [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee] there and who was in with all the white people. In other words, I would to use influence to get in. And I said, Oh no, I would not stoop to that." So, anyway, what I did that summer when I got there and I was pregnant. I married in June, June after my junior year and like a good woman of the 1950s, I wanted to have six children, I wanted to have six boys. So, immediately, I started trying to get pregnant. It didn't work after two months and I told my parents [Frank DeCosta and Beautine Hubert DeCosta], "Something is wrong, I'm not getting pregnant." So, anyway, by the time I graduated college, I was, I think three months pregnant, really happy about that. So, when I went to Memphis that summer, what I did was to teach French to teenagers in the city free, was at the YM-YWCA [of the USA], which was right up the street. And I taught the son of the college president and two, two children of one of the black bank owners there and, you know, just a group of black kids from the bougeoise, so to speak, and I did that for free; something to interest kids in languages. And then what happened, cause my in-laws, we lived right across from the LeMoyne College and my in-laws were very friendly with the Prices, Hollis Price and his wife, Althea Price; and so, Hollis knew that I was trying to get a job and hadn't had any luck with the public schools. And, well I was pregnant, and I had my baby in November and my best friend, [HM] Maxine [Smith], who was teaching French at LeMoyne College was also pregnant at the same time. She had her baby in December and her baby was born prematurely, so she was not able to go back to work. So, Hollis asked me, with just, with my little B. A. if I would come in and just substitute for her. So, I worked at the college, I taught French that second semester and I also worked in public relations. They didn't have anybody in public relations, so I wrote these little articles to send into the newspaper, so I did that. And then I realized at that point, that I really had to go back to school and get my master's. So, second year Maxine came back to work and I worked with the Urban League for a year. And I would go out and talk to high schools to try to encourage kids to go to college and that kind of thing. And that really let me know that I had to go back to school. So, the following summer, I think it was, I went to St. Louis [Missouri] where my sister-in-law lived and started work on the master's-- Story_ID: 180032 Speaker 1: --Now, in the meantime, okay, 1956 when I got to town [Memphis, Tennessee] what hit me was a big banner, they were having a political election and the banner said, Keep Memphis Down in Dixie. And apparently, the Dixiecrats were running for office and so, immediately I got hit by this, you know, overwhelming white political power structure. Some blacks had started, I think, probably in the early 1950s running for office, but it was just a thing that people did with no hopes of winning. I think Dr. [Joseph E.] Walker had run for the school board and maybe somebody had run for public office of some kind and what not. But there, we became, my husband [HM Russell Sugarmon, Jr.] and I became very involved in the political campaign and then also in the struggle for civil rights. Immediately, we joined the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], starting going to meetings, the NAACP was being overhauled, it had very old non-progressive leadership. At the time we got to Memphis, which was 1956 a lot of northern educated young professional blacks were coming back to Memphis. There was Jesse Turner, who was the banker, who came from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. There was A. W. Willis who came from Michigan [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan]. There was Russell Sugarmon, my husband who was from Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. There was me from Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]. There was [HM] Maxine Smith who'd gotten a Master's at Middlebury [College, Middlebury, Vermont]. Suddenly, there was Vasco Smith, who had gotten his doctor, D. D. degree. So, there were doctors and lawyers and people who, we were supported by the black community, you know; any time you have dentists, and doctors, teachers, nurses, whatever. Our financial support came from the black community, so we felt like we could afford to step out there, we ain't had no money, but we had lots of umpf, lots of energy and we got involved in politics. Immediately, let's see, Maxine and I had our babies. The next summer she and I applied to Memphis State University [later, University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee], which had no, this is, this is 19--, let me see, I went there in 1956; this is 1957. The Supreme Court decision was 1954 [Brown v. the Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas (1954)], this is three years later. She and I applied, oh it created a furor, ahh the people were really upset. Finally, they decided we were not qualified, (laughter) in spite of the fact that I finished Wellesley, she had a Master's, she said, "I didn't even want to go there." It was just something that, you know, we had to do; so we were unqualified. In the meantime I was getting nightly calls from people who said they were on the football team and if I came out there, they were come and rape me. My husband and I lived on Lenow Alley [sic, Place, Memphis, Tennessee]. His parents lived on Walker [Avenue, Memphis, Tennessee] right across from the college [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] and his father, bless his sweet soul, built us a little one bedroom, tiny little house on their back property, which faced onto the alley. So, one night we woke up and there was a gunshot through the window, people fired onto the thing. So, we were not afraid for ourselves, but we sent our kids, I sent-'cause I had two babies at the time and we sent them, the little girl up to Saint Louis to stay with his sister for a good part of the summer cause we were afraid for the children. So, you know, there were threats and what not. But we kept on, we were completely fearless. Then, in 1959 Russell ran for the County Commission [Shelby County Board of Commissioners], and all of us were really active; I mean door-to-door, campaigning, up late at night, up early in the morning, speaking in churches, rallying, just, we really just became caught up. Now, in that race we really did think blacks had a chance to win. Unfortunately, he was defeated and the other two, one of them was [HM Benjamin] Benny Hooks, one of them was a minister, Reverend [Roy] Love and so the three of them were defeated. But, we were not discouraged, we were determined and I think people realized at that point that there was this movement which was now manifesting itself in different ways. We went into the courts, we protested, we went into politics, you know, we began to do everything. Story_ID: 180033 Speaker 1: Ironically, even though Memphis State [later, University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] did not admit me in 1957, I was the first black teacher, faculty member there in 1957 so that would have been ten years later. Speaker 2: '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: '67 [1967], '67 [1967], right. So, '57 [1957] they denied, '67 [1967] and what happened that was kind of interesting how that happened, after I, after I couldn't get into Memphis State, realized I needed to get a master's. In 1959 I went to Johns Hopkins [University] in Baltimore [Maryland] and then came back. And when I came back, I was teaching at Owen Junior College [later, LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] in Memphis and our commencement speaker, I think, in about 1962 [1962] or '63 [1963] was the president of Memphis State and in his commencement address he said something about there will come a time when the university will be open, it was sort of vailed the way he said it. But he said, "And people need to be prepared for that opportunity," and it fell on ripe ground because at that point, what it was, it just re-- reinforced my desire to return to [John] Hopkins [University] to get the Ph.D. So, I happen to be the right person at the right time. Now, in the meantime, Uni--which is what is now the University of Memphis, at that time it was Memphis State University. We were denied in 1957, coming behind us, some students went into court and Memphis State was forced to open, I think in 1960 [sic, 1959], I don't remember the exact date. Once they opened, I went back and took courses in French in order to keep up my language skills, so I took a course there after it opened. And interestingly, the person who taught me she was from Mississippi and she spoke French with a southern accent. But I went back as a teacher, she was my office-mate. So, it's just kind of funny how things turn out. Speaker 2: So, you said earlier that I know you ended up going to Johns Hopkins for your master's, (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Um, mm. Speaker 2: Had you started some course work in St. Louis [Missouri]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. I went to Washington University [St. Louis, Missouri] and I was pregnant again, I think with my second child. So I took my baby, and I was there. I took course in Literature, thinking that, cause I taught English and French at LeMoyne [later, LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee]; I thought maybe I would get a P-- master's or Ph.D. in English, but my love was languages. And around that time, I think I contacted all the, the universities in the area like University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee], University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas], University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi]; none of them accepted blacks at that point. This was 1959. And my parents [Frank DeCosta and Beautine Hubert DeCosta] lived in Baltimore and I said well, I have two children now, so it would be just more convenient for me to go there and stay with my parents and go to Hopkins. That was how--Hopkins just simply was convenient. I had no idea it had the reputation that it did (laughter) and I was kind of floored after I got there. But, anyway that worked out. And then when I decided to go back for my doctorate, I went to Hopkins. Speaker 2: How long had your parents been living in Baltimore? Speaker 1: They moved, let's see, daddy went to, went back to Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama] at the time I was married. They went there in 1957, so when I went to school in '59 [1959], '60 [1960], they were there. Now, my father took a position with the agency for international development and he was away from '62 [1962] to '64 [1964]. They came back in '64 [1964] and I started doctoral study in '65 [1965] and I got a lot of fellowships, including one from Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] and I got, you know, loans and fellowships from Johns Hopkins. But, by that time, I had four children (laughter) and what I did was to rent a house from one of their friends, a faculty member who was away on sabbatical, but that man didn't want four children running through his house. So, my parents moved into the house that I rented and I stayed in their home for a year and finished my coursework in that year; and then did finish my dissertation the next year. Story_ID: 180034 Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 2: Uh, huh. Speaker 1: What was Johns Hopkins like in 1959, 1960? Speaker 2: Very, very interesting. I got in there on a fluke. (Laughter) And I say a fluke because the Chair of the department, at that time, was Dr. [Nathan] Edelmann, very nice Jewish gentleman and I didn't discover this until I got there--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: This is Romance Languages? Speaker 2: This is Romance Languages. And Johns Hopkins, as you know, was founded as a male institution and I had gone to female college [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], so this was a whole gender shift. But the thing was, my name at that time, was Sugarmon. And, I sent a, you had to send a picture in with your application, it was a non-descript picture, I could have been anybody, you know, Moroccan, Algerian, Jewish, whatever. Well, Dr. Edelmann, and the faculty members thought that I was Jewish. And they wondered what a nice Jewish wife with two children at that point, was doing pulling up her kids, leaving her husband and going to graduate school. 'Cause even though racism might not have been factor, (laughter) sexism was definitely alive. They started not to admit me 'cause they thought I was Jewish. Surprise, here I show up and I'm black, you know. Well, I loved Hopkins, the faculty were truly inspiring. One of my major professors was Dr. [Bruce Wear] Wardropper and he, he just was, just tremendous, I just can't speak enough. Hopkins was different, as I say, it was a male institution. I was one of only two, I think, women cause they had started accepting women in the graduate school. One night I went out on a date with five men, it was just buddy, buddy, you know, but we had a good time. We danced and had a good time. I found out about the Jewish experience, cause there were a lot of Jewish, Jewish students there. And they told me, for an example, about Crystal Night, nacht [Germany, November 1938] which was, you know, when they heard the people were killed and during the pilgrims and what not. And the sound of the breaking glass was like crystal breaking. So, it was a very broadening experience. And the other students would laugh at me because I would tell them how, you know, what it was like that I, I lived two lives. I felt like a very much split person, cause I was there and with men and women in an integrated situation. And I would go home to this completely segregated situation. But they would laugh and I would tell them jokes like, you know, in Memphis [Tennessee] Thursday was Zoo Day for the Negroes, you know (laughter) and how I would drive by the zoo and the kids would say, "Oh, ma, we want to go see the bears," and this and that. "No, you can't go, we'll come by here on Thursday, you know." And they didn't realize that was, that was the day for Negroes; and they just thought that was just completely ridiculous. We had a lot of discussions around race. Most of these guys were younger than I was, cause by this time, I was, maybe twenty-seven or so, and they were like twenty-one, twenty-two. They'd come direct from college; I was kind of a mature person. And we had a lot of talks, wonderful, I made tremendous friends that have kept up with me through life. Were there any racial incidents, uhh, not that I can really remember. But it was, it was a totally intellectual situation, very, very life changing. I did not do well, at first. I had come from Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], which was a very good school, but it was not the same quality of scholarship that I encountered at Hopkins. We, got, at Wellesley, we were taking courses on culture and civilization, learning about the music of Latin America and all of this stuff. It wasn't the sharp literary analysis that Hopkins was noted for. So, when I got there and I did my first paper, and you either pass or fail. When I did my first paper, the, the professor was just really was very stern with me and I just put my head down. He couldn't see the tears, but I just felt like I couldn't make it. But, I just rose up and finished and he said I redeemed his faith in scholarship, when I got through 'cause I knocked 'em out. That was, you know, I had just, I had been taught that everything is possible if you apply yourself. And I had two kids and there was a young woman who went with me from Memphis to keep my children. I'm, I will always be grateful to her, she kept my children. Sometimes, I'd be at that library until eleven, twelve o'clock at night. And then on the weekends, I would cook, you know, casseroles, chickens and what not. I lost twenty pounds, I went down to 105. It was grueling, but I finished my master's in one year-- Story_ID: 180035 Speaker 1: [Johns] Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland], generally did not award master's. The master's was the compensatory degree. In other words, they, they had a doctoral program and then if you couldn't make it, then as compensation you were awarded the Master's; so I got it in one year. And then when I went back, I can remember, I guess I was twenty-nine and I could remember the, the chair of the department, Dr. [Elias] Rivers gave a cocktail party. So, I was here with all these tall good looking white men and all, and we were just making conversation. I said, "Well, I'm here for a year." (Laughter) They said, "What, there's no way you're going to finish your doctorate in a year." I said, "Oh yeah, that's all the time I have. I have four children," you know. And I was just, you know, I finished in a year. Speaker 2: You finished in a year? (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: In a year, yeah. It was unknown, unknown. But, I was just determined, I had things to do. Now, interestingly enough--(simultaneous-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So this is 1960 [1960]? Speaker 1: This is '65 [1965], '66 [1966]. Speaker 2: When you went back? Speaker 1: Yeah. But the funny thing, people didn't understand, number one, there were not, at that time, any other black women in Memphis [Tennessee] who had Ph.D.s. So, when I left the first time, they thought that was, to go for my master's with two children; they said this is, this woman is really strange. So, the way my in-laws explained it, was that, "Well, Laurie [HM Miriam DeCosta-Willis], you know, her family is educated, so what more can you expect," you know. So when I went back the second time for the Ph.D., they really thought I was crazy. And everybody told me says, "uh, your marriage won't last two years." Well, it lasted one year and ten months, (laughter); but I never would have changed a thing. Speaker 2: So, the Ph.D. was instrumental in the breakup of your marriage? Speaker 1: Not really. We, we just got on different tracks. Russ [HM Russell Surgarmon, Jr.] became much more involved in politics and whereas I had also been very, very much involved and continued to be. I also had this intellectual life and I was a very ambitious person and I wanted to do things in my own career. So, we just, our paths just diverged, and so, that's, that's what happened. But he was fully understanding and, and supportive of my decision, you know, all the way through. Speaker 2: Now, while you were in Baltimore [Maryland], you were there for a short time, one year the first time and another year--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Did you, I know you were very busy with your children, but did you at all get involved in the politics there? Speaker 1: Not at all. Not at all. The, my only path was home, Elsinore [Avenue, Baltimore, Maryland], where parents [Frank DeCosta and Beautine Hubert DeCosta] lived and Hopkins. Oh, one interesting thing happened on the second. The first year the library was in Gillman Hall, which is an old hall. Talk about sights and sounds, I can remember sitting in the library, the windows were kind of broken out and it was in the winter and the wind and everything would come in. I can remember sitting in the library in my coat working, cause I, I'm a very studious person and I'm a very serious person and I had been raised, well, the prep school [Westover School, Middlebury, Connecticut] experience was totally scholarship, you know. I mean that just changed my whole outlook on life. I was, I knew then that I was dedicated to life as an intellectual, the life of the mind, that's all I wanted. When I went back to Hopkins that next time, I could remember that old library. When I went the second time, they had built the new [Milton S.] Eisenhower Library, and the library went up, no, it went down. You entered the first floor, that's the ground floor and then you go down into the stacks. And the romance, the language section was down in the bottom stacks. Well, I studied all the time and I can remember it was spring vacation and I was down in the bottom by myself, no escape, except the elevator. A man came down there, circled me, started the large circle and it got shorter and shorter. I was petrified and when he turned and went behind the stacks, (hands clapped) I zipped out and went up the elevator, you know. And I just thought, God how close I came, you know, you got to stop this staying at the library this late at night. But that was, that was my only path, from home to the library, home to the library. 'Cause I was determined, I only had one year. I had these little children, I had a husband back home. I had, you know, I had other responsibilities. So, all of my energy was, was devoted to, in fact, I had chosen my doctoral, my dissertation topic before I left and started work on that immediately. And even there I kept the same pattern, cause even though I was in Memphis writing, I would go back to my, I was, as I said, the first black teacher there and so I started that next year, being ABD [all but dissertation], and I would pick my kids up from school, take them home, clean, give them dinner, bathe them, put them to bed, go back to my office and work until eleven and twelve o'clock at night. But, I had, and there was a guard and I would have him come by, periodically, once an hour and check and make sure I was okay. I would do things like in the final stages, I would check into a motel, and write nonstop, I was determined, you know. And I said in life you can do anything you want to do, if you want to do it badly enough, and I was determined. Speaker 2: What was your dissertation topic? Speaker 1: Oh, it's deadly dull. The debate between the body and the soul and medieval Spanish Literature. I loved medieval literature. And I just, I read Saint Augustine, I read all the church fathers, I went back into Egyptian, the whole concept of the body and the soul, and never published it or anything, but it was something I could do. It was an area, an area in an area that I liked. And Hopkins did not have a medievalist, but I persuaded Dr. Elias Rivers that I really loved that period; I wanted to do it, and he, you know, worked with me on that. Story_ID: 180036 Speaker 1: Okay. So, in 1967 --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-six [1966], yeah, I returned to Memphis [Tennessee] in 1966 and I think from [Johns] Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] I had applied to Memphis State [later, University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] and I had met a lot of the faculty members out there, in fact, one of them, whose a very close friend, Charles Long, had sort of begun preparing me, introduce me to a lot of the, a lot of the faculty members in the Romance Languages Department; had encouraged me to go to local language conferences like the Tennessee, what did they call it, Tennessee, I can't remember what it was; but it was language conferences. I started going to those, so I knew people. And I was hired in Romance Languages, I'm sure the salary much less than everybody else, but that's the way it was at the time. And I went in as an, as an instructor and then when I completed my doctorate the next year, I was promoted to assistant professor. And Memphis State was an interesting experience (laughter) because I was still very much involved in the Civil Rights Movement and in the political movement and so those things went along parallel. For an example, in 1967 which would have been the year after I had gone to Memphis State, A. W. Willis ran for mayor of Memphis and he was the first black person to run for mayor and I was his campaign manager, and was, you know, scheduled all of his meetings, handled the finance, handled everything; and that was really, really exciting. I later married him. So, I was very involved in that and then in 1968 or '69 [1969], I was still very active in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and was chair of the education committee and we were very interested in the fact that there were no blacks on the school board [Board of Education of Memphis, later Shelby County Board of Education], and so we pushed to try to open that avenue; did not have any luck in negotiation, so we organized a boycott of the schools. Story_ID: 179861 Speaker 1: So, we were talking about Memphis State [later, University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]--(simultaneous-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um, mm. Speaker 1: And you, you become socially active in Memphis [Tennessee] (unclear), that you remained socially active-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: For several years. And now you're balancing that with your career as a professor at Memphis [State, later, University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Um, mm. Speaker 1: So, you can continue. Speaker 2: As I mentioned, [HM] Maxine [Smith], was, I think executive secretary [Memphis, Tennessee branch] at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at the time and I was chair of the education committee and we and a whole group of ministers and other activists, [HM Samuel] Billy Kyles, the person who is now superintendent of schools, Willie Herenton, a bunch of people were very active and we were not able to negotiate a person on the school board, so we organized a boycott of schools and also, what we called, Black Mondays [1969]. So, every Monday no one in the black community went to work and we wore these black armbands and that was very effective. That went on, probably, for about a couple of months, so between the school boycott and the Black Mondays, we got the political powers to agree to appoint an advisor to the school board. But that was sort of the beginning of the end in terms of, of the end of segregation. And I was kind of in a quandary because I was a faculty member, but I was also advisor to the Black Students Association. (Laughter) So, they would often meet at my house and then I would organize, I'd organize, the students and I a sit-in of the president's office. And, so I would accompany the students right up to the front door, but I would not cross the door, you know. (Laughter) And then I was always sure that my classes were covered so that I could not be accused of dereliction, dereliction of duty. And I used the opportunity 'cause there were helicopters and things flying all over all the time, you know. Every--it was just a lot of unrest and a lot of tension. But, I would speak in Spanish about these things, informed the students about what was going on, et cetera, et cetera So, they were getting a language practice, but they were also getting a lesson in social activism. So, that, that was something. In the meantime, my husband and I had divorced, I think in 1968 [1968] or so, and I continued to work there, but I was thinking in terms of leaving and going somewhere else after a year or so. But, I was active up until, up until I left in 1970. Story_ID: 179862 Speaker 1: So, you stayed at Memphis State [later, University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] until 1970 --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I stayed at Memphis State. Oh, the other thing that I did, I felt like the students needed some support from the faculty, so and I had been very involved, from the time I got there, I was concerned, and this was 1967 when I went to Memphis State, I was concerned about other faculty members being hired, that I should not be the only one. So I began sending, with the encouragement of the administration, sending letters to people that I knew throughout the country to try to see, you know, if we can recruit faculty, black faculty to Memphis State; didn't have any luck, cause who, whoever heard of Memphis State and who would want to go there anyway, you know, kind of thing. (Laughter) But I was very active in that. And then somebody pointed out something to me that I had never thought about, they said now, you know, we have this, we have whites teaching, but we have blacks serving in menial capacities. These were the janitors, and the maids and the cooks and all of that. They said now, you know, really we need for, for students to really see; we need blacks in faculty positions and we need whites in serve, and I had never really thought how class cuts across. And so, you know, I felt that there should also be some recruitment of whites in these other kinds of positions. But, I thought that the faculty should be involved, so I sent around a communication to the faculty members, saying that I wanted to organize a support group for students called the Faculty Forum where we could come together and really discuss issues of race, and how things could change, et cetera, et cetera. So, I got a big room and I said, well, you know, maybe eight or ten people would come, et cetera, could not get in, it was standing room only; and that truly, truly made me feel good, that the faculty would come out. And so, you know, really race became very much an issue that we, we dealt with. Speaker 1: So, how did the faculty administration generally respond to your activism outside of the campus? Speaker 2: Um, mm, they did not encourage or discourage. And the funny thing was, many years later, when I went back to Memphis [Tennessee] and applied to, the University of Memphis by that time, thinking I'd be welcomed with open arms. The former president said, "You did a wonderful job in your social activism," so, as if, if that's all I did, you know. Did I not also publish, did I not also teach, did I not also do those other things? So, in his mind, that's what he remembered mostly. It was kind of strange too, because, the assassination of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] occurred while I was teaching there and all of us had been very active in the marches and the sanitation strike, and I was in the march that ended when he had to leave the march and violence broke out from the, the Invaders, this young black militant group. I was in that march and many people, including [HM Samuel] Billy Kyles, who you also interviewed, was injured and different people were, were affected by that. But, it was curious, I took my children, we parti--my children participated in everything, the oldest ones. I had forgotten to mention that during that earlier period, the early '60s [1960s], I was arrested and what we had done, we had gone into a restaurant to be served and some kind of way, I think I must have been the only woman. We would send small groups out, like four or five people. I must have been the only woman in that group, because I was arrested and they threw me in the, it was like a wagon, police wagon with an older, kind of drunk white man. And it was, it was a little disorienting, disconcerting. And I was in pri--I was in the, in the jail, I think, overnight there. So I was in prison that time. And then when, when Martin Luther King was assassinated, that was a very, very traumatic situation. I had, I had taken my children to a lot of the church meetings, the two oldest ones and coming out of one of churches, we were Maced by policemen. And my kids then were, one of them must have been about six and one must have been about four; and they were Maced; and that really radicalized me. I can think of the moments in my life when I was radical, when the level of radicalization, you know, heightened and that was one; 'cause I said, How could you do that to children. But some of the faculty members, many of whom lived out in the suburbs, called me because I lived in the inner-city. And they said, you know, "Come on out to our house, you know, it's safe," you know. (Laughter) I said, "Are you kidding, I am much more safe in the inner-city," you know. "Then you are out there." Because, at that time, the--they had sent the Federal Guard [sic, National Guard] in, because they expected that like Washington [D.C.] and Detroit [Michigan] and other cities, that Memphis was literally going to explode, that did not happen; because there was a curious kind of relationship between the black leaders and the white leaders. My second husband, A. W. Willis was a very astute man, in terms of dealing with people. And I can remember, I thin--, it might have been, no, it wasn't when I was arrested, it was one of the marches. There was a prohibition against marching and they actually met with the city leaders and together, the whites, the blacks planned the march, so that it would be orderly. And they, you marched down a certain place and then you were arrested and you were put in jail. I mean it was all very org-- we didn't have a Birmingham [Alabama], we didn't have a Bull Connors [Theophilus Eugene "Bull" Connor], we didn't have those dogs, we didn't have those fire hoses, because the blacks and the whites, in a sense, worked together. It was, it was a strange situation and it has never been written about, but, but there was some kind of, they, the whites were as racist as pro-segregationists as they were in any other place, but they did not want our city to erupt into the kinds of violence that had hit other cities. I can remember, it must have been about 1962, I think, that we went to [Medgar] Evers' funeral in Jackson, Mississippi. And, of course, Evers was assassinated there. And we were at the funeral, and after the funeral, funeral they organized a march in the city's, in the downtown city streets and I can remember as we moved out to march, I can remember the police just advancing towards us and they broke up the march and there were some, there was some violence that erupted after that. But, in Memphis, it was kind of a controlled situation. Story_ID: 179863 Speaker 1: So, I know around this time, the [Civil Rights] Movement is shifting towards Black Power. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that, and how that affected you in your own personal--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Well, I had been reading Malcolm X, I had been reading [Eldridge] Cleaver, I had been reading [HM] Angela Davis, I had been reading all of these things. We were seeing progress in Memphis [Tennessee]. We saw the schools desegregated, my, my first husband [HM Russell Sugarmon, Jr.] and my second husband [A.W. Willis], the, the men and they eventually organized integrated law firm. The lawyers, Memphis, the struggle in Memphis was very much in the courts and the streets. The two went hand and hand. And the same lawyers that were fighting in the courts, were also in the front of the marches. So, there was never any, as in some cities, you had a break between the legal strategy and the, the, the more overt activist type strategy, there was not that there. And what was your question? Speaker 1: About Black Power. Speaker 2: Oh, about Black Power, okay-- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And just role in it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay. We were having successes, I mean we were seeing the courts, the parks, all of this, et cetera, but it was so slow, particularly, in the schools. And I was becoming much more interested in a more radical form of protest. As I said, I wa-- I began reading Malcolm X and Eldridge Cleaver, and all of these others. There was an element in Memphis, led by young people. I had mentioned them earlier, the Invaders, who were similar to the Black Panthers, except not as disciplined, not as coordinated, not as well organized, not as cohesive and all of that (laughter). And, and they were something of opportunists. So, the lead--, the black leadership in a sense tolerated this, but we did not have the kind of expression of Black Power, the legitimate expression of Black Power, ours was kind of an illegitimate one. There was a guy, for an example, who lived in base, called Sweet Willie Wine [Lance Watson, later Suhkara Yahweh] and well that kind of gives you an idea. And Sweet Willie had about seventeen children by ten or fifteen different women, I mean, you know, you get, get the picture. And, so that leadership was not, it was tolerated, but it, it did not have an impact, except in that [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] march, where it was broken up, it was a disruptive leadership. And they didn't care who they disrupted, black, white or whoever, you know; they were about disruption. So, we didn't really have the kind of forceful Black Power Movement that other cities did. I can remember a case (laughter) my husband, A. W. Willis, my second husband often talks about this. And this was probably about the late '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], he was a lawyer but he was also a real estate developer and these guys, about four or five black Invaders came into his office, my husband was a little short guy, and they were big and tall, and pow--, they had on their black, and they had the whole thing going, you know. And so they walked in and they said, "Now, listen Willis, we want you to give these houses that you're working on, we want you to give those to the working poor, we want you to bring those through us, sir." I forget what, what it was they wanted; protection money, you name it, you know. (Laughter) He also was a person, very courageous, and absolutely reckless. He, he'd lean back in his chair and then he reached down in his drawer and he pulled out his gun, he said, "Now, you said what 'MF,'" (laughter) and that was the end of that. He didn't have any more problems, so it was that kind of, of leadership. But, yeah, it was kind of interesting. The black, the bla--the Invaders just kind of disappeared eventually. We really didn't have a Black Power Movement there, it kind of broke a loose in the late, late '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 179864 Speaker 1: Now, let's talk your evolution into an Afro-Hispanic scholar. Speaker 2: Um, mm. Speaker 1: Introduction into that type of literature-- Speaker 2: Okay. I left Memphis [Tennessee] in 1970 [1970] and came to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and Howard was a watershed experience to me. When I walked on campus, I just fell in love with the place. Here, you had all these scholars from Africa, the Caribbean, South America, all over, John Henry Killens [sic, John Oliver Killens] was there, [HM Haki Madhubuti] was there, Andrew Billingsley was there, I mean, it was just heaven on--. Dorothy Porter was there in the library. Chancellor [James] Williams was right off campus, you know. All these people you'd heard about, it was just fantastic. What, I had been burned out in Memphis, I'd had like fifteen years of, of trying to juggle a husband, a family with four children, my life in, in politics and civil rights, plus my career, et cetera. When I got to Howard I found out that everything could be balled up into one, you know. I could still, you know, maintain my activist principles, but in a scholarly way, (laughter) that was a revelation. So, when I came to Howard, there was a friend, Martha Cobb, who was beginning to do research on the literature of Spanish speaking blacks and there had been a person there, Valaurez Spratlin in Spanish, he was a Puerto Rican, he'd introduce the first course in the Negro and Spanish Literature. Mercer Cook had been chair of my, our department and he was, not only an ambassador, he had written books on Francophone literature and the writers, and what not; and so I began to become very interested. It was the first time I realized that there were Spanish speaking black writers in the Caribbean, Central South America, I mean it was, it just opened up a whole new thing to me. I realized that I had not only been uneducated, but miseducated, because in college and graduate school I had no notion of people like Nicolas Guillen and Nancy Morejon et cetera, so I immediately became interested and started doing research and it was a matter of self-education cause there were no books out there. You, and it was hard to get those books by the writers, you had to either know them or know someone who know them, et cetera because those books were not being published here; so, I became very interested. Martha Cobb and I, and then eventually, Stanley Cyrus and Ian Smart, and others came who had similar interests. And we began developing courses, we began talking terms of publishing, we talked in terms of creating a journal. The Afro-Hispanic Review, which was maybe published ten years later, we began having conferences, we began writing grants to bring these writers like Manuel Zapata Olivella from Columbia and Aldeberto Ortiz from Ecuador, et cetera to bring them to Howard, to give lectures to give readings and things like that. And then we, we tried to work, work cross culturally with Francophone faculty members, writers, critics, et cetera and there were people who were in the English side, so it was, it was just a wonderful time to be alive. And Andrew Billingsley, who was the vice president, at that time, was very supportive of those efforts and would give faculty grants. For example, I got one, I think in 1972 to go to Spain to study to the African presence in, in Spanish culture, and that was funded by this fund that he had, so that it was, and it was a time that when Black studies were developing nationwide. And, of course, Howard had had for many years, courses in Black studies. They had an Afro American Studies Department, they had an African Studies Department, and it was just, it was just a fertile time. There was the Moreland Spingarn Research Center there and there was Dorothy Porter there, who was interested in black writers from Latin America and had acquired books and we would laugh because Dorothy would hide all the good books. You know she'd keep them down under her desk and you'd have to go and say, "Oh, where is the book by Nicolas Guillen?" "Oh, just happen to have it right here," you know. But it was, it was just a wonderful time to be alive and to experience that cross fertilization. Story_ID: 179865 Speaker 1: Sounds like it [being at Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was wonderful. And in 1977 you published--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Published 'Blacks in Hispanic Literature' [edited by HM Miriam DeCosta-Willis], which was people tell me, a ground breaking book. Speaker 1: Um, mm. Speaker 2: The first, it was actually a collection of scholarly essays by other writers; critics such as, Lemuel Johnson, who is basically a comparativist. Si--Si, can't remember her first name, Sylvia Wynter, who eventually went to Stanford [University, Stanford, California], and she was from Trinidad [and Tobago] and she lived in Spain and her family had originated in Cuba, even though she was a Jamaican Trinidadian descent and so, it was, you know, up and coming scholars in the field, and we put together that book; which was, made a lot of people for the first time look at the contributions of Spanish speaking blacks, because they didn't that they existed. Speaker 1: Well, you really were on the cutting edge, because now throughout the country there is Diaspora studies springing up. (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, um, mm. Speaker 1: What do you think about those contemporary developments? Speaker 2: Oh, wonderful, wonderful, absolutely. And in terms of Afro-Hispanic Literature, you know, I, I, have marked three phases in its development 'cause, let's see, this was, if you mark, say the beginning of the institutionalization of Afro-Hispanic Studies, say 1970, this is thirty years. And during that first period, we were primarily interested in finding the writers, identifying the writers, you know; analyzing their books, trying to get them published; trying to get them translated, or whatever. So, it was kind of an archeological kind of thing. And then in the second decade, which would be the '80s [1980s], there, then there began to emerge, well, that was when the Afro-Hispanic Review came out. Conferences were held all over. You began to get studies of a, one particular writer and books began to proliferate. I mean, it, publishing was just out there in the '80s [1980s]. And in the '90s [1990s] what you see is emerging, black women writers in these Spanish speaking countries, and so I've been very active in trying to make them more visible. So, it's been a sort of interesting kind of thing. And as you say, Diasporian Studies, many institutions now combine the study of Portuguese speaking, Spanish speaking, Dutch speaking, you know, French speaking, writers are their Caribbean studies in which they study writers from the English, French and Spanish speaking Caribbean, so it's just really grown. Story_ID: 179866 Speaker 1: In our department, were I taught last, is called, we have this, our department is now called the Department of Africana Studies. So, we taught African Literature, Spanish speaking blacks, et cetera. Speaker 2: I was going to ask that, that was at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]? Speaker 1: University of Maryland, Baltimore County [Baltimore, Maryland]. (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: Now, it wasn't always Africana Studies? (Unclear) Speaker 1: It was Afro-American Studies. And I think the Africana Studies indicates that it's not just devoted to studies of blacks in the United States, but worldwide, more global. Speaker 2: That happened while you were--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Yeah, I did. I was never chair, I was director of the graduate program in Afro-American Studies. Actually happened when Ghanaian became chair of the department and he was much more interested in seeing us project an international image, and so he changed it to that. Um, mm. Speaker 2: So, while you were director of graduate studies, what kind of changes were you able to, to-- Speaker 1: I was disappointed, I had been brought there to develop the graduate program and I was disappointed because we did not get the support, the financial support from the administration to really develop that. It was one of the few graduate programs in the country, Temple University, I think, Michigan, may be they're three, now, but now they're others. And, we had really hoped, we had projected that it would develop into a doctoral program. We graduated several of our students, graduated with Master's and went on to do PhD's. So, you know, I came in with the a whole lot of hope, but Black Studies Departments had been under siege for the last ten, if not, fifteen years and we experienced that same kind of situation there, that people, well, you had, you have the proliferation of American studies departments and Latin American studies departments and all of these things have taken some of the emphasis off of the Afro-American Studies, unfortunately. Speaker 2: Um, mm. That was something I wanted to ask you about. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Steady movement of progression and then-- Speaker 1: Um, mm. Speaker 2: Back step Speaker 1: Multi-cultural studies and all kinds of names except, and of course, they, they consider the African as a part of, but, not, you know,--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And used that as an under mind--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A separate department. Speaker 1: Exactly. For an example, we had two lines. I retired in 1999 and another person who had been chair, had been with the department a long time also retired. Those lines were never filled, they were switched to other departments. So, you know, it was sad. Story_ID: 179867 Speaker 1: So now, somewhere in the midst of your career, you come up with this idea. Tell me about the 'Erotique Noire/Black Erotica' [HM Miriam DeCosta-Willis], how did that--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Sigh) Oh that just kind of cropped up. (Laughter) You know, I think of myself as a scholar, as an academician basically. Most of my work has been scholarly work, either through published articles or books or what not. And, several things happened during that period, my second husband [A.W. Willis] died in 1988 and I was fifty-three years old and I felt like there was a whole world still for me somewhere out there. And it was time in my life when I was reflecting on just everything. And I had developed a program at LeMoyne [later, LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee], 'cause after, let's see, where was I, when, let, let me back up a little bit in terms of my personal life. I had met A. W. Willis when I first went to Memphis [Tennessee]. My first husband [Russell Sugarmon, Jr.] and I divorced in 1968. A. W. [Willis] and I married in 1972, and at the time, he was still living, we were both, he was in Memphis and I was in Washington [D.C.] and he was commuting back and forth. And, then, let's see, 1972, so he would, it was a commuter marriage, then 1976, I decided look if I want this marriage to work, I need to go back to Memphis. So, in 1976, I left Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and went back to Memphis. I work in real estate. I was a real estate broker for seven years. I also worked in construction, which (laughter) amazes my kids, because I couldn't get a job in academia, my husband was real-- mortgage banking and he said, "Okay, I got these duplexes, these twenty duplexes, convert them into single family houses." (Laughter) So, here's this PhD getting up every morning in her high heels and her jeans and her hard hat going to the lumber yard at six o'clock to get lumber and screws and tubes and all kinds of stuff. But, you do what you gotta do, I had four kids to raise. So, I did that for a couple of years. My brain was getting addled. So, one day in the bank I saw a former co-worker from Owen Junior College [later, LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee], he said, "How would you like to teach at LeMoyne," I said, "Uh, huh. But, oh no, not part time, no, maybe, I'll think about it, full time." So, anyway, I went to talk to the president, he offered me all of thirteen thousand dollars and this was in 1976. I said, "You have got to be kidding." I said, "My son just started working at the bank and he's making fifteen [thousand dollars]." So, I said I got to keep selling real estate. (Laughter) So, anyway, I, I, to make a long story short, I went back to LeMoyne. By that time, it was LeMoyne-Owen, they had combined Owen Junior College and LeMoyne. So, I taught there through 1989. Speaker 1: Not for thirteen thousand dollars? Speaker 2: No, it got up to twenty-one [thousand dollars], I was making twenty-one. Of course, I was married and my husband was paying the rent. But, I was still selling real estate up until a point. And, then, I kept active. Oh, at one point, they told me, 'cause I was going to conference, they wouldn't pay much to go to con--, if anything. But I was still paying my own money and so I kept my network going. And, by that time, I shifted from Afro-Hispanic into African-American and that's when I introduced courses in Harlem Renaissance, and black women writers and I was really interested. At one point I got a grant from UNCF, United Negro College Fund, $35,000.00. Now, United Negroes College Fund had given me a scholarship for college [at Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] they also gave me a fellowship for independent research. I had a whole year off, traveled all over the country, do we need to stop? Speaker 1: Probably, like one minute. Speaker 2: Okay. All over the country, studying the Schaumburg [Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York], the Amistad, studying at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know, to do this book on black women writers, okay. So, I'm still making the twenty-one thousand [dollars]. I went to conference that April and by th--, by this time, I'd start working on 'Erotica,' but that's a whole other chapter that we have to get back to. But, anyway, I ran into a former colleague that I had known at Harvard and he said, "How would you like to come up to George Mason [University, Fairfax, Virginia]?" I said: "I'm not thinking about leaving, my husband just died, I'm going to stay here. But, I never say no, let me fly out there and find out what it's like." Flew up here, loved it, could get back to Washington, Oh boy, this is really great. Went back and I found, I went to talk the financial manager, and I said: "I'm making twenty-on [thousand dollars]." He said, "Oh no, we made a mistake, you made a thousand dollars too much last year." I said, "You mean to tell me, if I stay next year, I'm going to make less?" He said, "Yes." I said, George Mason, here I come. They offered me fifty-five [thousand dollars], I didn't tell them what I had been making. (Laughter) So, anyway, that's how I did that. But, in the meantime, while I was at LeMoyne-Owen College working, I developed what's called the W.E.B. Du Bois Honor Program [W.E.B. Du Bois Scholars Program] and that was really truly exciting. I wrote grants to bring money in, developed a faculty, pulled in students, oh it was, I took them all over, traveling--(unclear) Story_ID: 180037 Speaker 1: So, you were talking about the program that you started with the LeMoyne-Owen [College, Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Right, the [W.E.B. Du Bois] Honors Program [W.E.B. Du Bois Scholars Program at LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee]. And, as I, I mentioned, I was writing a lot of grants to get support for that. And, one of the grants that I wrote, I think it was to the United Negro College Fund, was to bring a visiting scholar in. And, the scholar that I happen to bring was Roseann P. Bell, who was just a bundle of energy and just enthusiastic and all. We got to be immediate good friends. And, she--we were on a car trip to Atlanta [Georgia], to the Inauguration of Johnnetta [B. Cole], the president of Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Cole. Speaker 2: Johnnetta Cole, right, uh huh. And, I think I had on these Marvin Gaye records, 'Sexual Healing' and all these different kinds of things. So, we were just going down the road, just popping our fingers and just having a--just enjoying life. It was a beautiful day. The music was great. We were telling jokes back and forth. And, she revealed that when she was at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], that she and a friend, I think a male friend, had set up a telephone an, an erotic telephone answering thing. And, her name was Tondira [ph.] or some wild exotic name and it just sounded like fun. So anyway, it kinda hit me after we got back, I said, Hey, this is a whole new area that people just have not been dealing with, at least not black people. And, I had a subscription to Yellow Silk, which was an erotic magazine and I just began sort of exploring around. So, I said, "You know, Roseann [P. Bell] why don't you and I edit a, a book of erotica, Black erotica." So, then I began pulling up books and looking at things and what not. And, then we just began contacting writers. I got in touch with [HM] Charles Blockson, somebody had mentioned him. Turned out, he had a whole collection of erotica. And, so, people were like coming out of the woodwork. So, that was how that developed. I was in Memphis [Tennessee] at the time, and this would have been probably toward 1989. My husband [A.W. Willis] had died in 1988, that summer. So, this was like the next summer and I was thinking that we could, you know, over--just put it together over the summer. Well, it turned out to be like a two-year project. But, since I was in Romance Languages, I began to think of people in French and people in Spanish and all. So, we wanted to make an international book, and it just kind of took off from there. But, it was a fun project. It truly, truly was, and very different from what I've been doing. And, I would go to conferences, you know, and pass out flyers, you know. Do you do any erotica, or do you write any erotica, and people kinda turn and looked, you know. What are you doing? I mean, they were just like, shocked. Because it was so far field from what I had done. Story_ID: 180038 Speaker 1: What was the response of your academic colleagues [to 'Erotique Noire/Black Erotica']? Speaker 2: Kinda mixed. They didn't know to make of it. It was so out of character for me, number one. And, then a lot of people felt like it was something that would not be accepted. And, so at first, we were gonna do it under pseudonyms. I was gonna be Delores DeCosta, and she was gonna be Roseanne Pope, or something like that. And, then it got so good to us, we said, Well, heck we need leave--use our real names and then how could be ask other people to contribute to it and we're hiding behind these masks. No, let's not do that. Roseanne [P. Bell] as it turned out, was ill. In fact, she died, I think before the book came out, just before it appeared, maybe that March, and the book came out like in August [1992]. She was ill. And, at that point, I asked Reggie Martin [Reginald Martin] 'cause he was at the University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee]. And, it turned out, he was doing erotic writing and what not, so he came on board. And, he was a computer expert, so he was very helpful in that regard. The history of the book is very interesting because we could not get a publisher initially. I think I must have written to maybe fourteen or fifteen different publishers. And, they said, Well, I don't know, this is real interesting, but it's, you know, this is not something that we do. They just thought it was, would not be acceptable; but, even black editors at publishing companies. And, then we said, Well, the way to go is to maybe to find an agent. So, we wrote different agents. Agents were not interesting. And, then finally, Gloria Wade Gayles who's from Memphis [Tennessee] and was a good friend of mine and also a writer, told me about Calvin Hernton, who had a publisher at Doubleday. So, I contacted Calvin who was one of the contributors and he put me in touch with his editor at [Knopf] Doubleday. And, they were kinda leery too, for another reason that they felt anthologies would not, would not sell. And, they had not done an anthology before. Since then, they've done lots of anthologies which have made lots of money, you know. So, we were kinda breaking ice on a lot of different levels. And, so, when they finally did produce it, it was, you know, with paper that was not the best quality. And, oh, it was very interesting in terms of the cover, because I wanted to have something very sensual on the cover. I wanted to have good art, and I insisted on Romare Bearden and I, I also did not want the female figure to be objectified. So, I found a beautiful collage that he had done and it had a woman on a couch, a nude reclining and then behind her was a male figure with his pants coming down, and all. And, they said, "Oh, no, we could never depict a male nude on the cover. Females, okay. Males, no." So, that was kind of strange, you know. But, I still insistent on the art. So, they went with a figure that--a nude figure of a woman. So, it was, it was kind of interesting. And, I wanted art through the book. So, I contacted artists and they were--everybody was so en--the contributors were very enthusiastic. Speaker 1: So, the book was very groundbreaking. Speaker 2: Yeah. It wa-- Speaker 1: In terms, how did that feel? Speaker 2: The first. Yeah, it was the first in that area. And, we were also trying to combine, not just the purely erotic, but also studies of eroticism, so there, for example, essays by Audre Lorde and [HM] Charles Blockson and other scholars. So, it's kind of a combination of the creative and the scholarly. Speaker 1: And, since then it's gone into several--(unclear) Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. It's still available and it's gone--I think it sold many thousand--hundreds of thousands of copies now. Story_ID: 180039 Speaker 1: So, now that you're a full-time writer, do you have any thoughts of maybe publishing a second part? Speaker 2: Not really. We were asked by the publisher to do so and other people who say they also write, erotica writers were trying to get us to do that, even submitted some material and what not. But, I was in the, in the process of doing the--editing the diary of Ida B. Wells. When I stopped that to work on 'Erotique Noire [Black Erotica]' [edited by HM Miriam DeCosta-Willis] and then I wanted very much to go back and finish that one. So, I did finish that, and I said, Let me get back to where I'm really at home with these scholarly books that make no money, (laughter) and that don't sell. So, after, let's see, 'Erotique Noire' came out in '92 [1992], and then the diary of Ida B. Wells ['The Memphis Diary of Ida B. Wells' edited by HM Miriam DeCosta-Willis] came out in '95 [1995]. And, that was sort of the culmination of work that I'd been doing for twenty-- it takes me forever to publish a, a book. I had started doing--I did a, a book thing called the History of Beale Street, which was like 150 pages, it never was a published book. But, I did it for a grant at the request of my husband [A.W. Willis]. 'Cause he had gotten somebody to write that history and then she had to stop and then I took the project over. So, I really got interested in Memphis [Tennessee] History, Black History. Even though at the time, I was living in Washington [D.C.]. So, I had kept, I kept through my life, I've done scholarly works on the history of blacks in Memphis. In fact, one of the books is half completed, is a book that I started three years ago called, 'Notable Black Memphians"' [HM Miriam DeCosta-Willis] which has biographical sketches of, I think I've completed about 200 of them now, and I hope to do about 500. But, that was always an interest, the history. And, of course, when I found out that Ida B. Wells had lived in Memphis and was so integral to the Anti-Lynching Movement, at that point in Memphis. I really wanted to do that book. So, that came out in 1995. And, then I, as I mentioned, I was very moved by the fact that in the 1990s, you had the emergence of all of these black women writers, who were Spanish speaking. And, I had met Nancy Morejon. We had become very good friends, and so I started working on a collection of essays on her. And, that too was--oh, I think I started that in 1991, and finally published that book in 2000. So, that came out, 'Singular Like a Bird: The Art of Nancy Morejon' [HM Miriam DeCosta-Willis]. And, then right after the Ida B. Wells book came out, I said, Well, hey they're all these women writers and nobody has published anything on them. I need to start working on that. So, I started in like 1996, and then that book was just published in April of this year [2003], and it's called, 'Daughters of the Diaspora [Afra-Hispanic Writers,' edited by HM Miriam DeCosta-Willis]. And, it's the work of Spanish speaking black women whom I call, Afra-Hispanic writers, so. Speaker 1: Since you've come full circle from the first project that you've published. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, your most recent-- simultaneously). Speaker 2: This closes, this closes--I've told everybody, this closes it out. 1977 (laughter), 2003 that closes it out. What I'm working on now--actually when I retired, I was intending to write full-time and then as I mentioned, my mother [Beautine Hubert DeCosta] is now ninety, and I found that I just had more family responsibilities in connection with her care. So, I was not able just to plunge immediately into my writing. Story_ID: 180040 Speaker 1: But, I've now resumed that, and when in the process of cleaning out my mother's [Beautine Hubert DeCosta] house and having her to move, I discovered all these papers of my father [Frank DeCosta]. Now, I had intended to write a memoire of my husband, A.W. Willis, who was the first black elected to the state legislature of Tennessee since Reconstruction, and was a real dynamic shaker and mover in the Memphis [Tennessee] community. I was gonna write that. Then I was gonna do my memoire, and I was gonna finish that 'Notable Black Memphians,' [HM Miriam DeCosta-Willis] so. But, life is strange and you get moved in different directions. Like, I had no intention of doing 'Erotique Noire [/Black Erotica'] [edited by HM Miriam DeCosta-Willis] but it just happened, you know. It was an opportunity that I could not pass up. By the same token, when I began going through my father's papers, and realizing I didn't know this man. And, this man made a tremendous contribution to education. Then, I said, I gotta stop everything and work on a memoire on my father. So, it's--and then the last thing that I found in my mother's house, was a cachet of letters that he wrote. Over 200 letters, between 1934, the year of my birth, and 1969, just before he died. And, as I mentioned, he stayed in Nigeria for two years. So, I'm actually working on two books. One is called, Sojourn to--The Sojourn in Kaduna [Nigeria], which will be a collection of his letters with, and I'm gonna flesh the letters out in terms of the things that were going on in northern Nigeria, which is basically Muslim, in the early '60s [1960s], post-independence but before the Biafran Civil War [1967-1970]; critical time, and relate that to some of the things that have been happening there; The Amina Lawal [Kurami] situation, the imposition of Sharia law, and all that. I wanna really see how, what my father did during that period, connects with what's going on now. So, that's--that I'm working on. Then, I'm doing my memoire that examines his, his own education, during a period of total segregation. You know, how did this man go from being the youngest of eleven children, a very poor family, basically, he became self-educated, moving through college, married, two kids, through Master's, you know, on, on, working and then the PhD, and, and in primarily historically black colleges, founding dean of two graduate schools, acting president of a college and all, you know. In, in the transition between a segregated society and a desegregated society, you know, what role did he play? And, I'm gonna connect it to my own--what were the values that he gave me in terms of education that allowed me to continue. I did a short piece in a book that Gloria [Wade-Gayles] did call, 'Father's Songs [CL]' [edited by Gloria Wade-Gayles] and it's called, "Looking toward Arbutus [--Frank DeCosta]." And, it, in, it, I had started doing research on my father, maybe ten years ago for a family reunion. And, then for that article that she asked me to write, and it just, at the end of the article, I said, God, my life parallels my father's in so many ways. And, I hadn't really realized that. So, it's gonna be kind of a double memoire, looking at his life and my life and the intersection, and that kind of thing. So, that's what I'm working on now, and then at some point, I've got to finish that 'Notable Black Memphians,' I've interviewed all those people and they keep asking me, when is the book coming out? And, then I want to do a memoir of my husband, A. W. Willis, and then maybe my own memoir. Story_ID: 180041 Speaker 1: I hope you pick your own memoir. Speaker 2: Thank you. Thank you. Speaker 1: So, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: My kids are, have asked me that. Primari--my major contribution, I think is my, my children. I'm really, really, proud of them and I have not talked about them at all. My--I have a son and three daughters. My son is a judge in Memphis [Tennessee]. He's following in his father's footsteps, even though he looks just like my father. My oldest daughter was a Spanish--she was a flight attendant and she's now--she was a Spanish teacher, and now she's a full-time mom, doing a great job. My second daughter was in government and then decided that was not for her; went back to school, got another Master's in education and she now teaches. And, then my youngest daughter has been doing a variety of jobs. She's now back in Memphis. So, my major contribution, you know--I kind of have agreed with Jackie Kennedy [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis], if you don't do something right as a mother, you know, then the rest is not worth anything. So, I would say number one, that's my major contribution. Number two, I think the scholarship is what I'd like to be remembered for, the books, because even my students are tremendously important. But, what I think of what last beyond you, it's the written word. So, I think what I've written, because what my main goal in life through everything, through raising my children, through my teaching, through my scholarship, is to preserve and honor the memory and the contributions of the ancestors and the wonderful creative gifts that they have bestowed on each succeeding generation. Beginning not only with my own ancestors, but you know, those who came from Africa under all kinds of just difficult circumstances; that they, that they lived, and they created, and they passed on values, and they passed on stories, and they had these tremendous creative gifts; that's what my life has been involved in; preserving those contribution and passing those on to the next generation. And, whether it's in my teaching, or whether it's in my scholarship, or whether it's in the lives of my children and grandchildren, you know; that's how I want to be membered, be remembered, as a culture bearer. Story_ID: 180042 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, this is something that's been on my mind since you were talking about your early political activism, and I'm concern--what I wanna know, what is our opinion of the state of political leadership now, and in relationship to--for example, you mentioned professional blacks were so grounded in the community in Memphis [Tennessee], and do you still feel the same way about the class of professional blacks, in terms of their connection to the black community? And, has that changed in your opinion?--(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's a difficult and complex question, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's been on my mind since-- Speaker 2: I think those of us who were involved in the movement of the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], you know, have a tendency to look at the young people and be just very, very negative about them. I am not discouraged. I see a lot of problems that have emerged. In, in, some ways, it was simpler for us back then because everything was black and white (laughter), in every sense of the word, literally and figuratively. And, you knew who the enemy was and you knew what have to be done, so it was easier. I mean, I look at my own kids and they don't, they don't share some of my beliefs and values. I understand that, mine are grounded in particular time and place. And, people now, I mean, there, there simple things like, you know, your leaders were definite. You had [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], you had Malcolm X, you had Stokely Carmichael, you had, you know. We no longer have a leader. Now, maybe that's good, (laughter) because then that leader can no longer can be assassinated, you know. I look at our communities and it is disheartening, you know. I mentioned the community in which I lived, by the way, when Russ [DeCosta-Willis' first husband HM Russell Sugarmon, Jr.] and I moved, we moved into the all-white community within two days, all the For Sale signs went up. And, what had happened before, all the neighbors got together and tried to buy us out, that didn't work. So, and, and what has happened, we lived in a community where we knew everybody. Where you had postmen living next to teachers, living next to doctors, living next to maids, you know, there was just a vibrant community; that no longer exist 'cause people can living everywhere, and they should be able to live everywhere. They're all out in the suburbs here in Washington [D.C.], you know. And, our community such as it is, is falling apart. We have drugs, we have [HIV] AIDS, we have all these things. But, these, these are the years in which we're living. And, I think every age feels like its age is the worst. The challenge is the difference. And, I think that, I hope that the young people will rise to them. But, as an elder who lived and grew up and matured in a different time, I cannot pass judgment on today's young people. You know, it's up to them. And, you know, I see people like you [Kelly Navies]. I see people like my neighbors. I see people like my, my best friend's daughter. I see my own kids, you know, these are wonderful young people; bright, talented, all kinds of opportunities, you know. Surely, there gonna make a contribution. It'll be in a different way, but, I'm very hopeful. Story_ID: 180043 Speaker 1: So, do you have any final thoughts of something you'd like to share that I didn't ask about? Speaker 2: Oh gosh, you asked so many things, I can't, I can't think of what--I bridged two periods and some of us were talking about that, I came up in a very traditional period where things were kinda given to us. I think I've changed a lot to adapt to new circumstances. I much more questioning now than I used to be. And, I think I'm very fortunate to have moved from a very traditional kind of upbringing to one that's much more opened, much more free, sexually, politically, psychologically, in every way. I am very blessed to have embraced three (laughter) fourths of the Twentieth Century. And, now to be in the Twentieth-- Twenty-First Century, you know, looking forward to all of that. My life has been a blessing. There've been many challenges and many hardships which I don't dwell on. But, with each thing has come a learning experience. I'm a product--I've had serial marriages. I've had serial relationships. I've had serial careers, and that's been wonderful. Had I been born in 1900, that would not be possible. And, I'm very blessed to have two parents [Frank DeCosta and Beautine Hubert DeCosta] who turned me loose. I told my mother, on one of our car trips back to Baltimore [Maryland]; I said, "Mother, you know, you were such an unusual parent, you and my father. Because all of the people I knew in Orangeburg [South Carolina]," which is, was my home town, "are still there, still married to the same people, still stuck in the same rut." They had a wider vision for me. And, that was my saving grace. So, I'm very blessed in the parents I had, in the teachers I had, in the experiences that I had, even the negative ones; even the racist experiences, and the sexist experiences, all of that. Oh, I have not mentioned, I am a feminist. I'm very much, not only a product of the 1960s Civil Rights Movement, but also the 1970s Feminist Movement. And, I have raised my daughters to stand on their own feet, and be fighters. And, I think that is owing to my mother, 'cause she was a feminist. She would not label herself as such. But, she was definitely a feminist. She always taught us, you know, even though you're married, make sure you have your own money. Make sure you have your own job, you know. Make sure you're your own person. So, it's been a good life, and I'm looking forward to another twenty [years] or so. Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Speaker 2: You're welcome. Story_ID: 180044 Speaker 1: --Taken in Boston, Massachusetts in 1938, I believe it was, when my father [Frank DeCosta] was assistant director at Camp Atwater [North Brookfield, Massachusetts], up in Massachusetts. And, it's a photograph of my father, Frank DeCosta; mother, Beautine [Hubert DeCosta]; myself, [HM] Miriam [DeCosta-Willis]; and my brother Frank [DeCosta, Jr.]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Hold it (Unclear). Speaker 1: Oh, sorry. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Just want to make sure there's a--what I'm doing is check. Each one needs to have be sized for the-- Speaker 1: Turn the long way. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, long way (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's a photograph of my great-grandfather, Zachery Hubert, who was born a slave, and his wife, Camilla Hubert, on, on their property in Hancock County [Georgia]. And, he is the one that we consider the two of them are the sort of the beginnings of the family. But, he's the descendant of a slave woman, Sally, who was brought to this country in 1760. Speaker 1: The photograph of the four--of four generations of the DeCosta women. My mother on the right, Beautine Hubert DeCosta; I'm at the top, second generation, Miriam. To the left is my daughter, Elena, my oldest daughter. And, then her daughter, Angelique [ph.] and that was taken in 1992. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Great. Next. Speaker 1: This photograph was taken at the time of my mother's second marriage. My father died in 1972, and she remarried in 1976. To the left is my brother, Frank and his wife, and scattered among them are his three children. My mother is to my brother's left. I'm there, my second husband, A.W. [Willis], and my four children, and that was taken in front of my brother's house in 1976. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Great. Next. Speaker 1: That's a photograph of my second husband, A. W. Willis, Jr., who was an attorney. We married in 1972 and he died in 1988. He was the first black elected to the Tennessee State Legislature since Reconstruction. And, I think that would have been about 1973 [sic, 1964] that he was elected. He was also a mortgage banker, business man, interested in town, downtown development; very active politically, too. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right. Next. Speaker 1: Those are my four children; Tarik [Sugarmon] the eldest who is in the back, my only son. My daughter Erika on the left, my daughter, Elena, in the middle, Monique on the right, and two of my grandchildren; Gregory [ph.] and Kenny [ph.]. And that picture was taken in 1988. Speaker 2: Those are my maternal grandparents, John Wesley Hubert and Lillie Jones Hubert. That's their wedding partridge, and I think they married in 1904. He was one of twelve children who attended Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] or Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and she was also a graduate of Spelman. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Very good. Next. Speaker 2: That's a photograph of [HM] Maxine Smith who was executive secretary of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. She is to--she's the second person on the right. I'm the first person on the right. And, we were going into the courthouse. That picture was probably taken in 1969. And, it represent our leading group of Memphis [Tennessee] citizens into the courthouse to protest the segregation of schools and to reinforce our demand that the school board be integrated. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) Scott, can you please tell me if you we have a clean frame of it, and great. Got that (unclear). All right. Speaker 2: This is a photograph, is was taken in 1969], and I have my fist raised there and a black power (laughter) salute. The person with me is the Reverend Ezekiel Bell, and we were both involved in the school situation in Memphis and the movement to boycott schools. So, there I'm exhorting the crowd there to leave school and participate in the Black Monday demonstration. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. For captioning the spelling of Reverend Bell's last name. Speaker 2: B-E-L-L. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Great. Next. Speaker 2: This photograph was taken probably about 1957. I was on the faculty of LeMoyne College [later, LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] and that's one of the senior citi--senior students, Carl Johnson, who later became--he's been a member of the school board now for many, many years. But, we did a cultural program combining poetry, dance, readings, music, et cetera at one of the local TV stations and that was the first time that that TV station did, aired a program featuring blacks. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Great. Next. Speaker 2: This photograph was taken in front of LeMoyne-Owen College [Memphis, Tennessee] where I was working at the time and it depicts me in my PhD robe. I'd just received my doctorate and my husband is standing behind me and three of my four children are there with me. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That photograph was probably taken about 1963 in my parent's home in Baltimore [Maryland]. My brother is in the back on the left; my sister-in-law, my husband, [HM] Russell Sugarmon. My parents are seated in the front and I'm next to them pregnant with my fourth child. Three of my children are there and also my nephew, Frank the III. So, that's a three generational family photograph. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 2: Photograph of my brother, Frank and me taken in about 1939 in Charleston, South Carolina, which is where I first began school. And, I--we were both attending Avery Elementary School [ph.] at the time. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 2: The probably Wilkinson High [later, Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School, Orangeburg, South Carolina] tennis team, and I'm in the front on the right-hand side and those are my close girlfriends, my brother is in the back along with several of our other friends. What happened was, the American Tennis Association, which was the black tennis association, had its national tournament in Orangeburg, South Carolina in about 1947. And, all of us really got caught up in playing tennis. So, that was probably taken in 1948. And, we began traveling to all the national and local tennis tournaments. And, I was national girls' runner up; playing at a time when Althea Gibson was the champion women's player, tennis player in the ATA. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Could you reach forward and just point out yourself and your brother. Hang in there. Speaker 2: Okay. I'm here in the front. And, my brother is there in the back. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Great. Okay, next photo. Speaker 2: (Unclear) when I went to a regional tournament because it doesn't look familiar. It's not in Orangeburg [South Carolina]. It was probably at one of the tennis tournaments. But, what my parents did after we became interested in tennis, was every summer we would go to these different cities to play tennis against the different kids that were out there, my brother and I. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. You did give us the year for this? Speaker 2: I think that would have probably been 1948 or 1949. Probably 1949. Story_ID: 179876 Speaker 1: --With four of my girlfriends. And, I mentioned all of us went to the training school [Felton Laboratory School, South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. Two of us on that picture got doctorates and one is a medical doctor and it's just an example of, of the kinds of products that this little tiny town turned out. Speaker 2: What are their names? Speaker 1: One is Carolyn Weber [ph.], who is a good friend of mine. Barbara Jenkins Williams [ph.]-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Can you go from--what would be left to right when it's oriented vertically? Speaker 1: Can I take it up? 'Cause I had-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Sure. Speaker 1: Actually, I don't remember. Miriam, Barbara, Jane, okay. Speaker 2: There I am on the left. Barbara Thompson [ph.], Barbara Williams, Carolyn Weber, and Jane Lamar Dawkins [ph.]. Speaker 1: And, this was what year again? Speaker 2: This would have been about 1949. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And, then you could also repeat the locations, I was in pre-roll. Speaker 1: That's at South Carolina State College [later, South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] in Orangeburg, South Carolina. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And, was there a particular occasion that you were all together? Speaker 1: I don't know. We were all dressed up. So, it may have been Easter or something, I'm not sure. I don't remember. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 1: That's one of the few photographs from my college days. And, I'm in the second row on the left-hand side. Those are all young women from Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] and we were at Cape Cod [Massachusetts] for a week organizing, planning, developing, our junior show. And, this is something that each junior class put on every year and I was the choreographer for the group. Those were in my dancing days. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Next. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Hey, let me take a look at it. I didn't get a chance to see. (Laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Too small to hold up to the frame. Speaker 1: (Unclear) people to the (laughter) tennis court. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Go ahead. Speaker 1: This photograph is of my large extended family. My husband, second husband, A. W. Willis and I are in the middle. And, those are all of our children. I had four, he had five, and those are our grandchildren. This photograph was taken in 1988, probably about five months before he died, in our home in Memphis, Tennessee. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Good. Speaker 1: That was a language conference that I attended in Missouri. And, in the front, in the striped sweater is Nancy Morejon, a Cuban poet about whom I had written. And, the other people there are literary critics, who also attended the conference. But, it's an example of the kinds of things that we participated in and also an example of the kind of cohesiveness of the Afro-Hispanist in the field. And, oh, I'm there in the front and there's one of my good friends, Jan Hampton. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And, if you could, just for our caption on this, give the correct spelling of Morejon. Speaker 1: Morejon is M-O-R-E-J-O'-N, Morejon. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: There I'm at a restaurant with three of my graduate students when I was teaching at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County [Baltimore, Marylnad]. All of those young women have gone on. The one on the left, Belinda, is completing her doctorate at the University of Maryland College Park [College Park, Maryland]. And the other two are teaching. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 1: That's a group of writers and literary critics. We call ourselves the five M's and a T. Because five of us have names that began with M, and one of them is a T. There's Toi Derricotte, who is a poet. There I am. There's Maxine Clair a distinguished novelist. Marita Golden also a novelist. Marilyn [ph.] who is a literary critic, and Mary Helen Washington, who's also a literary critic. And, we meet periodically to see plays, and have dinner, and have fun. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Great. Next. Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in Costa Rica, also at a conference on Afro-Hispanic Literature. And, we're depicted in front of our bus with our guide here. And, I think we're on our way to Puerto Limon [Costa Rica], which is on the Atlantic Coast, and, which is an area that was settled by blacks who came from Jamaica, Trinidad, et cetera. So, they're bi-lingual, they speak both English and Spanish. But, they're Costa Ricans. So, we're on our way there to see them. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 1: That's one of my earliest photographs of my father [Frank DeCosta] and me. And, it's a photograph that I intend to use in my book on him, which will deal with kind of his education and by education and the influence that he had on my life. That was taken in Florence, Alabama. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Great. Next. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I got a good friend from Sheffield. Speaker 2: Oh, really? Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I've been there in Sheffield-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Hello. Can I have a little more (unclear) something is giving me a glare. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Let me see if I wrote on the back. Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in 1995 in Memphis [Tennessee] at a bookstore where I gave a reading from 'The Memphis Diary of Ida B. Wells' [edited by HM Miriam DeCosta-Willis], and with me is one of the grandnieces of Ida B. Wells, who lives in Memphis. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Do me a favor. Flip that vertically 'cause I'm gonna do each photo individually so we can get a better resolution. We'll start with the top. Speaker 2: This picture is of my grandmother, Lillie Jones Hubert. It was taken in Savannah, Georgia in the early part of the Twentieth Century. And, next to her is my grandfather, John Wesley Hubert, and I think this was taken soon after they got married. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Very good. Next. Speaker 2: That's a photograph of my father taken when he was a student at Lincoln University [Chester County, Pennsylvania] in the late 1920s, probably taken about 1928 or 1929. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 2: That photograph is my ma--my paternal great-great-great-grandmother, Martha Adams DeCosta. And, this photograph probably would have been taken about 1878, something like that. She was my father's grandmother, Martha DeCasa--DeCosta. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's a photograph of my great-grandfather, Benjamin DeCosta. The husband of Martha Adams DeCosta. And, he died about 1970 something. So, this was probably taken in the early part--I mean 18, 1870 it was probably taken in the early 1870s. Because he died quite young, in his thirties. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 2: Now you have two pictures of him already, so. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Are we on top or bottom? Speaker 2: Oh, I thought you were gonna do the top, as you did the other one. The top one. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): But, okay, so I wasn't sure. Okay. Speaker 2: The first photograph is of my maternal great-great-grandmother Georgia Jones Jones. She married a Jones. And, this was probably taken in Atlanta [Georgia], maybe in 1905. The other photograph is of her husband, the Reverend Willie Jones, and he was pastor of the first African Baptist church. The first independent black Baptist church in the country, and that's in Savannah, Georgia. And, he also had a church in Atlanta. He too, died very young. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 2: Well, that's good. Speaker 1: This is my grandmother, Anna Hamburg DeCosta, who was born in about 1875, and died about 1929. And, her father was a German immigrant, Hamburg..