 Story_ID: 654979 Speaker 1: We just slate the interview. My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer; and I, and Daniel Jackson is observing. And I want you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us. So we're just slating the interview at this point. Speaker 2: My name is Chaz Hammel-Smith Ebert, C-H-A-Z, Hammel-Smith, H-A-M-M-E-L, hyphen, S-M-I-T-H, Ebert, E-B-E-R-T. Or I can also be listed as just [HistoryMaker] Chaz Ebert. Speaker 1: Ebert, right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So can--yeah, we put that as your preferred name. So I want you to give me your date of place of birth and today's date. Speaker 2: Today's date is August 8th, 2017 [sic. August 7, 2017], and I was born on October 15th, 1952, which I usually don't like to say, in Chicago, Illinois. I usually--I, for years I did not. Even my children [Josibiah Smith and Sonia Evans] didn't know how old I was. I stopped telling my age when I was eleven years old. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, 'cause you know I remember one, one time we were interviewing a woman and her like, I think she was like ninety-four and she was like, and I said just, just, just go with it at this point. Just let it go (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know. Speaker 1: And so I want to also know-- Speaker 2: Let me just tell you, I have asthma so sometimes my lungs, I may have to stop to cough. Speaker 1: Okay. I have asthma too. It's horrible. I hate asthma. But anyway, I'd like to have your occupation. Speaker 2: I am the CEO of several Ebert companies that focus primarily on movies. And I also am a publisher and a producer. Speaker 1: And a lawyer too, though you haven't practiced in a long time. Speaker 2: I am a non-practicing attorney, yes. I actually retired from the law in about 1990 when I became the vice president of the Ebert Company [Ebert Company, Ltd.] (simultaneous). Story_ID: 654980 Speaker 1: So I want to--we ask five People magazine-ish questions. Just short answers. Your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food. I don't know. Can I do my favorite dessert? Speaker 1: Yes you can do it. Speaker 2: My favorite dessert is probably ice cream. Speaker 1: That was mine too--okay your favorite time of year. Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is, is an amalgam of spring and summer because I like the part of spring that is the hope of all new things and things in bloom and the promise of what is to come, and then it blossoms into summer that's warm and sunshiny, so it's that sweet spot of the transition from spring to summer. Speaker 1: Lovely, that was lovely stated. Okay and your favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: My favorite place to vacation--I am such a--it's almost--it's so difficult to get one answer from me because my favorite place to vacation is almost any place where I can rent a villa with my family. So whether that's in the English countryside, if it's in--I like renting villas in France. I like renting villas in Jamaica or Barbados. Almost any place where I can rent a, a house with enough bedrooms and land for me and my family to retreat from the world is my favorite place to be. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. Even that my favorite phrases are an old African proverb, fall down seven, get up eight. If you wanna get something done, ask a busy person. And I'll leave the--I'll use those two. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Did we get color? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, favorite color. Thank you, thank you Scott [Scott Stearns]. Favorite color. Speaker 1: My favorite color is an amalgam of colors and swirling colors and patterns. My favorite colors are actually the colors of the color spectrum that you can see only in sunlight or rainbows. So they're off the middle spectrum of color. And I actually like the colors that you can see only through filtered light or after rainbows. Speaker 2: That is so--you know you're unique in that--that was lovely. I just wanna say that (laughter) I've never--we do a lot of these interviews, that- that's lovely. Story_ID: 654981 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about your family-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --background and you know I'd like to start with your father. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And if you could give his name and either year or date of birth and what you know about his side of the family. Speaker 2: Did you, excuse me. Did you bring that--the family--but I think I know it offhand. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father's name is Wiley, W-I-L-E-Y, Wiley J. Hammel [Wiley Hammel, Sr.], and he was born I think in 19--1910 or 1911. He was born in Talbotton, Georgia, and I think he came from a small family. I think his father [Will Hammel] was a preacher and I remember--I think he had maybe a brother and a sister. I remember my Aunt Emma [Emma Hammel], my father's sister. But his family died out at a very young age, so I don't know a lot about his side of the family. Speaker 1: So did he talk about growing up in Talbotton, Georgia? Did he-- Speaker 2: He did. Dad was very--played things very close to the vest. He was very quiet. He was--I imagine he was a deep thinker, but he didn't share a lot of information with us. He had some good friends that he worked with and, but you didn't hear him talk a lot. I do remember--and that's why all the experiences that I talk about with my dad are even more profound because he was so quiet. He was just one of those quiet men who took care of his family and stayed within the boundaries of the law; I mean he was law abiding and a good neighbor. He liked to keep his property with where, you know where we lived, our yard was always like one of the neatest yards. He'd come home from work and mow the lawn and you know plant flowers with my mother [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel] and--but he didn't interact with a lot of people. And my mother said that's how his family was too; that they--in fact my, I said my great--that would have been my grandfather had a church in Georgia. But I think it was like mainly family members or varied people, neighbors close by. So the one thing I do remember, one of my biggest memories of my dad is when Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was marching in Chicago [Illinois] in 1966 and my father didn't talk about a lot about growing up in the South. But that night we knew Dr. King was gonna be marching on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] for fair housing. And my dad didn't really even say much. He said, "We're gonna go march with Dr. King," which really shocked me because my, my mother was the kind who would maybe demonstrate or, or, or fight. She was very active in a lot of clubs and things; dad wasn't. He was quiet, he sort of stayed in his lane. But I could see how much that meant to him. And he talked about, he said, you know, "So many people--." I don't know if he used the word died. He said, "There are so many people who sacrificed for the right to vote and we're gonna go march with Dr. King and for the, for equal rights." I don't remember the exact words, but I remember he came and he took my hand and we marched. And that's one of my best memories ever. And I was so proud of him and, and, and I did ask my mother, I said, "Why did dad do this but I don't see him doing some other things?" And she said, "He endured a lot when we lived in Georgia." And, and I wish I knew what that meant, even today I wonder what that meant, but--what it means. Story_ID: 654982 Speaker 1: So your mother, can you give her name and what her date of birth was and place of birth; and what you know about her family background? Speaker 2: Yes. My mother is Johnnie, Mrs. Johnnie Hammel, Johnnie Mae Hammel. She was a Hobbs, it was Johnnie Mae Hobbs, H-O-B-B-S [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel]. She was born in May of 1914, and she and my dad [Wiley Hammel, Sr.] married in Georgia, but they moved to Chicago [Illinois] when I think my first brother, my first sister was born in maybe 1930 something. And I think they moved in to Chicago right after the, either the first or their second child was born. Speaker 1: Did, did she-- Speaker 2: And she was born in Thomaston, Georgia. Speaker 1: Thomaston. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know my mother's side of the family is from Thomaston 'cause that's not far from Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Yes, right. And I think they used to have a cotton mill or something there. Speaker 1: That's exactly right. You never know. Speaker 2: A lot, have a lot--we could be related. I have a lot of relatives there. Speaker 1: Well you know we just had a family reunion down there. And there was family you know, interesting history there. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 654983 Speaker 1: But I, I wanna--so did they--how did they meet? Do you know how they met? Speaker 2: (Cough) Excuse me. I did hear the story of how they met a long time ago and I don't remember because the towns, it is. I'd like to know--I, I wish I could remember the story. Did Uncle Johnny [John Hammel] say? No? Speaker 1: So let me ask you this. Did your mother [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel] share any stories of growing up in Thomaston [Georgia], did she ever say that? Speaker 2: She did. Mother took me and my younger sister Donna [Donna Hammel] to Thomaston in 1958 to visit. And we were the cousins from up north. And we were so excited to go down south and because my, my relatives there had farms and I remember chasing chickens and, and I remember one vivid memory, I have is of with my cousins, we were chasing chickens and I saw my aunt grab a chicken and snap the neck. And I said, "Why did she do that? Why did she kill the chicken?" And they said, "That's going to be our dinner." And I said, "What? You kill chickens down here?" They said, "Don't you eat chicken up north?" I said, "Yes we do, but we don't kill them; we go--they make them in the back of the store and you get them in this package." And they said, "You're so dumb. You don't know that all chicken come--it's all the same. This is how they start off. Is that what you think up north?" And my, my father [Wiley Hammel, Sr.] was a little embarrassed. He said we were--we needed to go south more often so that we could learn about planting food and animals and, and nature and everything (laughter). Speaker 1: (Cough) That was--he was probably saying, "What have I raised here? They don't know anything" (laughter). Story_ID: 654984 Speaker 1: You have, how many children are in your family? Speaker 2: I had four brothers and four sisters that I grew up with. There was another brother George [George Hammel] who lived until he was three years old, but he died before I was born. So I grew up with four brothers and four--so there were nine of us. I count nine because--only because George died before I was born. Speaker 1: Right. So can you give the names and in birth order? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: From your oldest to the youngest. Speaker 2: Do you have that? Speaker 1: Where do you fit? Speaker 2: I really want you to pull that sheet out in case we need it for something. Yes, my oldest sister Carrie, C-A-R-R-I-E [Carrie Hammel New], was born in--when mom [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel] and dad [Wiley Hammel, Sr.] lived in Georgia. And my oldest brother Johnnie [Johnnie Hammel] was born in Georgia. And I think that all the rest of the brothers and sisters were born in Chicago [Illinois], maybe my sister Martha [Martha Hammel] and my brother Wiley, Jr. [Wiley Hammel, Jr.], my brother Sam, Samuel [Samuel Hammel], my sister Adele [Adele Hammel Flowers], my brother Andre, then I think it's me and my sister Donna [Donna Hammel]. Seems like I skipped someone. How many? Speaker 1: One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I thought you did eight. But let's see, you can check. Speaker 1: Eight. You did eight so you would be nine. Speaker 2: That's right, okay. Speaker 1: You were right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: My sister Carrie was born in 1936. Johnnie was born in 1937. Martha was born in Chicago in 1939. Wiley was born in 1941. Samuel was born in 1942. My brother George was born in 1944 [sic. 1948] but he died in 19--I think he lived for about three years. My sister Adele was born in 1949. My brother Andre, Steven Andre [Steven Hammel] was born in 1950, and then I was born in 1952. And my younger sister Donna was born in 1954. Speaker 2: When you think about that, your mother was having babies. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: She was, she was--sometimes at--I mean you know she was going 1939, 1940. Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So she--and that was a different time back then. Speaker 1: Back then people had large families. Speaker 2: They, they had large families. Carryover from the farm in some respects, you know. Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 654985 Speaker 1: So tell me about early life growing up and what--because you're coming in, you're at the tail end, so you don't even (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm second youngest. Speaker 1: You're second youngest, so you don't-- Speaker 2: But I was always treated like one of the older ones in the family. Our family used to have family meetings. So if you had like a family council meeting. And it would be maybe Martha [Martha Hammel] and Carrie [Carrie Hammel New], Johnnie [Johnnie Hammel] and Wiley [Wiley Hammel, Jr.] and I would be sitting maybe on the floor cross legged, listening to what they say or decisions they were making and they would actually consult me sometimes about things that were happening. So I always felt like they're--like one of the elders in my family, even though I was the second youngest. I was always treated like one of the older ones. And even to this day it's that way. Speaker 1: So were you not precocious you think (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I was precocious. I, I, I knew it and they would tell me. In fact, my first memory of anything, any memory--my first memory in the whole world is being in my crib and my sister Martha who was my favorite sister, looking--dressing me and telling me that I was the prettiest, smartest, the best thing ever. I mean I remember her telling me all these things and I remember my older sister Carrie looking in the crib and saying, "You think you're so cute, don't you? Martha's always telling you that." I remember that as a little kid. And as a little ba- I mean I was in the crib. So I must, must have been a baby and I remember my sister Martha used to dress me up in little frilly clothes and take me to visit her friends. And now this part I don't really remember, but Martha would laugh and say, "You always had an eye for things. You would look and see the way someone's books were assembled on their shelves and you would say you know, 'That's the wrong order. You should--if you did it like this, it would look better.' And my friends would say, 'Your little sister is so weird. Why is she always saying stuff like that?'" And Martha said, "Well she just knows." So Martha was my favorite sister and I remember she got married in 1959 and I remember when my brother-in-law Harry [ph.] took her on a train after the wedding to take her away from me. I cried every day when she was gone. I used to write letters to her and I signed them, your twin sister. We always called each other twin sisters, so-- Speaker 1: That is lovely. So you, so she would--you were her adopted, I mean not adopted, but-- Speaker 2: I was like--she called me her little baby doll. Speaker 1: Little baby doll, that's wonderful. Speaker 2: And but, but you know the thing that I have to say about my family is this: my mother [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel] was like the most loving person that I ever met in my life. She was so kind and she almost never said anything negative. She did sometimes, but almost never. And she loved us all so much that at her funeral, we were surprised because we each thought we were the favorite child. So when she passed away we were at the funeral and everyone, every brother and sister who got up to speak said, "I was my mother's favorite child." And then the other one got up, "No, I was the favorite." We actually all thought we were her favorite. So how you could do that with nine children, I don't know. The only one who wasn't there, one daughter Carrie died before my mother, but everyone else was there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And she was the oldest. Speaker 2: She was the oldest. Speaker 1: She was the oldest. Story_ID: 654986 Speaker 1: Tell me what growing up was like; and where were you living? Speaker 2: I lived at 1244 South Racine [Avenue], at Racine and Roosevelt [Road], across the street from St. Ignatius [Holy Family Church, Chicago, Illinois]. And we lived in--I, I don't know what you'd--I know they called it the village. And it was also maybe Robert Taylor public housing [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Robert Taylor wouldn't have been over there. Speaker 2: No, it's Taylor on the--Robert Brooks [Robert Brooks Homes, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: I don't know what--okay. Speaker 2: I don't know what you call them. But it was over--but I was--Racine and Roosevelt. And-- Speaker 1: That was the entry point for a lot of black people from the South, um-hm. Speaker 2: My, my, my family had actually lived several different house--places before then. Are those addresses here? Speaker 1: I don't think we ask that. Speaker 2: You don't need that. Speaker 1: No, no. It would be good if we had it, but we--I don't think we ask that in our question. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (Cough) So, so do you, so 1244 South Racine, that's a-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So this is--you're born in 19-- Speaker 1: Fifty-two [1952]. Speaker 2: --fifty-two [1952]. Story_ID: 654987 Speaker 1: So can you describe--take me back to a time of memory. You know you gave me the example, you know, with you in the crib, and tell me about what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. Italian ice reminds me of that because we lived near the Taylor Street neighborhood. And we used to go and buy Italian ice from the Italian vendors who lived near our neighborhood. And also you know sometimes I, I, I was recently at a, at an event where there--the people from the CHA, the Chicago Housing Authority. I was sponsoring some young women from there as emerging filmmakers. And I was telling them when I was growing up there, first of all just about all the houses, just about all my neighbors--I can even name them today. Speaker 1: Can you tell me-- Speaker 2: And they had a mother and a father. You know the Carol family, Mr. and Mrs. Carol [ph.] who lived two doors down from us, they had something like fourteen children. But Mr. and Mrs. Carol were together and they raised their children together in that house. We had the Jackson [ph.] family who lived--in fact it was so unusual not to have a father that we used to sort of feel sorry for the kids whose fathers had passed away or didn't live with them for some reason. That was unusual back then because just about everybody in our neighborhood had a mother and a father. So we also had to take care of our lawns. We had a front yard and a backyard. I lived in a--I didn't live in a high rise, we lived in townhouses. So these were two story townhouses. We had four bedrooms, a duplex. So we lived on the--there's a living room and dining room, no a living room and a kitchen, combined dining room kitchen with a pantry on the first floor. And then on the second floor we had four bedrooms and one bathroom. Speaker 1: Now were these, were these homes or were--you had mentioned, you know, housing project [Robert Brooks Homes, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: This is public, yeah it is. Speaker 1: Public housing. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was public housing, but it was built like a, like townhouses, duplexes with an upstairs and a downstairs and a front yard and a backyard. And they were connected, it was block housing, so they were connected. But each--you each had your individual unit. Story_ID: 654988 Speaker 1: So I was asking you. So let's go through, so you have neighbors. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Are there a lot of kids playing on the street? You know is there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes. We, we were--that's the other thing that's to me kind of funny and sad about today. We used to go out to play and you played out all day. We had a gangway that they called it where kids--where we would jump rope. And there was a playground nearby. I think it was called Fosco Park [Chicago, Illinois]. And you would go play on a seesaw or the swings and you didn't have--your mom and dad didn't take you. I mean you would just go with the kids. All the kids would just sort of go out and play; but you knew to be back home by a certain time. And I think the lights would come on a certain time of night and you knew to come home for dinner. Also, you just knew--well in my house you had to check back several times during the day. There was no such thing as just going out and being gone all day without checking in at home. My parents [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel and Wiley Hammel, Sr.] were a little stricter than some of my--at the time we resented it a little bit because my friends could just go and do what they wanted to do and get money and run off to the store and buy candy and, and we had to check in with our parents. And now I, I appreciate that discipline and that accountability that we had. But back then, you know. Speaker 1: So you, so you live--so it's Racine [Avenue] and what you're talking about is a, maybe a several block area? Speaker 2: Yes. And on, on our side of the street from Racine and going back--what direction would that be? Maybe going back west, were these, the townhomes. Across Racine and Roosevelt [Road], there were sixteen story high rises. And then St. Ignatius church [Holy Family Church, Chicago, Illinois] was over there. And then the other--I wish I could remember the name of this housing because one of them they made into a museum. They--where I lived, they tore down. I went looking for it one time, it's torn down. But they preserved one of the houses near there, a Brooks, or Robert Brooks [Robert Brooks Homes, Chicago, Illinois] or Robert Abbott [sic.] or something. There's one house that they preserved to make it a museum to show what the housing was like back then. Speaker 1: So that's on Racine right now. Speaker 2: No that's not Racine, that's like 13th Street or-- Speaker 1: 13th Street. So what you're talking about, is it thir- oh, you mean so it's behind, it was behind-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) where you were. Story_ID: 654989 Speaker 1: I asked my older brothers where they used to live and-- Speaker 2: Oh, that's good. Speaker 1: They were--the way they got over to the Near West Side [Chicago, Illinois] is they actually used to live on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] when they first came in, like 29th [Street] and Prairie [Avenue], 31st Street, and their house was burnt, burned down. So they lost everything. And I think when we moved into those--the housing unit over on the Near West Side, I think they were just newly built. And I--my mother [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel] told me a little bit about the, the background, the history of that at one time and I just don't remember. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I think that one of the--I think the union actually advocated for my dad to--for my family to move there after they, after they were burned out because my dad worked for the stockyards. He worked for Swift [Swift and Company] and I forget the names of all of the companies that he worked for. And I remember he was a member of the union and there was actually an article in the paper about my family, about--they called him: "Brother Hammel [Wiley Hammel, Sr.] endured hardship after fire. And even though he works all the time, he needs decent housing for his family." And I think that that was part of the impetus in getting--somebody told me that our family was part of the impetus in getting public housing built; those blocks. And we were one of the first families that moved in over there. Speaker 2: You know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So there's some history that I wish I had for you. Speaker 2: Right. You know what's interesting though, those jobs for the union, it was hard for blacks to get in those jobs-- Speaker 1: It was (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you know in the, in the, and s- Speaker 1: Back then especially. Speaker 2: Back then. Story_ID: 654990 Speaker 1: Do you remember anything about him coming home from work from the, you know from the stockyards; and, they say you could smell the stockyards too. Were--stockyards weren't located close-- Speaker 2: Well they were on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: They were on the South Side, so you were-- Speaker 2: So I never smelled that. No the thing, the only thing I remember about my dad [Wiley Hammel, Sr.], I remember that he was very good at sharpening knives. He would sharpen knives in our family and on Sundays I remember I liked to watch him cut meat, carve chicken or cut--you know take a steak and cut it into pieces. Because he worked at a meat processing plant, he knew all the cuts of meat and he knew how to cut. So I never saw anyone else's dad do that. My dad was so proficient in sharpening the knives and even when he was--had the, the strap to sharpen, his razor, straight razor to shave, all of that was so interesting to me because it was something that was very dad like to do to me. And, and, and I, I always--I don't know, it's just an image of my father made me somehow feel that he was probably--could protect us and take care of us. Speaker 1: Well you know he was almost--I think he was forty years old when you were born. Speaker 2: My parents were in their forties when I was born for sure. Probably--I thought that they were maybe even closer to mid-forties. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: When my, when my sister [Donna Hammel] was born for sure, so. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah they were old, I had older parents (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were older, so you had older parents. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: When you were coming along too-- Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 654991 Speaker 1: So who's in the household when you're there, when you're growing up? Which of your siblings are there? Speaker 2: So some of them--my oldest brother Johnnie [Johnnie Hammel] joined the [U.S.] Army so he was away part of the time. But I remember when he first came back, and then he got married very early. He, he's on his second wife, but they've been together almost, like over fifty-five years. So--but I remember when he came home from the Army and I remember his first wife. He was--I always felt very protected because I had these older brothers and they were very protective of us and--but really the first five grew up more together and the last four of us; so me, my younger sister Donna [Donna Hammel], my brother Andre [Steven Hammel] and my sister Adele [Adele Hammel Flowers]. Speaker 1: So you were the team together. Speaker 2: The four of us. Speaker 1: Were the team together. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So can you describe what life was like in the Hammel, right Hammel household? What was it like? Speaker 2: My sister Adele, my brother Andre, Don- actually all of us who--the four of us, let's talk about the four because that's--my biggest memories of the four because the others either got married or moved on. Story_ID: 654992 Speaker 1: A lot of reading. My mother [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel] worked for a while at R.R. Donnelley [R.R. Donnelley and Sons Company, Chicago, Illinois]. And my mother was a big--my mother was very smart. She didn't have a lot of formal education, but she was very smart. Education was important to her, but she read a lot. She read--like we used to subscribe--I think there were--Chicago [Illinois] had four newspapers at one time and we used to have A.M. newspapers and P.M. newspapers. Papers used to be delivered in the morning and then in the afternoon. And my parents subscribed to all the papers. And we, we read a lot. My mother always made sure we had books all around, encyclopedias. They used to sell those things door to door and so I remember reading, I remember Sundays was always family day to go for a ride in the car. My dad [Wiley Hammel, Sr.] would gather us all together and put us all in the back of his--I remember he had a Corvair [Chevrolet Corvair] I think, and we would always go visiting someone, a cousin on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] or friends of my parents, or my mother would have--back then women had a lot of social groups. So the Friendship Club was one of her church groups and there was another group she belonged to. And if we didn't go visit out, my mother would have teas. So every--back then it seemed like all the--even though we lived in what we--you know we lived in public housing [Robert Brooks Homes, Chicago, Illinois], but every woman had a tea set. And I remember we would have--invite people over for teas and my mother would have us make little tea sandwiches and she would serve tea and some little pastries and--and the Friendship Club, I'm not quite sure what they did. But they were very--if anyone was having any problems, the ladies would get together and help them. There was always something to be done or they would get together and help some group of something, someone. I don't, I don't know what the whole purpose of these clubs were, but I just remember we loved getting--helping my mother get prepared, getting ready for them. Story_ID: 654993 Speaker 1: Well you're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Cough). Speaker 1: --talking a lot of very middle class values in some ways in terms of clubs and service and-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) and those types of things. So what about church? Speaker 2: Church. My mother went to a Spiritualist church and she later became a Spiritualist minister. So when I was younger I didn't know the difference between a Spiritualist church and a Baptist church. But I knew that in--that we had seances and I guess Baptist, Baptist did not. And--but we used to have great gospel choirs and I remember having to spend too much time in church on Sundays, hours in church. That's the one thing. The church service was too long to me, but, but we loved it. We sang in the choir when we were growing up. And then when I was in grade school [John M. Smyth Elementary School; John M. Smyth Magnet School, Chicago Illinois], there was a, a boy in my class who used to play the organ at my mother's church. My mother loved this kid, and he was in my class and I think he had a crush on me and I remember him coming to my house and asking my parents if he could take me to a dance or something. He actually grew up to become a preacher and a gospel singer, his name is Calvin Bridges. And he is--and it's funny because for years I didn't see Calvin Bridges. I saw him on a bus once, got his number, hadn't seen him for probably twenty years. My mother passed away something like two weeks or sometime later. And I realized the reason I saw him on the bus after not seeing him for years, I invited him to come sing at my mother's funeral and he did because he was always one of her favorites. So it was just a beautiful memory, I think about that. But yeah, old church we had to go. My dad [Wiley Hammel, Sr.] didn't go to church too much. He would sit and that was his quiet time on Sundays while Mom and the kids went to church. Speaker 1: So what was the name of the church? Do you remember? Speaker 2: I do and I--I remember. I'm gonna--it will come back to me. Speaker 1: Okay so let me ask you--so when you say Spiritualist, is that the same as--not the holy roller churches? No it's not. Speaker 2: No, that's Pentecostal. Speaker 1: Pentaco- so you were-- Speaker 2: No, Spiritualist is where you believe that you speak with people from the other side. And so-- Speaker 1: So did you mother practice that some too? Speaker 2: My mother was very intuitive. My mother was a psychic and a lot of people, women would come to the house to ask her to read tea leaves or to interpret dreams. She didn't do it, she didn't charge money for anything like that and in fact she--we didn't even really talk about it that much. But she also was a, an herbalist and she would prepare things that now you would call, you know like organic remedies. But she was very well known in the neighborhood for having second sight or whatever they called it. They called it a lot of stuff back then but--so we knew our mother was different than the other mothers. Speaker 1: Yeah, they would say second sight. I know my sister was supposedly born with the veil over her. Speaker 2: Yes, they would say that. Yep, they said that my mom was. And something else they said about her. But Miss Johnnie [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel] was known as the woman--and in fact the girls in the neighborhood--if a girl in the neighborhood was pregnant and unmarried, she did not want to be around Miss Johnnie because she said Miss Johnnie could tell. She probably would dream about her or something and so it was, it was--I remember that was really funny (laughter). Speaker 1: So they didn't want--they didn't want her in their business (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They thought that my mother could just tell all these things. Speaker 1: (Laughter) So they didn't want, they didn't want-- Speaker 2: Yeah, her psychic abilities. Story_ID: 654994 Speaker 1: That's fascinating. So what other--so are there chores in the household? I mean are you expected to do chores and? Speaker 2: Yes we were. We each had jobs to do. We had a washing machine back then and we learned, we learned a lot of things very early. I remember being eight or nine years old and coming home from school and putting a pot, you know, washing my hands, you always--first thing you do when you go in the kitchen, wash your hands. Washing my hands and getting this big pot to put on the stove so I can get water boiling to put in some meat or some beans or something to, to help cook because we loved, I loved to cook when I was younger. And so my mother [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel] would teach us to cook and maybe she was working by then, 'cause she wasn't always working. Most times my mother came home from school, she would actually greet us with a cup of mint--she grew mint in her backyard, fresh mint. So she would make fresh mint tea for us when we would come home from school so we would have that. And yeah most, most of the years that I was growing up I remember my mother being around. But I remember she did work for a while. My dad [Wiley Hammel, Sr.] had a stroke and I think my mother got a job or something, so. Story_ID: 654995 Speaker 1: You know I also read and maybe this is at a later time that she served as a precinct captain, and? Speaker 2: Mother [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel] was a precinct captain and she used to take us to knock on doors with her to get people to vote, yes. She was very, very politically motivated. Just a very--she was, she was an organizer. So she would organize--she was always doing things, always active. She very much believed in democracy and very much believed in the fact--you know she would say--she and my father [Wiley Hammel, Sr.] like I said, they would say people died for us to get the right to vote. So they took very seriously. Mom and dad would almost get dressed up to go out to vote. So voting day was always a big deal for us at my house. And that's why if I've--you know most times I, I, I have voted from the time I was able to vote at I guess age eighteen, any time that I missed for whatever reason I would feel guilty because I felt it was, you know, we grew up thinking this was our duty to vote and participate. Speaker 1: So do you remember any activities around her as precinct captain and as--I mean or who she was associating with or discussions around the dinner table or anything like that? Speaker 2: I do remember. I remember one thing that years later had a different meaning for me. At the time I didn't understand. We lived I think in Chicago [Illinois] I think they called the wards. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And I think we may have lived in the 1st Ward. Speaker 1: You were in the 1st Ward. Speaker 2: And one of the people who was the head of that at the time was John D'Arco [John D'Arco, Sr.]. Now if you know anything about that name now, these are names that were associated with the mob, but I didn't know that as a kid, I don't know if my mother knew that. And but I don't know, I mean apparently they knew that mother could get, knock on doors and get people to get out to vote. And so they were kind to her. I remember getting some things--there, there was an incinerator at the end of each block where people would go to empty their trash. So you could get rid of your trash daily, empty it in the--there was a cinderblock thing and you just burned it. You burned it and it just came out of there; that's where everybody--and something was happening. Once I think maybe it wasn't working and people complained. Mother--she would say something and it would be repaired. So I think that she got things done for us on the block or, you know the blocks around that maybe some other people couldn't get. She was like--you know they had block captains and precinct captains and--but I, you know I don't know what all of that meant. I just knew that when I was growing up I would hear those terms. I knew she was involved with the political process in some way. Speaker 1: Well this was--I mean this is the system that is Chicago, politically. I mean the precinct captains where--I mean you had the aldermen, precinct captains, they're all like little mini mayors in some respects-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and it was a hierarchy. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 654996 Speaker 1: So where did you go to elementary school? Speaker 2: I went to John M. Smyth Elementary School [John M. Smyth Magnet School, Chicago Illinois] on--I don't know that address. I think it was--it wasn't-- Wa- not Wabash [Avenue], Washburne [Avenue]? Speaker 1: Okay and then where to junior high or middle school? Speaker 2: I went to--knew--we didn't--we only had--we had elementary school, then high school. Speaker 1: And then you went to high school. Speaker 2: First through eighth, and then I went to Richard T. Crane High School [Crane Technical High School; Richard T. Crane Medical Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois]. And that school actually still exists. They were gonna close it at one time and I was--I graduated from Crane High School in 1969. And the class of '69 [1969] went back for our fortieth anniversary to have a high school reunion, and they asked if I would lead it. And I said I would lead it only on one condition; that we go back to the high school and do something for the seniors there. So we went back to the school and we took them on a class trip to Springfield [Illinois], to the Lincoln museum, Abraham Lincoln museum [Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum] in Springfield. We organized buses and lunches and permission and free admission and everything. And then because I was on the board of the Lincoln library and the other thing we did is we gave them scholarships. The seniors who were going off to college, we gave them you know, some money and gave them scholarships. And so a few years later when the--when they were going to close and the board of education [Chicago Board of Education] was gonna close the--that school, the class of '69 [1969] went to meetings, we you know they more so than me, did a lot of things to keep that school open. And as a result today, in addition working with the community, and we were successful in keeping that school open. And it is now a college preparatory school divided into four houses. And one of the houses is the Chaz Ebert house. Speaker 1: Okay, that's lovely. Speaker 2: Yeah, so-- Speaker 1: So you've given back to your community in that way. Speaker 2: I try to. I--that meant so much to me. Story_ID: 654997 Speaker 1: So let me ask what were you like as a young person? You know what is influencing you? Speaker 2: Okay. One thing I have the best memories of my teachers. In grade school, at Smyth School [John M. Smyth Elementary School; John M. Smyth Magnet School, Chicago, Illinois] we had some of the kindest teachers. I remember Mr. Caesar [ph.] who I had a crush on in third grade, dark skin, tall, handsome teacher. And he wore white shirts and he had really white teeth. He looked like Sidney Poitier. And he would walk around the classroom and tell us he was just very authoritative like you sit there, you do this, do your homework. We all wanted to do well for Mr. Caesar. And I, I, I think it's so important to have both male and female teachers in grade school; those are your role models that you're looking at in addition to your parents. And so Mr. Caesar--I loved him as a--we had Mrs. Swain, Lanier Swain [ph.]. I remember her name. She was so sweet. She looked like--she must have been from New Orleans [Louisiana] or something. She, she, she looked like her family was probably a mixture of things, but she was so kind to us. Mrs. Gary, no Miss Gary [ph.], I remember she was not married and they were--and the person Jim Compton [HistoryMaker James W. Compton] who became the head of the Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois] and the National Urban League [sic.] at one time I think. I think he was a, a nephew of, I forget-- Speaker 1: Whitney Young. Speaker 2: Of Whitney Young. And he became, he was my third grade teacher. And I kept up with him after all the--after I grew up and so anyway we had some of the best teachers; they really cared. And they would make sure we did our homework, they taught us so many things. They taught us to be proud of ourselves and to carry ourselves a certain way. It was--I don't know if you still see that today, I don't know. Speaker 1: It's a different (clears throat)--the community right now. The commu- our community was poor, but it was never poor spirit. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know, so that, that is what has changed. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 654998 Speaker 1: So in high school [Crane Technical High School; Richard T. Crane Medical Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois]--well no I had read that at age six that you wanted to become a lawyer. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But how is that? I don't un- what around you are you seeing that-- Speaker 2: I lived next door to the family, the Mitchells [ph.]. And the Mitchells, Mr. and Mrs. Mitchell, Mrs. Mitchell had a son from a first marriage, Clayton Mitchell, who was older. And Clayton always talked about being a lawyer. He came--he was older and he moved away from home, but he came back to live with his family for a brief period of time or he would visit. And he was always so helpful to me. He, he told me I was smart and he told me you can be anything you wanna be and we talked about the law and I think at the time--I don't know if he ever became a lawyer or if he was a paralegal or what, but I knew he--there was something about the--'cause I didn't really know about lawyers except you know, maybe later 'Perry Mason.' But from when I was six, I remember forming that idea, Clayton and I forming that idea that I was going to be a lawyer. And I just knew from that moment on that was going to be it. The other thing that I wanted to be was a diplomat, or the president. Something--I remember always this--Clayton always thought this was so funny because I don't know where I got this idea from. I told him that one day I was going to be at the top of a ski slope in Switzerland and there were gonna be people from all--from different countries. And there was gonna be an international incident. And I was going to be the one to mediate the incident in Switzerland with these people from other countries. That was always my idea of myself growing up. And I don't know where that came from, but. Speaker 1: Wow. Well that's probably happened in some respect. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 654999 Speaker 1: So in high school [Crane Technical High School; Richard T. Crane Medical Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois], are you active in organizations and things like that, are you? Speaker 2: Yes. Can I look at a book or not right now, my high school yearbook? In grade school [John M. Smyth Elementary School; John M. Smyth Magnet School, Chicago, Illinois] and high school I was always either the president or the vice president or the leader or the class, the teacher's pet. But I was also a class clown. It was funny that I could be the teacher's pet and a class clown at the same thing. And that's one of the things my husband Roger [Roger Ebert] always thought was so funny about me, he called me Lucy for Lucille Ball because he said, "You can be so serious and then you have this whole other side of you that's so funny. It's just hilarious." And I was like that in school. I wanna just. I wanna go to the, 'cause I forget some of this stuff. Speaker 1: I wonder if they're producing yearbooks now. I wonder if they're going online. Speaker 2: Senior directory. This is--okay so I was in the national--I was the vice president of the National Honor Society. I was student council, I was in the Crane players, the drama club, the modern dance club, the pep club, the Spanish club. I was a pompom girl, I was in the science club. I was briefly in the ROTC [Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps], but I didn't wanna handle guns. And in the class notables, I was the most popular girl, the best dancer, the, the best looking girl, although that was just by default. Actually the best looking girl had to drop out of school and I was the runner up, so-- Speaker 1: So you were active in high school. Speaker 2: I was always active in everything, in grade school and high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And now and in college and--yeah. Story_ID: 655000 Speaker 1: When comes the decisions about colle- well you know I do wanna go back to the--you marching with your father [Wiley Hammel, Sr.]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --King because what you said--you said that that--you loved that experience, but you didn't describe it, what it meant to be, you know with them. 'Cause the whole movement, I mean there's a lot of activity in those '60s [1960s], those late '60s [1960s] you know a lot of turmoil, a lot of discussions, a lot of aspirations for the black community. So what was that--when you said that about that with your father, what were you talking about? Speaker 2: Well back then in school I was probably a member--there used to be something called the Afro American club. I was probably a member of that. And my parents--we, we, you know, one thing that we grew up were--I said we always read. But my mom [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel] and dad had these books that talked about Africa from a different standpoint than what we would hear about in school. They had these books that talked about Africa as being an advanced civilization. And we--my mother was very fair skinned and my father was very dark. So we actually grew up revering dark skin. And so there was--we, we thought it was very strange to have colorism in the world, where people said they were ashamed of their skin before the say it loud, I'm black and I'm proud movement. We, we were taught that there were--that we had been kings and queens and we knew and in Africa, you know their mathematics, and we talked about how the pyra- nobody knew how the pyramids were built and that we had come from a very advanced civilization. So my mom and dad said the things that you had to endure in the South before you were allowed to vote, poll--paying poll taxes, having those literacy tests. All of those things that they said were testing people and trying to exclude people who were, you know, at one time we called ourselves Negroes and then black, then Afro Americans, but trying to exclude people of color. They just thought it was just wrong and undignified and humiliating. The sense that I got at that time, this is what I--when I marched with my father, and this is a sense memory that you're just calling for me. I felt that this was some way of taking back something--I don't know what he experienced that had been humiliating to him, but there, there had been. I saw a very resolve in him when he said, "We are going to march," and, "This is just wrong," and I know Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was there to, to talk about eq- open housing and fair housing. And we were marching and everybody was singing "We've got to shoo wop doo wally for our rights." That's what we sang as we marched. (Singing), "Oh we've got to shoo wop doo wally for our rights. Dr. King's gonna shoo wop--," you know we were all singing and marching on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. And I saw other fathers with their kids out there too, as well as just people and neighborhood activists and everybody marching with Dr. King. Speaker 1: Now what is shoo wop doo wally, what (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know. Speaker 1: That's (unclear). Okay. Okay, we can change. Speaker 2: I don't know what it means. It's just what we sang. Story_ID: 655001 Speaker 1: What grades do you get in school? Speaker 2: I was a very, I was a very good student, probably A's and Bs or Es when I was in grade school [John M. Smyth Elementary School; John M. Smyth Magnet School, Chicago Illinois]. I remember to this day a wound that I have is when I was in graduate school [University of Wisconsin-Platteville, Platteville, Wisconsin] and I should have had all A's and I remember a statistics instructor and one other instructor for something very trivial, mark me down from like an A to a B and I should have had all A's and I didn't. I was so angry. It happened in law school [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois] too, something happened one semester that I was supposed to have all A's and one--the instructor lost my exam. And instead of--and he was gonna give me an F but I had all these character witnesses, all the other law professors said, "Are you kidding? No, she's one of our best students." He said, "Well I don't think I lost--I couldn't have lost it; she didn't take the exam." Everybody testified, "I saw her in the class." I told him what was on the exam, and they ended up giving me a B instead of--well didn't give me an F, I didn't have to take it over. They said okay, either take the test over--this was like months later, or take a B, and I just took a B, messed up my A average, but anyway--see I still talk--this is on camera. I shouldn't even talk about this. Speaker 1: This is fine. Speaker 2: But it meant something to me at the time. Speaker 1: No, no, no, I was-- Speaker 2: When I was marked down when I had actually done the work and deserved the higher grades. Speaker 1: Right. No, 'cause I went, I went following a teacher into the, the teacher's room, you know teacher's room-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or whatever. Story_ID: 655002 Speaker 1: How do you decide where you want to go to college? Is that-- Speaker 2: Okay that was-- Speaker 1: Was this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's kind of a painful thing to talk about now. Speaker 1: It is? Speaker 2: Yes it is because, because I had tested very highly on the-- Speaker 1: The-- Speaker 2: --scholastic something (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultnaeous) The AT--SATs or AC-- Speaker 2: And there was also something else that (unclear) took. Speaker 1: ACT, it's-- Speaker 2: It was something for scholarship. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It wasn't just SAT and ACT, there was the national scholastics exam or something (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) National Merit Scholarship [National Merit Scholarship Program]? Speaker 2: Maybe it was National Merit and something. Anyway I was getting all these letters, so many letters about colleges. I have to admit that I was so ignorant, I did not know the Big Ten schools [Big Ten Conference], I didn't know Ivy League schools, I didn't know anything. And my mother [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel] was almost crying. She said don't--I said, "Mom I'm getting too many letters." Everybody thought--I had just thought everybody got all those letters. I didn't know how fortunate I was because I had tested so high, I was getting all these offers to come to school everywhere. And I was turning them down. But my mother was--she said don't--so I went to my counselor. By the time I actually started paying attention, I had gotten an offer of a scholarship at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and I turned it down because I wanted to leave town. I wanted to move away, see what it was like to live outside of the city. And I ended up going to the University of Dubuque in Dubuque, Iowa because I was late getting my application in. And, and that's where I went. And then I ended up getting a, a bachelor's degree from there and- in political science. And I got a master's [degree] from the University of Wisconsin in Platteville [University of Wisconsin-Platteville, Platteville, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: And a master's in what? Speaker 2: In, in--I think in social science, I think. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can barely remember what it was. But I remember it seems like geology was my concentration. And then I went on to law school [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois] after that. Speaker 1: Okay. So I wanna ask, so you--what year do you graduate from, from, from high school [at Crane Technical High School; Richard T. Crane Medical Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969], okay. And so you go up to the University of Dubuque, Iowa--that's totally different than the, the--? Speaker 2: Very different, yes. Story_ID: 655003 Speaker 1: How do you do there? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: 'Cause I mean they couldn't have had that many black students, right? Speaker 2: There weren't that many black students, although the year that I went they probably had more than they had any other year. That year they probably admitted more. And I've gone back since then, but yeah it was diff- it was very different. On the--when you went to like a department store, on the cash registers they would have like a little sign, "Do not cash Negroes' checks." And one of the students in--I can remember her so vividly. She was from the South, so beautiful, so very quiet, but very determined. She became a lawyer too. She actually sued them and won. She got the--their local human rights counsel to back her in a suit to take that off so that the department stores--it would be--it was illegal of course to have that on, but they don't cash Negroes' checks. And they used to follow us around the stores, the, the security guards like as if we were gonna steal stuff. And yeah, but also I was appointed to the Airport Commission there while I--when I there in Dubuque [Iowa], and also the--maybe I sat on the Human Rights Commission board or something, as a student. So-- Speaker 1: So did you grow during that time period in Dubuque? I mean and, and what are you thinking? I mean 'cause how many black students are there with you? Speaker 2: Well the school was small. I think there were only one thousand students even counting the seminary, the college and the seminary made up the university and I think there were only about one thousand students. So it was a beautiful little campus on rolling hills. But out of the one thousand, maybe twenty were black I think. Speaker 1: Twenty is large at that time. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I, and I could be getting the number conflated because there was also Loras College [Dubuque, Iowa] and, and another college. There was a girls school, Clarke College [Clarke University, Dubuque, Iowa] was the girls school and Loras College was the boys school at the time. Now they're both coed. But there were black students there, and Loras, Clark and the University of Dubuque [Dubuque, Iowa], and maybe twenty or thirty, maybe that was from all the schools together; I don't remember. Speaker 1: So (cough) you went there in 1969; then you graduate nineteen seventy th-? Speaker 2: Two [1972] I think. Story_ID: 655004 Speaker 1: But that's where--didn't you meet your first husband there, Merle Smith, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. And then you, then you, you--your father [Wiley Hammel, Sr.] dies also. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think dad died in 1971 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy-two, two, oh, I have '2 [1972], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--you know one of the things--one of the--ano- another--my two, two of my favorite memories--three of my favorite memories of my dad; marching with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] with him, how much he loved my son. My son was born when I was in school, and he and my, my mom [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel] and dad actually kept my son Jay [Josibiah Smith] at home so I could go back to school. And, and they loved my husband, my first husband. They loved Merle so much. He was--they just, they just thought he was great, and he loved them. And when dad died, I just, you know, the, the picture I have of him is when he would come home from work, my son was crawling and my son would crawl to him. He was so happy my--and my dad, like he was so quiet with us when we were growing up, but you could--with his grandkids you could see all the love he gave. You know it--the grandkids opened his heart in a way that maybe his kids didn't. Maybe his kids were more obligation, so it was more quiet with us, but you could see the joy that he had in the grandchildren. Speaker 1: So you, when you--so you were undergrad and had your-- Speaker 2: I did, yes and the children would go to school. Back then, this was the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], they had these daycare centers right at the university. So the kids, you know, sort of like the kids who go to the Lab School here [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. They had all this enrichment because they had all of these programs that were on a college campus. And so we could take our kids to class with us or take them to the daycare center. Or maybe if it wasn't on campus--because I remember we also had a Cuban babysitter at one time. I remember my daughter Sonia [Sonia Evans], if you would ask her, "Do you want a glass of water?" She wouldn't know, but you had to say (speaking Spanish), "Quieres agua?" She'd say, "Yes, quieres agua." And I, and I was taking Spanish. I took eight years of Spanish, four years in high school [Crane Technical High School; Richard T. Crane Medical Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois], four years of Spanish in, in college. I remember Shirley Chisholm came to the school [University of Dubuque, Dubuque, Iowa]. And Shirley Chisholm was fluent in Spanish I think. And I remember having to introduce her in Spanish and taking her around the university and, and I remember her telling me about being, you know, she said, "You know it's really something to be tough and be a woman and all these men try to put you down." She said, "But you just gotta keep going." I loved Shirley Chisholm. Speaker 1: She was pretty amazing. She, she ran--she's the first person, black person to run for president, actually; or first--yeah, I think she-- Speaker 2: Yes she was (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was the first black person to run for president. Story_ID: 655005 Speaker 1: So you got your bachelor's [from the University of Dubuque, Dubuque, Iowa] and then you got your master's [degree] at the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Platteville, Platteville, Wisconsin]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay and that was in Madison [Wisconsin] or you said Platteville [Wisconsin]. Speaker 2: No, I took some--I actually got it--Platteville was only about a half hour's drive from univer- from Dubuque [Iowa]. So we were still living in Dubuque and we'd drive there. But I took courses in Madison also. Speaker 1: So were you thinking you--so you got your master's and then you go to law school [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you're thinking that you still wanna be a lawyer, but you're going to-- Speaker 2: Always. The only reason I got the master's--well I loved, you know I was one of those--I wasn't a nerd, but I was one of those kids who loved learning and loved going to school. So why not get a master's? I knew we would be living--moving back to Chicago [Illinois] at some point and I knew I wanted to go to law school in Chicago. So I got the master's because we were still living in Iowa and when I--and then I applied to law school and then we moved back to Chicago. Speaker 1: So Merle [Ebert's ex-husband, Merle Smith], was he--he was an engin- was he an engin- what was the-- Speaker 2: When we moved in--yes, he was. And he worked in--I forgot what he did when we--he worked for one of the big companies when we were in Iowa, but then when we moved back to Chicago, he became an--and he worked as an electrical engineer at--I forget the name of the company he worked for. Story_ID: 655006 Speaker 1: And so you come back here; and it's what, what, what year do you come back? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: You don't remember. But is it (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I do remember. You know what? Maybe it was 1974 because I came back for law school and I graduated from law school in 1977. Speaker 1: I see, okay. So at that time I was wondering who else is black at the law school when you're there? Speaker 2: The year that I went to the law school at DePaul [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: You were at the DePaul, yeah. Speaker 2: Was one of the largest incoming classes, and I keep in touch with, with them. I remember one--as a judge La Quietta Hardy [La Quietta J. Hardy-Campbell] was in my class. I remember the class above me who's now also a judge, Toby Talmare [ph.], [HistoryMaker] Anthony Young was a ju- became a judge. Hank Aaron [ph.] was--is that his name--I know it sounds like the--he became a, a sports attorney. I can name a lot of the people who were in my class and they just about all went on to do, you know, pretty nice thing. I just had a reunion with them not too long ago. Speaker 1: You know 'cause it's interesting, but I think he's older than you. There was someone who became a federal judge named [HistoryMaker] David Coar. Speaker 2: David Coar, yes I love David Coar. He was my--he was our bankruptcy attorney. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he became a bankruptcy trustee and then a judge, yes, David Coar, yes. Speaker 1: Right. He said that DePaul had a very aggressive affirmative action program, so it was bringing people-- Speaker 2: At that time it did. Speaker 1: It did at that time, right. So you know and he said that it was a big ruck- what did he say? It would add--it wasn't a traditional student mix and there was some friction, but it was also a very dynamic place at the time. Would, would you say that around the time you were there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I agree, I, I agree. I, I enjoyed my time in law school at DePaul. Story_ID: 655007 Speaker 1: So what are you thinking you wanna do? Were you thinking any path when you came in, and what? Speaker 2: I did not know. I didn't know. I just knew I wanted to help people; whatever that meant. And I didn't know. And so [HistoryMaker] David Coar was also friends with--he was very instrumental; he used to help a lot of the students get jobs outside or do things. He was, he was so sort of hands on helpful. And he was friends with one of my--with my constitutional rights-- Speaker 1: Professor. Speaker 2: --professor, whose name was--I think his name was Allen Ginsberg [sic. Robert E. Ginsberg]. And Gins- I forget his first name, I think it was Allen Ginsberg. And he was married to Sue Ginsberg [ph.] who was an attorney at the [U.S.] Environmental Protection Agency (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: And he recommended--Coar and Ginsberg recommended me to his wife, and that's how I got-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (Simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) an interview and got my first job out of law school [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois] at the Environmental Protection Agency. Story_ID: 655008 Speaker 1: During the summers, where were you working in law school [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois], do you remember? 'Cause you're actually--you're-- Speaker 2: I was working at the preventive legal services [Croak Student Legal Services, Chicago, Illinois]. I was--well during law school--no maybe that was during the course of the year. I was doing pro bono work I think. Was it--I don't even know if it was a paid position; maybe it was, the preventive legal services. It was like a legal, legal rights--and I used to go to the prisons to help prisoners work on civil cases like you know, if, if their families needed something. Or I used to go to Statesville [Statesville Correctional Center, Crest Hill, Illinois] and Dixon [Dixon Correctional Center, Dixon, Illinois] I think was the women's prison. And--but I remember, I remember one of my last times going. It never even occurred to me that something could happen while we were in the prison. And I remember once, one of the last times I went. And it wasn't because of this incident, but I do remember one of the prisoners leaned forward, he said, "You know, you are so cute. What if we wanted to keep you in here? You couldn't do anything about it, could you?" And I was from the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], so I did not show any fear. I just said, "No you wouldn't, and who's gonna do all the work for your family out there? Don't even get a thought like that in your head." Inside, I was probably feeling scared. I was thinking, oh my goodness, I never even thought this. And I remember that door slamming the last time I was there and thought, oh my goodness, I never even thought. What if I'm on the other side of this and something happens and I can't get out? But, but I didn't, but I didn't think that because when you're, when you're doing that kind of work--I was watching being interviewed the other day. He was an interrupter with CeaseFire or one of these organizations who go to you know, the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] or the West Side and they try to interrupt the stem of violence before it, it happens. And somebody said, "You put yourself on the line when you do that. You put yourself in physical danger. You stand between these two explosive entities and you could be the one who can get hurt or killed. How often do you think about that?" And he said, "Never, I never think about it. When I go--." He said, "Yeah when you talk about it and if I gave it a lot of thought, maybe I would become afraid." He said, "But no, when you go, when you go in with the right intention and you know why you're going in there, and they know why you're coming, then you're not afraid." And that's how I felt going into the prisons, except for that one time. Story_ID: 655009 Speaker 1: How many women were in your class [at DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: You don't. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: Because, you know, still the numbers of women are (cough)--they're starting to increase around, you know the time you're coming in, right? Speaker 2: I think we had maybe about the same number of men and women at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That one class, that particular class was unusual because even the classes who came in after us didn't have as many African Americans, didn't have as many women. That year that I was in, that year--1974 I think a lot of us were admitted. Speaker 1: And what courses did you gravitate to? Speaker 2: I loved contracts. I loved intellectual property law, even torts. I mean torts was interesting because torts was kind of fun. I knew I didn't want to be a personal injury attorney, but I did like torts. And I, you know, and I'm a, I was a litigator so I became a litigator and so I was interested in any of the trial, any of the trial courses. Speaker 1: So when you-- Speaker 2: And constitutional law of course. Speaker 1: Okay, and so you're raising a family. Now is your husband [Ebert's ex-husband, Merle Smith] supportive of your--'cause law is a lot of work. Speaker 2: It is a lot of work and there were times when--you know we both came from close knit families. So the good thing is when I was in law school, both my mother [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel] and my mother-in-law would help my husband, and my brothers and sisters and my sisters-in-law would help with the, you know with the children [Josibiah Smith and Sonia Evans]. And I, and I would come home and cook and do everything. But I had to do homework and--but yeah it was, it was a lot to do. Speaker 1: 'Cause you've got two little ones. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 655010 Speaker 1: When you decide to, you know--so you get hired at the EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You talk about that. So at this time, what is the work that's being done in the, in the office here? You said it was Region Five, right? Speaker 2: Region Five, yes. At that time, this was 1977, that's right at the time that all of these laws were being promulgated. The Clean Water Act [Clean Water Act of 1977], the Clean Air Act [Clean Air Act of 1970], the hazardous waste distribution and--I mean hazardous waste disposal and whatever RCRA [Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976], and recovery, hazardous waste disposal and recover act. All of those were new laws at the time. The environmental movement was going very strong back then in that time in the '70s [1970s], much stronger than it is even today. And so I felt that I was on kind of a mission. It felt good to say I'm trying to help make the water clean and the air clean and you know one of the things that I learned that was kind of painful working at the EPA, is seeing racism in action, because one of the states that was part of Region Five was Indiana. Gary, Indiana had Mayor Richard Hatcher [HistoryMaker Richard Hatcher] was the mayor. He was such a dignified man, I loved him. And he employed a lot of the, a lot of the workers who were like you know in Chicago [Illinois]. We had the Chicago Metropolitan Sanitary District [Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago; Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago] I think it's called, whatever. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And just about everybody who ran that, they were all white. All the ones who in the--and you see now they're even now talking about some of the racism there at the sanitary district. In Gary they were all black. And I saw, and even though if there were violations at the sanitary district in an area that was run by all whites compared to Gary, I was one of the enforcement attorneys. So when I would go in with the, the attorneys for the--what do you call the attorneys for the federal government? Speaker 1: The U.S. attorney? Speaker 2: U.S. attorney's office. And we would go into settlement meetings or talking about violations. I saw the difference in how they were treated. And I discussed that. I couldn't say it while I was in the meeting, but I had discussed that with one of the U.S. attorneys and he was like, "No, it's--no we, we treat everybody the same." I said, "No you don't. I'm sitting there." I said, "I'm an enforcement attorney. I know the way we enforce the laws for this sanitary district here. And I see how you treat them. You condescend to the people from Gary; you act as if they don't know what they're doing, as if they're incompetent, as if they're trying to get away with things." I said, "You have to treat them with the same respect." And to his credit, I forget this--I, I have his name written down somewhere. He--I saw that he did change the way that he approached them. But it was just kind of--it, it hurt to see that. And sometimes I mean it's insidious. And sometimes people don't know or you get used to doing something or treating people a certain way. And some people, you see it with the police in, in some of the police districts. You get used to doing things a certain way and it becomes a way of life and you don't even--you forget that it could be something that could be considered discriminatory. And then until it's brought to your attention. For some people it's so engrained, they don't change. And for some people they do make a change and they, you know, try to make things better. Story_ID: 655011 Speaker 1: Who was running the office there? Do you know who you were reporting to? 'Cause I had Burford and Barber [Walter Barber, Jr.] and Jellinek [Steve Jellinek]? You know any of those names or Douglas Costle? No, no, none of those. Speaker 2: Yeah, those, all of those names are very familiar. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Those were, those were--but those people were all in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: They were in Washington, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. So I--Burford, Gorsuch--I remember the Gorsuch [Neil Gorsuch] who is now on the [U.S.] Supreme Court. I worked, I remember working with his mother. She was-- Speaker 1: Anne Gorsuch [Anne Gorsuch Burford]. Speaker 2: Anne Gorsuch. I remember I went to Washington and we had to go--I had to go with her to testify on--before [U.S.] Congress for something. And I remember going into--I remember Ann Gorsuch. I also remember I was there when the one who's a Supreme Court justice, the Afri- only African American on the Supreme Court. Speaker 1: Clarence Thomas. Speaker 2: Clarence Thomas. Speaker 1: He was, now he was at, at the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], right? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, that's EEOC, I'm sorry, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: We're EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency] right now. Speaker 2: EPA, yes. Story_ID: 655012 Speaker 1: You're on a mission, really. I mean it's exciting probably to be part of the EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency] because it was still relatively new and, so-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in some respects laws are being made, you know, and you're there to enforce them. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. So let me--who were you reporting to, though, in the Region Five office? And you also said that you were the first African American hired I think. Speaker 2: In the, in the--as an enforcement attorney, I was the first African American in Region Five, yes. John McGuire was one of the heads of Region Five at one time. Speaker 1: John McGuire? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I worked for John McGuire. Speaker 2: I thought so. In the--with the--in the cable, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: That's why I asked you if you were--what year; if you were there under Harold Washington because I remember John McGuire when he went over there. He, he-- Speaker 1: I'll be darned (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Cough) John McGuire-- Speaker 1: I just had dinner with John after a long time. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Last year, I sure did. Wow. Speaker 2: Does he still live in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 1: He lives in Evanston [Illinois]. Speaker 2: John McGuire (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wow, so now that's--you know I was--in fact I took over after he--I was acting cable administrator after--'cause when you said--so he was-- Speaker 2: He was at. Wait, EPA or EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], which one? Now I'm getting, I'm getting them mixed up. Speaker 1: No, I'm confused. I don't know because you said you--I mean I know who John McGuire is. So that--maybe he was EEOC but I don't know his background like that. I don't--I know he went to--I think he went to John Marshall [The John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois]. But I don't know, I don't know. Speaker 2: You know what? I worked for two federal agencies and I'm getting, I get them mixed up sometimes, EPA and EEOC. So John McGuire was--and both of them were Region Five, EPA and EEOC. I worked in Region Five, Chicago was the Region Five office. So I'm just gonna tell you. Let's just put them together. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: EEOC and EPA (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Okay we can't put them together historically. Speaker 2: Okay, one of them-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I, I, I would-- Story_ID: 655013 Speaker 1: What made you go over to EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission]? Let me ask that. How long, how long were with, you with first EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency]? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I don't remember the years. I know I went right out of law school [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois]. So that was 1977. And then maybe to '80 [1980] or '81 [1981]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think I went to Bell Boyd and Lloyd [Bell Boyd and Lloyd LLP; K and L Gates LLP]. And then we were going to-- Speaker 1: Wait a minute. You went to Bell Boyd and Lloyd from the E--from EPA? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then you went to EEOC? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I see, so I, I don't think that chronology (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because-- Speaker 1: Okay I don't think I have-- Speaker 2: Well--or I could be getting that mixed up too. We were, I know we were going--at one time-- Speaker 1: We need to get that-- Speaker 2: I know, this is why I was thinking I would--this is the other reason I was nervous. I didn't get a chance to look at my--read through my stuff back in my history before I came over today. I was asking Daniel [Daniel Jackson] to help me get it together. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: All that stuff happened so long ago. Speaker 1: I know. It seems like a long time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I never have to, you know-- Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Revisit it. Speaker 2: I don't have to revisit it chronologically. Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right (laughter). Story_ID: 655014 Speaker 1: When I left the EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency]--and I'm pretty sure John McGuire was at the EPA, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think he may have been at the EPA, yeah. Speaker 1: And you know who else was at the EPA? After John McGuire left, or maybe it was before--after him; Valdas Adamkus. Now that name may not mean anything to you, but he became the president of Lithuania. Yes. He--Valdas Adamkus, this was so amazing to me, he sort of escaped that region, his family. They came to America. He's a very quiet man also, but--and he was the head of the, of EPA Region Five for a while. He, at some point he actually went back to Lithuania and became the president, which I just find-- Speaker 2: That seems amazing (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Pretty amazing, yes. Speaker 2: That's amazing, okay. So, so you leave, you leave the EPA you think what year? And then you join--do you join--go to the-- Speaker 1: Bell Boyd and Lloyd [Bell Boyd and Lloyd LLP; K and L Gates LLP], so that could have been around maybe '81 [1981]--'80 [1980], '81 [1981], something like that. Story_ID: 655015 Speaker 1: Maybe '81 [1981] because I left--my husband [Ebert's ex-husband, Merle Smith] and I were gonna move, we were gonna move--I wanted to be--go into entertainment law (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You did. Speaker 1: Yes, and I was going to go to California, take the California bar. Speaker 2: Wait, wait, wait. Where does entertainment come in with the EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency]? Speaker 1: When I was going--remember I was always a litigator, but I also did contracts. You know maybe it was just an interest I had. I always was in drama. And a lot of litigators have an interest in either torts, personal injury, or a lot of, a lot of litigators actually are in the entertainment industry. And I don't know. I, but when I first went to Boyd and Lloyd [Bell Boyd and Lloyd LLP; K and L Gates LLP] that's not what I was doing; I did- I went because of my environmental experience. And--but I also was in, I was in the litigation department so I got a lot of different cases. I did mergers and acquisitions, I did whatever kind of litigation they would give. Now things are so compartmentalized that I probably wouldn't have done as many, as broad a range of cases as I did. But one of the things that I got to work on was intellectual property, and that's when I developed an interest in the entertainment field. Speaker 2: Okay because--now was, was, was there an African American there--did they-- Speaker 1: There was one. There were two African American lawyers. I was the only black woman lawyer and there was one black male lawyer named Charles [ph.], I forget his last name. Speaker 2: Because Bell Boyd and Lloyd was a major law firm here in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. And did you find that different from you know the, the-- Speaker 1: Very different. Speaker 2: From the government (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was actually, it was actually kind of difficult because being the only black woman attorney, there was one other black woman attorney who had been there and I would talk to her sometimes. She ended up going to the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] or somewhere. Her name was Richardson. Her last, her last name was Richardson, Katrina, not Katrina, Kathy Richardson [ph.] or something. I know two. Anyway I remember her--somebody telling me you're probably not gonna be here very long. They were like it was, it was--you know there were a lot of things that I liked about it and a lot of things I didn't like about it. And I think that I heard later they tried to make a better effort with African Americans. But at the time I was there, I was the only black woman and there was one black man. And I think he left too. Speaker 2: Yeah. The law firms have been notoriously hard places. I don't know if they're much improved even these days. Story_ID: 655016 Speaker 1: So you did that, and then that's when you went to the EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency]? Speaker 2: No, we were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, I'm not--I'm sorry, to EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission]? Speaker 2: I didn't go directly there, no. We were--remember I was going to--we were gonna move to California because I had--back then, by, by then working on some of the cases I was working on at Bell Boyd and Lloyd [Bell Boyd and Lloyd LLP; K and L Gates LLP], I would go out to California and I don't know whether I went to visit friends or go to seminars. And I took an interest more--we worked on--our firm worked on some cases for like Michael Jackson and some other people in the entertainment industry. So I did some of those cases and I thought I wanna do more of these. And somebody said you should just go out to California. And I went and I actually (pause) arranged to take the--to rent a house and to take the bar out there. But my father-in-law got sick and he--my husband [Merle Smith] had to help take over his business. And he--so we helped run my father-in-law's business for a while and then after he passed away, my husband and I were getting divorced so I decided not to move out--I decided I was gonna stay in Chicago [Illinois] and by then I was looking for a job and went and-- Speaker 1: To the EEOC. Speaker 2: EEOC. I see. So you had been married--at that point, how many years to your husband, you had been married? Speaker 1: I don't know, but we stayed married for about seventeen years total. Speaker 2: Okay. So what--then what--so you work at the EEOC and Clarence Thomas is head of the EEOC at that--was he at that point in time. So what was the work being done here? 'Cause there--Chicago had to be somewhat of a hotbed for cases, right? Speaker 1: It was. We did a lot of--they were, they were you know a lot of the things that we did in Chicago at the time was they said to force--at the EEOC too. I mean at EPA. They were saying we not only enforce, but we try to force change, not force change. Those, those aren't the words. I really, I wish I could remember. But one of the cases--I remember one of the cases that I tried that helped make law was I represented disc jockeys at a radio station. I think Century Broadcasting [Century Broadcasting Corporation] was the station that hired these disc jockeys and one time they fired all of the ones over the age of forty. They didn't say that, that's not how they couched it, but I actually ended up taking them to court and winning treble damages on their behalf. And some of them--one of them was, was also on Channel 9 [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois], he was a broadcaster. I can't remember his name now. And then there were others, Dave Robbins and some other names that were still--some are still around and some may not be. One I think passed away. But they were very, very grateful but that's, that's why and still to this day, I just don't like people to--ageism. I don't like people to discriminate people, against people--well for any reason, but on the basis of their race or their age or you know, their, their sex. And another case where I represented some women who were waitresses. I forget whether they worked for the Holiday Inn, or I forget the name of the company they worked for. But there was this one particular guy who used to do horrible things, and make them like sit under his desk and, you know, pleasure him in his office or, or he'd threaten to fire them. I actually won, of course won that case. But the thing that was so painful for one of the women, I had to have her testify in court. And her father was in court. And I was afraid--she, she said, "I can't say those words in front of my father. I can't say penis or blow job or stuff like that, but this is what he made us do; but I can't say that. My father's gonna be sitting in court." And I remember because she was so reluctant, I remember her testifying and I remember how strong her testimony was, and how believable and credible she was as a witness. And there were other witnesses. And then they, I think they--I don't even know if we had to finish the trial or if they actually stopped the trial and said let's talk settlement. But I remember, you know, sexual harassment cases and age discrimination cases and, and race discrimination cases--so. Speaker 2: Did you like to practice? Speaker 1: I did. Yeah you know I'm like a bleeding heart. I mean if I can help someone powerless against someone who is powerful and taking advantage of them; of course, yeah, I, I, I love that. Story_ID: 655017 Speaker 1: In these agencies was the caseload manageable or were you managing a large caseload? Was it manageable and how many people in the office (simultaneous), and? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember. I don't remember all those details. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So this is--so you work at the EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency] how long? To what--do you remember? Speaker 2: EPA, like I said I think from '77 [1977] until I think I went to Bell Boyd and Lloyd [Bell Boyd and Lloyd LLP; K and L Gates LLP] maybe around 1980 or '81 [1981] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You said '81 [1981]. Speaker 2: And then maybe I was there--we got divorced in '85 [1985] or '86 [1986]. So we were probably gonna move to California in maybe '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: In between that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In that. So you worked then at the EPA and so-- Speaker 2: Just a few years. And then I was there until (pause) I became the vice president of the Ebert Company [Ebert Company, Ltd.] in 1990. Story_ID: 655018 Speaker 1: So when do you meet Roger Ebert? Speaker 2: In 1989. Speaker 1: And tell, so-- Speaker 2: We went on our first date-- Speaker 1: But how-- Speaker 2: September 25th, 1989 at the Lyric Opera [Lyric Opera of Chicago]. Speaker 1: (Unclear) but you have to have your first meeting first, right? Speaker 2: Yes. This is--I--he first laid eyes on me, we were both at an AA [Alcoholics Anonymous] meeting. And he was with Ann Landers and she had gone because she wanted to update her twenty questions questionnaire that she used to publish in her paper. Do you think you drink too much? Do you think you, whatever and she just wanted--so she wanted to go to a meeting and Roger took her to a meeting. And I was there. And afterwards, we went to a restaurant and I was sitting on the other side of the room. And he said he looked across and he wanted to meet me. So he had Ann, Eppie [Eppie Lederer] is her name, he had Eppie come over to the table, introduce us and he--they sat down and we talked. And by the time he left, he was--he, he teasingly said, "Oh I need a lawyer, do you have a card?" And I gave him my card. I said, "But I don't represent criminals." And you know we were just teasing, joking back and forth. Well we started talking that night and I noticed that everybody else at the table with us got kind of quiet because we kept going back and forth. He--every book he brought up, you know I had read and he talked about places, we both liked to travel. So we started talking a lot and I just discovered that he was different than what I thought he would be like. 'Cause on TV I thought he came across a little whiney at first. But in person he was so smart, so personable, so charming. And he told me he was going away and when he--he was going--our first date was September. He must have been going to the Toronto Film Festival [Toronto International Film Festival]. And when he came back he asked if I would go to the opera with him. Story_ID: 655019 Speaker 1: So had you dated outside your race to the--at that point? Speaker 2: I had, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But my first husband [Merle Smith] was black. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Um-hm, and, no, I didn't make a, a habit of it. But I had dated someone. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's so cute. But you know but what's extraordinary is that you both were at AA [Alcoholics Anonymous], at the AA meeting and you end up and fall in love and have this extraordinary relationship. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: This is--so you both join--each--that doesn't happen a lot of times. I think a lot more people will be going to AA meetings (laughter). Maybe I should sign up. I don't mean to be laughing. Speaker 2: No, no. I don't know, I, I--you know-- Speaker 1: I mean you (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I, I, I wonder about that sometimes because we, we had an unusually close relationship. And-- Speaker 1: But this is what I'm trying--so you had a problem with drinking. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: And he [Roger Ebert] had a problem with drinking. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you both end up at an AA meeting. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you know at AA meetings people sit around and they talk, right? Now do you--so and a lot of times people are--don't wanna do that in public, you know, sort of-- Speaker 2: This was an open meeting (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was an open meeting. Speaker 2: Which means that it's open to anyone who wants to come to listen. A closed meeting--they had gone to a closed meeting before they came to the meeting where I saw him because it was--he, he went to another meeting. So we really even shouldn't have met that day. But he went--took her to another meeting, but they wouldn't let her in because it was a closed meeting that was limited to only people who had a desire to stop drinking. Speaker 1: So wait a minute. So he brings Ef- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eppie-- Speaker 1: Eppie [Eppie Lederer] along-- Speaker 2: Eppie. Speaker 1: --to his meeting and she wants to update-- Speaker 2: Because she wants to update--so she wants to just observe and listen and update her, her questionnaire. Speaker 1: Unbelievable. Speaker 2: And they went in and he said that they were in this long stretch limousine and pull up to the meeting and he goes in to explain, "Can I bring Ann Landers into the meeting? She wants to update her pamphlet." And they said--they talked about it and they said, voted no, she can't come. So he said she was going--he went out, she was getting out of her--the limo and he says, "Get back in Eppie, they said no, you can't come in." She says, "Well I never--they're not gonna let Ann Landers into an AA meeting." So. Speaker 1: So and then--that's when you end up. Speaker 2: So he went, so he went to another meeting that was an open meeting that anybody could go to. Speaker 1: And then afterwards you're at this, at the restaurant (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Restaurant. Speaker 1: I see. So by the time you meet, have you finished the program and you're just going to meetings as, you know-- Speaker 2: Well you never finish. Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: It's been--I, I, I've been, you know--I think I had my last drink on St. Patrick's Day 19--or maybe that was my first day of sobriety, 1987. So it's been thirty years. Speaker 1: That--I mean I just think it's an extraordinary. I mean (cough) you know th- that story has been told but I mean I just think it's an extraordinary story. Story_ID: 655020 Speaker 1: What do you--so it's when--so you meet, you said Septem- you said at s-? Speaker 2: Our first date at the Lyric Opera [Lyric Opera of Chicago] was September 25th, 1989. Speaker 1: And that first date is how long after you meet? Is it a couple weeks or is it a month or-- Speaker 2: I don't remember that. Speaker 1: But he called you up, he took your card? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what-- Speaker 2: (Cough). Speaker 1: --so what is your conversation like in those early years? Speaker 2: The greatest conversations because he was so--I love, I love smart men, I just do. And he could talk about any--and Roger [Roger Ebert] was a storyteller too. He could talk about everything and he was so funny and I loved his confidence. He was fat, he didn't care. He, you know I, you know when I'm overweight, I'm always trying to put my, you know. He would put his shirt in his pants and he didn't care. He just--he was, he was dressed neat and clean and everything. But he just had--I loved his air of confidence. And it was--and plus he was so charming, he was so kind to people. He--I saw that he had such a good heart. And I say that I saw a light in him. I saw something in him that I don't think he even saw in himself in the beginning. And you know it's funny in the movie 'Life Itself,' people talk about how he changed after he met me. At first I would deflect that talk saying, "No, he was always this." But I would hear stories that, you know, maybe he wasn't always the kindest or the most compassionate. He was always a good man, but no I saw such goodness; deep, profound goodness in him. And that's, that is what attracted me to him and also he was you know like I said just so smart. He could talk about everything. Speaker 1: So when did you know it was taking a serious track, when it got on a serious--how long--'cause you got married pretty-- Speaker 2: No, we got married in 1992. Speaker 1: Two, so you but-- Speaker 2: So we really got to know each other. Speaker 1: You got to know each other, but you started working being part of his enterprise, right? Speaker 2: In 1990 I think, yeah. Because you know one of the things as we were dating and we knew we were getting serious, I didn't know that he travel- I didn't even know that he was on--you know I thought he was still local. I didn't know that he had been syndicated on all these stations. I didn't know that he traveled so much, I didn't know that he spoke, had so many speaking engagements. I didn't know that he did so much international travel. He didn't know that I--when I prepared cases for court, that I couldn't travel. I couldn't go, even go visit, you know to Michigan where he used to like to-- Story_ID: 655021 Speaker 1: You said that, you know people said that, you know, he was, you know, he could be not nice, or you know whatever (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Speaker 1: But you thought-- Speaker 2: Well in, in, well in the movie 'Life Itself,' his friend Bruce Elliott said--you know I said something about Roger was nice. They said, "He was nice, but he wasn't that nice," or something like that before he met me. So I guess I did have some influence on him. But he--but I saw how he had a deep capacity to love and a deep capacity for goodness. He was good. And that's what he said about me and we both--well in, in movies the thing that made us--in movies or in watching things with other people, we didn't cry if something was sad; we cried if something was good. We both felt that. So-- Speaker 1: And so you, so you said you didn't know that he traveled-- Speaker 2: All that much, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) much. And so when you say that, you mean you didn't know he traveled. Was he wanting you to travel with him? Speaker 2: Yeah, well we were having--we, we wouldn't be able to see each other. We wouldn't have a relationship. So if I were preparing something for court and I was working late at the office, or I remember one particular holiday. I think this was over Memorial Day weekend or something. I remember he wanted to go out to his house out in the country, what we called out in the country, out in the Harbert, Michigan area. And I couldn't go that weekend. I said, "I'm sorry, I'm really preparing a case for trial and I have to study, I have to review everything. I have to get, you know my arguments together. I, I can't--." He said, "You can't just go for the weekend?" I said, "I can't." So he invited other people out there and I was so angry that he didn't stay in the city with me. And he didn't realize how--you know he was probably used to just having his way, you know. He was the--he was Roger Ebert, so all of his girlfriends probably just did whatever he wanted to do. But I was so angry, when he called I would not answer the phone for two days I would not, I just--he called, I would just hang up or back then we had answering machines. So I would--he would leave a message, "Please call me," and then he finally realized how hurt I was. I didn't have to say anything. And then he lea-- start leaving messages, "I am so sorry." He said, "I didn't realize that you, you know--maybe I should have stayed in the city." He said, "But I always went out there this weekend and I just thought if you can't go, then I should go," and that was the first thing in our relationship where that could have been a rift. And, but it didn't, it actually made our relationship stronger and it made him pay attention. Story_ID: 655022 Speaker 1: When do you know it's getting serious? At that, you know and how, how, how soon in the relationship does it get serious? Speaker 2: You know, it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you think a year or two (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's maybe sometime, somewhere in the first year or two, because we--our first date was in '89 [1989]. He [Roger Ebert] did, he asked me to become the vice president of the Ebert Company [Ebert Company, Ltd.]-- Speaker 1: Which is a-- Speaker 2: --in I think 1990. Speaker 1: So he, so he--what does he say he want you to do then at that point? Speaker 2: Well they had him--contracts and he had, you know he also had outside attorneys and agents and all of that stuff, but he needed someone--he did not like running his company. He had a, you know an executive secretary and--but he needed someone to kind of overlook everything. He had speaking engagements, he was publishing books, he had a television show, he had a, probably a radio show. He was, he was doing a lot of things and he did not like the business part of it. He just--and so he asked if I would--he said, "It could really help if you would do this." And at that time I don't think--I don't remember--I just remember us having a serious talk about whether this is something that I should do. And we knew that if we--if I didn't do this, we would never see each other. Speaker 1: I see. So it was a thing of seeing each other at that point, but the other thing this is almost like getting your--you get in entertainment. Like you get plopped right in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, right. Speaker 1: --in the smack of entertainment that you had wanted to go to California for and it's right there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And are you knowing that will end in marriage, or you just-- Speaker 2: That's the--I don't remember. I don't remember that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I need to go back. I'm sure I must have written it down somewhere in some journal or something, but I really don't remember. I just remember him saying, "This is a serious thing that I'm asking you and I know that, you know you went off to law school [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois] all these years and you, you did this. But I," he said, "I really--you would still be able to use a lot of that practice and you know we could travel together and you could also oversee--you could talk." He said, "I don't like doing this business, I don't like having to keep up with, with my contracts. I don't like you know when--," a lot of things, he just didn't like business at all. Speaker 1: So when you came in, was there a lot of organizational work you had to do or did you just enjoy the process of reviewing contracts and helping make decisions (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, there was some organizational work I had to do, of course, in order to--because and you know when--actually it was easy because his lawyers, I knew how to talk to his lawyers. And it was easier for--to keep giving the, the executive assistant who was doing, working with us. It was easier to help give the instructions and to get things back from outside and setting up--you know it was, I mean it was real work. It wasn't just going in, so-- Speaker 1: So, but did she give you any--was she objecting at all to you coming in and helping or-- Speaker 2: There was, there was one who did, who didn't stay. He asked her to leave and then we hired someone that we both knew and she stayed with us until she just retired like last year. Speaker 1: That's lovely. So tell me what those early years of traveling--'cause this is a whole different world. It's a world that you wanted; and how are you, how old are your children [Josibiah Smith and Sonia Evans] at this time? Speaker 2: I think they were in high school. Story_ID: 655023 Speaker 1: So this lives actually at the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: (Cough) And there's a lot in there, but it's really for education--I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --our focus is education so I don't want you to shut down on me (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right, all right. Speaker 1: But you know it's people being able--in some respects I think it will be pathways for people you know in some respects; some. It's others that--I mean I don't know. Speaker 2: Well this is what I tell my friends. You know after I got divorced from Merle [Merle Smith] who we're really good friends today, I remember the years that I was, I guess a bachelorette, divorced between Merle and getting married to Roger [Roger Ebert]. And I remember that's when that article came out that said a woman over thirty is more likely to be struck by a terrorist than find another husband, or something like that, a woman over thirty with children. I remember that--do you remember something like that came out? And I remember my friends would say there are no, you know there're not enough good men around. And at that time I said, "That's bullshit." I said, "I know I'm going to get married again. I know I'm gonna find love again. I'm not worried about that." I said that at the time and so when Roger and I got married, they were like this is so much hope for us, you know. Now that I'm widowed and I've been widowed for four years, I always thought of myself as the marrying kind and I love being in a partnership and love being in a marriage or a good relationship. I'm at a point now I understand those women. My mother--I'm not giving you a whole sentence because all these thoughts are coming. When my dad [Wiley Hammel, Sr.] died in 1971 or '72 [1972], I realized now my mother [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel] was only probably sixty years old, or maybe fifty-nine or something like that. And I--to me, I was always so sad that she never got married again. And I would say, "Mom aren't you--," but she did get engaged three different times after dad died over the years, three times. Each time her fiance died. So I used to tease her, I called her the black widow, like the black widow spider who eats her mate, you know. I said, "Mom, I don't know if I were a man, I would be a little nervous to get engaged to you because they all die." And you know she took it good naturedly, but she said you know, actually I said, "Are you gonna go for--are you gonna try to get married again?" She said, "No, I'm really--." She said, "You know what? I'm really happy. I'm really happy. I have a good family, I have all my grandchildren, I have all of you, I have my church, I have my, you know, social groups" and she was volunteering work and doing everything. And I never understood (cough), excuse me, how a woman who had been happily married could not want to be married again; now I do. All these women that I didn't understand before, I understand completely. It's not that--and I, you know I go out with friends and do things. It's not--I don't know if I would ever marry again. Maybe I would if--I don't say- never say never, but now I understand how you can be--you can feel so complete in yourself as a human being and so happy, so grateful for the things that you do have in life. I mean family and friends and I wish I could say our president [President Donald John Trump], but can't say that. But just, just things and, and knowing so deep down inside who you are. Story_ID: 655024 Speaker 1: The thing that I'm the most grateful for in life is that my parents [Johnnie Hobbs Hammel and Wiley Hammel, Sr.]--and this is what Roger [Roger Ebert] said he saw in me. That I was so grounded. Yes I went through a period where I drank alcoholically and I got sober and I'm really sorry for that period for my children. But they have, you know, they say, "Mom we love you, you were still one of the most loving mothers. Yes we wish--there were some things that happened that we wished didn't happen. Nothing we would hold against you." So--but and there were other periods in my life when I felt thrown off my core a little bit. But once I regained that, I, I actually--I know who I am. I, I don't have any hole in my stomach to fill up by people heaping praise on me or by people needing--I don't need anybody to tell me who I am, I know who I am. And the thing that I feel that I need to do is give. To me I--when I give more, that fills me up. When I do something with our foundation [Roger and Chaz Ebert Foundation, Chicago Illinois], when I give to charity or when I work with young people especially who are emerging writers or emerging filmmakers, or emerging technologists, my big kick right now is trying to teach them to incorporate I say four principles: empathy, kindness, compassion and forgiveness. If they can incorporate that in their work and in their lives, that makes me happy. If I could get my grandchildren to do that, if I could get my son [Josibiah Smith] and daughter [Sonia Evans] to do that, that makes me happy. So that's what my life's mission is now. Story_ID: 655025 Speaker 1: I wanna go back though because the two--you and Roger [Roger Ebert] are from totally different backgrounds. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: (Cough) And then you meet at this AA [Alcoholics Anonymous] and something clicks. And then you're running his, basically his organization [Ebert Company, Ltd.] and in an ar- you know you--and I can't imagine up to that point had he trusted someone with that like that, or did he-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head) I don't know. I mean well he had his attorney that he had worked with for many years and the same accountant that he worked with for many years. It didn't have the same kind of organization that it had after I came, became the vice president. Speaker 1: So what are you thinking you wanna do with it once you see it and you understand it more? Speaker 2: Just do whatever I had, I had to do to support him so that he could do the work that he had to do. Speaker 1: And what are you--are you learning about each other because you--he grew up here in Chica- right, he grew up (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He grew up in, he was brought up in Urbana. Speaker 1: At Urbana. Speaker 2: Urbana, Illinois. Speaker 1: So he's a small town, you know, country boy in a way, you know a small town downstate. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then who makes it big in the city, I mean big, big, not, not little big. And then you are you know raised here in Chicago [Illinois] with all that. Now is there like the coming together of the two families. Is that complicated in some respects? Speaker 2: Well, his family sort of died out. I never met his mother [Annabel Stumm Ebert]; she was dead. His father [Walter Ebert] died when he was--the year that he was going, going from high school to college. His mother died before I met him. I did meet his, his favorite aunt. He had a--my favorite sister was Martha [Martha Hammel], his favorite aunt was Martha [Martha Stumm]. She died before I met her. He did have Uncle Bill [William Stumm] and Aunt Mary [Mary Stumm O'Neil]. And in the beginning, he was afraid to tell them that he was dating an African American woman. And he told me it was because I wasn't Catholic. I said, "No, that's not true. I'm not Catholic or I'm not white?" He said, "Maybe a little bit of that." But then after they really got to know our families and we would go visit them and they came to--we, we came to love each other. And then they passed away. So it's not--he didn't have a lot--a big family. And he--but he has still cousins today that I'm still in touch with in, in Colorado and down even in Illinois who come to the film festival [Roger Ebert's Film Festival] and do things. Our families, yeah--after--in the beginning it was not so smooth, but it became smooth later. Story_ID: 655026 Speaker 1: (Background noise) And then he had his--then there was also si- (cough) Siskel, you know who that, that relationship was on again (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --off again, right? I mean sort of-- Speaker 2: Well they were, they were--when they first--they were newspaper competitors. Gene Siskel worked for the Chicago Tribune, Roger [Roger Ebert] worked for the Chicago Sun-Times. They both were the youngest people hired in their positions. They both were very smart, very kind of cocky and aggressive, and they both were newspapermen and loved what they did. Roger was the better writer, Gene acknowledged that. But they were as film critics, back then newspapers were big. I mean they made a lot of money. The film critics for a major city newspaper were highly thought of and they would go out to Hollywood and do everything. But they actually both became well known after they got together. And in the beginning, they didn't wanna work with each other. But over time they became like brothers. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, you're rolling. Speaker 1: So but you're opened up to a whole new world. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gene Siskel and I got along right from the very beginning. Yeah we were good friends. We only had one fight, and that was toward the end before, shortly before we discovered that he had a brain tumor. But up, up until then we were--I was like a den mother. I would travel with Roger and Gene when they would go, you know like on 'The Jay Leno Show' or the Letterman show ['Late Show with David Letterman'] or you know, 'Today Show' ['The Today Show'; 'Today'] or whatever. And I was always the one they would say, you know, "How do I look and who was the funniest? Who made the best jokes? Who, who should sit next to the host? All of that stuff." I was like a den mother when I traveled with them; it was fun. Story_ID: 655027 Speaker 1: But this is extraordinary in many ways. You end up in the heart of entertainment in, in that way and they really were--I mean they were the, they were the film critics. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know they were it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: For a place that was, you know, was really made out of Hollywood. Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah, it's true. The thing that I think the reason they had so much longevity. They were together almost twenty-four years before Gene [Gene Siskel] died, is because their midwestern roots. I think there's something about being from the Midwest that made them so authentic. They were not pretentious, they were not pretty boys, they were not--they were smart, they were passionate, so enthusiastic about the movies and they cared about trying to persuade the other one. And I think that served them well in all those years. And they had integrity. You know there was a time when I think it was Apple [Apple Inc.] or some corporation offered them a million dollars to do a commercial. They turned it down. At that time they felt that film critics should not endorse or do commercials. They felt that that would reflect on their credibility. So they turned down lots of money over the years to do some things that you know maybe other--that today no one would even blink an eye if they did; people would understand. You know a lot of big movie stars at one time didn't do commercials, but everybody does them now. Or wouldn't do stuff on TV, everybody does it now, so--but they, but it was--I learned a lot. I always liked movies even before Roger [Roger Ebert] and I met. But I learned a lot about movies from him as well. Story_ID: 655028 Speaker 1: In what way? Speaker 2: Because he was so open to a, such a wide variety of films. And he wasn't a snob about films. He--and we both were open to the horror genre, you know martial arts, foreign films, ethnic films, you know, all kinds of things. And so he--and, and when he--we both liked learning. So when we did something, we'd become a student of it. One of the things we wanted to do, that he wanted to do, we both wanted to do this but I'll tell you. It was our, one of our--we didn't have a bucket list. But if we did, one of the things on our bucket list would be we wanted to go to Cambridge [University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England] or Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] to take a summer course. So we would maybe study Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] or study whatever course they had. The difference--we both wanted to do that because we both loved learning. The difference is Roger [Roger Ebert] actually wanted to live in the dorm. And by that time, I was not--I did not want to live in the dorm, I didn't wanna have that experience. I said, "Nope, let's find some luxury hotel nearby or some nice bed and breakfast"; it didn't have to be luxury. But I just didn't, I had no desire to go back and be a student and live in the dorm. Story_ID: 655029 Speaker 1: So what are you learning about the entertainment industry; and how are your skills being put to use? And then you're also, also part talent manager. So you're, you know you're learning, you're doing the legal part but you're also managing the talent. Speaker 2: Well I, you know I, what I do is I publish rogerebert.com, which we had started together. In 2002 we started it as an online magazine, you can say, with the publication in conjunction with the Chicago Sun-Times. And then in 2013, we--when we thought the Sun-Times might be going out of business, they were going through turmoil, we decided to take it private, and that happens to be the year he passed away. We, we, we did not know that was going to happen. But--so from 2002 when we started it, I always hoped to run it more in the background. When you have somebody like Roger Ebert, he was so prolific. He would write just about all the reviews, he would write just about all the articles. We had some other people, we had an editor who helped with the publication, who was actually an employee of the Chicago Sun-Times. But basically Roger, when Roger does something he's kind of--he used to call himself like a one man show. And he would tell Siskel [Gene Siskel], "I could be a one man show." So that's the sad thing about when Siskel died, Roger said, "I am so sorry for those times I said I could be a one man show." He said, "I miss him terribly and there is nothing like having him there to talk about it, talk about movies with." But so I--when he passed away in 2013, I just, I took over and I continued to run it and now I've been running it--we hired--we have primarily freelance writers who write for us. And people love to write for us because one of the things I didn't know about this industry, sometimes freelancers don't get paid as often as they should or I make sure, you know I run it like a business. It's a business. So I make sure that my accountant or the bookkeepers or the--get those checks out and people always say they appreciate the fact that, that they get paid on time; that's important to me. Also, I'm--I try to do something, even though it's primarily freelance writers, I try to do something nice for them. I, I don't even know how to describe this, but--no because I care. It's not just (cough) people writing. I care about their lives and their families and you know if they're sad or if they're depressed or if they're, you know, or if they, or if they get into a fight on social media with someone, you know I wanna come to their aid and support. And I feel so very fortunate to have so many writers who continue to wanna write for us. Story_ID: 655030 Speaker 1: I wanna take you back a little bit 'cause--and tell, when Siskel dies and Ebert takes--I mean your husband-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, has to go solo. Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he tries out, you know their different partners. During that period of time, is that an unsettling period of time about what that means, you know? Speaker 2: Let me tell you one thing that people forget. Roger had the show by himself I think for a year. It was just 'Roger Ebert at the Movies' [sic. 'Roger Ebert and the Movies']. And he didn't like it; he said, "I want another partner. I want a partner." So I would love to go back and see those. Speaker 1: Those shows (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Shows, and people forget that, they forget that he actually--and it wasn't just a matter of looking for partners. At that time he was not looking for partners. They said he'll just continue the show by himself. And they did a new opening for it and everything--and probably-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: But when he was actively looking for partners, it was actually kind of exciting because he would try different people out. It wasn't unsettling in a sense that he felt I don't know what I'm gonna do. We knew he was not gonna find another Gene Siskel. They had a chemistry that you can't even buy. If you look back at those old Siskel and Ebert tapes, they are--I mean they're brilliant. They're funny, they're informative, they are just, you know, they're someone who's writing a play about them. So by the old approach they would like to do a movie about them. And so there's also a movie in the works about Roger Ebert and his relationship with Russ Meyer who he wrote 'Beyond the Valley of the Dolls' for. So there's a lot going on back then, but to me the most important thing was making sure that Roger felt that he was continuing to grow and thrive and I--he said that that period--the love that he felt, the stability that he felt in our family, in our grandchildren, in our, you know, family vacations and, and everything that we did together was so important. Story_ID: 655031 Speaker 1: He's moving along hosting and then, then Richard Roeper comes in, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Well I, I actually spotted Richard Roeper before. He and Richard Roeper were friends at the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times], but Roger [Roger Ebert] never even thought to consider him for the show because they work for the same newspaper and he kind of thought that the--because he and Gene [Gene Siskel] worked for different newspapers, that you had to continue to do it that way. And one day I was watching Richard, I was on the treadmill and I was watching Richard Roeper and I thought actually I bet he could--we should try him out; I bet he could do this. So I said to Roger, "You know that Richard Roeper, he might be a good--." He likes--he was writing a book called, he says, 'He Rents, She Rents' ['He Rents, She Rents: The Ultimate Film Guide to the Best Women's Films and Guy Movies,' Richard Roeper and Laurie Viera]. It was like a he said, she said about the movies. And I could see that Richard liked movies and talked about 'em and we were friends with him and I knew he could hold his own in a conversation. And I said, "Why don't you try him?" And Roger said, "No, I can't." I said, "Why not?" He said, "Because we work for the same newspaper." I said, "So what?" You know and he tried Richard out and, and he auditioned him and everybody liked him, and the people in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] liked him and you know the staff liked him, so they hired him. Speaker 1: So that was your suggestion then (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: And were you making other suggestions that we don't know about that, you know, sort of helped guide things along? Speaker 2: Yes, there, there-- Speaker 1: Can you talk about some of those? Speaker 2: You know I can't--. (Pause) I don't know, I don't wanna talk about 'em. Speaker 1: You don't, okay. Speaker 2: No. And sometimes you know if I, if I were thinking of a specific thing, but there are lots of times. He, he did listen to me and we listened to each other; we had a, a real respect for each other's opinions, so. Story_ID: 655032 Speaker 1: And so then he [Roger Ebert]--did you know about the--that he had had, you know, been diagnosed with thyroid cancer be- you know, earlier? Did you know that and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before we, before we--I did know that. Before we got married he said, "I have to tell you something." He said you know in, I think it was maybe 1987 or 1988 he said, "I had a bout with--." He said, "I had a, a tumor." Yeah, he never really called it cancer. He said, "And it was malignant." He said, "But they said it was very slow growing. I had surgery. But they said one day it could come back. I just want you to know this, I feel I have to tell you, I have to be open and honest and tell you this." And I said, "Okay." So I did know and-- Speaker 1: That's very, that's very, that's very honorable 'cause sometimes people would hide things like that, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's very honorable. So when it came back, which was in 2002, right? Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: I think. Speaker 2: The first time, yeah. Speaker 1: The first time because he ends up having a--having I think is it three, three? Speaker 2: Well he had surgery and he came out of the hospital like the next day or some really quick--he, he, he taped all of his shows [for 'Ebert and Roeper'] before he had surgery. This was in 2002. He left the hospital before the doctors wanted him to; he felt good, he felt strong. He went back to work, everything--he had--everything went great and then it came back again in I think 2003 and 2006. So in 2006 is when-- Speaker 1: He had the-- Speaker 2: He had had radiation and we didn't know because of the radiation, the doctors he had a different kind of neutron beam radiation or something that was different in the state of--in Seattle [Washington]. And they said, "If you ever have surgery after this, you should have at least fifty treatments with hyperbaric oxygen before surgery, or else it could--your blood flow may not be great." But--or you should have treatments with hyperbaric oxygen. But the doctors here didn't really believe in the hyperbaric oxygen. It's still kind of controversial. And they said, "Oh, we've done this surgery many times." The thing is they had never done it on someone who had had that kind of neutron beam radiation, rather than the regular radiation. So that made a difference and it was--so it was hard to establish the blood flow. They did a beautiful job reconstructing. We thought everything was okay. And on the day I went to take him home from the hospital-- Speaker 1: That's when it burst (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The carotid artery burst. Speaker 1: He had the burst. 'Cause I remember, you know, read--I mean hearing you talk or him talk, one of the two, that it just was--blood was flowing all over the place, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then that happened--that did-- Speaker 2: That was in 2006. Speaker 1: Right. That didn't happen just once, though, right? Speaker 2: No, over--he was, he ended up being hospitalized for almost a year. So it happened something like--over the course of a year until they could really finally stop it-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: It happened like six or seven times. But in the beginning, we thought he was going to be okay. We, we thought that he would be able to just go back to work. He actually was able to speak longer than people thought he was able to. They just put a trach [tracheotomy] down his throat and he--you know it's hard to even talk about this stuff, so-- Speaker 1: Because of all the doctors and-- Speaker 2: We had great doctors. They were very knowledgeable, very caring. It just, you know, we said--I don't know. Maybe this was his-- Speaker 1: Time. Speaker 2: --his moment on earth, that maybe that was his destiny. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: We, we don't know. It's hard to talk about it now because now they would do something different, but back then-- Speaker 1: Maybe not as radical like with all the removal as what you're-- Speaker 2: I, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well there's--but you know he--this is a very--I mean from an outsider's viewpoint is that you become a--well you were already a constant companion, but you become the, the very gentle caretaker. And then there's a point where he can't talk anymore. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And even that is--it's really because he--his persona becomes different. And it's almost like how you described him, you know what you saw inside of him. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Emerges as an outside presence. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And that's all I can say because I was looking again last night in preparation and I'm like he's joking. You know it's like--and that, that, that voice machine--like I can't--'cause he types a little bit and then it's like-- it comes up. And I'm like that is--first of all it's an amazing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Cough). Speaker 1: --invention. But you're--it's just full of--I don't know, it's-- Story_ID: 655033 Speaker 1: Well he told me that I had to become his public voice because he--we had a custom. I found this company in Scotland to make a custom voice for him, but he still ended up using--it was good and we still have it, but he still ended up using the voice that came with the Apple computer. And one voice we loved so much we called, it was the--first he used a British voice and we called it Sir--I forget his name, Sir William or whatever the name was (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah you said that (unclear). Speaker 1: And then he--but sometimes the British voice couldn't pronounce the American names, so he started using the American voice. And I met the--I think I met the man who told me that he made that voice. Yeah I think I may have met the person who recorded the voice that Roger [Roger Ebert] used. (Pause) Anyway the thing that I learned that I didn't know when someone can't speak, after a while they stop looking at you when you're speaking. Someone who can't hear, they, they communicate differently. And at first this was--created a little bit of a distance because I would say, "Roger I'm talking to you, will you listen?" "I, I'm listening." But I said, "But you're not looking at me." And that's because he wasn't expecting people to look at him when he was speaking. It just--it becomes a different orientation. You learn so much during that period. And so our communication became differently and I know people think that this is, you know, some woo-woo stuff, but we actually started communicating more really like telepathically. And, and some people witnessed it. Michael Phillips from the Chicago Tribune and A.O. Scott from The New York Times was at our house for one time after they finished shooting the show. And we gave a little dinner for them. And Roger and I were doing that telepathy thing, but we weren't even aware of it. And we were laughing and we were--and I said, "Okay I'll go get it," and they're saying, "What are you doing? What are you talking about?" I said, "Roger just told me this." They said, "No he didn't, he's up there, you're here. He doesn't even have his computer. So he didn't write or type anything." And I realized, yeah, we do that sometimes. And they were like, "Wow." And I realized we do. And I remember when he was in the hospital. The time that I remember the most and I woke up because he told me he was cold, and I called the hospital and I said, "Will you go check my husband?" They said, "Mrs. Ebert [HistoryMaker Chaz Ebert], he's asleep, we don't want to--." I said, "No he's cold." They said, "How do you know he's cold?" I said, "I don't know, he told me." So they said, "You were at the hospital?" I said, "No, but please just go check." They came back, they said, "My god, he's frozen." They said, "We had to put the warming blanket on him." They said, "Thank you for letting us know. However you found out, thank you for letting us know." So that--things like that would happen and you know the time when they thought that he really was a goner and we were--I was in a room at the hospital praying with some friends. And after we had our little prayer circle, we were all just sitting waiting for the doctor to come in. And Roger walks into the room, kind of like in the air wearing this plaid shirt. He walks in and he waves to me and he tells me don't--, "Make them keep working on me." He said, "Please don't let, don't give up on me." And then a doctor came into the room. I said--and the doctor said, "I'm afraid we don't have really good news." And I said, "Please don't give up on him. He just asked me--." I said--he said, he said, "Maybe you're tired, maybe you should go to bed." I said, "Nope, I have to sit here so my heart can beat for his heart. Right now his heart is too weak. 'Til his heart is strong enough to beat on its own, I have to be his heartbeat." I don't even know where I got those words from, but the doctor remembers them to this day. And they were saying, "We don't know how he's going to be though," you know, "whether he'll even have like brain--you know what kind of mental capacity he'll have." I said, "He has it. I've been in touch with him and please just--," and they worked on him and he was fine..