 Story_ID: 179331 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My name is Rita Aliese Fry. R-I-T-A, A-L-I-E-S-E, F-R-Y. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 28, 1946 in Memphis, Tennessee. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am an attorney at law, and until recently, I was the head of the Cook County Public Defender's Office. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is October 2, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are at the present time? Speaker 2: We are presently in the offices of The HistoryMaker[s] at 1900 South Michigan in Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179332 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always ask. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: They only require, they only deserve a short answer. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Oh, good. Speaker 1: Alright. Now, the first one is, Ma'am what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, God. I couldn't even imagine. I like all sorts of things. I... ooh, ooh-- Speaker 1: Okay, well-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). I don't have a particular favorite that leaps to mind, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: Okay, we know that. (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). That's easy. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The world, actually. I love to travel, and I've been to all seven continents. So, anywhere in the world. Speaker 1: Okay. And finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Um, yes. It's sort of a cliche. But I always tell people, "You can't hit a homerun unless you step up to the plate." And I think that sort of signifies my whole life--that in order to hit a homerun, you do have to be in the game and you do have to step up to the plate. And so, I use that a lot. In fact, some people say too much. Story_ID: 179333 Speaker 1: Tell me about your family history. I'm going to ask you about your mother's side and your father's side. But first I want you to give us your parents' names, full names, and spell them for us, and their dates and places of birth. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, on my father's side, my father's name was McKinley High, H-I-G-H. And he was born in October, in fact, October 8, 1923 in New Albany, Mississippi, which is a small town about thirty miles from Tupelo, Mississippi. And he lived there until he was maybe twenty, and then he moved to Memphis [Tennessee]. And in Memphis, he lived and worked for a candy company. He was a delivery man until he and my mother married, and then subsequently moved to Chicago [Illinois]. My mother, her name is Lucille Hoskins, H-O-S-K-I-N-S, High. And she born June 26, 1928 in a small town outside of Memphis, Tennessee, and she was the twelfth of thirteen children. And she lived in Memphis all of her life until she and my dad moved to Chicago. Story_ID: 179334 Speaker 1: How much do you know about your father's [McKinley High] side of the family? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: Well, I know--knew, my grandfather very well. His name was Mack High, M-A-C-K, H-I-G-H. And he was a tall, thin man who had been a farmer. And I knew him as a wonderful grandfather, and I knew him for many years before he died, and saw him fairly frequently. He was one of seven brothers and three sisters, I believe. I never met more than one or two of his siblings, my grandfather's siblings. My great-grandfather, his name was George High, H-I-G-H, and I met him a couple of times when I was very young, say, five or six years old. The interesting thing about meeting him was he also was a farmer in Mississippi. But the first time that I actually met him and was aware that he was my grandfather's father, I was startled, because I thought he was white. And I said, I don't know any white people. And so, I was a little reluctant to get to know him. But, but, he was a very warm and gentle person, he and my great-grandmother both. Her name was Mattie High. I don't know her maiden name. And she also looked white. Apparently, they were black but just very, very light. And they both had very long hair. She wore hers in two braids that came down the side of her body. And my grandfather wore his hair one way that went down the back. I saw them maybe three or four times in my life before they passed away. In terms of my grandmother, her name was Alberta Dunkin High. And she was the twentieth child of my great-grandfather. I never met him. He was quite, apparently he was old, or older, when my grandmother was born, because he only had one other child after her. And he had children by two wives. The first wife died and then the second wife also died. And so, I never met any of them. And as I think about it, my grandmother and grandfather were shaped a lot by the fact that one was the oldest and the other was sort of the youngest. And that sort of had a lot to do with how they viewed life, and how they viewed their children. Story_ID: 179335 Speaker 1: In terms of my mother's [Lucille Hoskins High] family, my grandmother, her name was Avalou, A-V-A-L-O-U Bradley Hoskins, and she lived to be 100 years old. I absolutely adored her. I loved the other grandparents, but this grandmother I adored, because I spent a lot of time with her after my family moved to Chicago [Illinois]. From the time I was like five years old until the time I was fourteen, I spent every summer with that grandmother. So, I was really very, very close to her. I believe she was an only child, but I don't know that to be true. She never really talked about her family. Her mother's name was Alice. I never met my grandmother's mother. I know that they, they were part American Indian, but what part, I don't know. And I know that she rarely ever talked about her family and her growing up. All I knew was that it was very hard, and that she remembered the end of slavery. She was a young girl, she remembered that. But she never talked about it all, and never wanted to talk about it. She married my grandfather, whose name was Will Hoskins, H-O-S-K-I-N-S. And she had thirteen children with him, and my mother was the twelfth. So, my mother had nine brothers and three sisters. And my grandparents, my mother's mother and father, separated at some point in their lives. And so, I knew my grandfather. He would come to visit my grandmother, and would always bring things for the grandchildren, whoever were around. But I know that they were separated. And then he died when he was about eighty or so. And that was in the early--I want to say the early sixties, around '64 [1964] or '65 [1965]. But as I said, my grandmother lived until 1982. And in terms of, again, knowing the family history, it's sort of hard. Because with my grandfather, I know very little about Will Hoskins, other than he was a good grandfather. But whether or not he had brothers or sisters, where he came from, I don't know. I mean the family did not really talk about it, and he didn't really talk about it. So, I really don't know a lot about his background at all. Story_ID: 179336 Speaker 1: So, are there any stories on your father [McKinley High]'s side of the family about life during slavery or after slavery? Speaker 2: Not really. As I said, my great-grandfather, George High, apparently was a foreman of a sort, an overseer of a sort--it's really hard to gauge--on a farm. And it would have coincided with certainly the end of slavery. But all of the details are sort of vague. The family really didn't talk a lot about it. Clearly, my grandfather--my great-grandfather, was doing well for a black man in those times--in the early '20s [1920s] and before. But why or how, it's hard to know. When I would ask my grandfather about it, he would simply say that his father was the overseer on a farm, or on a plantation, and that they raised horses and some other things. But apparently there was some sort of dispute within the family over some horses or something. So, whatever it was, it cost them a breach, I guess in the family. So, nobody ever really talked about who did what, or any of that. So I don't really know a lot about that. Story_ID: 179337 Speaker 1: Tell us about your father [McKinley High]. What kind of person was he, and what did he do for a living? What was he like? Speaker 2: Oh, my father was an interesting man. He was tall, very attractive, had a wonderful singing voice, and always wanted to sing but never really did. He grew up in Mississippi. He had ambitions, but wasn't really able to realize them in the way that he wanted. Partially, he said that it was because he lacked education, which was why he always pushed education for me and my siblings. He, but he was always a hard worker. I always remember my father working. When I was a very little girl--and we lived in Memphis [Tennessee], as I said--he worked for a candy company as a delivery driver. But he had his own little small business that was like a shoeshine stand, combination candy store combination, a catch-all kind of thing. But it was because it was important for him to have his own business of a sort. And when we moved to Chicago [Illinois], he felt that it was going to be an opportunity for him to start his own business or do some things. But he wasn't able to accomplish it in the way that he wanted. He only had an eighth grade education. And while he looked good, and people's first reaction to him was very positive, he felt that his lack of education kind of held him back. Also, he had gotten an injury to his eye when he was a young boy, and that kept him out of the [U.S.] Army. So during World War II, he was not in the Army. And he said he also felt sometimes that maybe people looked at him differently because he hadn't fought in the War. But he was always there for us as a father. And I was an only child until I was eight. My parents had been told that my mother couldn't have any other children, because I was a difficult birth. And so, until I was eight, I was the only child. So, they made sure that while we didn't have a lot, that I was always going to be well-educated. So, right away my father made sure that I went to Catholic school, and he worked hard to pay the tuition, even when it was tough. And then later when I started having brothers and sisters, apparently the doctors were wrong when they told my mother she couldn't have any more children. (Laughter). He made sure all of us had a good education. We all went to Catholic school through high school. He worked many different jobs trying to make sure that we were taken care of. One of the things that I've learned from my father, that even to this day is important to me, is give back... commitment to the community. And it wasn't like he was saying it, he was doing it. For example, when I was in grade school, tuition was pretty--now it seems cheap. But back then it was pretty expensive. And so, because we were Catholic and we were involved in the parish, my father did a lot of things in the parish to make up for the tuition. But he also did things because he thought it was the right thing to do. He just, he didn't make a big deal of it, he just did it. The thing that I remember--every year at Christmastime, the school always said to the kids in school, "You have to bring something for the gift baskets for the poor families at Christmastime." So, all of us would bring things, you know, a can of something or a box of something. Or the kids who had money could bring a ham or a turkey or something of that sort. But anyway, we would help put all these baskets together. Well, my dad would deliver baskets to the poor families. Well, sometimes we would be the poor family that would get the baskets. (Laughter). And but he didn't, you know, we didn't feel bad about that. Because we understood that when we had something, we would give, and when we didn't, someone would give to us. And, and, I've always appreciated that about my dad. Even though he only had an eighth grade education, he always read, and he always insisted that we read. And I think overall he was a stern father, don't get me wrong. Hhe was stern. But he cared about us, and he was always there for us. And he was there until he died. I mean, my parents have been married forty years. So, I think a lot of my dad. Speaker 1: Okay. When did your father pass? Speaker 2: He passed in 1991, just before I was appointed to the Public Defender's Office. That was the one regret, that he missed seeing that. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179338 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [McKinley High & Lucille Hoskins High] met? Speaker 2: If there is, I don't really know it. I know that when my father used to talk about it, he would say my mother--he used to see my mother coming and going from her high school. She went to Booker T. Washington High School in Memphis [Tennessee]. And he said he used to see her going back and forth, and she was always "Miss Personality," always had a lot to say. And he was intrigued by that, but he said--because he was not in high school; he was actually working. And he said he finally decided he wanted to find out what was she all about. Was she just a lot of mouth, or was there more to her? And so apparently there was, because they started dating, and then they got married two weeks after weeks after she graduated from high school. So, I don't, I don't know more than that. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179339 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your mother [Lucille Hoskins High]. What kind of personality does she have? Speaker 2: My mother is a very out-going personality. That has never changed about her. She's now seventy-five. An example of what my mother is like, is at age fifty she decided that she wanted to go to college. She'd raised her kids and she done the things that she wanted to do. And she said, "You know what? I'm going to go to college." So, she signed up for a program at Governor's State [University, University Park, Illinois], where she was allowed to get credit for life experiences, a certain amount of college credit. And she, she sat down and she wrote out her life, for this college credit, and all of the things that she had done and the businesses that she and my father had started that hadn't succeeded, and what have you. And she got two years' worth of college credit for that. And then she took those two years and then she went on and she graduated with a B.A. in social work. And then she went on and got a master's. And she started out as a counselor, but actually wound up being an elementary school teacher. She liked that. And so until last year, she was teaching. And that's, that says a lot about her. I mean she has a lot of drive. She doesn't take no for an answer if there's another way. She's very conscious of community involvement. And again, it wasn't like she was always preaching it, it was that she was doing it. So, we as her children learned to be involved and to do things, because we saw our parents do it more than we heard them just talking about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, she had a chance to go to Booker T. Washington [High School, Memphis, Tennessee], didn't she? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Is that as far she--well, she went to college after she had her children? Speaker 2: Right, right. I mean, Booker T. Washington High School when my mother was going there was the black high school in Memphis. And they had a rival. I think it was called Manassas [High School, Memphis, Tennessee], I think (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --Manassas-- Speaker 2: And so, I used to hear stories about the rivalry between the two schools. But that was her big thing. She was really proud of the fact that she went to Booker T. Washington High School. And from time to time when we would go to Memphis, she would always go by the school or want to see what it looked like. And she was really upset when it finally closed down. Speaker 1: Did they tear it down? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think they finally tore it down, actually. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it had a lot of interesting-- Speaker 1: I know Manassas is still there. Speaker 2: Right. But I think Booker T. Washington is gone. Story_ID: 179340 Speaker 1: Now tell us about your brothers and sisters. They all have a name that starts with the letter R? Speaker 2: Yes. (Laughter). My mother [Lucille Hoskins High] and father [McKinley High] had a thing for that. I'm not sure why, but all of--with the exception of me, they all, all their initials are RMH. And mine is RAH. But I don't what, where that came from. We used to ask my mother that all the time. And she would say she just liked the way it sounded. And when we would ask my father, he said, well he'd just give in to my mother. (Laughter). So, I have five sisters and a brother. My sisters are Renee, Rhonda, Ramona, Regina and Rochelle. And my brother is Reginald. And there is a twenty year age difference between me and my youngest sister. In fact, my mother was pregnant with my second youngest sister when I graduated from high school in 1964. And I was in college when she had my youngest sister in 1966. And I was appalled that my parents were still doing whatever, (laughter), and that she was having babies and I was in college. But, you know, now I have an excellent relationship with my youngest sister. In fact, my mother says that she and I are probably the most alike of all of her children. But I'm very proud of my brothers and sisters. They all work in jobs, and they own their own homes. That was something that my father stressed to us, that homeownership was important, along with education. And they all are self-sustaining. And my brother lives in Alabama, which always surprises me. I mean he grew up in Chicago [Illinois], he grew up in this area. But after he got out of the Army, he went to Alabama. He loved it, and he's been there for the last twenty years. He said he loves living in the South. He loves the pace, he loves the way that they people interact. So, he's there. I have two sisters in California, and the remainder live here in the Chicago area. Story_ID: 179341 Speaker 1: Now, well tell us about growing up. What neighborhood did you grow up in? Speaker 2: Well, I grew up on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois]. Some people say the Near West Side, but as far as I'm concerned it's just the West Side, at 14th and Wood, which is an area that's--that was an interesting area when I was growing up. Because Western Avenue was the boundary on one end, and 18th Street was the boundary on the other, in terms of integration, in terms of the neighborhoods. Story_ID: 179342 Speaker 1: Everything you could possibly want to have was there. I mean, I walked to school. I was probably the furthest away, in terms of my friends. And, but I could walk to school, both grade school and high school. I could go to the movies, I could go shopping. (brief interruption) Talking about the neighborhood--part of the, I guess one side of our boundaries was Pilsen--which is now Pilsen [Chicago, Illinois]. But back then it wasn't Hispanic... it was Pilsen, but it wasn't Hispanic. It was German, Bohemian, Eastern European. Speaker 2: Um-hum, like Polish people lived-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: The Italian Hall and all that. Speaker 1: Exactly. And on the other end, across Western and across Taylor was Little Italy. But then on the other side of that was still a black community, because my mother's sister lived on Oakley. So, I could leave my high school and frequently would walk from my high school to her house. And I would walk through parts of Little Italy, because a lot of the kids I went to school with lived there. Story_ID: 179343 Speaker 1: What high school served that area? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: What public high school, I guess. Because you went-- Speaker 2: The public high school was Crane [High School, Chicago, Illinois] and Farragut [Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois.] There was a boys' school, Cregier [High School, Chicago, Illinois]. And I think those were the main feeder high schools. St. Mary High School [Chicago, Illinois], which is where I went to school, was the first all girls' Catholic, central Catholic high school. Prior to that, most of the high schools, Catholic high schools, were attached to a parish community. And the kids went from their grade school to that high school within that community. St. Mary's was designed to be a central high school, so that girls could come from all over the city to that school. And we did. We had girls primarily from the West Side and the west suburbs, but we had a few from the South Side and from the North Side. And the school itself was predominantly white. When I started there in 1960, our class was the first class where there was more than two or three black students. And in fact in my freshman year, there was one black senior, who as it turns out was [HM] Sharon Gist Gilliam. And her sister Myra and one other girl were juniors. There was two girls who were sophomores, and then our class, which was seventeen black students. And that was the first time they'd had that many black students. Speaker 1: Sharon Gist Gilliam was, she served in the [Harold] Washington administration? Speaker 2: Yes, she was the budget-- Speaker 1: Budget director. Speaker 2: Right. And now she's, I mean, and she's on a lot of boards and commissions. And I mean, she's just terrific. But at the time, all I knew was she was just the only black girl in my high school, (laughter) in the senior class. Story_ID: 179344 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I want to you back to when you were a little kid. And tell us about growing up in your neighborhood. What were some of the--what was your household like? And what were some of the sights and sounds of smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh. Well, it was, it was funny in a way, because it was a neighborhood of houses, not high rises. You had two-flats, three-flats, but primarily houses. And my uncle, my mother's brother, owned a poolroom. And it was right on the corner of 18th and, 1800 West 14th Street, I'll never forget that address. And we lived three doors down across the street. And everybody knew who my uncle was, and knew that he ran the poolroom. And like I said, everything that was--that you wanted to do was right there. You had a grocery store down the street. You had a shoe shop, you had everything that you needed immediately right within two blocks. If you went up to Ashland Avenue or you went up to Roosevelt Road you had the dime store, you had the butcher shop, you had a supermarket, you had the theater. And my mother's other brother owned a poolroom on that street, Roosevelt Road. So, it was sort of funny that people knew both my uncles as owners of pool halls, but they didn't really know my family other than we were the family whose kids went to Catholic school. Story_ID: 179345 Speaker 1: We were talking about--I asked you about, off-camera, Maxwell Street--that people used to--and we said they used to call it "Jew Town." Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's what everybody colloquially-- Speaker 2: Called it. Speaker 1: --called it. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It was in the Maxwell Street area, and it was-- Speaker 2: Halsted-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was Roosevelt Road to 16th Street on Halsted [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Yeah. I think at one time there were a lot of Jewish-Americans there. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: The famous, those famous hot dogs in Chicago-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the polish sausage. Because (laughter) when I was a kid, my father [McKinley High] would take us there. Because those polish sausages, I don't care what anybody says, are the best in the world. But part of what made them great was the fact that they cooked them outside in a grill; the onions were grilled. You had flies and God knows what else there, but that added to the flavor. And, but, we were never allowed to eat them in the car, because you could never get that smell of those cooked onions out of the car. And also, if you had them, people would know you'd had them, because you'd get the smell in your clothes and on your hands. But that was part of growing up. I mean, for me, I never went shopping downtown. I mean, you had to have a major event happening in your life in order for you to buy something in downtown Chicago [Illinois] on State Street. It didn't happen. For me, a big deal was if I got to go down to Maxwell Street to one of the shops to buy something for a special event. For example, my high school, for freshmen the only school dance they had was the Father/Daughter dance. And so, it was a big deal for me to be able to--instead of having to go to Leader's Department Store on 18th Street, I got to go to Maxwell Street to a bigger store and buy a dress to go to this dance. But the best part about shopping on Maxwell Street is that the merchants were much more engaged and involved with the customer. Because I remember I found this dress, I loved this dress, I wanted this dress. And I didn't have enough money. And I think the dress probably cost twenty dollars. And I think my mother [Lucille Hoskins High] gave me like twelve dollars for me to find a dress and some shoes, if you could imagine, for a big dance. (Laughter). And this is like 1960, '61 [1961]. But I saw this dress, and I was looking at it and touching it and thinking, "Boy, I wish I could have it, but I don't have enough money." So, the merchant in the store asked me what did I want this dress for? Why was I buying it? And I explained it was for the Father/Daughter dance, and that my father was taking me to the dance, and that this was all the money that I had, and maybe could I put it on layaway, but I really wanted to have it. And so after talking to me, he said, "Well, you know what? I think this dress just went on sale." So, I actually got it, and I was so happy. And in my mind, that was Maxwell Street. You could always find what you needed when you needed it, at the price that you could afford. Speaker 1: You could haggle. Speaker 2: Absolutely. But you didn't even think about it as haggling, at least when you're a young person. You don't think about it as haggling. You think about it and say, "Well this is all I have, how much will you take?" You don't think of it as haggling, you think of it as a merchant being open to possibilities. And so for years, you know, it was a big deal. Like, when I was a senior in high school, my father bought me this dress at... the store then was called Turner Brothers, and it was right on the corner of Roosevelt and Halsted. And it was supposedly a pretty upscale store. And next to it was a store called Bertell's. And so, to get something from either of two those stores was always a treat. Well, when I got that dress, you know, it was like my father paid full price. I don't remember what the price was, but it was like a big deal to have something from that store, full price. But everybody that I knew, everybody in my community, they shopped on Roosevelt Road--either on our end of Roosevelt Road between Ashland and Paulina, or you shopped at Maxwell Street on Roosevelt Road between Halsted and Maxwell. And that's just our lives. Story_ID: 179346 Speaker 1: The big thing to do was go roller skating. Everybody knew how to roller skate. We'd go roller skating first on the street. And then as you got to be a teenager, all of the schools had roller skating parties. So, and those were acceptable ways of going out and having a good time with teenagers. Because we didn't have chaperones, but you had music, you had skating, you had fun. Riverview [Park, Chicago, Illinois], I used to love to go to Riverview. Speaker 2: That's a-- Speaker 1: Amusement park. Speaker 2: Amusement park, right--now defunct. Speaker 1: Exactly, it's now a shopping mall and a police station. But at the time it was the big place to go, and it didn't cost you a lot of money. And I remember, you know, doing things like that, going to the movies. There was a movie theater near us on Roosevelt between Ashland and Paulina called the Broadway Strand. And I used to go there every week. I mean, you could get in for a quarter, and you could see movies all day. You didn't have to leave, you could stay there if you wanted all day. Then when I got to be a teenager, it was going to the Regal [Theater, Chicago, Illinois], and going from the West Side to the South Side to go to the Regal. But again, if you belonged to--Al Benson, he was a disk jockey on the radio. If you belonged to the Al Benson fan club and you had a card, then you got a discount to go to the Regal. And so, me and my friends would go to the Regal Theater, and you could see a whole stage show and a movie. So, you know, you got to see Stevie Wonder; you got to see the Temptations; you saw the whole Motown review frankly, for a dollar, and a movie. So, you can't beat that, you know. And on those times when I didn't have a dollar, when times were hard for us--and there were times like that--one of the things that I learned from my parents was to take advantage of the free things. And one of the free things that became my favorite was the Museum of Natural History. I loved going to the Field Museum. Because you could get on the bus and ride to the end of the line and walk across the tracks, and there was the Museum. And you could be there all day. You could see, you know, ancient Egypt. You could see all kinds of interesting and wonderful things. And it was free, you know. Back then it was actually free, you'd just go in the museum. And in the summertime, the 12th Street Beach was right there. So, you could also go to the beach. So, if you got tired of being in the museum you could walk over to the beach. Or if you got tired of being at the beach, you could walk into the museum. Story_ID: 179347 Speaker 1: So that's how I saw my life, in terms of my neighborhood. I knew most of the people on my block, and obviously I knew the kids that I went to school with, who lived like on Hastings or Washburn or 13th Street. I knew that on the other side of Ashland, on the east side of Ashland going towards downtown, there were housing projects. But back then, housing projects didn't have the connotation they have today. It was just that people lived in high rise buildings. But that didn't really mean anything, they were still your friends. And they were safe to go into, they were well-kept. So, it was never an issue about living in the projects. There was no real distinctive, that I'm aware of. That's just where people lived. So-- Speaker 2: That's an important point. Because people... with the stigma that public housing has today, it's hard to imagine a time when it did not. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I know what you're saying. Speaker 1: Yeah, it didn't have that at all. And so, you know, the only thing that made me different in terms of my neighborhood was that all the kids on my block went to public school. They went to Gladstone grade school [Gladstone Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. And there was another grade school I don't remember the name of. And then they all went to high school, public high school. So, that's--so I stood out for that reason. And one of the things that they used to tease me about was, they said, "Oh, you talk proper." But even then, it wasn't like it was today. Like today, when you say that to somebody, they feel that--you know, young people today don't want to be "white," as they call it. But back then it was just you talk proper, and they just thought it was funny and they teased me. But it wasn't vicious or mean, and it didn't make me feel like I should talk differently. For example, something as simple as toilet paper--I would go to the store, because the owner of the store used to laugh. I would come in and I would ask for "bathroom tissue." And he'd say, "Bathroom tissue? Is that the same as toilet paper?" (Laughter). Well, yeah. But again, that's how, you know, that's how I saw it. And that's how I was raised, and that's what I called it. But so, while the teasing was there, it wasn't mean or vicious. And it certainly wasn't meant to make me feel that I should be different in some way, or, that by being different was so unusual that-- Speaker 2: Did you feel different? Speaker 1: I felt different, but not alienated, I think is what I want to say. Speaker 2: Did you feel, I mean did people see you being a little bit more proper as encouraging--as somebody on their way up out of the neighborhood? Or were they-- Speaker 1: Well, they-- Speaker 2: Did they see it like that, or did they see it as you're... Well, you said they didn't see it in a negative way. Speaker 1: No. I mean they thought it was just funny, that I, that I, that I seemed so proper and so straight. But it was like a good thing. It was like, it's okay, you're different but it's okay. It wasn't like you're different, you should be like us. It was just, you're different. Speaker 2: I know there's a term that they use I know in Tennessee, in Memphis, called being "sdiddy." Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Well, they wouldn't--you know that got to be the issue when I was a teenage girl, because then my father [McKinley High] was very strict. And there was, and by then there were gangs, but not like the gangs we have now. I mean there were gangs like the Vice Lords and others, but not vicious, not criminal activity in the sense that you see it now. So, my father was very strict about who was allowed to come and see me. So, a lot of the boys would say I was "sadiddy" because I wouldn't talk to them. But I didn't talk to them because it was like, there was no point. (Laughter). "You can't--my father's not going to let you come to our house. And I'm not allowed to be standing around outside on the corner." I mean I had this, I could stay on the porch of our house because we had a house with a porch. So, I could be on the porch. And if you weren't acceptable, well, my father wasn't having that. You weren't going to be on the porch with me. So, a lot of guys said, "Oh, she's sadiddy." But it wasn't so much that; it was just me being practical. Story_ID: 179348 Speaker 1: Now, do you remember the blues being played in your neighborhood? Speaker 2: Oh God, yes. Oh, I love the blues. I love the blues. But growing up, my parents [McKinley High and Lucille Hoskins High] were like, "You're too young to love the blues. The blues is for grown folks." And I, I didn't understand what that meant. I love the blues. I mean I had two uncles who owned pool halls, who had jukeboxes. And you could go in there and listen to [HM] B.B. King, Muddy Waters, Ted Taylor, you name it. So, I loved the blues. And I remember being places--like, for example, I used to--like we had--The way our house was designed, we had a back porch that was enclosed, and then a backyard. So, I, in the summertime I would go out on the back porch, thinking that my father couldn't hear me. And I'd be singing 'The Thrill is Gone' and having a great time. And my father would come out there and say, "What are doing? You don't be singing that. That's grown folks music. You don't know nothing about that. You don't be singing that." But I loved it, I felt it. It was, the blues was just wonderful. And so to this day, I love the blues, I listen to the blues. I have a blues music collection. And when you went to Memphis [Tennessee], that's all you heard. On the radio station, WDIA, I remember that. Blues was the predominant music, then R & B. But blues was predominant. I remember when I would go and visit my grandparents in Mississippi. I had cousins by then that were old enough to hang out. And it was still blues. You'd go to these little garage type nightclubs, and that's what you heard. So, blues was really important. But what's funny--as much as I love the blues, it was not necessarily the music of my friends. Motown was more--because by then, I mean, let's face it '62 [1962] to '68 [1968], my friends were into Motown. So, [HM] Smokey Robinson and the Miracles, the Temptations-- Speaker 1: This isn't 'til the latter part of high school for you, right? Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: When kids were into Motown. Speaker 2: Exactly. But from the time I can remember music, I loved the blues. Story_ID: 179349 Speaker 1: Yeah now, did you ever see the bands playing on Maxwell Street? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sure. Sure, because I don't know--people told me it was John Lee Hooker. I don't know that it was John Lee Hooker, because I was, I was like maybe seven or eight. But they used to sit out on Maxwell Street on the east, going on the east side of Halsted [Avenue]. And you'd have these old guys out there singing. And I love the harmonica, so all I had to do was hear a harmonica, and I was like, I'm there. And so, I was told that one of the bands that I watched was with John Lee Hooker playing the guitar. And somebody else was on the harmonica, and there was maybe four or five guys. They were terrific. It was free. You'd stand in the street... and especially on Saturday and Sunday. And the thing was, the best blues was on Saturday. Because back then, it was thought to be not religious, a bad thing, the devil's music, to be playing the blues on Sunday. So, you didn't always get the blues on Sunday, even though that's when all the shopping was going on. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. The blues on Maxwell Street, live blues, was a feature of Chicago that really-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. And again, that was good music, free, and you could just stand there and listen all day, as long as the guys played. And you know, sure, people would put, you know, put money in a hat or in a cup or whatever they may have out there, but it was essentially free music; just wonderful music, too. Story_ID: 179350 Speaker 1: Now, what kind of a little girl were you? What did you like to do when you were growing up? I mean, what things were you most interested in? Speaker 2: Well, depending on who you talk to, when I was little girl in Memphis [Tennessee], where I spent a lot of time, I was the spoiled daughter of the youngest daughter of a big family. And everybody thought I was the greatest thing since sliced bread. And that went on until I was probably eight years old. So, that meant--but I liked boys' things more than girls' things, which is sort of an odd thing, especially back then in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s]. Because I was born in 1946. So, from '46 [1946] to '56 [1956], the toys and things that I liked playing with were boys' things, because I thought boys were having a much better time. So, I liked cowboys, for example. So at Christmas time, I wanted a cowboy outfit--not a cowgirl outfit, I wanted a cowboy outfit. I wanted Roy Rogers' guns, or Hopalong Cassidy's guns. My favorite cowboy was Lash LaRue, you know. I wanted--I got a scooter, I got a wagon. I got things like that because I preferred that to a doll. I mean dolls just, you know, what's the point in playing with a doll? And so, I guess around the time when I was eight, that was when my first sister came along, the next sister. And suddenly I wasn't the only child anymore. I wasn't allowed to just do whatever I felt like doing. And I was pretty strong-willed, and I had to learn to share, because now I had siblings. And my sister and my brother came within a year of each other. I mean, they were like just eleven months apart. So, suddenly there's two more people in my world. And I started developing--primarily because they were babies--I liked them as babies. And so I sort of liked dolls a little bit, but not to a great extent. I liked playing--in grade school, I liked playing softball. I liked playing volleyball, dodgeball, basketball. I didn't like sitting around playing with what was perceived to be girl things. Our school had a place for us to go after school called the Environment House. And at the Environment House, you could learn all sorts of things. So, my mother insisted that I learn how to dance--ballet and tap. I saw no reason (laughter) to learn to be a ballerina. I didn't know any ballerinas, never seen a black one. I thought, well, this is silly. So, I did that for like a few months and then took tap dancing. Tap dancing, I liked. Because, again, I could relate to Sammy Davis, Jr. and Bojangles, you know, Bill Robinson, because you saw them in the movies. So, I was like, oh, okay, maybe I can learn to do that. But I did that for a little while, but it wasn't really my thing. I still liked playing the games with the boys. Then they offered a program called Life Skills. And remind you, this is, this would be like 1959, 1960, where the girls were taught to cook and sew. Well, I wasn't interested in learning to cook and sew. Who cares? But I learned to do those things because those were things that were offered to the girls at the environment house. If you didn't do the dance classes, you weren't allowed to do the other stuff. But on the other hand, at recess we could play softball, dodgeball, volleyball, all the things that I liked playing. So, for me it was--I'd say until I was fifteen, I was a tomboy of sorts. And then typical of me I guess--because like a lot of--I tell people this all the time. My life is yin and yang. I'm a Gemini, and as a result, everything for me is always two-sided. At fifteen, I discovered high heeled shoes, and I just loved wearing high heeled shoes. And I wore high heeled shoes for years, even when they were killing me and they were bad for my feet. I loved high heeled shoes. Well, when you're wearing high heeled shoes, you can't do a lot of things, you know, that tomboys would do. But then I sort of changed, in that I liked dressing up on Sunday, because then I got to wear high heeled shoes. You go to Mass, and you get to wear high heeled shoes. Now, a lot of my friends were still wearing flats. But to me--they used to tease me. "Where are you going with those shoes?" But I just loved high heeled shoes. So, that sort of sets the stage I guess for the whole of my life. I enjoyed things on the extremes on some level, but all moving in an active way. Story_ID: 179351 Speaker 1: Tell us about school. Where did you go to grade school? Speaker 2: I went to grade school at a school called St. Charles Borromeo [Chicago, Illinois], which was on Roosevelt and Hoyne. And it was a Catholic high school. The parish was predominantly Italian. It was a rival to Our Lady of Pompeii [Chicago, Illinois], which was in Little Italy. It was, there were very black families in our parish, but it was a great place to go to school. We still had nuns who still wore habits. And so, we were always intimidated, because you know, they had these huge habits with the big squares. And then they seemed like aliens almost. But they were always there for you. They always cared. I mean as strict and mean as they could be, but they were also loving and caring. So, if there was a need for you to have something, or do something, or be something, they were there for you. So, I, I enjoyed being in grade school. If there was any downside to it, it was sometimes I would have fights with the kids from Gladstone [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Because I'd have to pass there going home every day, and I was the kid that went to Catholic school. Speaker 1: In a uniform? Speaker 2: And I had on a uniform, you know, those ugly blue jumpers with the white blouse and the little... And we used to have to wear these little red beanies, and we wore, you know, saddle oxfords and socks. So, you stood out. And so, sometimes kids would chase me. But once they understood that I was willing to fight back--you know, sometimes I won and sometimes I didn't--pretty soon everybody was sort of, "Okay, that's who she is. We know who she is, leave her alone." But the school itself was great. I mean, my potential was always encouraged. The school offered a lot things. I mean, we had little school trips to the zoo and places like that. But we also had people who came in that were role models. Most of the time they were white, but at least nobody ever said just because you're a black kid you can't do it, you know. They just said, "Here's... here are things. Here's some things in your life." We had, the parish itself had a teen club. So, when I graduated from eighth grade and went to high school, there was still a teen club right there in the parish with kids that I'd grown up with. Everything. Our life basically was around that school and that parish, and that church. Story_ID: 179352 Speaker 1: Okay now, now who do you remember coming to talk to the students, you know, some of the role models? Or, or who was, who were some of the teachers that you remember? Speaker 2: The people who came to speak, I don't remember by name. They were just, you know, we had a doctor come one time to explain about what doctors did. We had police officers, we had social workers. We had, I think it was somebody who--I'm trying to remember. They did something really unusual. Oh, it was an entertainer. Because this particular entertainer was an actor/singer type, who was very, who was friends with one of the nuns. And so he made a point every year of coming, and we would always be excited when he would come, and sometimes he'd bring somebody with him. But again, it was somebody that I wouldn't necessarily see other than at school or maybe in a movie. But here he was, and he came to our school, and that meant something. In terms of the nuns, I had a nun in sixth grade that was very un-nun-like to me. (Laughter). Because she was loud, she had a big booming voice. She was very athletic, very energetic, and she was always saying, "You can do anything you want. And you don't have to be a namby pamby sissy just because, you know, you're a girl." And I appreciated that, and I saw that as something important. I had a nun in eighth grade, Sister Mary Caroline Cecile, I'll never forget, who--I won a scholarship, when I graduated from eighth grade, to high school. And so, that scholarship paid for my first year in high school. And she said to me, "You got that scholarship because you not only are part of our school and our parish, and all of that, but because you have the skill to go on. You just need to, you just need to settle down." Because I was always kind of a rebel. She said, "You just need to settle down." And I appreciated the fact that she understood that yeah I was a rebel, but at the same time, I had potential. I didn't know what I was going to do. I remember looking in my eighth grade, you know how you get those autograph books when you graduated from eighth grade, where everybody signs, you know, and says all these little sentimental things to you. Well, inside of there, it said "What would you like to be?" And I said, "I want to be a lawyer." But I didn't know any lawyers. I'd never seen any other than on television. I didn't know how one went about being a lawyer. But I said it, I wrote it, and nobody said, "Oh, you can't do it." They just said, "Oh." And that makes a big difference. Story_ID: 179353 Speaker 1: Tell us about high school now. Speaker 2: Oh, high school. Oh, high school for me was different for me, in the sense that here I was in an all girls' Catholic high school [St. Mary Catholic High School, Chicago, Illinois] that I didn't want to be at. Most of my friends after grade school were going to be going to public high schools or other Catholic high schools. I was going, I didn't want to go to an all girls' school. My father [McKinley High] was not having any of that. I was definitely going to an all girls' high school. And I remember the first day I arrived in class. And I was sitting in my home room, and I realized--I looked around and I realized it's me and one other girl in--we were the only two blacks in the whole class. It turns out that the girl who sat in front of me was also black. She didn't look black, and I didn't know it at first. So, but because our names were H, she and I got to know one another, because she sat in front of me. But then pretty soon, it was like--high school at first seemed difficult. As with most freshman, you'd think high school is difficult. And I thought, well, I'm going to have to make the best of this, because my father is just not allowing me to go anywhere else. So, there I was in a high school, where we wore uniforms. And we were not allowed to wear stockings or jewelry or makeup. And for the white girls in particular, they were not allowed to wear ratted hair. Speaker 1: What? Speaker 2: It was what was called ratted hair. It's like that big bouffant, big hair (laughter). You'd have to rat your hair, brush it back a little bit, and then comb it over, and it's called ratted hair. And they couldn't wear their hair ratted. So, what was hysterical about it was all the rules that the nuns had set out for us--we also were on what's called a closed campus--we could not leave for lunch or anything. Once you got to school, you stayed at school until the end of the day. Lunch was at school; there was no reason to go outside. And they had like a little internal garden where, if for some reason you actually had to be outside, that's where you went. We even had gym inside. So, at the end of the day, we were like the old cliche. All the girls would then--right at 3 o'clock when the bell rang, you'd roll your skirt up. Because we wore these uniform skirts that were long. So, you'd roll your skirt up, you'd take your blouse out, and you'd rat your hair and you'd put your makeup on (laughter). And then you'd go outside. Because you were now going to be with the kids from the public school, who were supposedly doing all these things. Also, our school had a rule where boys were not allowed within two blocks of the school. So, for the girls who-- Speaker 1: How did they enforce that? Speaker 2: Trust me, they enforced that. Because that school had a lot of parents who were police and fire, and that sort of thing. So, they enforced it. There would be police and so forth around. So, boys were not allowed to drive around or hang around within two blocks of the school. So, all that meant was that girls went three blocks away from the school, and you'd meet your boyfriend or whatever. But again, because it was predominantly white, it was a difficult kind of vibe, in that we were in an integrated school during the day for classes and so forth, but we didn't socialize together. All the black kids went back to their neighborhood and did things, and they didn't do things with the white kids. And the white kids went back to their neighborhood and they did things. You know, we all probably were doing the same thing, but it's just that we didn't do them together. And the first dance that we had the school, that was boys and girls, was as sophomores. There were no dances in the freshman year except for the one dance, Father and Daughter. The second year, you had the sophomore dance. And we had to have it with what was called our brother school. Well, for our school, the brother school was St. Ignatius [College Prep, Chicago, Illinois]. Well, St. Ignatius was all these nerdy white boys who were not interesting at all. And that year, they had five black boys in the class. And three of them, I went to grade school with. So, I was definitely not interested in them. I mean these were the same guys I--you know, I knew them. I knew Marcus and the other guys, they were all the same. But the night of the dance, only two of the five black boys showed up. And ten of the black girls from our school showed up. So, ten girls had to try to dance with two boys. Because back then, there was no concept of integrating dancing and socializing with one another. Story_ID: 179354 Speaker 1: So, when we had plays in school, all the plays that we had, the boys came from the boys' school. But again, predominantly St. Ignatius [College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois]. The junior year, when most of us then were allowed to date kind of--meaning group dating, if anything--a lot of the black girls, we looked for boys from the public school. And most of us, including my parents, were not happy with that. They did not want us dating boys from public school. Because the boys from public school were too fast, too loose, you know, not the right sort. So, you would then look for boys from other Catholic high schools. Well, that meant Mt. Carmel [High School, Chicago, Illinois], St. Philips [Saint Philip Basilica High School, Chicago, Illinois], maybe one other school, Leo [Catholic High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Because the rest of the Catholic boys' schools were white. St. Rita [of Cascia High School, Chicago, Illinois] was almost all white. Quigley [Archbishop Quigley Preparatory Seminary] was boys who wanted to be priests. So, forget about that. And when I started dating--and I was dating boys from public school--my father was pretty strict about who they were and where they came from, what they were about. So, that meant I didn't do a whole lot of dating in high school at all (laughter). You know, and a date consisted of you've got to go to a roller skating party with other kids, or you went to the movies with other kids. Nobody that I knew really had a car. So everywhere you went, you were going on the bus, in any event. If somebody had a car, it was a fluke. And God forbid that you should be dating somebody--if you were on the West Side, dating somebody on the South Side. You had that South Side, West Side rivalry. And all the kids on the South Side thought they were superior to the kids on the West Side. And all of us on the West Side felt like, well, we're the ones who are going to do something. You people are, you're pretty, but you're all flash and no substance. So, we would have these battles. But having a boyfriend from the South Side was always a problem, because if he didn't have a car, it was always, he'd have to take a bus to visit you. And so that, of course, those romances didn't really last. So, the dating scheme of high school was very narrow, and you did a lot of group kind of things, if you did anything at all. Story_ID: 179355 Speaker 1: One of the--in terms of the academics, I was fortunate that I was always in the pre-college courses in high school. One semester I had typing and shorthand. And typing and shorthand was not me, and that didn't last. I had Latin for three years. My sophomore year, I decided I didn't like Latin, and I wasn't really going to do what I was supposed to do. And this nun, who I will never, ever forget if I get to be hundred--her name was Sister Mary Everilda [ph.]. And Sister Mary Everilda made me her project. She was determined that I was going to learn Latin if it killed me. So, at the end of my sophomore year, at summertime, instead of giving me a D and just letting me be, she gave me an incomplete and made me come the entire summer. I was her only student, and I had to come for the entire summer to learn Latin, and conjugating verbs and all of that. And it just, it taught me a lot. It taught me how, as adverse as a situation could be and when you're, you know, you're fifteen and you spent all summer learning Latin when everybody else is out having a good time, that you can overcome anything. You just have to figure out a zone to be in, and you'll survive it. And then later, it was years later, I also learned that while I may not remember all the Latin that you taught me, I learned the discipline from it. And I learned that if it's valuable or important, you need to stick with it. Because there's something further down the road where it'll be of help to you; you just don't see it right at the time. Story_ID: 179356 Speaker 1: So, and then the other major lesson that struck me in high school--I was in high school when [President] John F. Kennedy was assassinated; I was a junior in high school. And the reaction of the school and the nuns and so forth--you know, we felt like we'd lost a member of our family. He was Catholic, he was our first Catholic president. And he cared about black people and civil rights. So, all those things impacted and made us all want to do something more. And I remember also in 1963 when they had the March on Washington. I wanted to go. I was, Oh, I was going to work a part-time job and get the money, and I was going to go. But my father [McKinley High] was not having it. He said, "I'm afraid of what's going to happen." He said, "I grew up in the South, I grew up in Mississippi, and I know how white people can hurt you and harm you. And I'm not about to let my daughter go off to, you know, alone to Washington." And I'm like, "Well, I'm not alone. I'm going to be with all these people. We're going to be on the bus." He's like, "No, I don't know those people. No, you're not doing it." So, I watched the March on Washington on a newsreel because, you know, I didn't get to go. Speaker 2: There was a--local pastors were organizing the March, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: On the West Side? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Buses and-- Speaker 1: Buses and so forth. Speaker 2: Do you remember which churches? Speaker 1: I don't, I really don't. I just remember some of my friends being able to go, but that I was not. And it was an unfortunate... for me, it was unfortunate. But then at least I got to see, like I said, the newsreels and talk to my friends about what it was like. Speaker 2: Did you get a chance to see it the day it occurred on television? Speaker 1: On television when they showed it on the newsreels, you know, on the news, you got to see it. And so, but then for my father that just solidified his belief that it was the right thing to not let me go. Because he saw all those people out there, and he saw all the police and all that, and he just said "No, I'm glad that, you know, I didn't let you go there, because that would not have been a good thing." Story_ID: 179357 Speaker 1: Then in my senior year, our senior trip was to Washington, D.C. And all of the seniors didn't go, but those of us who went, there were--again there were six black students who went. I was one of six out of a total of say twenty-thirty--it was thirty kids who went, and six of us were black. And I never--it's funny, I never thought about segregation up close and personal. I mean, because I went to an integrated school all my life. I lived in the neighborhood where there were white people on both sides. And in other neighborhoods where I interacted, I was never really mistreated or called, you know, or called names. So, it just never occurred to me. But on the trip, we were taken from Washington on a bus to Virginia, to Williamsburg. And we had to stop in a place somewhere outside of Richmond [Virginia] to eat. So, when we got off the bus to go into the facility to eat, the restaurant insisted that the black girls had to all sit together at a side table off to the side, and that we had to be served separately. We had to like go up to get the food separately and everything. And the nuns were like, "Oh, no, no. We are responsible for these girls. They will stay with the group, and you will serve the group." And that was the first time I'd ever been face to face with that on a personal level. And I remember thinking, "They can't do that." But I didn't know what we were going to do. But the nuns, the nuns said "The girls stay together." And we did. They put one of us at each table, so that we wouldn't be isolated or harassed, you know. There was like--every table that had a group of white girls had a black girl. And when it came time to eat, they did it table by table, and the whole table went up to eat, to get the food, because it was like cafeteria style. And I remember all of the people who waited on us were black. But all of the, all of the... I mean behind the counter to serve the food, they were all black. And they were all so happy to see us, and just, it was startling (laughter). You know, it was like, why are you so happy to see us? We're just getting food, you know. But they were--because they saw for the first time that we were actually being served in the white dining room. And we had to sit with the white people, and we had to come up with the white people to get served. And so, they would give us extra food. So it was clear when you looked at the tables, that all of the black girls had more food. We had more everything (laughter). Because they were giving it, because they were so happy to see us. And then later when we got to the town, the place where we were going to stay in Williamsburg--because it was going overnight and we were going to visit the historic Williamsburg. The hotel--because again the nuns would not agree to us being segregated--put all of us in the back part of the hotel. But to us, we didn't care. We were young girls who, that was fun for us; we were all together. We could laugh and scream and be loud, because we were at the back part of the hotel. But again, it was the insistence that we stay together. So that, and that was like 1964. Story_ID: 179358 Speaker 1: And that was the strangest thing to me, because I'd never encountered it up close and personal. And I'll always remember it. Speaker 2: This is 1964? Speaker 1: Yeah. It was like May of '64 [1964], and I just never forgot that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Now, you were in D.C. at that time. Was the Poor Peoples Campaign and Resurrection City still going on in Washington, D.C.? Speaker 1: If so, we didn't know about it. Because what they did, was they took us on the standard Washington tour. So we went to the Congress, we went to the White House, and we went to all of the historical sites. And then we had a class picture. In fact, I still have it, of us sitting on the lawn in front of the Capitol Building. And you know, we're all--and there we are-- because we were from a Catholic school, and the nuns had rules, every day that we went sight-seeing, we had to wear hats and gloves. And so, here are all these girls sitting in this picture with these little hats and these gloves (laughter). You know, it's hysterical. I mean I imagine nowadays that people wouldn't tolerate that, but there we were. Speaker 2: Now, that was proper fashion in those days. Speaker 1: Exactly. And so, they never-- Speaker 2: Mrs. Kennedy wore it; Jackie-O always had-- Speaker 1: Exactly, hat and gloves. And so, we never were taken... If... we never saw poor people, really. We didn't see a lot of things that probably existed in D.C. We were--the nuns' attitudes were we were there to see the capital of our country and the good things, and they did not allow anything bad to happen to us. But we really didn't see anything bad, either. Speaker 2: Okay. I guess maybe they pulled it up by then. But they had the Tent City, you know, erected on the [National] Mall-- Speaker 1: I remember, I remember seeing it on the news and so forth. But I never saw it in person. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 179359 Speaker 1: So when you were a senior in high school [St. Mary High School, Chicago, Illinois], who were the major influences on you at this point? Speaker 2: Umm, you know, I don't know that there were any, in the sense that I could pick somebody out. I mean I knew--like I graduated from high school, and I understood that I wasn't going to be able to go to college unless I worked. My father said, "I can't pay for you to go to college. I want you to go to college." My teachers in school were like, "Well, you can go to a business college." Nobody was talking to me about you should go to the University of Illinois, or you should go to--I remember wanting to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and I remember applying to go to Howard. But I remember my father not wanting me to be away from home. And so, I never did. And then it was too expensive, and I didn't--and he couldn't have afforded it. So, what he did was he sent me to Cortez Peters Business School [sic, Cortez Peters Business College of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] which was on the South Side, where I learned keypunching. Well, keypunching was a precursor to computer training, in the sense that you punched these computer cards that were then fed into a computer. And that was a skill that paid good money. If you could get that job, it paid good money. So, my father's attitude was, "Well, I will help you have the skill to have a good job so that you can go to college. But you're going to have to, you're going to have to pay." So, I went to a junior college, because by then we had moved from the West Side out to East Chicago Heights. That was a chance for my parents to have a home. They built a sub-division called Sunnyfield, and it was all brand new houses. And most of the people were people who had moved from the city to the suburbs, because it was a chance to own your home, a brand new home. Well, by then I was already out of high school, because we moved out there the week I graduated from high school. Speaker 1: Now, Chicago Heights is the south suburbs? Speaker 2: It's the south suburbs. And East Chicago Heights was a small all black town east of Chicago Heights. And-- Speaker 1: There's a lot of these towns out that way. Speaker 2: Out that way. Speaker 1: Markham, Harvey-- Speaker 2: Phoenix, right. So, needless to say, when you move--here we are moving. My siblings were young enough that, you know, they were still in grade school. So, they could make new friends and sort of adjust. For me, I was eighteen, and I, it was harder. Because I had a job working in the city, so I had to take the bus and the train into the city every day to go to my job. And then I was going to college at night. And so, I didn't, I didn't really get to know the people in the community and the sense of the community that I could have, because I just wasn't there all the time. Once I'd made enough money during--working during the day, I quit working days and started working nights so I could go to school days, with the idea that I could get more classes and get more things done. So, I went to Prairie [State College, Chicago Heights, Illinois], back then it was called Bloom [Township] Junior College. But then it was later called Prairie State College. So, there I took all of the, you know, the standard junior college courses with an eye towards going on to another college; I just wasn't sure where that was going to be. Story_ID: 179360 Speaker 1: And during that time I met my husband [Adelbert Fry], who had just graduated from Southern Illinois University. And he was taking some course or another that he was interested in that he had missed, I guess. And we started dating, and then when we got married he got sent to Vietnam, and I started working as a secretary at IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois]. So, I moved into the city because I could get student housing down on 31st and Wabash. So, that's where I lived until my husband came home from Vietnam. Then I went back to school. So, I went to Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois] and I was going at night, because I was home with--by then I had a son. And by then I was home with my son during the day, and I would go to school at night. And then my husband was working during the day, because he worked for Xerox. So, we just had a regular life. And then I'd say we moved from there to, in fact, not far from here, a couple of blocks away to the high rise at 201 South Michigan. It was brand new; everything was really nice. And we moved there because it had a day care center in the building; it had a grocery store in the building; and it was perceived to be middle class living. And we thought, okay, we're moving up, life is good. And so after I graduated from Loyola, just before I graduated, actually, one of my political science professors, Michael Levitan [ph.], said to me, "What are you going to do with yourself? Are you going to go anywhere this degree?" And I said, "Well, I would like to go to law school, but I don't really know." So he says, "You should go to law school." And he says--and I said, "Well, I don't know what to do." So he said, "Well, you take the LSAT, which is the precursor to law school. You take that test." And he says "And I'll write a recommendation, and I'm sure you can get others to write a recommendation." And he did, and I got accepted at Northwestern [University School of Law, Chicago, Illinois]. And then, so I stopped working, because Northwestern is a full-time day law school. They don't have part-time, and they don't have night school. And so, I went to law school. It was, law school was really, really hard. Because I wasn't prepared for what--I wasn't prepared for a Socratic method, meaning I wasn't prepared to deal with professors asking you questions, and then you're engaging in this debate and discussion long term, and professors being particularly harsh and intense. Story_ID: 179361 Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in any political activities in the '60s [1960s] at all prior to going to law school? Speaker 2: Not really. I mean, you know, I, I don't know that I did any marches or anything like that. I was aware of all of that. Speaker 1: You said before you were interested in the March on Washington. Speaker 2: Um, hum. Speaker 1: Did you continue to follow the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Well, I followed it in terms of I knew what was going on. And like, if somebody said to me, "Would you sign a petition, or could you donate five dollars," something like that. I was doing that sort of thing. But I wasn't doing the things that people do that they were doing on college campuses, because I-- Speaker 1: You weren't involved in the black student organizations? Speaker 2: No. I mean, Loyola for example had a black student organization, but I don't remember them doing anything in particular. And by then I was married with a child, and my focus was different. Same thing--I mean like for example, my son was born the day that Fred Hampton and Mark Clark were assassinated. I mean, I remember that very well. Speaker 1: That was in '69 [1969]? Speaker 2: Nineteen--December 4, 1969. I was sitting at home watching this play out on TV, and I was in labor (laughter). I went to the hospital that night and had my son. And I tell him this all the time. I said, "You were born the day that the police took action, revolutionary action, against black people for no reason." And I said, "You need to be aware that as a young, black male this is something that you're going to have to be prepared for, for the rest of your life." And I mean, I remember being aware of it. And talk about life's ironies--later I was a law clerk for [HM] James Montgomery, a pretty prominent attorney here in Chicago [Illinois], who represented the families of Fred Hampton and Mark Clark in the civil suit against the Chicago Police Department. And I was a law clerk for him, so I got to watch, to learn, what really happened. I got to look at the mark-up of the apartment, and realized all of the bullets going into the house but none coming out, those sorts of things. Speaker 1: The famous door. Speaker 2: Right. And there was a book written about it later, and I gave that to my son. I said, I said, "There are very few things that people can say happened on the day that they were born. Here's something of real significance that you need to be always aware of." And so, things like that, I remember. I remember wanting to be involved in a demonstration in support of [HM] Angela Davis and being there, but being like on the fringe. Because I didn't, I didn't really know the people. Everybody there seemed to be part of the revolution, and everybody seemed to be, you know, part of the whole thing. And I didn't, I was there because I thought it was important. But I didn't really know the people. I knew the issues, but I wasn't engaged in the same way. So, in that, in that sense I was always aware, but not always engaged. Story_ID: 179362 Speaker 1: Now, who were some of your professors at Northwestern Law School [Northwestern School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] that--I guess it's sort of difficult--but were any of them, any of your professors helpful? Speaker 2: Yes. Ron Kennedy, who was one of the first black professors that they had, was... he was very much involved in setting up what has now become the Minority Bar Review course. He was working on that at the time, and he was very supportive. He was an advisor; he helped me with my papers and research, and things that I had to do. Later, it was Tom Todd, "TNT," [HM] Thomas Nathaniel Todd, (laughter) who was always supportive of the black students, and kept saying, "I know that you all don't understand how important it is for you to be here and do what you do." Because my class, my entering class of '73 [1973], was again a class where they had more blacks and more women than they'd ever had in the law school. So, I went in at a critical, critical time. Also, Professor Victor Rosenblum, who told me that I didn't have to give in to the push, which was, at Northwestern everybody graduates and goes to a big law firm or corporate America. He said, "No, you don't have to." And I didn't-- Story_ID: 179363 Speaker 1: Professor [Victor] Rosenblum-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --presented the possibility that there's something else to do other than just go to a big law firm. Speaker 2: Exactly. He, he talked about public service, he talked about getting involved in all sorts of alternatives that I never thought about or heard about. And then we had a professor, a black professor came to teach tax law, Sam Thompson. He was, he had an effect not in the way that one thinks, in that he and I would talk about issues, but he never seemed to quite give you the right direction. He would listen, but his advice was always kind of, like, disconnected. And, and, but because of that, I had a person to talk to who was slightly disconnected, which always then forced me to think about "Well, he just said... I don't think I want to do that." So, it made me, so, some people have an effect on you when you don't really think that they do. Story_ID: 179364 Speaker 1: So, but law school was difficult. And in fact, after the second year, I dropped out for over a year. I didn't think--it was really hard trying to be a law student, a wife, a mother. All of that just got to be overwhelming, and I had to re-think it. But as luck would have it, I was able to go back and finish and graduate. And-- Speaker 2: Well, what made it possible for you to go back? Speaker 1: Well, I think my friends, my family. My husband was very supportive, because he was having to pay the tuition because I wasn't getting any loan money. And his willingness to sacrifice some things that he wanted to do to pay for me to go, and his constant saying, "You know, you don't have much left to finish. So, finish. It's hard, but we can do this." The sense that my father [McKinley High] was disappointed that I didn't finish, and the fact that my mother [Lucille Hoskins High] had at fifty gone back to college. And I mean she had, you know, five kids at home and everything else, and she did it. So, the more I talked to people, and the more I thought about it, I realized yeah, I just have to get more focused and not be sidetracked. Because one of the things that happened--and I say this to young women today. One of the things that happened was I lost my focus. I got caught up in hanging out in the student lounge talking to students about issues and debating. I loved to debate and talk about issues and all of that. Well, that took up valuable study time, and it took up time that I should have been more focused. And the students, most of whom were single and lived in the dorm, they could hang out and be foolish all day, because they could then go study all night. I couldn't do that. At night when I left school, I had to go and pick up my son from daycare. I had to cook dinner, I had to make sure my son was put to bed, and then study. And then, try to get everything done for the next day, you know. And I didn't realize the toll that it was taking. But once I understood that, and prioritized, then I went back and I kept my eye on the prize and I did it, and I graduated. And once I graduated I was fortunate, because I was law-clerking for [HM] Jim Montgomery. And I said to him, "You know, I like trial work. I want to do trial work, but I don't know how to go about that." Story_ID: 179365 Speaker 1: Now, before we jump that far--now how did you get--[HM] James Montgomery is an important Chicago [Illinois] attorney. And how did you get a position with Jim Montgomery? Speaker 2: Again, story of my life, yin and yang. A friend of my husband's at Xerox said he knew a woman, a black woman lawyer, who was looking for a law clerk, and he recommended me. He told her about me, and me about her. And it turns out she worked for Jim Montgomery. And she was one of the first women Jim had ever hired; Jim was not known for hiring women. So, she insisted that she wanted a woman law clerk. And so, I went over and I interviewed. And Jim said, "You know, well, you're married and you've got a family. We have great expectations for a law clerk to do a lot of work here. So, if you're willing to do it, we're willing to hire you, but you need to think about it," which is typical of Jim. So, I went home and I talked to my husband about it. And he said, "Well, this is an opportunity of a lifetime. And since you've always said you didn't know any lawyers and you've never worked for one, now's a chance to work for the best. Go ahead." So I did, and Jim was right, it was hard work. And many times we'd be working on a project, and I'd have to do research, or I've have to stay and do a report or something late into the evening. And I'd have to say to him, "Jim, I need to go pick up my son from daycare." And Jim's standard response was, "Fine, go pick your kid up and bring him back here, because I still want this work done." So, I learned a lot, because I learned how to manage my time. I learned to prioritize. I learned to get more adept at doing things that seemed hard at first, but that you can do it. And I learned an incredible amount from him about the law, about the practice of law, about what lawyers do, what good lawyers do, what ethical lawyers do. So, I would have never on my own thought to go and ask him for a job. I would have never thought to even try to meet or know him. But because of a friend who said there's a woman who's looking for a law clerk, I got to work with not only--her name was Diane Kinnard. And I not only got to work with Diane, but I got to work with Jim Montgomery. And it was through Jim that I made the decision that I wanted to be a trial lawyer--that I wanted to be like him. And I made the decision to go to the Public Defender's Office, because I could try cases. I had applied--it's funny, because I had applied to both the Public Defender's Office and the State's Attorney's Office, because all I wanted to do at that point was try cases. But I realized that philosophically I was more attuned to defense work than prosecution, and the opportunity to go to the Public Defender's Office was something that I hadn't anticipated as quickly as it came, but it did. And Jim was very encouraging, and so I went to the Public Defender's Office. Story_ID: 179366 Speaker 1: Okay now, is there something in your background that makes you more suitable for the Public Defender's Office than the prosecutor's office? I mean, is there some things that you saw growing up, or personal things that have happened to you that makes you think that you're more suitable? Speaker 2: Well, probably it's the notion that I have a strong belief in justice and fair play. And I have a strong belief in that people have rights that ought to be protected. And I've had that ever since I was a kid. I didn't define it necessarily as being a public defender. I defined it more as--when somebody tells you that you can't do something because of your gender or your race or your age or whatever--something inside of me just rebelled against that. And I always felt like, well, everybody should have an opportunity to do whatever they can do, or want to do. And if they can't, somebody ought to fight for them. And so that, that was the philosophy that sort of led me down the path to being a public defender. I see defense work as guaranteeing rights to people. I mean, all of the rights that people enjoy today, they enjoy it because some criminal defense lawyer fought for the right to counsel, fought for the right to have an attorney present during a statement, fought against search and seizure. These are all things that the Constitution guarantees, but unless somebody fought for it, it didn't happen. So, going into criminal defense work suited me, it really did. Story_ID: 179367 Speaker 1: Now, this is the early '70s [1970s], right? Or mid-seventies? Speaker 2: No, I actually graduated from law school in 1979, and I went to the Public Defender's Office in 1980. Speaker 1: Okay. And the first day in the office, I was in a courtroom. That was kind of a surprise. I wasn't prepared for it, because back then the Office really didn't do the kind of training that it does now. So, essentially you were a lawyer. You were given an assignment, and you appeared in court. So, my first assignment was in Women's Court at 11th and State. And I represented hookers in the morning, and shoplifters in the afternoon. And I hadn't had any--other than the work I'd done for Jim Montgomery [HM James D. Montgomery], I hadn't had any training for how to represent people one on one in court. Speaker 2: Now, this kind of speaks to a problematic, you know, scenario in the justice system-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --where you've got public defenders that are not trained to represent the people. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Absolutely. And I mean that's the thing that struck me as being a real problem and a real negative--that--and it was one of the things that later the Office itself learned to change, and give people training before you send them to court. But back then, you were just sent to court. So, my first case, my client helped me through it (laughter). And that's the irony. Speaker 2: The client had been there before? Speaker 1: Right. I mean, she'd been there so many times (laughter). And so, she explained to me about what a plea bargain was. She explained to me about whether or not she was going to have to take a bench trial or a jury. And I was saying to her, "Okay, well, we're going to take a jury trial. And you know, they had no right to do this to you." And she said, "Listen, Honey, we're going to take this plea bargain. I'm going to take my two days' time served. I'm going to go home, and you're going to have the next case." And I said, "But, don't you want a trial?" And she said, "No, I don't want a trial. I want to go home. And the only way I'm going to go home is to plea bargain this, and you're going to accept it." So, that was my first client, and I learned from her. And then forty clients later, in the same day, I had it down to a science--what to... what questions to ask, what to do, and so forth. Speaker 2: Forty clients later, in the same day? Speaker 1: In the same day. There were forty hookers, actually, forty-two hookers, sitting on the bench, on the hard seats as they're called. So, when the judge walked out--and I introduced myself to the judge as the public defender assigned to his courtroom and this was my first day--I said, "Judge, I haven't had a chance to talk to my clients yet, they're in the lockup." And he said, "No, they're not, just turn around." And I turned around and there were these forty-two women sitting on the bench. One after another. Story_ID: 179368 Speaker 1: So, forty cases represents forty conversations, forty adjustments or, you know, pleas. Is this a typical load for a public defender? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: In a day? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. So, I--you go through, you go through each case as best you can. You learn all of the techniques that you need to learn, which you're essentially learning on the job. And-- Speaker 1: There seem to be two problematics here. First of all, you're learning on the job. And then, you've got all this, this huge caseload. How long does it take to try all of these cases, or to-- Speaker 2: Well, what you wind up doing, is that you don't try them all. That's the key. You plea bargain a good many of them. The ones that are going to require a trial, you continue for another day, so that you can plan for it. And some cases are continued because the witnesses aren't there, or a police officer's not there, or things of that sort. So, now these are misdemeanor cases, and most of the time people are not going to be getting a lot of time in jail, or any time in jail, frankly. So, back in 1980, that was forty cases in the morning. Remember, these are all morning cases. Then I had a whole afternoon call of people who were out on a bond who were--basically there may be a few in jail--but mostly out on a bond on shoplifting cases. Speaker 1: Now, this is almost like traffic court or something. Somebody calls a ticket, and docket--the person stands up and-- Speaker 2: Right. So you--so what I learned to do was I learned to come early, so that I could go back in the lockup and talk to as many women as I could. Because, I was fortunate, because most of these women had been through the system a lot of times. They knew the, they knew the drill. So, it was easy for me to talk to the ones who said, "Okay, I'll take the time served, because I can go home today." And then the ones who said, "Well, this was a bad arrest, and I want to fight it," you talk to them about a trial and when they'd have a trial, and whether or not they could bond out, and that sort of thing. So, that was my introduction to trial work. But I loved it, loved it. Story_ID: 179369 Speaker 1: Typically in a day like that, how many really want a trial? Speaker 2: Out of forty, maybe two-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --would want a trial. Speaker 1: They say that they were arrested erroneously for prostitution? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, they say they weren't doing that? Speaker 2: Right. Or, that some other thing had happened, you know, and so therefore they wanted a trial. But those would be rare. Most of the time these are people who had been through the system before. So, I went from hookers in the morning to shoplifters in the afternoon. Then my next assignment was in Gun Court. So then, all the people coming in were people who were charged with possession of an illegal weapon. So, then you learn to do what's called motion practice. So, you spend most of your time doing motions to suppress the arrest and seizure of the gun. And you'd have fewer of those cases, but nonetheless those took longer, because you had to do the motions. And then after a while, you could, you could do them in your sleep. Because, I mean the language and the requirements were the same, and so you'd do those. Then you'd go from that to misdemeanor bench trials. And you'd do fewer of those. But you could do maybe three or four a day. Depending on the judge, you could do three or four bench trials--calling witnesses and cross-examining witnesses and so forth. And then you'd go, you'd move to misdemeanor juries. And you'd have, obviously, fewer of those because you've got to put twelve people in the box and present the case. So, a trial might take a day or two days, but you only did that one. Story_ID: 179370 Speaker 1: Then I got assigned to the Felony Division at 26th and California [Chicago, Illinois]. So, I was assigned to a courtroom. My very first court assignment as a Felony Assistant was in front of Judge [HM] R. Eugene Pincham, which was a life's lesson in many ways. Speaker 2: Yeah he's one of the legends too alongside Montgomery [HM James D. Montgomery](simultaneous)--. Speaker 1: Yeah, because he had been a, yeah, because he had been a star defense attorney. So, just sitting with him in the quiet times and in the off times--learning lessons from him was great. And he was very demanding as a trial judge, so he forced you to be on your toes. And you learned a lot, because a lot was required. And then after him, my next felony assignment judge was Judge William Cousins [HM William Cousins, Jr.]. And again, Judge Cousins worked long hours, was very, very smart, very intense, and had a lot of requirements. So, again, you learned how to do a really good, thorough job in your presentation. Because this was a man who expected that, and held you to that standard. And then after that I had, I think, Judge Gino DiVito for a while, and then one other judge. And then I got the opportunity in 1983 to go into the Murder Taskforce. Story_ID: 179371 Speaker 1: The Murder Taskforce of the Public Defender's Office was a very elite group of lawyers who did only murder cases and capital cases. And at the time that I went in there, they had only ever had one black person before, and he was still there. He's now a judge, Jim Rhodes. And there was one woman, Clare Hillyard. And so, I became the second woman and the second black in that division, and the first black woman in that division. And I stayed in that division until I left the office. I did nothing but murder and death cases. And again, because as I said to you before, my life is yin and yang. While I was in the Public Defender's Office in '83 [1983], I joined with six other people to sue the Public Defender's Office for discrimination. So, that kind of changed things as well. Speaker 2: Now what was your assessment of that situation? And why did you sue? Speaker 1: Well, at the time, the Public Defender's Office had approximately 320 lawyers in the office, and only seventeen black lawyers in the office. And of that seventeen, only one was a supervisor. And he really supervised a unit where he was not included in the supervisor's meetings. He was not allowed to really interact with making policy or anything. And we thought, well, that's totally unfair, because the minority lawyers were not being promoted, were not given opportunities. And the public defender at the time was a good person, James Doherty, who was a good person... who was a caring person who had a national reputation in criminal defense. It's just that he didn't see--he was more concerned about the representation of the clients and less concerned about the administration of the office. So, he didn't see the issues. When he was presented with the issues, he was like, "Okay, well, this is something we can solve." But it was not quite that, quite that simple. And so, as the case progressed, it caused disharmony in the office. Because a number of my colleagues felt that--you know, they said, "Well, you have a lot of nerve. You've only been in the office three years. We've been in the office for years. How dare you sue us? How dare you say that we're racist?" You know, and I'm saying, "I'm not saying that you're racist. I'm saying that the system is not open and fair, and it's not you personally." But a lot of people took it personally, and a lot of people were abusive to those of us involved in the lawsuit. Story_ID: 179372 Speaker 1: So lawyers are appointed to the Public Defender's Office? Speaker 2: Yeah, they are-- Speaker 1: Appointed through the-- Speaker 2: Back then they had something called The Committee on Help. The Committee on Help was made up of five presiding judges who interviewed potential Assistant Public Defenders. And then, you were either accepted or rejected. If you were accepted, then you were then interviewed supervisors in the Public Defender's Office, and then you were hired. Once you were hired. And I went through that process. I was interviewed by The Committee on Help, and then I was interviewed by the lawyers in the office, and then I was hired. And then once you're hired, you're assigned, and you just move through the system. And everybody thought that worked fine, except for the fact that minorities were not being promoted. So, once the suit actually was up and going, in fact, Stan Willis [HM Standish E. Willis] was our lawyer, who's a prominent attorney here doing police brutality cases. Well, at the time, he was with a firm called The People's Law Office. And the People's Law Office and Stan Willis represented us. And as we were going through the process, we also discovered through the hiring of an expert witness that the Public Defender's Office was paying the women lawyers less than the men for the same job. And the explanation was that the men had families (laughter.) And so as a result of that, during the pendency of the suit, the Public Defender's Office hired their expert who confirmed our expert. So, the case was ultimately settled. And after the case was settled, the office went to a more structured process for hiring, a better training program, and a more structured vehicle for promotion. So it was, it was an interesting time, because I was involved in that just as I was going into the Murder Taskforce. And a lot of people said, "Well, you're, you're already privileged, because you're going into the Murder Taskforce. And a lot of us..." --a lot of white males--"...we're not in the Taskforce. We weren't invited to be in." You know, and my position was "I don't control who gets invited to be a member of the Murder Taskforce. I'm happy to be in here, and I'm going to do a good job, but that's not something in my control. And it wasn't something that I could impact one way or the other." And strangely enough, it helped me. Because I was so busy and so involved with my cases, I didn't have time to dwell on the pettiness or the abuses from my colleagues about the suit. Once the suit was resolved and settled, what was interesting--well, the interesting outgrowth of it was that many of the lawyers in the office felt that the settlement--as part of the settlement there was going to be affirmative action. Now mind you, this is 1986. There was no affirmative action piece involved in it. But a lot of them thought that that was going to happen. So, what happened was after years of saying no, the lawyers in the office decided to join the union. And they joined the union, and the first thing in the contract was that seniority would always govern promotion. And so, since the minority lawyers were always the last hired, that meant they would always be the last promoted as well. But it sort of made everybody feel more comfortable with the results of the lawsuit. I think the lawsuit was important and valuable. Clearly, once the court determined that the women were being paid less than the men for the same job, the court, the federal court, declared a class, and it became a class action. And all of the women except two in the office signed on to the class. And so, as a result, women and men were treated the same and paid the same. So, I'm very happy and very proud about that. And later, it would come into play when I became the Public Defender. Because as the Public Defender, I was the first woman to ever be the Public Defender of Cook County [Illinois]. And I was responsible for hiring more women than the office ever had. Story_ID: 179373 Speaker 1: Now, I just want to go back and ask you, you started in 1980? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980]. Speaker 1: And was there... did you notice... In 1980, the [Cook County] State's Attorney was Richard [M.] Daley [sic, Daley served as Cook County State's Attorney 1981-1989], who is now the mayor. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And the atmosphere in the country was law and order, lock 'em up, you know. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Ronald Reagan was the president and he had been the governor in California, and he had a lock 'em up policy, "Let's get these criminals off the street." Some have called it a repressive kind of regime of, you know, draconian almost, you know. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Lock everybody up, you know, that would be a solution to street crime--just sweeps and-- Speaker 2: Sure-- Speaker 1: --all of that. Speaker 2: All that, yeah. Speaker 1: Harold Washington was elected here in Chicago in 1983. Did the atmosphere change any when Harold Washington was elected? Or did you see, did you notice any difference in-- Speaker 2: Not in terms of the crime rate or the police department. Because remember, the city of Chicago is one city within the County of Cook. And so, the State's Attorney represents the County of Cook. And so, you're talking about crime across... over a hundred municipalities. So, the State's Attorney was always very strict in terms of the way the State's Attorney's Office was laid out. Only the first chair in a courtroom--meaning the most senior State's Attorney in a courtroom--could determine the level of plea bargains in certain kinds of cases--crimes of violence, murder, rape, home invasion. That was when the law changed as well, to make it a Class X, so those crimes got greater penalties and no probation, which meant those cases had to be tried. So, that whole law and order mentality made for a more tense time, because you had cases that suddenly--where maybe you could have plea-bargained for something less than prison time--now automatically carried a prison sentence. So, unless the State's Attorney was willing to reduce the charge, you were going to be going to trial on these cases, because there was really no alternative. So, you didn't sense a change, in terms of the way the police or the State's Attorney dealt with crime. You simply saw under Harold Washington a greater awareness about how it was impacting minorities. Story_ID: 179374 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the corporation counsel's office under Mayor Washington. You joined the staff in '86 [1986]? Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986], yes. I had always admired Harold Washington, and had always--because he had graduated from Northwestern [University School of Law, Chicago, Illinois]; he graduated from my law school. That was incredible to me. And I had an opportunity to meet him when he was in Congress, and I just thought he was the greatest thing ever. And when he became mayor, I mean, I had worked on his campaign, just another worker getting petitions, doing fundraisers and all of that. And I just always had admired him, but never thought I'd get a chance to work under him. And the opportunity came in 1986. And I left the Public Defender's Office and I went to the Corporation Counsel's Office, ironically enough, as supervisor--Senior Attorney and Supervisor for Municipal Prosecution. So, I went from being a defense attorney doing death penalty work to being a city prosecutor. The difference was, as a city prosecutor, I was still doing things philosophically that I liked doing. Because I wasn't dealing with criminal cases in terms of petty crimes, but rather prosecuting on behalf of the city slum landlords, environmental protection violations. I was working with the police department instead of in opposition to them, in terms of things, like, I was the person that would go with them when there would be marches. So, for example if there was a civil rights march or any kind of march or protest, part of my job was to advise the police on how to handle it, what to do, and to be on the scene. So those were things that I was really looking forward to-- Speaker 1: How to do the right thing? Speaker 2: How to do the right thing. Speaker 1: Well historically, you know, Chicago has a big stain on it from 1968 and from '69 [1969]--I mean '68 [1968] being the civil--I mean the Democratic-- Speaker 2: The Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention]. Speaker 1: The convention protests, and then the way the police mishandled that, and then of course the murder of Fred Hampton [December 4, 1969]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It was a horrible act that still is not--I mean it's been resolved in a civil court, but not as a criminal case. Speaker 2: Exactly. So, those were the kinds, so I was looking forward to that. So, I went in as a Senior Attorney and Supervisor for Municipal Prosecution. And the first day on the job, me and the chief of that division, David Atkins, it was great. Because we were--at that time Jim Montgomery [HM James D. Montgomery] was no longer the court counsel. It was now Judson Miner. Story_ID: 179375 Speaker 1: Well, Jud [Judson] Miner took us in, David [Atkins] and myself, to meet Harold Washington in the Mayor's Office. I was so excited. My first time ever in the Office of the Mayor of the City Chicago was with a black man, Harold Washington, an alumni of my law school, a person that I had met before. And I, you know, he said, "Well, welcome. You know, my administration is about fairness and equality, and we're looking forward to having you here." So, that made a big impact on me. So, I went to work for the City and it was terrific. Because Harold--and I feel like I can call him Harold, Harold believed in an open process. He believed in equal process. He believed that every person who had something to contribute should be allowed to contribute. And that was always the watch word in his administration. And even people who criticized him for maybe lack of efficiency could never criticize him for lack of fairness. Story_ID: 179376 Speaker 1: And so, for the two years that I worked there, I had just an incredible experience of working with many different kinds of people. I mean even, for example, there was a demonstration that was done in Gage Park [Chicago, Illinois]--well actually Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois]. And it was a black woman who had gotten a permit to do a march and a picnic in Marquette Park. And for anybody living in Chicago, you know black people did not go to Marquette Park. And that's the one place where Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], when he appeared, was stoned. And it was not a comfortable place for black people to be. And this woman had gotten a permit. And the day of the march and the picnic in the park, as the Assistant Corporation Counsel, I was the person who sat down with the district commander for the police department and for the Park District and everyone, to talk about what the role of the police would be--what the expectations were, how people were going to be treated, and how people were going to be protected if in fact there was a counter-demonstration or there was violence. And it was understood by everybody in that room that as the representative of the Corporation Counsel and the representative of the Mayor of the City of Chicago, there was not going to be a repeat of what had happened in the past. And it was a good feeling, because everybody knew it. Everybody understood it wasn't a wink and a nod situation. This was Harold Washington, and as the Mayor of the City of Chicago, demands this, and this is what it's going to be. And so, her march went off. It turns out she didn't get as many people as she had hoped. But it did cause some consternation for some people in the park, but there was no violence. There were curiosity seekers, clearly. There was some concern about why--you know, from some of the white community--why is this happening in our community, why don't you people go back to your community? But there was no violence. The police understood what was required of them. The police were told that they couldn't allow anybody to do anything improper, and they were vigilant. And, but I'm sure that part of it was because this was the message from the mayor. And as a black woman who was the Assistant Corporation Counsel there to work with them, I was there to provide oversight as well as support. And so that, those were the kinds of things that make a difference, you know, that I never thought I'd ever have the chance to do. So, the two years that I got to work for Harold were just tremendous. I was there working for Harold the day that he died. It was, it was the most heartbreaking thing. I mean, everybody in my unit, I mean we just broke down into tears. I mean we could not believe he was gone. Because here was a man that had really changed the thinking, the actions, and the will of the people of Chicago, and who had been a positive force. And I mean and he was gone, and it was, it was quite a loss. I remember it very well, sitting in my office that day when the call came in that the mayor was taken to the hospital. Story_ID: 179377 Speaker 1: So, you stayed until 1989? Speaker 2: Until 1988. Speaker 1: Eighty-eight [1988], okay. Speaker 2: And at that time the Public Defender's Office, due to not only the previous lawsuit that I was engaged in, but a number of things, had been under fire to make some changes. And the determination was made to change public defenders. And Jim [James] Doherty was out, and they were looking for a new one. And they hired Randolph Stone [HM Randolph Noel Stone], who was the first black public defender. And he came from Washington, D.C. I mean, he had been a Chicago [Illinois] resident and had practiced in Chicago and left went to D.C., and was now coming back. They hired him as the new public defender. And so, I got a call from him one day saying, "I'd like to talk to you about the Public Defender's Office." So, I said sure. And so I met him and talked to him about my perceptions about the office, the issues that I thought he might encounter, who I thought, you know, might be supportive, who I thought might not be, the good old boys network, the whole thing. So we had a long talk, and I wished him luck and left thinking, "Thank God I don't have that job; that's going to be a tough job." And he called a few weeks later to offer me a position with the office. And I was reluctant, I'll be honest, I was reluctant to go back. I said, well, it's going backwards. I've been there, done that. I don't know that I want to go there. And I called Jim Montgomery [HM James D. Montgomery] and I asked his advice. And he said, "Go. It's not stepping back, it's moving forward." He said, "You have an opportunity to work for the first black man to hold that job. The majority of the people you represent are minorities. And you won't be going backwards, you'll be going forward because you're going to be going as First Assistant, you'll be in charge." So I called Randy and I said, "Okay, I'll take the job." And so, I went back in August of 1988. Story_ID: 179378 Speaker 1: And indeed, the first few weeks were a little tense. Because when I came back, most of the people that had, who had been there when I'd been there were still there. Most of the people who had been hostile to me when I was there, were still there (laughter). Speaker 2: And still hostile? Speaker 1: And still hostile. And so, [HM] Randolph [Noel] Stone called a meeting of all the assistants, and primarily the ones at 26th and California, because they would be the people who I knew. The new people would not be in First--would be in First Municipal. So, we met at 26th and California, all the people who had been in the office. And he said to them, "This is Rita Fry. She's my new First Assistant. I know that some of you might have some concerns. She is here to answer any questions and talk to you." And he turned it over to me. So I said, you know, "I am back, I am happy to be back. Public defense is something I've built my career on. I'm hoping that we can bring about some changes in the office--better training, better opportunities--and I hope that we can work together. The past is the past." One of the guys raised his hand and said to me, "How do we know we can trust you to not retaliate against us for things that happened to you?" And I don't know where this came from, it was just spontaneous. I looked at him and I said, "You can trust me because I am a public defender at heart. But more importantly, I'm the boss, I don't have to retaliate." And they all looked shocked, but they understood it, and that was that. Story_ID: 179379 Speaker 1: And so, from that point on, I just was there to do my job. And with Randolph Stone [HM Randolph Noel Stone], we did a lot of creative things to change the office and upgrade the office. Because Randolph had been in Washington in the Public Defender Service, which was a model defender office. It had been created by Congress and funded by Congress. So, he brought a lot of their ideas to the Public Defender's Office. And so, we suddenly, we now--where we had training maybe here and there, we had a full training course that taught lawyers from day one how to try cases, how to interview witnesses, how to interview clients, how to, where to go, where was the jail? How to read the code... all of that. And they, so they went through three weeks training before they were assigned clients. We had a better system for promotion. We had requirements from people in terms of the number of trials they'd done, the number of jury trials, things like that. Randolph [HM Randolph Noel Stone] believed that the office should have a higher profile. Yes, we represented people who were accused of crime, but that didn't mean that we didn't have a voice, and that we didn't matter. We were a major component to the criminal justice system. How could we not have a voice? How could we not have some authority? We deserved some respect. And so, with that directive, I moved forward as the First Assistant. And my job was the day to day operations of the office, to make sure that the office ran well; to make sure that if there were communication with the elected officials; if it there was communication with the union; issues around budget; all these things were day to day operational things that I did. And we accomplished a lot of good things as a result of that. Story_ID: 179380 Speaker 1: And in 1991--I mean Randy [HM Randolph Noel Stone] came in in 1988 and left in 1991 to go to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. And he became the first black law professor they'd had there since, I believe Bob Ming [William Robert Ming]. So, it was fifty years, almost fifty years. So, when he left, the issue was well, who would be the next public defender? And just about that time, the law changed. In the past, the public defender had been appointed by the Chief Judge of the Circuit Court. So, just when Randolph was leaving, the Chief Judge of the Circuit Court at that time was Harry Comerford, the very person I had sued when I had sued the Office (laughter). So, there was some concern that perhaps he might not be interested in appointing me as public defender, but indeed he was. He understood that one thing had nothing to do with the other. So, he announced that he was appointing me as a public defender, as the next public defender. Well, there was a law that had been pending in Springfield [Illinois] to make us independent of the court. And just when he announced that I was being appointed, the law changed. And it said that the public defender would now be appointed by the president of the County Board. So, I went from being the next appointed public defender to the acting public defender, as one of fifty-two candidates for the job. So, it went from fifty-two candidates to ten, to three. And then in February of '92 [1992], Dick Phelan, who was the president of the County Board at that time, selected me. And under the statute, I had a six-year term. And I was then sworn in before the full County Board, and became the first woman to be the Public Defender of Cook County in the history of the office. And the office had been in place since 1930. Story_ID: 179381 Speaker 1: Well, what have been the--what would you see as your legacy as the head of the Public Defender's Office? Speaker 2: Ooh, I would like to say that part of my legacy is bringing the office into the 21st century, with computers, so that lawyers have access not only to computers, laptops, to better training, to better opportunities to use expert witnesses. We increased our expert witness budget. When I left in April of this year, 2003, our budget was $50 million. With that $50 million, we were able to upgrade the level of training, the level of technology, the use of investigators, expert witnesses. And the other thing that I'm very proud of is the fact that we were considered equal to the other components of the criminal justice system. We were not the stepchild. We were not those people that represented the underbelly of the criminal justice system. Speaker 1: That's very important. Speaker 2: We were seen as lawyers who were professional, who were doing their job, who were well-trained, who were committed, who were equipped. And when issues came up within the criminal justice system, we could be called upon to be expert witnesses. Suddenly, we had an opinion; our opinion mattered. We had stature, and I'm very proud of that. Because, I mean, on a personal level, what that did for me was it gave me the opportunity to go to Africa, to Ethiopia and set up a public defender office. Because people had heard about how things were going in the Cook County Public Defender's Office, I had an opportunity to go to China and lecture in Beijing and Shanghai about the role of a public defender, the rights of people to be represented by counsel, whether they can afford it or not--all because people understood that what we and the Cook County Public Defender's Office did mattered, was valuable and professional and responsible. So the personal goals that I was able to accomplish also impacted the office, and the office impacted me. When there were issues about changes in the law in the past, you'd get the state's attorney being asked; you'd get maybe probation; you'd maybe the court, but nobody ever asked the public defender. Now, nothing happened in the system that the public defender wasn't asked about. I mean, I was on under Governor [George] Ryan. I was on the committee to deal with juvenile justice, and changes in the juvenile code, and the juvenile law. Because as a public defender, we had a voice; we participated, we had something to say. And we were necessary, we were necessary to the process. When Governor Ryan decided to re-write the criminal code, I was made a vice-chair along with a prosecutor. In the past, that wouldn't have happened. The prosecutor would have dominated, and we would have had to stand on the outside giving comments that may or may not have mattered. But I was on the inside saying this is how the criminal justice system can be made better and fairer. On the governor's Death Penalty Commission, I was there to say, this is what happens when poor people are represented in these death penalty cases. This is, these are the resources that are necessary. This is the way the case is being handled. You should not only look at it from the prosecutor's perspective. So, these are areas where I think my legacy will be--that the Public Defender's Office has stature, it has a voice, and it has greater respect than it's ever had. Story_ID: 179382 Speaker 1: Some of the things that you mentioned, I want to talk about. For the past, I guess, ten years in Cook County [Illinois], the prosecution--I mean the number of young black men and young Hispanic men that are going to prison have been astronomical. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: It keeps accelerating. And the crimes that were once juvenile crimes are now--I mean the juvenile code is under constant attack, you know. It's almost like there's no juvenile court anymore to some, you know-- Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Speaker 1: There's no recognition that a juvenile is innocent--is not the same as an adult--when they commit a violent crime. Speaker 2: Exactly. And, and, but, you know, that's changing. Under the Juvenile Code, a child from technically ten years old to the age of sixteen--their cases will all be heard in Juvenile Court, whatever the offense. Then through a series of legislative changes, certain violent offenses were to be tried as adults automatically. Story_ID: 179383 Speaker 1: One of the problems that has come about in this country is we allowed a few people to dictate to the system how it would operate. And the first thing that happened is young black males were defined as "super predators." We all know by all the newspaper articles and magazine articles that suddenly said young black men are super predators, they're out of control, the only thing you can do is lock them up. So, you had states across this country passing laws creating the automatic transfer of young people from juvenile court to adult court, all with an eye towards stemming the super predator. Suddenly, you had systems talking about the need for juvenile prisons. I mean for example in Illinois, we had the Youth Division of the Illinois Department of Corrections in St. Charles. And suddenly, there was talk about expanding that, because more young people need to go to prison. So, you were talking about sending fifteen and sixteen year olds and seventeen year olds to prison--not to a detention center, not to home arrest, things like that--but to prison. And as a result of that, the system became completely out of control. And in the last, I'd say in the last four years there has been a move to something different. People recognize you can't solve problems of poverty, lack of education, lack of opportunity--you can't solve that sending people to prison. You've got to do something else. So, they created this process called balanced and restorative justice. In that, it gives young people who have been accused of criminal activity an opportunity to be rehabilitated. And if they are rehabilitated, then their records are expunged and then they can get on with their lives. Expungement is really important. One of the things that Congressman Danny Davis has been pushing is expungement. Because even with young black men who do commit a crime and pay the price, when they get out of prison or out of jail, they have these criminal records which make it almost impossible for them to get good jobs, get a--even a student loan. You can't get a Pell grant if you've got certain kinds of convictions. Speaker 2: Even an I.D. At one point, they couldn't get an I.D. Speaker 1: Exactly. So, the change that has come about has come about primarily for practical reasons. People suddenly realized that you can't solve the problem putting everybody in jail. You have to do it differently. And one of the things that in the Public Defender's Office we had been saying for a long time, is that alternatives to incarceration are important and valuable. And for a long time, we were sort of walking in the wilderness alone. But now, more and more people are starting to realize that alternatives to incarceration do matter. And when you hear people talk about it costs more to send a person to prison than to college, it's true. When you talk about the costs of what--it's called "three hots and a cot." When you, when you look at the value of "three hots and a cot" versus a high school diploma and a good job, it should be a no-brainer. And yet it took people a while to come to a realization about that. And all of my life, and certainly most of my professional career, I have always believed that all anybody needed was an opportunity to do the right thing, and they would. What's happened is a lot of people haven't had the opportunity. We see kids in the criminal justice system as young as twelve and thirteen who start out-it's sort of like Judge [HM R. Eugene] Pincham used to say all the time, "When you start out wrong, you end up wrong." And it's true. And when you have kids who are selling drugs--not because they use drugs--but because it brings money into the household. Not because they use, but because they can buy all the things that society tells them are important--the high priced gym shoes, the high-priced leather jacket--all of the things that their parents can't afford. When you tell them, okay, you can sell drugs on the corner and you can make money and then you can buy whatever you want with that money, then they see that as a way out. What they need to see, and what they don't see, is they don't see people who go to work on a job every day. In a lot of communities, they don't see that. They don't see people finishing school. They don't see people appreciating education. I remember as a, as an assistant public defender in a courtroom, seeing four or five people standing in front of the judge, none of them with a high school diploma. Story_ID: 179384 Speaker 1: As an assistant public defender, I had a client charged with murder. He was seventeen years old. He, his fifteen year old girlfriend had just had his baby, and this baby could not have been more than two or three months old. And she, like most fifteen year olds, wanted to go out with her friends. And so, she wanted to go out shopping, and she asked him to babysit. He said, "Okay, no problem. I'll come and get the baby." He came and got the baby and took the baby to his home. His mother worked. He asked his mother, "What should I do for a baby?" She said, "Just give him a bottle and keep him dry, and you'll be fine." Now, mind you, this is a seventeen year old who's a high school dropout. He doesn't work, he's just home. The baby starts to cry. So he gives the baby a bottle, then he changes the baby, but the baby keeps crying. So he walks the baby, he does all this stuff, but the baby keeps crying. So, he calls his mother on her job several times, and the mother says "Stop calling me. The baby--I don't know what's wrong the baby. Just stop calling me." And so, he finally just had had enough. So he said what he thought he would do was just make the baby be quiet, so he punched the baby in the stomach. Well, that did make the baby be quiet. It also killed the baby. And it was just--he didn't have any sense of that. I know it sounds crazy, but he really didn't. Speaker 2: Now this, this story is... I know somebody that did the exact same thing, I know them. And it happens every year around the country, maybe a dozen times, maybe even more-- Speaker 1: Uh, huh, right. Speaker 2: Maybe dozens of times, I don't know. Speaker 1: Right, it does, dozens of times. And, and, and so once he, so once he realizes the baby's not moving, he calls the ambulance. They come and get him and the baby, take the baby to the hospital. Clearly, the baby has died. And he's charged with murder, and I now represent him. He was found guilty of manslaughter, which is the lesser included of murder. And as we're preparing to do his sentencing--as I am presenting to the court his background--because I'm asking for probation rather than prison--we start to talk about him and his family and his background. And it certainly occurred to me as I'm talking to the judge, here we have a seventeen year old with no high school diploma, he's a dropout. You have a fifteen year old with a baby who's a dropout and no high school diploma. Her mother, who was like thirty-two, without a diploma. His mother, who's like thirty-five, with no diploma. And the grandmother, the great-grandmother really, at fifty--one had a diploma and the other one didn't. So you have a whole generation or more--two generations, almost three, without a high school diploma. Speaker 2: And needless to say, they probably didn't attend birth classes or-- Speaker 1: No, nothing. Speaker 2: --training on how to take care of a baby. Speaker 1: Nothing. I mean, the only person who really knew and understood about how to care for a baby was the great-grandmother, who at fifty was just starting her life. I mean, suddenly she didn't have to worry about everything. But she was fifty. Speaker 2: And a great-grandmother. Speaker 1: And a great-grandmother. I mean, and this is the kind of thing that we encounter a lot. Story_ID: 179385 Speaker 1: I mean, I can tell you all kinds of stories about young people that we represent, who come into the criminal justice system who are not bad kids--who simply have no home training. If I could start a program in this country to take us back to just old-fashioned home training--how to live in society with other people--I would do it in a heartbeat, because that's what's missing. I mean, you have these young people--I mean, I had a client--the judge laughed because I said it out loud in court, I didn't mean to. I had a client, I'm telling him "You have to come back to court. You're out on bond. I've got you out on bond, you have to come back to court, and here's your next court date." He says, fine. He leaves, and the next court date he doesn't come. Two days later he's brought in, because he's been arrested on a warrant. I say to him, "Why didn't you come back to court? I told you what your court date was, I told you everything. Why didn't you come back?" He said, "Because my mama didn't give me no carfare." I looked at him, I was so angry. I said, "Your mama wasn't with you when you were committing a crime, was she?" And the judge laughed. And I apologized to the court, and then I apologized to the client. I mean, that was not the appropriate response, but I was so angry. Because I was like, "How could you be out there doing the things you're doing, but then when you need to do something responsible, because your mother didn't give you bus fare?" But the truth is, later he explained to me that he really didn't know how to come on the bus. So, you know, he said he'd been--anytime he'd come before, he'd ridden with somebody in a car. He didn't really know how to come on a bus. I mean, and these are just things that we all take for granted. And now, we're in a society where people don't like to talk about it, but it's a class issue. It's a class issue. Middle class people do things differently than the underclass, or poor, and it matters. And if we don't go back to some sort of fundamental training for our survival in society--how you bring culture to a society--we're in trouble. And that's one of the things that we see in the criminal justice system. When you have kids coming into the system who can't read and write--I told a kid one day, "I need you to sign your signature." He printed his name, and I said, "Oh, no, you need to put it in cursive." He said, "Oh no, I don't curse." He didn't understand that cursive was his written signature. How, how, where has education gone? Not only at the school, but at home, at home. And then you realize the reason that's a problem is because at home if Mom doesn't have a high school diploma, if Grandma doesn't have a high school diploma, who's going to teach the children anything? If all they learn is what they learn from television and what they see just around them, how is it gonna get better? Story_ID: 179386 Speaker 1: You talk about juvenile cases, we have, we represent, we in the Public Defender's Office represent parents charged with abuse and neglect of their children. Most of the time, it's just young mothers who don't know how to be a parent, who don't know how to do what mothers are supposed to do. So they scream, they curse. We've all seen it--young women walking down the street. She might have one child in a little seat, and another walking alongside that's maybe two or three, and she's cursing and calling them all kind of, you know, obscene names. And yet, because that's all she knows. She's frustrated, that's all she knows. And so things are bad, and then she winds up in the criminal justice system because she's overwhelmed. And then how many times have you seen little kids--you go someplace and you hear little kids laughing and talking and playing, and they're using obscene language. Because that's all they know, that's all they've heard. When and where does that change? And it's, it is becoming a class issue. Because what's happening is more and more middle class blacks and Hispanics are trying to move out of the communities that foster that, to live somewhere else. And the people that are remaining don't have any resources to take them to the next level. And, and, and you know, when I was growing up my father used to say, "It doesn't matter that you don't have a lot of money. But you know how to be clean, you know how to keep respect, how to say "Yes, Ma'am, no Ma'am, how to treat people with respect, how to act when you're in public." All of these things you learn at home, home training. That doesn't happen, especially among the poor. And then you're asked to deal with that issue and all the other things that go with that. And we don't see it until they come into court. Story_ID: 179387 Speaker 1: And society, wrongly, I believe, believes that the criminal justice system can solve the social justice system, and you can't. We can't. We're, we're there-- Speaker 2: That's an important point, because people call for it all the time. And since they've had the community policing meetings out in the neighborhoods, the neighbors often call for more patrol, increased patrol, more severe control, you know, more-- Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 2: More police presence and more arrests of their neighbors, basically. Speaker 1: Right. I mean it's like I have gone to community meetings where people have--because especially our office was the office that took the case to the Supreme Court about gang loitering, standing on the corner. And people would write to me and call me on the phone, "How dare you. Who do you think you are? If you had these punks standing on your corner--" And I explained to people--the people you're talking about, the young people you're talking about, live in your community. They don't, they don't drive from the North Side to the South Side, or the South Side to the North Side to hang out on the corner. They hang out on the corner in their community. And if they're not engaged in illegal activity, you can't just make them move off the corner. What you should be doing is offering them alternatives. And I go to community groups and I say, "Well, what alternatives are you offering? Is there a community center? Is there a softball league? Is there a basketball league? Is there a book club? Is there a garden club? What are you offering to your children? How are you managing your children? Why are they standing on the corner? And then people get angry. "Well, they're not my kid." Well, then when the young people are arrested and you look at their addresses, they live in that community. And because--surprisingly enough, most of these kids are afraid to go outside of their community. They've never really been outside of their community, so many of them don't know how to go outside of their community, have never been outside of their community. So, yes, the problem in your community is in your community. And you, as a citizen, have to take control. And it doesn't mean being repressive. It means to provide alternatives. You know, go up to the school and demand that the school functions appropriately. What is the after-school program situation? What kinds of alternatives do you offer kids to selling drugs on the street? What alternatives do you offer for gangs? I mean, when you talk to gang members, gang members used to tell me all the time that the gang provides family and structure. Yes, if you belong to a gang, if you don't follow the gang's rules, you get violated. That's right, you get corporal punishment. You get a violation for not following the rules. So, it's important for you to follow the rules. And it's important for you to know what the rules are, so you will follow them. And the gang will then in exchange provide you with a family, provide you with support, provide you with income, all of the things that-- Speaker 2: Gym shoes. Speaker 1: Gym shoes, whatever. Now, in exchange for that, the gang's also got you out here doing some illegal activity. But can't we substitute for that? A lot of young people don't want to be in gangs, but they have to for survive, especially if they're in poor communities where the gangs have pretty much taken over. Either you belong to the gang, or you don't survive. In middle class communities--I remember when my son was growing up, I was adamant about making sure his time was always accounted for. Because I saw it every day in the court system--that if you don't account for the time, if you don't give them alternatives, somebody else will. And that's why it's important that society know the criminal justice is designed to arrest, prosecute, and incarcerate. It's not designed to do anything else. It's not designed to educate, it's not designed to rehabilitate, it's not designed to train... it's not designed for any of that. It's designed to arrest, prosecute and incarcerate. And if you want something more, you as a community have to demand it. And you have to do it, and you have to engage in it. And I don't know that that's going to be something that we accomplish in my lifetime, which makes me sad. Because every time I pick up the paper, all I see is more repressive laws. I mean, we've got the Patriot Act on the federal level. I mean the federal government is now saying that they come into your home and listen to your telephone calls, they can track the music you listen to, track the books you read, all in the name of safety. Speaker 2: That's something. Speaker 1: See, so it's becoming more repressive, not less repressive. And I don't see, I don't see an end, and I think that's really sad. Because in truth, we as citizens in this country have the power to make a difference. We just, we just aren't doing it. Story_ID: 179388 Speaker 1: Yeah, people have written that as fear escalates in the country, repression, you know, increases-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --unfortunately. And that seems, we seem to be in that cycle, for some reason. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. I mean-- Speaker 1: And there seems to be no way out of this. There's no clear way out of this. Speaker 2: No, because right now people, again, we're in a society where people are losing their jobs. Employment is not what it used to be. We went through the nineties where it was boom town. You know, everybody had everything. And now we're in a period when people are losing the big homes, the big cars; they're losing their jobs. They're not sure if they have medical--they can't even afford medical insurance. What education their children are getting is hit or miss, at best. It's pretty much based on their ability to either get their kid in a charter school or magnet school, or pay private tuition. If there's, it they're just stuck in a regular public school, it's hit or miss. The jobs are going overseas. I mean, everything that people have taken for granted is changing. And people don't seem to have the collective will to say "Enough of this, it's time for a change, we're tired of this." And, and in that kind of atmosphere, the repression grows, because it's easy to pick a target and say, you know, that target is at fault. So, now with this notion about terrorism, you know, people are hyper-vigilant about anything that they perceive to be terrorism. There's a lack of privacy. I mean, how many times have you been on the street and you see people with their video cameras? I mean, you find yourself on people's video cameras. You know, you're on vacation, and somebody's videotaping you and this, and the scene. I mean, so the loss of privacy, it seems okay. So, now when people hear in the Patriot Act that, you know, that somebody can track all that stuff, they're like, "Oh, okay." It doesn't mean, it doesn't mean the same. I mean, you have people responding to the theft of music on the internet by saying, "Oh, it's just music." They don't understand. You know, it wasn't until the music industry said that they were going to start prosecuting the parents that the parents said, "Oh, well, maybe I'll do something." And then you have parents saying, "Well, I can't control my children." Excuse me. What kind of society do we live in where parents can't control their children? Well, it's because parents are like their children. I mean, how many times have you--I'm sure we've all encountered children who are friends with their parents--the parents are not the parents, they're the friends. The parent doesn't want to discipline, the parent doesn't want to be the bad guy; the parent doesn't want to be the heavy. And yet, children crave authority and structure and direction and control, none of which a lot of them are getting. And they have to rely on each other, and that reliance comes back to where we started, back with the gangs. Because the gangs are going to give you structure, it's going to give you control, it's going to give you discipline--all of which is not positive, but at least you're getting it. Speaker 1: Basic human organization. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: At the basic level-- Speaker 2: At its core. Speaker 1: You know, which is somewhat of a relationship, but not necessarily the best. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. And so, we have to--we as responsible adults have to make a decision--where does it end, and when do we start being responsible for ourselves and our children? Story_ID: 179389 Speaker 1: Is there anything you would do differently with your career when you look back? You're not that old actually, but-- Speaker 2: Thank you (laughter). Speaker 1: --you're retiring from one position. Speaker 2: Well, actually, what I--what I'd like to do next is I would actually like to work in public policy and planning, maybe for a foundation or an organization. Because I see that as the future. For example, here in Chicago [Illinois], you have a group called Metropolis 2020. And what Metropolis 2020 is doing is looking at--the Chicago metropolitan area is now Cook County. But it's edging out to Kane, Will-- Speaker 1: Lake. Speaker 2: Lake, you know, DuPage. And you take all of these counties, they are... The city of Chicago is suddenly becoming the center, and feeding out to these communities. And one of the things that's happening is as you start to talk about Chicagoland, you're talking about more than six million people with all the issues that come with that--transportation, education, housing, jobs, medical. And you look at the budgets for most of these communities. Outside of medical, the next biggest budget is criminal justice--police, sheriffs, courts, state's attorneys, public defenders, jails, and prisons. The biggest industry in Illinois is prisons. I mean, we've got seventeen prisons. What does--you know, we should be doing a better planning job. I mean one of the things, for example, is DuPage [County] and Lake [County]. Because of the increases--we talked about juvenile cases. They never had a real juvenile detention center, because they dealt with runaways and, you know, less serious offenses. Now that they're arresting more juveniles for more serious offenses, they need a facility. So they're talking about building a juvenile detention center, much like what we have here in Chicago over on the West Side. These are things that we never thought about or contemplated, because people didn't see that as a vision of their future, and now here it is. So, I'd like to work within an organization or a process that talks about the future, the plan for the future and the criminal justice system--not solving the social problems, but solving them in a way unconnected to the criminal justice system. So, that's, that's where my interest and my heart is, and we'll see. I've only been retired six months. I'm going to wait until the end of the year. My son's getting married and after that, probably January or February, I'll start seriously thinking about what I'm going to do next. Story_ID: 179390 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Ooh. Well, I guess what I'd like to be remembered for is my willingness to take chances for the betterment of society. I, I've always been willing to take the good and the bad if it helps to make us a better place to be, a better place to have. And I would only hope that people would remember that everything that I've done has been to ensure that people have justice and opportunity. Story_ID: 179391 Speaker 1: Is it becoming more possible to get a decent defense these days if you don't have any money than it was? Or is it getting more difficult? Speaker 2: No, it's getting better actually. Because, for example, with us--we in the Public Defender's Office, we have a fund so that we can get DNA experts. And in fact, the DNA expert in our office is one of the best trained in the country. And when we, when we wanted to start training our lawyers on forensics, I was able to get Barry Scheck and Peter Neufeld from the O.J. [Simpson] case, and their team, to come in and train. Because they understand that public defenders don't have any money, and that--so we paid their hotel expenses and airfare. But they came in and gave us hundreds of thousands of dollars' worth of training. So we now know and understand when we need an expert, how to get one. And, and we pushed for a government rate, but at least we know what's available, and we're willing to provide it. Also, my office, along with a lot of other offices in the country have investigators. So, we don't rely on the police reports. We don't rely on the police investigation, we have our investigators to go out. And in fact, public defender offices by and large can give a better defense than a private attorney. Because when you hire a private attorney, you have to pay for all of that. And if you hire a private attorney who doesn't have the wherewithal, and you don't have the wherewithal, then you don't get it. So you have a private attorney, and if that makes happy, that's fine. But if you don't have the money to hire an investigator, hire an expert witness, do the forensics, do the charts and graphs for the court, fly witnesses in... I mean, we've had to bring witnesses from Mexico, from London, to come to court when there's a trial, because we have money in the budget. That's because as a public defender, I fight to have that money in the budget. But if you're in private practice, your client pays that. And if your client doesn't, can't afford that, then you don't get that. Because remember, you've got to pay the lawyer's retainer fee for just representing you. Then you have to pay the costs of the litigation, which includes even things like photocopying and phone calls and witnesses and all of that. So, yeah, I'd say public defense today is light years away from what it was twenty years ago. And I think anybody who gets a public defender these days is going to get a very experienced, well-supplied lawyer whose sole job is just to defend you, not make money. Story_ID: 179392 Speaker 1: This is a panel that I was on in Washington, D.C. at the Kennedy Center for the Court Excellence Program, talking about the criminal justice system. I was on the panel with Judge [David] Sentelle, as you can see, from the District Court, Federal District Court; Cornel West, professor at the time at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]; myself, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg from the Supreme Court, and Judge Leon Higginbotham, as well as two other panelists. This was in Washington. Speaker 2: About what year is this? Speaker 1: Nineteen Ninety-Three [1993], I believe. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me standing, I'm the one standing. I'm about seven or eight years old, and I'm with my aunt and my cousin. And this picture was taken in Memphis. And this was, I used to spend a lot of time with this particular aunt. And the cousin that's in her lap was her first child. And this would be probably 1955 or so. Speaker 2: Okay, this is a photograph of the trial advocacy instructors at Emory Law School in Atlanta, and this is us as a group. The group is made up of lawyers and judges from around the country. And the man in the middle who looks sort of like Colonel Sanders is Bill Ferguson, who is the head of the program. And we're all there to teach trial advocacy skills to the law students. Story_ID: 179393 Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me and Barry Scheck. Barry Scheck was the counsel to O.J. Simpson during the O.J. trial. And this is a picture of me with Barry, as I was an instructor in his trial advocacy program in New York at the Benjamin Cardozo School of Law [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: What year? Speaker 1: That had to be 1994, '95 [1995]. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: Okay. This is me with Professor [HM] Dorothy Roberts, who's on the right, as I'm facing. She is a professor at Northwestern University Law School [Chicago, Illinois], a tenured professor. And the woman on the right--on the left, in the blue jacket is Paula Johnson. She's a professor up at Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York]. And the woman in the glasses is, in the middle in the white, is an African lawyer in London whose name is Ruth something. We'd just completed a panel for the Law Society in London on black women and mental health issues. And as you know, Dorothy Roberts has written extensively about poverty and women and abortion issues. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that is a picture the day I was sworn in, with Dick Phelan, who appointed me as the first woman public defender, and Judge [HM] Blanche Manning who at that time was on the Appellate Court for the State of Illinois, who is now a district court judge in the federal court. And she swore me in. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And this is me in New York with the O.J. Simpson team. And we were there teaching trial advocacy. And the members of O.J.'s team--Carl Douglas is the black guy, along with Barry Scheck. The two other people whose names... I'm sorry have escaped me. The guy on the right was his DNA, was one of his DNA people who did the technical stuff. And the woman was one of the lawyers who sat at the table. I can't remember her name, sorry. Speaker 2: That's okay. Speaker 1: This is amazing, that you all can do this with these pictures. Okay, this is a picture of me and my wonderful family, right after I was sworn in. So Judge Manning's in the middle, and it's me and my brother, my son, my husband, and my sisters, my five sisters. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: And this is a picture of me following my passion, which is travel. And we, my husband and I are in Antarctica, and we're at the site of the Antarctic Treaty, designating Antarctica as a world site. And my husband and I are holding pendants from the Chicago Bulls. And this was in January, 1999. Speaker 2: That's when they were still doing some things. Speaker 1: Right (laughter). Speaker 2: They were still world champs. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me wearing the court robes of the Court of Ethiopia. And this is in front of the court building. And this was in 1994 when I was asked by the Supreme Court of Ethiopia to come and set up a public defender service. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture of me and my husband and my son and my mother with Judge Manning at my swearing-in. My son is now in Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture of Judge [HM] R. Eugene Pincham and my first felony trial partner, Danielle DeFranco. And this was in Judge Pincham's courtroom, and this was my first felony trial assignment. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's me and [HM] James Montgomery at, actually, my going away party leaving the Corporation Counsel's Office after I had just been appointed First Assistant Public Defender. And Jim Montgomery was my first legal employer, as I clerked for him while I was in law school, and the best mentor ever. Speaker 2: Very good, okay. Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture of me reading a commercial that I had written as part of a play that was done by a group of us at the Aspen Institute in Aspen, Colorado. I was there as part of a senior executive program, and we did a play based on 'Antigone,' and we did it in a modern fashion. And I wrote a commercial, so that was me doing the commercial. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's me graduating from high school, with my hair ratted. That's what ratted hair looks like, big hair (laughter). So, every girl you know from the fifties to the early sixties should have had a picture like that. Speaker 2: Right, they did. Speaker 1: Yeah, everybody had ratted hair. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a picture of me in, I think fifth grade. I think I was in fifth grade with those little weird bangs. I was in fifth or sixth grade. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: And that's me again in grade school. This might have been fifth or sixth, that might have been sixth or seventh. Yeah, I can't tell. It's been a while, and there's nothing on the back, right? Speaker 2: Right. Okay, this one? Speaker 1: Oh, that was when I was brand spanking new, still had the new car smell (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's me in the seventies, you can tell by that outfit (laughter). And that was in, that was at, near Niagara Falls [New York]. I was on vacation with... me and my husband, because we love to travel. So, we got in the car and drove... I'm never going to do that again. Because I'm pretty sure this was in the seventies. Because when did Nixon resign? Speaker 2: In '74 [1974], wasn't it? Speaker 1: Yes, that's when that was. Because we had driven up there and listened to the whole thing in the car on the way. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And this is me at the Kennedy School [John F. Kennedy School of Government], Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I was there in '98 [1998], and I graduated from the senior executive program. That was great, that was a fun time. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: And this is me with the Chief Judge of the Illinois Supreme Court, [HM] Charles Freeman, and Justice Blanche Manning. This was when I was on the board of the Lawyer's Assistance Program. And Judge Manning had played her saxophone for us, (laughter) her trio. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a picture of me taken with one of those bulls, cows. And in fact, this is the only one that got stolen, that they never recovered. And I didn't do it (laughter). Speaker 2: It sounds suspicious. Speaker 1: Yeah. We took this picture to use for something that said, "No bull" for the office. But we've just never used it. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: This is a picture in front of the United States Supreme Court where we argued against the city's gang loitering statute, and won. Yes, we won. So that's me, and the man in the middle is the guy who argued. And me and other guy sat at the table. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's me and my husband in Colorado as part of an executive program at the Aspen Institute. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's me at a statue of Dr. Martin Luther King in Riverside, California. Again, that was when I was there to do a review of the Public Defender's Office, an evaluation. Story_ID: 179394 Speaker 1: That's me in China in the, what do they call that, Tiananmen Square? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: I was part of a team of lawyers from Chicago [Illinois] that went to lecture on public defender and legal aid opportunities, for want of a better term. Speaker 2: Okay, we're ready. Speaker 1: Okay. That's me with a group of Chicago and Cuban lawyers in Havana, Cuba. And we were at a law firm, one of the few private law firms in Cuba. And it's run completely by women Cuban lawyers. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's me with the wonderful [HM] Etta Moten Barnett. One of the things that I've been doing in the last few years is trying to make sure I get a picture with black women who are significant in our community, either as the first or the only or the whatever. So, I had an opportunity to meet her at a lecture, and she was most gracious in talking to me, and we had a picture together. Because I got pictures--I couldn't find them--I've got pictures with [HM] Angela Davis and Shirley Chisholm and Carol Mosely Braun and just-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is funny. This is a picture taken at Just the Beginning Foundation dinner, which Judge Ann Williams is responsible for creating--the Just the Beginning Foundation, which deals with all of the black judges in federal court. And when the picture was taken, [HM] Lani Guinier was also a guest there, and we took this picture. And when the picture was sent to us we all laughed, because by me being the shortest, I was the only one whose head wasn't cut off at the top. And so, Lani Guinier said that that was probably significant in what that says about the nature of what happens to black women in America, because our heads were cut off. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: That's the Riverside, California courtroom where I was there to do an assessment of the Public Defender's Office. Isn't that a beautiful court building? You should see--and the sun is just spectacular. That's why I took the picture. I said, oh man, I've got to have a picture. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And this picture is taken in the, at the Bar Association in Havana, Cuba with a group of lawyers and judges who had just been giving us a lecture on the nature of justice in Cuba. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is the family reunion, taken at our family reunion with my mother and my siblings. This was the 4th of July, 1990-something, late nineties. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And this is me with activist Bernadine Dohrn, who now heads the MacArthur Project over at Northwestern Law School. And she's pre-eminent now in juvenile justice issue, no longer being an advocate. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's me graduating from Loyola University [Chicago, Illinois]. And I'm really happy to be out of there (laughter). Speaker 2: What year was this? Speaker 1: Nineteen Seventy Two, [1972]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And this is me as the acting public defender in 1991, trying to re-arrange the organizational chart. (Laughter). And as you can see-- Speaker 2: Big job. Speaker 1: Yeah, I gave up actually, and I actually threw that board out (laughter). Trying to organize 800 people. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And this is me on the streets in Havana, Cuba outside of, I've forgotten what it's outside of--one of the buildings downtown, but it's Havana. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture with me and [HM] Jewel Lafontant, who was a wonderful mentor. Jewel was the person who talked to me about the fact that I loved travel, and why I shouldn't take--use the travel in a better way. And she wrote a letter for me to try to get a position with the U.N. [United Nations] And she did a lot. I mean, she's just a good, she was just a terrific person. Speaker 1: How did you meet her? Speaker 2: I met her through an organization, actually. We were both on a panel, and from that, she got to--you know, we got to know each other really well. And so, she would, I could call her and talk to her about anything. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's me, oh, that's me in 1950 I believe, standing on the corner of where we lived. In front of where I'm looking is my uncle's poolroom. And down the street behind me on the left, I lived four houses down. But that's how our street looked, and that's how I looked. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I would have been four or five years old then. And then this is when I was about to be sworn in. No, this was after I was sworn in, I was about to make a speech to the County Board. And so that's my son sitting behind Dick Phelan; my husband, and one of the workers there..