 Story_ID: 208260 Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I am the interviewer. Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer. And, [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Edith Armstead] Gray, if you would, please, tell us your name, your full name, and spell it, please. Speaker 2: I am Edith Armstead Gray. You spell it, Edith, E-D-I-T-H, Armstead, A-R-M-S-T-E-A-D, and the Gray, G-R-A-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. And Mrs. Gray, could you please tell us the date and location of your birth? Speaker 2: I was born November 19, 1910 at Galveston, Texas. Galveston is an island and, of course, it's surrounded by water. Speaker 1: Okay. And today's date is Tuesday, May 18, 2004. And the location of this interview is 12601 Spriggs Request Court in Mitchellville [sic. Bowie], Maryland. And, Ms. Gray, could you please tell us your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I'm a retired school teacher. Story_ID: 208261 Speaker 1: Now, the next couple of questions are some People magazine-ish type questions just to help you get comfortable with the interview process and that kind of thing. So, the first one is could you please tell us your favorite food? Speaker 2: Well, generally, I like most foods. And to be honest with you, I don't know whether I really have a favorite food. Speaker 1: Okay. And what's your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I think spring. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Yellow (laughter). Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, I've traveled extensively, and I don't know whether I have a favorite place to go. I really like to go places that I haven't been before because I've traveled in almost every state in the country in the United States. And then, I've traveled in Europe in ten countries, and three principalities, as well as in Seoul, [South] Korea. Speaker 1: Okay. What about a favorite phrase or saying? Do you have one? Speaker 2: I tell you recently--the one that I have been saying to Phyllis [Gray Hallmon] and her husband [Morgan Hallmon] since we're having this war [Iraq War] and everything. I tell them that Henry Ward Beecher's [sic. Oliver Wendell Holmes] favorite saying is--his quote is: "War is the surgery of crime. Bad as it is within itself, it always implies that something worse has gone before." Story_ID: 208262 Speaker 1: Now, if you will, [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Edith Armstead] Gray, tell me a little bit about your mother, starting with her name and where she was born? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Millie Williams before she married, and when she married my father [Henry Armstead, Sr.], she was Millie Williams Armstead. And she was born at a little place called Hawkinsville, Texas. And, of course, you just asked me about my mother, but I could tell you what my [maternal] grandmother [Amy Hawkins Williams] used to tell me about her part of her family. But you may be holding that for later. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Now, tell me about where your mother grew up, and what you know about her background and how she grew up. Speaker 2: My mother grew up on a small farm in Cedar Lake, Texas, and that's about three miles from Hawkinsville, Texas. And, of course, that's after my grandmother married my grandfather. His name was Pope [ph.], his last name was Pope. And, of course, she was brought up right there on that small farm in Cedar Lake, Texas. Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother? Speaker 2: Well, my mother was a very disciplined woman and she really (laughter) disciplined us--I would say, in a sense, quite harshly. She didn't take any foolishness at all from any of us, but she was always a loving mother. And I tell my children about the time when I was a little girl. I remember when my father worked on the [Galveston] Causeway back was when they were bringing the bridge from the island [Galveston, Texas] over to the mainland. And every Saturday when he would come home at night, he would bring a long stick of peppermint candy. And that was the only time that we ever had candy was on Sunday morning. And my mother had a kitchen butcher knife and she could go out there, and we would get around her just about like chickens would get around a hen, you know. And she would crack that candy, and I don't know how in the world she did it, but each of our pieces were exactly the same, and she'd give us those little pieces of candy. And I--my children laughing and say, "Mother, that was sad." I say, "No, it wasn't." I said, "It taught you how to preserve"--I told her. I would suck on mine, and then I'd wrap it up in some newspaper, so I'd have it to suck on a little bit later (laughter). Story_ID: 208263 Speaker 1: And did your mother [Millie Williams Armstead] share any stories with you about growing up, her growing up? Did she share any stories with you? Speaker 2: Well, she said that her brothers worked in the field, and she never did talk too much about her sisters working in the field. They worked around the house, and they worked in the garden, and that sort of thing. But her father [Polk Williams], especially, he was very anxious for them to go to school. Now, my mother was born back there in 1882. And, of course, I heard her say that they had a teacher who came. He was white, who came in from the North, and he taught them into one, one room, schoolhouse. And she said that she had heard her father talk so about the Yankees, and the Rebels, and this and that and the other. And for some reason, she didn't seem to care too much about him, but he was a very, very good teacher. And he told my grandfather, that was her father that, "Millie is a very, very good student, and say she will educate, but she's just so mean," (laughter)--talking about my mother. And my mother was a great mathematician, and she was an avid reader. Speaker 1: And any other stories that she may have shared with you about growing up? Speaker 2: Well, she went through the eighth grade way back there. And I think that was as far as they went back there then because, as I said, they lived on the farm. And there was a big lake right in front of their home that they called the Cedar Lake [in Cedar Lake, Texas]. And I can recall, as a very small child, we would go down there in the summer. And my grandfather would go out there and fish, and catch fish out the lake and bring it in. And my grandmother [Amy Hawkins Williams] would cook it for us for breakfast. I can remember things like that-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --but that was after my mother was grown and was married. Story_ID: 208264 Speaker 1: Now, what about your father? Could you please tell us a little bit about him, starting with his name, and where he was born and where he grew up? Speaker 2: Now, my father's name was Henry Armstead. He was Henry Armstead, Sr. because I had a brother named Henry [Armstead, Jr.] also. And he was born down in Brazoria County [Texas], and they just call it Brazos. I don't know where that was--the name of the little town, but it was on a farm also. My father doesn't know too much about his father because he said his father died when he was two years of age, and his grandfather reared him. He always referred to him as Grandpa Otis [Armstead]. In fact, I have a brother that he named Otis after his grandfather. And they were farmers down there on the Brazos River--they lived on the Brazos River and farmed down there on the Braz--and my father said he never went to school any more than the third grade. Story_ID: 208265 Speaker 1: And did he [Gray's father, Henry Armstead, Sr.] ever share any stories with you about growing up on the farm [in Brazoria County, Texas], and what life was like, and that kind of thing? Speaker 2: He said life was real hard on the farm because his grandfather [Otis Armstead] brought them up. There were five boys and one sister--see, because his father died when he was almost two years of age, and the grandfather reared him. And he said that life was real hard down there because they worked the farm from early morning until late in the evening, you know. And he said they didn't get to go to school very, very much because he only went through the third grade. Story_ID: 208266 Speaker 1: And do you know how your parents [Millie Williams Armstead and Henry Armstead, Sr.] met? Speaker 2: No, I don't. It seems to me--I heard my mother said they first met in Bay City [Texas] because she had a sister who was older than she, and she had married in Bay City. And she went to Bay City to visit her older sister, and she met my father there, but they didn't get married there because he had gone to Galveston [Texas] to work as a young man. And later, she had another sister who had married, who was younger than she, and she was living in Galveston. And my mother went down to Galveston to visit with her, and she met my father again, and they got married. Story_ID: 208267 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Edith Armstead] Gray, how far back can you trace your ancestors? Who were they? What was, what were, what was the origin, and do you know if you came from slaves or free people? Can you trace your ancestry back that far? Speaker 2: Well, now, on my mother's [Millie Williams Armstead] side of the family, her grandmother, or her great-grandmother, was a slave. She came over--my grandmother [maternal grandmother, Amy Hawkins Williams] has told me this story. And I have related it to my children and to many of my nephews and nieces many times, and they loved to hear it. She told me that she always--I never knew what her mother was named, what my grandmother's mother was named, because she always referred to her as Mammy. She said, "Mammy said she came straight from Africa on the boat and said that she was a little girl, but whomever had purchased her, or had enslaved her over there in Africa, and sold her to these people who were on the boat. And they were bringing her over to America, that they allowed her to bring this little girl"--must have been a toddler, I guess--her mother was at that time. And see, her mother said that she could remember when people would die on the boat--she must have been more than a toddler. She must have been two or three years of age, I, I would think--said they would put them over the side of the boat, and put them in the water, and said they would say they were giving them a sea grave. And she can remember that. And so, her grandmother was brought straight--her mother, as a little child, was brought straight to Texas from Africa. But now where the slave boat landed, I never did hear her say. And I don't know whether she knew, but her grandmother came straight from Africa as a little girl. Speaker 1: Now, what can you tell me about your maternal grandparents on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Well, this, this is the--maternal one that I'm talking about. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Now, that came as a little girl on the boat. And grandma said that when they came to--I don't know where they landed, but they were enslaved to their master that they referred to Orville Hawkins [ph.]. You know, they didn't say that to his face, but his last--and that's how they got the name of Hawkins. And the whole plantation was called Hawkinsville in Texas. And she said, Orville Hawkins was as mean as he could be. My grandmother, seemingly, just hated him, and when I tell you the story of why she hated him, you will understand why. When my grandmother, my grandmother's mother, who was a little girl that was on the slave boat--when the--I don't know how they were purchased and brought into Hawkinsville, Texas. But they had some auctions stationed some place, you know, where they would go and buy the slaves. And this Hawkins man had bought them--her mother and this little girl--and brought them down to Hawkinsville. Story_ID: 208268 Speaker 1: And grandma [maternal grandmother, Amy Hawkins Williams] said that as she grew up, she can recall when her mother told her this story that they brought her Pappy--that was her father. She referred to him as Pappy--brought Pappy in. They captured Pappy in Galveston [Texas]. He was a coolie--that's one of the workers--on a banana boat that had come in from the West Indies. And the captain had asked them, all these workers--said, "Do not get off the boat and walk around. You all stay on the boat and just look out over the city." Well, I'm sure Galveston wasn't developed, you know, like because it's a big city now, as it is today--and say, you could look all over the city. You could see from the Gulf of Mexico back over to the Galveston Bay [Texas]. You just see water all around. You see a few buildings here and there and elsewhere. And her Pappy said, he watched the people, and watched the people, and said he just got tired of standing on the boat looking over the rail. So he got off the boat, and decided that he would walk around to see what he could see. And three men, white men--she said her, her father was jet black, but he had coal black straight hair. She always referred to him as Pappy--and said they came up to him. And he didn't know what they were saying because he didn't speak their language, and they didn't speak his. They tried to talk to him, and he tried to talk to them. So, they just assumed that he was a runaway person. And they grabbed him, and they put him on--carried him, put him on a wagon, and covered him up under a thick cover, and say they drove for days and days. And, finally, he landed up down there in Hawkinsville [Texas]--and said when they got to Hawkinsville, they put him with Mammy [maternal great-grandmother]. And that was her husband and they lived together as husband and wife, and they had fourteen children, but she said Pappy could read. So, I'm thinking that possibly Pappy could speak Spanish or something because, you see, down there in that part of Texas, you're close to Mexico, to Old Mexico. And more than likely, he could see the papers and he could read some, you know, possibly some of it was in Spanish because you had so many Spaniards living in that part of Texas anyway. I don't know whether Hawkins--some of his folks could have had Spanish in--were taking Spanish papers, but he could read. So, so Pappy kept saying, "I'm going to--one of these days, I'm going to take my family away from here. We're not going to always be on Hawkins' farm, we're not going to always be on Hawkins' plantation." And, sure enough, Pappy did run away one day, and he left and went to Mexico. And, well, from the way she tells it, Mexico was just about fifty or sixty miles from the border, you know. And once you cross the border, you are free over there in Mexico, and said that he would write back. And he told them that, "You all are going to be free before long, and I'm going to come and get you." He had written that back and said that the old master would say, "Yes, we heard from, from Pappy--said but if he comes back, we'll going to kill him." And when they freed the slaves, nineteen-, I mean 1865--shortly after that, Pappy came back. But they had not freed the slaves in Texas. They didn't free the slaves in Texas until June 19 [Juneteenth] of the same year. They made him stay on the farm and gather up the crops, and that sort of thing. And then, grandma said that when they released them, 'cause she was born in 1854, and she said when they released them, they had a big barbecue farm and, oh, they just let them dance, and had a celebration and gave them the liquor, and all that kind of thing, you know. They could get drunk and just cut up and act the fool, I guess. And she said that when Pappy came back, they carried Pappy out. And they dug a hole and had--they, they, the slave--the master didn't do it himself, but he demanded that other slaves do it. They laid him nude over this hole and just beat him, and beat him until he could not get up. And so then, when they helped him up, he was so weak and so feeble that he just wandered around for days. And she said, finally, Pappy disappeared. I said, "I believed they killed him, you know, because he wasn't able to work or anything because they had beaten him so." And she said that nobody ever said anything or asked any questions about Pappy. They didn't know what had happened to him. And she said, to the very day that she was telling me--said, "We just don't know what happened to Pappy." So, I said, "Well, grandma, do you think they killed him?" She said, "Child, I don't know, I don't know." That was what she said about it. Story_ID: 208269 Speaker 1: But back to why grandmother [maternal grandmother, Amy Hawkins Williams] disliked whites so badly--see, Pappy [Gray's maternal great-grandfather], as I told you, she said he was jet black, but he had this coal black straight hair. And as far back as I can remember, my grandmother was, she was a little lighter skin than you and she had reddish brown hair. Now mama [Millie Williams Armstead] says that, as a child growing up, that grandma had hair hanging way down her back, long hair hanging down her back. But I don't remember her in that manner--I remember her as a child when I was about nine or ten. She had short hair, very much like an Afro, and folk weren't even wearing them back there then. And mama said she guessed it was a nervous condition--said her mother used to just pick at her hair all the time. I'm sure it was nerves, but grandma said that when she was a girl, fourteen years of age, said Mammy [maternal great-grandmother] came and got her. And I can think, as being her child, what I said to my grandmother, you know, children, as, as Art Linkletter used to say, children can say some of the darndest things. And what I said to her--she, she said, "Mammy came and told me that I had to go in and bathe. And she was going to take me up to the master's house and say--I said, 'Whatcha taking me up there for, Mammy?'--say, she said, 'Well, we will see when we get up there'--said, 'but the master asked me to bring you up there.'" And when the master--I mean, when Mammy carried her up there to, to the master's house, he told Mammy, "You just leave her and go on, and you come back in about an hour, and you get her." And grandma said--she didn't call it rape then. She said all the things that he did to me, and said I've got--I had an uncle named Edgar [ph.], and he was just a pretty man. She said all the things that he did to me--said that old no-nation son of mine, but she would call him that, but he wasn't responsible for who he was--Uncle Edgar, my mother's oldest brother. She said that she referred to him as an old, no-nation child--said that he's the result of what the old master did to me. And she hated white people--she couldn't stand them. And she was just fourteen years of age. And then Mammy brought up Uncle Edgar. And when he was a little boy about six years of age, the master told her, told Mammy to, "Bring that boy up there to my house, and he's going to be my houseboy"--well, it was his child, see. And so, the master just about reared Uncle Edgar up there in his house--bringing in wood and splitting wood, and that sort of thing. I don't know whether they let Uncle Edgar to go to school or not because he didn't stay with grandma and grandpa, my mother's mother and father, but that's, that was a story that she told me. Story_ID: 208270 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Edith Armstead] Gray, if you will, tell me a little bit about your earliest memory. Speaker 2: I have some very, very early memories. I can remember at Christmas time--that was one thing my mother [Millie Williams Armstead] always gave me were books. A lot of times I hadn't even begun going to school but, you know, I would look at the pictures. And then, I would make up my story about what I thought they were saying (laughter) in the book, you know. But I, I can remember 'Jack and the Beanstalk' and I can--'Pinocchio.' I can just remember so many books, you know, little picture books, thin books, you know, that had little stories that went along with them. And I can recall when I learned, when I started school, and I learned to read--I would go, I'd save my books, and I would go back, and I would read those books. And I would think about the stories that I had put to the pictures that were in the books. Those were some early stories that I had. And, of course, I can remember when I was a very young child. I guess I was about three, and my mother always said that I was very mischievous, you know. And if you would tell me something that I shouldn't do, and maybe if I were to do it, she would get her switch or her belt after me. And I remember once I was outdoors, and my mother said, "Edith, I asked you not to do thus and so," and my father [Henry Armstead, Sr.] was there. And I was always crazy about my dad, and so I ran--he was sitting on the porch down low with his feet on the ground, and I ran between his legs. And I can recall--I couldn't have been more than three. And he said to my mother, "Millie, she's too little to whip, she's too little." And so, my mother was trying to whip me. She said, well, I guess you're going to take it, and she whipped Tony [ph.], his back, to keep me from getting it. That's one thing that I can always remember (laughter). Story_ID: 208271 Speaker 1: What other memories can you share with us? What was family life like--the holidays, special occasions, and that kind of thing? Speaker 2: Well, I say all the time, and I tell my children that our family was a loving family, but it was one of the poorest families that I can think of. But I never thought of myself as being poor because all the other families in our neighborhood were about on the same status as we were. And, you know, when everybody, you know, have about the same things, and I tell my children--we always had three meals a day. It may not have been much, but it was three meals a day. We had oatmeal and biscuits and sorghum syrup every morning for breakfast. And my mother [Millie Williams Armstead] always said she never had a sick child because she brought us up on Mother's Oats. And I would say to her and the others, too, "And you don't have a child who like oatmeal today," (laughter). But we were, and we--she shared with us, and she taught us to share, and that's why I was telling you about that stick of candy--how she would wait until Sunday morning after we had eaten that oatmeal. And she would crack in the same size pieces until all of us had a piece of that long stick of peppermint candy. And, I, I had pleasant memories as a child, you know, playing out in the yard, doing things that children now just wouldn't think of. I tell them how--and I used to tell my school children, school girls, how, as a child, we made our own play games. We would draw lines on the ground, and we'd find bits of broken glass, and we played hop scotch and, you know, throwing in spaces. I don't know whether you know about the game, hop scotch, and we would jump, and we played the rain games, and things like that. We didn't have to have all of these different games, you know, that they have now. I believe, I see my grandsons--they have all this Sego or Seg [Sega]--say something, you know, but they have all of these games that they play, but we didn't have any such games. But we had a good time, you know, playing with one another out in the yard. And on a moonlight night--that's when we played out. They would let, especially in the summertime, if we weren't going to school, we would stay out, and we'd play by moonlight, and because it didn't have street lights in those small towns. Now, they had lights in Galveston [Texas]. But I was young--when we moved away from Galveston, I was just seven years of age, and moved over on the mainland to La Marque [Texas]. And I had a pleasant childhood, you know, living with friends and relatives also because we had lots of relatives around. Story_ID: 208272 Speaker 1: What about holidays--what were holidays like growing up? Speaker 2: Well, holidays growing up, especially Thanksgiving and Christmas--my mother [Millie Williams Armstead] said it wasn't Christmas if she didn't have a turkey, and if she didn't have some wine, and if she didn't make--I'm trying to think of what is that she made--in fact, we've got a punch bowl in there on the table now that my mother got with Octagon soap coupons. And my--she gave it to my sister, one of my sisters. And when Phyllis [Gray Hallmon] got married, my sister gave it to her as a wedding gift, and that punch bowl is over a hundred years old. And eggnog, that's what I was trying to think of. She, she would always want to--make some eggnog at Christmas time, and she had to have that turkey and some wine. And I can remember when my grandfather [Polk Williams]--when we were living in Galveston [Texas], my grandfather would come from Hawkinsville [Texas], or really Cedar Lake [Texas], because he was living at Cedar Lake at that time, and he would bring our Christmas turkey and our Thanksgiving turkey because he raised turkeys and that sort of thing. And my, my grandfather, my mother's father, he was a very progressive man. I can recall when they say that he was raising a lot of what they called blue mules, you know, because they farmed, used, and animals to plow the soil, and that sort of thing. And he was raising some special kinds of mules, and he would take them from Cedar Lake into Bay City [Texas] and sell them, and they brought a great price. And he raised cattle and things like that on his farm. He had a good size farm--I think it was almost a hundred acres of land now. How he managed to buy it way back there then, I don't know because my grandfather died in 1918. I can remember that. Story_ID: 208273 Speaker 1: So, [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Edith Armstead] Gray, you were going to tell me a story about your grandmother [maternal grandmother, Amy Hawkins Williams]. Speaker 2: As I was about to say, my grandmother was a cob--she had a cob pipe made out of corn cobs. And what they did, they would cut a section in the corn if--shell the corn. And they just have the cob and they cut it off, you know, in pieces, and then scoop out the center. And then they put--I don't know what the little stem was that they put in there. But anyway, they could pull the smoke out of the pipe through that. And she would tell me, "Put a--go in the kitchen"--and we all wooden stoves, you know, "and take a coal out of the stove, and put it inside of my pipe on the tobacco," and I would do that. And I would go out on the porch with a--and grandma would just tell me so many things that happened when she was a girl growing up, you know, and things like that. And when mama [Millie Williams Armstead] would come home from work--my mother was a housewife, and she was a laundress also. She would go every day and wash clothes for white people. And she washed on the rub board and they hung the clothes outside to dry. And I don't know whether you, either of you, ever heard of the boiling pot, but they had a big iron pot outdoors. And they build a fire around the pot. And the white clothes, they would put in this boiling pot and boil them. I'm sure it was to kill germs, but I don't know what they called it, and they said it was to bleach the white clothes. And she would keep that fire going around those white clothes, the sheets, and the pillow cases, and the men's white shirts, and that sort of thing. And she washed and ironed five days a week, Monday through Friday. And they paid her three dollars a week for all that washing and ironing. And I have heard her say that she has ironed as many as twenty-six shirts in a day, you know. And possibly, she did other work as well, but that was all that she got. And I would tell momma when she would come home about the stories that grandmomma had told. When I told her the story about Pappy, you know, what she said about Pappy, you know, how they got him off, he got off the boat himself. And these white men caught him and carried him down. She believed that because she knew that Pappy had been her grandmother's husband. She knew that--momma knew that. And then, sometime when I would tell certain things that grandma--momma would say--"Oh, don't listen to what momma say. She doesn't know what she talking about." But grandmother had good sense, good common sense--she couldn't read nor write, but she had good common sense. And she could relate incidents that had happened in her life, and that had happened in her parents' life up to a certain point because she told me that the old master [Orville Hawkins (ph.)] was the one who told her that she was born in '54, 1854, because her mother didn't know what year she was born. But she said the old master told her she was born in 1854. She was born during slavery, but they were freed, you know, before she became a full adult. Story_ID: 208274 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Edith Armstead] Gray, let's talk a little bit about your siblings. Would you please tell me their names in their birth order, including yourself? Speaker 2: Um-hm. My oldest sister was named Alma. She was Alma Armstead [Robinson] and, of course, she married a fellow named Robinson, Edgar Robinson. Alma was a big, stocky sort of girl, and Alma didn't go any further than the ninth grade in school. And Alma worked for the white people there in Bay City [Texas]--see, we were living in Bay City at that time. And she always loved pretty clothes. And she would take every dime that she made and go and put something way back there then, you know, you put things on layaway. And she'd put things on layaway and she would get them out and she would dress up. She was really a very attractive girl. She had a real dark complexion but she had pretty hair. And people used to say that Alma is really a beautiful black girl. She was dark-skinned. She had real pretty teeth and everything. And the guys were crazy about her (laughter)--that was another thing about her. But that was as far as she went in school. And she spent most of her time around Bay City, and she was a good cook. She worked in the white people's kitchen and that sort of thing. She was mostly a cook though, and that was her life. Story_ID: 208275 Speaker 1: Now, my brother, Otis [Armstead], was a second-born child. My oldest sister was born in 1906 and, of course, she passed away in nineteen-, she lived to be ninety-five. I think she passed away in 2001 because my baby sister [Mildred Armstead Norman] passed away in 2000. And my sister was in a nursing home, but when she heard that--really found out that my sister had died, they say she had a panic attack, and she died almost suddenly from that. My older brother, Otis--he was named for my great-grandfather [Otis Armstead], my father's [Henry Armstead, Sr.] grandfather. And my father named him after his grandfather because his grandfather had reared him--Otis Armstead. And Otis was sort of a little--I guess, well they weren't doing the jitterbug then. I forgot now what they were doing back there then. But mamma [Millie Williams Armstead] wanted Otis to go to Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] to school because she had had a brother [Joel Williams]-- Story_ID: 208276 Speaker 1: My mother [Millie Williams Armstead] had had a brother [Joel Williams]. I was trying to tell you about how my mother's father--I don't know how much schooling he had had or anything. I never heard her talk anything about his schooling, but he was in for his children being educated. And he sent his oldest son to Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] years ago, and he finished--Uncle Joel finished Tuskegee when Dr. [George] Washington [Carver] was at, at Tuskegee, you know, with the founder of Tuskegee Institute. He finished school in Tuskegee in 1912. And, of course, Dr. Carver was there then 'cause Dr. Carver was there when I went there to (laughter) in 1931. Dr. Carver was still living--he was still there. But grandpa really--he stressed education, you know, for his children. He knew the value of it way back there then. But I never heard my mother say anything about how much education grandpa had, but I know he could read and write. But grandma [Amy Hawkins Williams] couldn't read nor write. And momma wanted Otis [Armstead] to go to Tuskegee. Story_ID: 208277 Speaker 1: And so, the area that we lived in, in Bay City [Texas] at that time, it was a great farming area and a ranching community. They had all these big ranch farms, but right across the Colorado River from where we lived, between Bay City and Palacios [Texas], was a little community called Donovan [Texas] where a lot of Germans lived. And they grew so much cotton over there in that area. And, naturally, all of us knew how to pick cotton because, as a girl growing up--I guess I was fourteen or fifteen--I could pick three hundred pounds of cotton a day--myself. I picked cotton also. All of us did. And I don't recall whether my youngest sisters, May [Marion Armstead McDaniel] and Mildred [Armstead Norman], whether they ever picked cotton or not. But I know Alma [Armstead Robinson], Otis [Armstead], myself, (unclear), my brother that's named Henry [Armstead, Jr.] that we call Bro--we all picked cotton. There were five of us that used to pick cotton. And we used to chop cotton and hoe cotton, too, because for--I guess I would say some six or seven more years, Pappy [Henry Armstead, Sr.] tried to do some sharecropping. But he didn't know too much about farming because he had left the farm down there in the Brazos River bottom as a young man and went to Galveston [Texas], you know, where work is more plentiful, and that sort of thing. But we have done that kind of work and did quite a bit of it. So, Otis could really pick cotton. He could pick three hundred, three hundred-fifty, or almost four hundred pounds of cotton a day. And they paid you a dollar a pound for the cotton that you would pick. And if you could pick three hundred pounds of cotton a day, you made three dollars. But if you could pick four hundred pounds, you got four dollars for the cotton that you had picked for that day. Story_ID: 208278 Speaker 1: So, momma [Millie Williams Armstead] had Otis's [Armstead] trunk all packed to go to Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. And he wanted to go to Donovan [Texas] because--"Momma, I can make a whole lot more money and have money to pay my tuition," and this and that, and the other. And she said, "Go," and she sent him with some friends who we live next door to us who went over there every year to pick cotton. They carried, they carried that whole family. And that's how they made their living for the whole year--picking up cotton in the fall to take care of him for the rest of the year, because in Bay City [Texas], there was a lot of rice farming that went on in that area, too. And the men worked on rice farms, but they were the cotton pickers, you know, and they would go over to Markham [Texas] to pick the cotton. So, she sent Otis over there with them. And this lady--we call her Ms. Huggie [ph.]--she, she said Otis moved out after he'd been over there for a week or two--said he did real well, picked cotton well, and made good money. And then, he took down with a group, you know, how some young men are, and he just strayed away. And he never came back home from that day until--I guess he was just a boy, sixteen, at that time. And I never shall forget he was very studious. He had finished the ninth grade, junior high school there in Bay City. And he had won the spelling match, you know, for the whole county, and that sort of thing. And instead of him coming back, he just wandered on off, and we don't where all he went. But momma couldn't hear from him--naturally, you know, she was quite worried about him. But he stayed gone for about four or five years before he ever came back home. And, of course, when he came back home, he was a grown man. And so, he didn't get to go to Tuskegee. And after she had helped him to try to go to Tuskegee and he didn't go, then she said, "Well, if anyone else wants to go, you're going to have to take yourself." And I said, "I want to go." She said, "Well, you take yourself," (laughter). But after I finished high school--see, Bay City only went through the junior high school department, ninth grade, and then I went back to Galveston [Texas]. That was about seventy miles away and lived with my aunt, you know, so I could finish high school [Central High School, Galveston, Texas]. Story_ID: 208279 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Edith Armstead] Gray, before we move on to high school [Central High School, Galveston, Texas], let me ask you a little about elementary school first. What was the name of the elementary school that you attended, and tell me a little bit about your teachers there? Speaker 2: I went to ele--I started at elementary school in La Marque, Texas. That's the first school that's on the mainland, you know, out toward Galveston [Texas], is now. And, of course, my parents [Millie Williams Armstead and Henry Armstead, Sr.] had moved over--the mainland is twelve miles, on the mainland from the island. And we lived there two or three years and that's where I started school there. But it's in Galveston County [Texas]--La Marque, it was, it was in Galveston County, and that was my first school. It was a one-room school also. And my first teacher was named Mrs. McCullough [ph.]--I can remember her. I can see her in my mind today--Mrs. McCullough. And I can recall my first day at school that--back there then, most of the teachers taught with the blackboard and the crayon. And she put some alphabets up on the board that I later, later learned were alphabets. I didn't know what they were then because I don't recall--mamma had started me with my alphabets and things like that, you know, but saying them, you know, in row, A-B-C-D-E-F-G, and so on. And the teacher had me--she put them up on the board, and then she had me to go and stand there. I don't know how long I stood there, but she just told me to copy what I saw up on the board. And, of course, I did try to, you know, and actually looked like, goodness knows what. But she was Mrs. McCullough and that was my first teacher in La Marque. And I had her only one year but, you know, back there when you started school--they call it, you in the primer. You don't start off in the first grade--you're in the primer. That was a primer. I don't know how long I stayed in the primer, but it seems as, as if I was apt to learn. And then, I was soon in the first grade, and, you know, I don't even recall having other classmates. You know, this one, one-room school, one teacher, and she had one through eighth grades in that, in that room. And she had us all divided off--I guess the children who were just starting, the small children--she had them in one section, and those who were a little high up in another. But I know the older children were over to the far side of the room. I guess those were the eighth grade students because that was as far as they went in that school, and then, they would go back to Galveston. And, you see, at that time, we had a, a transportation system that we refer to as the interurban [the Galveston-Houston Electric Railway], and it went from Houston [Texas] to Galveston every hour on the hour. And if you were going to school, you didn't have to pay to ride that transportation to get back to Galveston because you knew that to enter, and it was an electrical trolley. It came along, and they had a special place, you know, where it would stop and you would go out, and you would catch it. And so, the students who went back to Galveston, after they completed the eighth grade, they would go every morning and catch the interurban, and go over to Galveston to high school. And then, they would catch it in the afternoon and come back to La Marque. And then, as I said, my second teacher was Mrs. Robinson [ph.]. And Mrs. Robinson, I guess, taught me in the first grade and the second grade and maybe, you know, back there then they, they skipped children. They--it depended on how well you learn because when I went to Bay City [Texas], I was in the fourth grade. And it seems as if we aren't--we moved to Bay City in 1919. And I guess I was seven years of age when we moved across the bay to La Marque--seven, eight, nine--I've, I've gotten those years mixed up. But anyway, I know I was in the fourth grade when I went to Bay City and started school [Booker T. Washington School, Bay City, Texas] there. So, I went to, to the La Marque elementary, I guess, and they called it junior high school. I never heard of the junior high school--it was just the La Marque School for blacks [sic. La Marque Colored School, Galveston County, Texas], and it was in the black neighborhood. I can remember that. And I went through the third grade there. Story_ID: 208280 Speaker 1: What kind of student were you? Speaker 2: Well, my teacher said that I was an excellent student (laughter). That's what they said (laughter). And I can recall when we used to have--what we called spelling matches. I would always win. I would start at the bottom. I would ask my teacher to let me start at the bottom of the class. And we had what we called turn-down. You know, if you, someone would miss a word and you spell it, you would get up in front of that one. And if you start at the bottom--and finally, you, if you turn down everybody, you finally get up to, to the front at the top. And so, before the period was over, I was always up at the top; I was a good speller. Story_ID: 208281 Speaker 1: At this time in your life, the elementary school years, did you have dreams and aspirations at this time? Speaker 2: Yes. I always--well, I had an aunt. I don't know--it's my mother's [Millie Williams Armstead] second oldest sister was named Rosie [ph.], and she was a great seamstress. And I used to sit and watch Aunt Rosie sew. And I said, I want, when I get grown, I want to be just like Aunt Rosie. I want to sew and I wanted to design clothes. And when I was to Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] to college, I really went there to be a dress designer. And when I got there, I was told that you get designing in your art classes, but they don't teach art designing as such at Tuskegee Institute at that time. And they told me that I needed to have gone to Pratt University, Pratt [Institute] School of Design [New York, New York] in, in New York City [New York, New York]. I think that's what they--how they refer to it--said, but you can get designing in your home economics classes. So, that's how I ended up taking home economics. Story_ID: 208282 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Edith Armstead] Gray. What sights, sounds, and smells remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: You know, as a child growing up and as a young adult, I don't know what that smell was. But it was the way I used to have to walk to school, especially when I was--well, I was in, in high school [Central High School, Galveston, Texas] at that time because I was tenth grade then. And I had gone back to Galveston [Texas]. And we used to have to pass by a grocery store that, you know, how we use all these names that we shouldn't use. We called it a Dago store (laughter). And there was a strange smell on the street, on the sidewalk. I didn't know whether it came from the sand, or where it came from, but it was an unusual smell. And I can still remember that smell today that I used to get from walking on that street. And it was just one block from where my aunt lived because they would go up there every morning and buy milk-- Story_ID: 208283 Speaker 1: You know, it's a strange thing about it. I can recall--I don't recall that in my family because we always lived so far from the store. But in the City of Galveston [Texas], when I went back to go to high school [Central High School, Galveston, Texas], my aunt [Rosie (ph.) Williams] lived just one block from the grocery store. And for every meal, they went to the grocery store. And, see, I wasn't accustomed to that because poppa [Henry Armstead, Sr.] would bring groceries home on Saturday night, and he would bring enough home to last all the week. But they went to the grocery store for milk for breakfast, whatever else they were going to have--before lunch or dinner or what, they had to go to the grocery store. So, that, that was unusual to me at that time that they had to grocery store so much. And then I see people now in my small town of Evergreen [Alabama]--this, I got to run over, "I can't cook dinner because I got to run over to the grocery store." And I think--well, I had a man to come and work on my refrigerator. And he said, "[HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Edith Armstead] Gray, why do you have all this food in your refrigerator, and nobody here but you?" And I said, "You know, why?" I said, "If anyone should come and I need to cook a meal, I don't have to go to the grocery store." Story_ID: 208284 Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. As a small child, I can remember, you know, almost before I knew what church was--and my older sister [Alma Armstead Robinson] and brothers [Otis Armstead and Henry Armstead, Jr.], and some of my cousins, my mother [Millie Williams Armstead] would have them come and get me. And she'd have us ready, and we had to go to Sunday school every Sunday morning. And then, when we moved to Bay City [Texas], the church was at an angle right across the street from us. All you had to do was cross the street. Our house was on one corner, and the church was over there, across the street on that corner. And we could just walk diagonally across the street. And my mother would have us to get ready to go to Sunday school and church on Saturday. You got your things ready on Saturday to be ready to go to church on Sunday morning. I was brought up in the church and have always been active in the church. At my church that I belong to now in Evergreen [Alabama], I have taught Sunday school for over forty-five years. Story_ID: 208285 Speaker 1: Where did you go to junior high school? And at this time, who were your friends, and what kinds of things were you interested in? Speaker 2: Well, junior high school, I went to junior high school in Bay City, Texas because that was all that we had. It was elementary and junior high school. It was called the Booker T. Washington junior high school [sic. Booker T. Washington School, Bay City, Texas], and they went from the first grade through the ninth grade. And I guess it was the typical black junior high school. They had a principal and had about four or five teachers, you know, in the school who taught the various grades. And I know the principal's classroom was up on the second level. It was a two-story, old two-story brick building, and it was in the north end of the town. We lived in the south end, and we had to walk about four miles to get to the school, but we did that every day and thought nothing about it. And as I told you, I was in the fourth grade when I went to Bay City and started school there. I had, I can recall that first teacher I had--was named Ms. White [ph.]. Whoo, she was a mean hussy (laughter)--that was the meanest woman (laughter). If the children would keep notes--I'm sure, you know, as I look back on it now, she may have been a very good teacher, but she had trouble trying to keep order because there were so many of us, you know, in the room. I imagine that woman had some forty or fifty kids in that fourth grade--see, because the children came from all over Matagorda County [Texas] to go to school there at Booker T. Washington junior high school. And she would try to get order, and she couldn't get order, and she would just go up and down the aisle like this, with a strap, a big strap, whipping children. And she hit me in my eye once, you know, whipping children, you know, trying to stop the noise that was going on in the classroom. And my mother [Millie Williams Armstead] wrote her a note and told her that, when I did no day (unclear), then she whipped me, too, but she didn't beat me over my head--said she always whipped me on the lower part of my body. And her not to ever hit--strike me in my, my face again. And I'm just showing you how ignorant some teachers were back there then. Shoot--if ever a teacher said or did something like that now, (unclear) would be up there with a gun (laughter). You wouldn't dare say it. And, and she said openly in class--see, because mama, you know, I do what my mother would tell me to do or ask me to do. She told me to, "Be sure you give Ms. White this note when you go in that classroom this morning." And I did because I didn't know exactly what momma had said. It was sealed and to Ms. White, and she read it and she took it as an insult. She said, "Not only will I hit you over your head and your body, I'll hit you anywhere else I want to hit you, and any of the others of you in here." Well, you know, that was an insult. You couldn't do that now. Children now will tell you, "Don't you touch me," (laughter), "don't you touch me," (laughter). Story_ID: 208286 Speaker 1: While in junior high school [Booker T. Washington School, Bay City, Texas], [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Edith Armstead] Gray, who was influencing you at this time? Speaker 2: Well, you know one thing, most of my teachers influenced me because they said that I was quite apt. And I was creative, and I could sing real well, and there were so many things. I could speak well, and if they had plays, they would give me leading parts and the little operettas, and the other little plays that they had, and that sort of thing. And I had one teacher who was named Ms. Gilmanot [ph.]. She was from Corpus Christi, Texas. She was our music teacher and she influenced me a lot. She would develop me for singing new songs and things like that. In fact, I took music for a short period of time, but I didn't do well in music because I didn't have a piano at home to practice on. And, and I used to tell my home ec. [home economics] girls the same thing--"If you want to learn to sew, you've got to ask your parents to help you get a sewing machine because you can't make just one garment here at school, and think that you're going to learn to really sew. You've got to have something to practice on at home." And so, that's what I needed--was a piano at home. Story_ID: 208287 Speaker 1: And what kind of person were you at this time [junior high school years], this point in your life? What kind of young lady were you developing into? Speaker 2: Well, I was well-liked by all of my classmates, classmates, and I liked them. And I had one special friend--her name was Josephine Daley [ph.]. And so many of the children didn't like Josephine and, you know, as I have thought back on it, and as I grew and became older, they were jealous of Josephine. Her father ran a grocery store. And I was especially fond of her because she'd bring me apples and oranges (laughter), things that I didn't have, you know, if you know, so we could have them for lunch. And we spent lots of time together. And back there then, her father was the only black man close by that I knew who had a T-Model [Model T] Ford. And if--his mother lived up in Horton, Texas and if they were going up there, she would have her parents to come by and pick me up, so that I could ride up to Horton with, with them. You know, it was just a great thing for me. And we remained friends up until she died. She had a brother who was, who lived in Houston [Texas]. And he was one of these guys who called themselves some kind of spiritual man, you know, and he could look into the future and all that sort of thing. And he just amassed a fortune. Story_ID: 208288 Speaker 1: If you will, tell me a little bit about your high school years. What high school did you attend and what was high school like? Speaker 2: High school was--were some of my very, very pleasant years. After I had finished junior high school [Booker T. Washington School] at Bay City [Texas], I went back to Galveston [Texas], and I lived with one of my mother's [Millie Williams Armstead] sisters, so that I could go to high school. I went there in the tenth grade and, of course, as I said, they were all pleasant years. I had marvelous teachers and classmates, and I remained with that group until I graduated from high school. Speaker 1: So when, what was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: Central High School [Galveston, Texas]. Speaker 1: So, when you were in high school, what were you thinking that you wanted to be, and what were you thinking you wanted to do with your life? Speaker 2: I still was thinking that I wanted to be a dress designer and, of course, I took home economics. It was an elective, but I took home economics in high school, because that was the closest thing. And I had begun to sew at that time when I got in, got to Central, we had a home economics department, but it was an elective, and I chose to take it where we would have foods and clothing, and I excelled in clothing. I started designing various things myself. You know, I'd buy a pattern, but I would always add something onto it, you know, where it would be mine, you know. Story_ID: 208289 Speaker 1: Who was influencing you at this particular time? Speaker 2: Well, to tell you the truth about the thing, I don't think that--I had a home ec. [home economics] teacher. She was a Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] graduate at Central [High School, Galveston, Texas], but she didn't influence me that much in designing of garments because we had to buy patterns. And she would allow those of us who wanted to, to add something extra to your garment. She would let you do that, you know, but you had to follow that pattern to the last word. She would say that your pattern is just like the Bible--you go by it step-by-step. And, of course, before I would complete my garment, I would always let her know what I wanted to do. I want to do this or that or the other to change this pattern--to make mine a little different, you know, add something else to it. And her name was Mrs. Hathaway [ph.]. Story_ID: 208290 Speaker 1: So, did you know at this time that you wanted to go to college? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I always wanted to go to college because after my mother [Millie Williams Armstead]--"Didn't get to send my son [Otis Armstead], he just left home." You know, as I told you, he really left Donovan [Texas]. That was the name of the little place where he went to pick cotton, and he didn't come back. And she was so heartbroken over that. And I recall her sitting by the stove crying, you know, that he didn't come back. She wanted some of us to go to college. And, in fact, I'm the only of all of my siblings who finished high school. None of them ever finished. They never got--now this brother, Otis, he went--once he went down to Galveston [Texas] and started working, he went through the eleventh grade. But he didn't complete, stay there, and complete the twelfth grade when he could have. My sister, Alma [Armstead Robinson], went back to Galveston, and she went through the ninth grade, and she dropped out. And then, my other sister, Amy [Armstead Hilliard-Jones], that went to, to high school in Bay City [Texas], she only went through the tenth grade. And my younger sisters, my sister, Marion [Armstead McDaniel]--we call her May [ph.], she went through the eleventh grade. And my baby sister [Mildred Armstead Norman], she went through the tenth grade. And my brother [Henry Armstead, Jr.], he went through the ninth grade--the one that we call Henry, we call him Bro. But none of them ever finished high school. Story_ID: 208291 Speaker 1: So, how did you make the decision of where you wanted to go to college? Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to go there because I had this uncle [Joel Williams] who had gone to Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and had finished in 1912 when Dr. Booker T. Washington was the president of the school. And I knew that he had come back from Tuskegee. And he was the first black man, or white man either, in Matagorda County [Texas] who had gotten a job. He was a steam engineer, and he had graduated in steam engineering, and he operated the first steam engine gin, and he did that for many, many years. He would gin all the cotton that came in from Brazoria County [Texas], Matagorda County, and all around. He was operating that gin. I used to--yeah, my mother [Millie Williams Armstead], when we would hear the whistle blow at twelve o'clock, she'd say, "Well, that's"--I can't even say his name--Joel, "That's Joel up there causing that gin to blow." See, he was the engineer up there. Story_ID: 208292 Speaker 1: And once you got to Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], what was life like? What were your years like at Tuskegee? Speaker 2: Well, I tell you--after I finished high school [Central High School, Galveston, Texas], I stayed out of school for a whole year and worked. I worked as a--we call it babysitting now, but we called it nursing then--looking after little white children, and doing housework. And I would cook for white people and things like that for that one year. And I recall--I made eight dollars a week. And I would send seven dollars and seventy-five cents of that money home to my mother [Millie Williams Armstead] because I knew she wasn't going to spend not a penny of it, and would ask her to put it up and save for me, so I could have it to get train fare and tuition to get to Tuskegee. So, I wanted her to know that I really meant to go to college, and she saved that money for me all the year. And I enrolled at Tuskegee as a night school student. I went there as a night school student because I knew I had to work. And when I got to Tuskegee, I enrolled as a night school student. And I had many schoolmates who had gone to school at Galveston [Texas]. Many of them were ahead of me but, see, I knew them in school because we were all schoolmates. And there was one girl that was named Letha Brown [ph.]. She was like a big sister to me. And she said to me one day--she said, "[HistoryMaker] Edith [Armstead Gray], you know, you're in the school of home economics, and you're going to night school, and said you can't get three subjects a night." She said, "Do you know it's going to take you ten years to finish home economics?" You know, I hadn't thought about that. I was just so glad to be there and so anxious to go to school. I didn't care if it had taken me twenty years. And she said, "I'll tell you what you do--say you go back to the registrar's office, and you let them know that you want to take some day school classes"--see, because I worked, I, I went to school at night. We would go to school--say, around six o'clock in the evening, and the last class was over at nine o'clock in the evening. And you'd come back to your dormitory, and lights were out--I think at ten-thirty. They'd give us that amount of time to study, you know, if you had to, and then you'd have to go to bed. And, she said, "You go and you talk to them." So, sure enough, I did, and I went and talked to the registrar. And they said, yes--said they could change me over, and let me take me take some day classes. So, then I started going to school at eight o'clock in the morning, and I would get out of class at twelve o'clock. And then, we would go to lunch, and then I would go--I worked in the dean of women's office, you know, sorting the mail and putting up the mail list, and whatever they wanted me to do. But, earlier in the morning, every morning, as a part of my work, I had to get up early--say, around four o'clock in the morning. And I swept a hall in the--I lived in White Hall, and that's the one that Jerome [A. Gray] was telling his sister [Phyllis Gray Hallmon] about, that they renovate it, and you can see it's a beauty. And I said, "Well, I've got to go there to see it." And I would sweep the hall on the first floor, and then I would have to clean one bathroom, all the face bowls, and the toilets, and the bathtubs, and so forth. It seemed to me we had about three bathtubs in that bathroom, and I don't know how many toilets and face bowls there, but anyway, I had to clean them. And then, I would come back. And before I started going to day school, I would have time to go up, and take my bath and get dressed, and then go to the dean of women's office where I sat there all of the morning. I--that wasn't much to do. I'd have to go pick up the mail from the post office. It was just right across the road there from White Hall. And then, I would have to sort it, and put up the mail list to let the children know who had mail. And then, when they come in to get it, I would pass it out to them. You know, that was my job at that time. But, once I started going to day school, I would get up early, and I'd sweep that hall, and I'd clean those bathrooms, so that I could get out and go to school, you know, with my regular classmates. And, of course, I was '40 [1940]. Do you know I finished with the--that class that I started out with? Story_ID: 208293 Speaker 1: And how long did it take you to get your degree from Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]? Speaker 2: I did--first, I did three years in college. And I had no money, and I had acquired a large bill of four hundred dollars that I owed Tuskegee. Well, four hundred dollars back there in 1934, that was just like four thousand dollars, you know. It was during the [Great] Depression--see, I went to Tuskegee during the Depression years. And so, there was a lady, that someone had pointed her out to me, and said that she was the itinerant teacher trainer for all black home ec. [home economics] teachers over at the State of Alabama. And she was passing by White Hall one day and I saw her. And I went out and I stopped her, and I made myself known to her. I told her who I was and that, that--see, that year was my senior year. And I wanted to stay at Tuskegee so badly, so that I could finish with that class that I had started with. And I told her that I had to go home because I had no money to pay Tuskegee and that--see, they all, the teachers all knew about it because, see, Dr. [Robert Russa] Moton had made that announcement in church that--I mean, in the vesper services that they were going to have to send children home because the philanthropists in the North were not giving money like they once had given to Tuskegee, and that Tuskegee was operating way below what it should. And it just didn't have the money, you know, to continue to care of them there. He said that one Sunday evening in vesper. And the next Sunday--even they had begun to send children home. The next Sunday evening, he got up in vesper, and he said, "We don't want to send another child home--said because when the children get home"--say they can't explain to their community nor to their parents why they are home--said, "Tuskegee is a school for working students, and we want to keep them here and let them work, and take classes when they can." Oh, we were so--see, I, I wasn't the only one. There were so many of, you know, at that point, you know, who were working students--said, "We're going to keep them here and let them work, and let them go to school when they can go." And said, "Let's let them stay here until they work out the bills that they owe Tuskegee." And I was glad. But I had written my mother [Millie Williams Armstead] and told her that I was going to have to come home. And my sister said that she went to these same white people that I told you, that she had washed and ironed for so long, and borrowed twenty-five dollars to send me, so I would have a ticket to come home on. And she sent me a money order and I wouldn't cash it. I just kept it, I kept it for a month or so because I was just so hopeful that I was going to get in college, you know, that year 'cause that was my senior year. And so, finally, after I saw that I wasn't going to get in, I told the lady, who was the assistant to the dean of women, Ms. Clopton [ph.], that I was going to have to go home. And so, when I showed her the money order that I had, she said, "[HistoryMaker] Edith [Armstead Gray]--they always call me Edith Tom [ph.]--said, "Edith Tom--said, how long have you had this money order?" I said, "I've had it for about six weeks now." And she would sniff all the time--"You mean, you're just now deciding you'd go home?" I said, "Yes." See, but I had--before I decided to go home, I had written home. And there was a young man that I was in junior high school [Booker T. Washington School, Bay City, Texas] with, who had gone to Prairie View State College [sic. Prairie View State Normal & Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] and his father [A.G. Hilliard] had been the principal at--for that school. And his father had become ill. And A.G. [Hilliard II] had come out of Prairie View, and had come to Bay City [Texas] to take over his father's work as principal there. And so, I had told him I was going to come home. He said, "Well, I'll have a job waiting for you, Edith." And so, I went home, thinking that I was going to get that job. I didn't want it, but, you know, it was--I had no job at all, so I came on home. But I had talked with this lady, and she asked me where I was from. I said, "I'm from Bay City, Texas," I said, "formerly from Galveston [Texas]." I finished how I was born there and I finished high school [Central High School, Galveston, Texas] there. And she said, "Oh," she said, "You know, I'm from Texas, too." I said, "You are?" She's--"Where?" I asked her, "Where?" She said she was from Houston [Texas]. So, I told her--I said, "Well, you know, I worked in Houston, Texas my last year trying to get money, so I could come to Tuskegee." And she said, "Oh, I just gave a young woman a job there the other day--said I wished I had known it." She said, "Give me your name and your address," and said, "I'm going to put it down, and I'm going to--the first opening that I hear of, I'm going to get in touch with you." And I gave her my name and address. Story_ID: 208294 Speaker 1: And when I got to Bay City [Texas], the first thing that I did--see, because I could sew then. I got a piece of cardboard box. You know, you hear me tell me these things--it sounds untrue to me. And my children tell me, oh, Ms.--Phyllis [Gray Hallmon] is the one. The boys [Frederick R. Gray and Jerome A. Gray] don't--"Mother, don't tell it, it's just so sad." I took a piece of cardboard box, brown cardboard box, and, you know, how you can take a square out of it. And I took a piece of black crayon, and I wrote on this piece of cardboard box, "Plain Sewing Done Cheaply." And I went outside the house and nailed it up on the side of the front of the house. And, girl, people just started bringing me sewing, sewing, sewing. But, you know, they didn't pay but fifty cents to make a dress. And the way I sewed, it took me all day to make a dress, you know, doing handwork, you know, hems and thing. We didn't do anything on the machine--the sewing machine, like hems and, oh, that was handwork, you know, and bindings and that sort of thing. But you couldn't make anything, but I did it anyway. And I was at home for two weeks. And I was sitting at the sewing machine one day. And we had the Western Union Telegraph guys who came around, you know, and they were on bicycle. And he said, "Does anyone live here by the name of [HistoryMaker] Edith Armstead [Gray]?" I said, "Yes, I'm she." He said, "Well, I have a telegram for you." And I had a telegram from Conecuh County [Alabama], Evergreen, Alabama, from the superintendent of education, saying that I had been recommended to come to teach home economics at the Conecuh County Training School [Thurgood Marshall Middle School; Evergreen, Alabama], and wanted to know if I would accept. If so, to let him know--telegraph him right back. And I did, and that's where I am still today. I said I wasn't going to stay there but five years, but I met my husband [Philander A. Gray] there. He was the ag. [agriculture] teacher, and I was the home ec. [home economics] teacher, and we were thrown together so much--just as good friends in the beginning. And then we started dating and got married. Story_ID: 208295 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about just what it was like to attend Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] with Dr. [George Washington] Carver and just what was that like? Speaker 2: Well, when I went there, Dr. Moton was the director of the school. He was the president, Dr. Robert Russa Moton. And Dr. Carver, at that time, was not teaching. He just worked in his laboratory over in the agricultural building that was along the far side of the campus. But I took biology in that, in that same building. And we'd see him every time we had a class over there, I think. I took biology about three days a week in the lab, two days a week, but we would see him in his lab working. And then, not only that, we'd see Dr. Carver every morning when he passed by White Hall. He'd have a little basket on his arm, you know, and he would be going around picking up little grasses and little flowers and different things, putting in his basket. And they said that he was running experiments on those things, and you'd see out there every morn. And he wore the same--the whole time that I was there, because Dr. Carver didn't die until about 1941 [sic. 1943], he wore that same little brown coat. He had worn it so long that it had lost its color. And that's what he was--a very, very smart man. And he had--the [George Washington Carver] Museum [Tuskegee, Alabama] had been opened, and you would see all of his paintings and all of the things that he had done. Oh, he was just such a marvelous person--all of the things that he had made from the peanut, and from the sweet potato, and that sort of thing, but he never taught any of us. But he would have Bible study every Wednesday night down on the Tompkins Hall that was a dining hall. And that was right across from White Hall. All I'd have to do is walk out my building and go--I'd say about a half block and get Tompkins Hall where you'd have your meals. Story_ID: 208296 Speaker 1: Now, I'm just going back for a second, [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Edith Armstead] Gray. When you got that telegram for the job in Evergreen [Alabama], what was your mother's [Millie Williams Armstead] reaction? Speaker 2: Oh, she was so happy, oh, mama was so happy, she was so happy because she always said, "Where there's a will, there's a way." And so, my father [Henry Armstead, Sr.] said, you know, like I told you, he just had a third grade education. And he didn't have too much business and had no business, since I guess I should say in a sense--the only business since he had was to know the work, and try to take care of us. And then, he had a lot of skills that helped him to support us because when we first got to Bay City [Texas], he had an uncle who was younger than he. It was his mother's baby brother, Uncle Ross [ph.]. And Uncle Ross told papa--said, "If you come and work with me--say, I'll teach you how to slaughter animals." And back there then, you'd see it would be against the law to do what they did then. They would go out on the ranches and kill cows-- Story_ID: 208297 Speaker 1: When you took your job in Evergreen [Alabama], what was life like there in Evergreen? Speaker 2: Well, it was the first real job that I had ever had. And it was very pleasant, to me, to even have a job. The school [Conecuh County Training School; Thurgood Marshall Middle School, Evergreen, Alabama] was a high school, but I went there in 1934. And the first year that I was there, they only went through the eleventh grade. They didn't go through the twelfth grade. The white schools had twelfth grade. But the black school--it was called a, a training school. All over the State of Alabama, all of the black high schools were referred to as training schools. And in later years, when students graduated and went to other places, they said that when they would tell people that they had finished a training school, that they felt that they had finished some school that was sort of a detention place, you know. And they made so many complaints that the name had to finally be changed. And then they changed it from a, the training school to Thurgood Marshall High School [Evergreen, Alabama]. Story_ID: 208298 Speaker 1: And what was teaching like in the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s]? Speaker 2: Well, I tell you, the teachers were very dedicated, very dedicated teachers, and they wanted us to learn more than anything else. They didn't have too much to work with. They improvised many, many things because in my first year as a teacher [at Conecuh County Training School; Thurgood Marshall Middle School, Evergreen, Alabama], I know I improvised so many things in teaching my girls home economics. In the beginning, I only taught girls, but before I retired, I had begun to teach boys as well. I taught boys, home and family living, you know, how to be good fathers, good husbands, and that sort of thing, and how to be a good family member. But in the beginning, I taught only girls. And we taught all phases of family life--personal and family development; human development, you know, how to take care of their bodies, and that sort of thing; how to make themselves more attractive; how to be a real lady, you know, how to walk, how to sit. And, and the girls just enjoyed it because they had never had any courses like that before. Story_ID: 208299 Speaker 1: Do you wish we still taught that in schools today? Speaker 2: Oh, I do, because they have, they have cut it out of all of the schools now down in that area. They have no more home economics. They still have agriculture, but they do not have home economics. They're teaching some kind of a science. So one of the young women whom I taught years ago--one who succeeded me--she said, "[HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Edith Armstead] Gray, they don't teach home economics like you taught it years ago." Speaker 1: And what kind of a difference do you think that would make if young men were taught how to be family men, and that kind of thing--if they were taught that today? Speaker 2: It would be much a better world. And the same is true of women if they could be taught home economics--how to be good mates and that sort of thing. Story_ID: 208300 Speaker 1: We're celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of Brown v. The Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]-- Speaker 2: Uh-hm. Speaker 1: What are some of your thoughts on that just in terms of where we were fifty years ago compared to where we are now? Speaker 2: I don't know about up here. But in the South, I haven't seen too many changes take place because there in Evergreen [Alabama], the school is--I would say, about 98 percent black and 2 percent white. It's still a segregated situation in the schools there in Conecuh County [Alabama]. I live right across the street from the school that used to be the high school when I taught [at Conecuh County Training School, Evergreen, Alabama]. It's now an elementary school. That's Thurgood Marshall--used to be Thurgood Marshall High School, first Conecuh County Training School, and now it's Thurgood Marshall Elementary School [sic. Thurgood Marshall Middle School, Evergreen, Alabama]. And I can look out of my kitchen window every morning, and I see the children going to class. And you see such a few white kids, you know, parents bringing them over there to go to that school. And then many times, when we celebrate National Teachers Week, and I always go right across the street. Every school will plan a meal for teachers on a certain day in that week, but I always go right across the street because that's where I always taught. And you can look around you--see maybe one white student in a class. And most of them, you do not see any white students in the classes. The school is predominantly black. Story_ID: 208301 Speaker 1: If you will, tell me a little bit about what life was like in Evergreen, Alabama in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s], somewhat at the height of the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 2: Well, to tell you the truth about the thing, too much didn't go on in Evergreen. Most of the action was up there in Montgomery, Alabama. And, of course, that was really our main shopping area--Montgomery--we would drive up on weekends, really on Saturday 'cause we could come back home. It was just seventy miles away. And policemen would be all over the streets, you know, call themselves keeping black people in line, and that sort of thing. But those were the years when blacks were really walking, but they were determined they were not going to ride the bus, you know, pay money and ride the bus, you know, because the Civil Rights Movement had begun, you know. [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was pastor at the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church [Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama]. And, of course, you'd see black people giving one another rides, and that sort of thing, because they just refused, refused to ride the bus. And it just put the transportation system in Montgomery out of business because black people were most of the riders anyway. They were riding the buses to work and getting places. They didn't have the cars. And some of them had--many of them had cars, but they really used the buses for transportation. Story_ID: 208302 Speaker 1: I recall once at our school [Conecuh County Training School; Thurgood Marshall Middle School, Evergreen, Alabama]--it wasn't in my department [home economics] because I had taught only girls, but in a history teacher's class, I understand that they were talking about the Civil Rights Movement. And the children became, especially some of the boys, became so upset about what was going on in Montgomery [Alabama], and things that they had seen on TV and so forth, that they just walked out of class, and started running, and said they were going downtown [Evergreen, Alabama] and start protesting. And some of the teachers went out and stopped them from going. So, we didn't have a, a protest going on in Evergreen. And sometimes, I think it's because many times, we had a principal--he was my principal, too--Mr. [O. F.] Frazier. The first principal I worked under was Jackson [ph.]. He was a strong-willed man. But Mr. Frazier was a little docile, and he said, "We don't need to have any marches, and so forth going on here in Evergreen. Things are all right." You know, you've seen those kinds of people. And we didn't have any marches, but a lot of small towns had marches and so forth, but we didn't there. Speaker 2: So, do, how do you think Evergreen wasn't influenced by what was going on so close to what, so, so nearby in Montgomery? Speaker 1: Because, as I said, of docile black people and, and special school officials, like the principal of the school. Then you had--see, you had many little sub-schools around in the community--various communities that fed in to--we didn't have, but the one high school in the whole of the county. And children rode for miles to come into town. The high school was in town, and I've heard so many people who were there at that time--said that when they dedicated that school in 1918, the Conecuh County Training School, that Dr. [Robert Russa] Moton came from Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. And he was the main speaker for the dedication of the Conecuh County Training School when it was built. And if you don't have strong leadership among your educators, you're not going to have too much going on in your community. You've got to have strong ministers and strong leaders in the educational field. Story_ID: 208303 Speaker 1: Now, you were somewhat active in civil rights. You were very involved with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Tell me a little bit about that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I tell you--you know, for many years, the State of Alabama outlawed NAACP in the State of Alabama. They didn't even allow any city, excuse me, or community to have an NAACP chapter. And so, it was not until 1965 or '66 [1966] that they ruled that unlawful to not let us have an NAACP chapter. And that was the first time in Conecuh County [Alabama], and in the State of Alabama, that the NAACP could come back into the state. Speaker 1: What was your role in the NAACP? Speaker 2: Well, from the day that we got our charter, I was right there, and I was chosen as its first secretary. Speaker 1: When was that? Speaker 2: I would say that was 1966. Speaker 1: And how long did you serve in that post? Speaker 2: Oh, I served in that post--I guess, some six or seven, or more years as the secretary. Speaker 1: And what, what kinds of things were, was the NAACP doing in Evergreen [Alabama] in the '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: Well, in the '60s [1960s] in Evergreen, we were trying to get the various communities to organize and to become members of the NAACP because so many people, you know, they'd heard so much about all that was going on in Montgomery [Alabama], Birmingham [Alabama], and that sort of thing. And see, Bull Connor, he was sticking dogs on black people and students and shooting--I mean, fire hoses on them. And, and a lot of the people were afraid, you know, they were just afraid. They, they wanted to take part. And then, finally, you found--I found that more women spoke out, and were more active than many of the men. You know, women, black women have always been strong in leadership. Many times, the women could speak when men couldn't open their mouths. And I remember once--it was stated that a black woman who was active, there in Evergreen in our NAACP, she went in a meat market to buy some meat. And she was insulted because of something that she didn't want to get, but the butcher there in the market wanted her to buy. And so she, she didn't get it. And she told him--said, "Well, I'm going to report this at my next NAACP meeting," and said, "I'll be going in a few nights." And so, he gave her what she wanted (laughter). Speaker 1: Was there any fear, though, of being too active in the NAACP in Evergreen at that particular time? Speaker 2: No, it was new to us, you know, and they had outlawed it for a long number of years. And I guess I would say, we were bold. We started walking up and down the sidewalks. If we heard that a black person, who had worked in a store, had been mistreated--because I know I marched up in front of a B.C. Moore [& Sons] Store because they had fired a black girl, who was in the shoe department, and put in a white girl. And so, I got out, and I marched up and down the street on fair practices, and that sort of thing--we want justice. Speaker 1: And what about SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]? Was SNCC active at all in Evergreen or near Evergreen? Speaker 2: No, no. It was near because it was in Greenville [Alabama] and it was in a number of towns in Lowndes County [Alabama], closer to Montgomery, but they were never in Evergreen. Story_ID: 208304 Speaker 1: And as an educator, how do you think we fared as African Americans in terms of integration? Do you think integration worked, and is it successful? Speaker 2: You know, you may hear me say this. And I said this to many of my former students. Integration is great if it's going to be fair and just, but as I look at it, we gain a little, but we lost a lot. So many of our children lost their identity. You know, when integration came, we had a brand new high school that they had built over there on the Thurgood Marshall campus. We had a huge gym that was beautiful inside, hardwood floors with basketball courts at each end, and then had side basketball courts, floor painted and stained, and we had good cross-ventilation, high ceilings, and all that. And then, we had--it was a new school. See, it was just built in 1967. And they had a place there where the people who wanted to go to a ballgame, they could buy their ticket to outside, you know, and then come in, and go into the gym with nice bleachers and everything. And then, they had the metal doors that they would let down where the people who came to the game--they couldn't get back into the part where you had your classrooms and restrooms. They had restrooms up in that area for people who were attending the games, and that sort of thing. And nice classrooms, nice biology labs, and chemistry labs, nice cafeteria, you know, and kitchen, and all that--library. And when we went up to the high school, that was just the most dilapidated old building--see, because I had to go up there one hour every day and teach home and family living because we had so many home ec. [home economics] girls. It wasn't anywhere to put them up there on the Evergreen High School [Evergreen, Alabama] campus. And I was glad there was no place up there for us because they were so broken down. They were still using wood stoves. And we had nice electrical and gas stoves, you know, in our department. But we had worked for it because my girls sold candy, and we had fish fries, and we had various things that we did to help raise money. And the county [Conecuh County, Alabama] would match us dollar for dollar. And we were able to buy things, but we worked for it ourselves to get those things. But they didn't have them up there because white teachers--I tell you, they wouldn't work for stuff like that. They said the state--and even when you think about it, it is true. The state was supposed to buy (unclear) for them, but we didn't have it. We had always improvised, and we were still doing what we could in order to teach our children. And so, that's what we did. And as I said, up on the high school campus, Evergreen High School campus, that building was built in 1896, and so they closed it this year. They condemned it and closed that building. It's a junior high school [Thurgood Marshall Middle School, Evergreen, Alabama], but they closed it because termites were in it and were eating it up, and that sort of thing. Story_ID: 208305 Speaker 1: Over the forty-some odd years that you taught [in Conecuh County, Alabama], what were some of the biggest changes that you saw in students and in the way that you were teaching? Speaker 2: Well, I tell you one thing that I noticed. And I would say that to them when the white children went home. If we're having a test or anything like that, when white kids finished their tests, they would check out and go home. But our children--practically all of them rode the school bus, and they didn't have any way to get home until that bus left out there that evening at three o'clock. And they were there, and they would stay there, so they could get their lunch--the black children. But white kids went home. And when our children went to the high school--now this is just my thinking, it seems to me that they tried so hard to be accepted by their white peers, that their whole mannerisms--so many of them--their mannerisms changed. Students who had been real polite and friendly and cordial, you know, to the teachers, they just became insolent in a sense. They would want to say, "Um-hm", and "un-uh", to you and "okay", and all that kind of stuff. And when the white kids would go home, and I would have an opportunity to talk to them, you know, just all blacks, I would tell them--I'd say, "I've seen so many of you who have changed. I said, "You haven't changed for the better, you have changed for the worse." I said, "Many of you who were polite and cordial"--I said, "where in the world did you get this 'Um-hm' and 'un-uh,' and this 'okay' when you're speaking to your elders?" I said, "Nobody wants you to say 'Yes, ma'am,' and 'No, ma'am,' and 'Yes, sir,' and all that sort of thing." I said, "But you know how to say 'yes' and 'no,' 'Yes, [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Edith Armstead] Gray,' or 'No, Mrs. Brown [ph.],' or whomever you're speaking to." I said, "Where'd you get it from?" And they just shrug their shoulders, but, girl, they were just impolite--so many of them. Their whole attitudes changed. And I told them, I said, "You know something, if and when you finish over here, and you don't get good jobs, you're going to say they didn't give you because you were not capable. You're going to say, they didn't give it to you because you were black." I said, they're going to give it--"They're not giving it to you because you've lost your self-respect, and you don't know how to respect others." I said, "If you can't respect yourself, you cannot respect anyone else." I said, "You all need to change and stop all of this 'un-uh,' and 'uh-huh,' and 'okay' when you're speaking to your instructors." Story_ID: 208306 Speaker 1: How do you think integration benefitted your children, or do you think it did? Speaker 2: Well, now I tell you, when my children are--especially my sons [Frederick R. Gray and Jerome A. Gray], when they were in school, they had excellent teachers. And the teachers back there then, we didn't have as many students as we had in late years. See, my boys finished high school in 1955, and, of course, they were very good students. One of them was a valedictorian, and the other one--his brother was a salutatorian. And, naturally, you know, when students are real good, the teachers take special interest in them and that sort of thing, and so they fared real well. They always made top grades in everything. Of course, they did the same thing when they were in college. Story_ID: 208307 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community. Speaker 2: Sometimes I wonder about us as a community. It seems to me, even now, we have a long way to go. I just don't know what to say. I don't know whether we--I know we have young people now who are developing into good leaders, but we don't have the masses like we used to have. You know, in high school [Conecuh County Training School; Thurgood Marshall Middle School, Evergreen, Alabama] years ago, when I started teaching and back in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], just about every teacher in the school knew what each student could do. If you could sing, every teacher knew that you had a good voice, and you could sing. If you could draw, every teacher would say, "Go and get so-and-so, to do thus, and so-and-so--he's an artist, so she's an artist." They knew those things about their students. And we would put on these talent shows, and, and that helped you to learn so much about what your students could do, and what their innate talents were. But now, they don't even have assembly, and that sort of thing where they can find out anything about the students. So, I really don't know what we are coming to. It isn't only the black students, the whites as well. Story_ID: 208308 Speaker 1: Do you think that there are things that teachers nowadays don't do that they did when you were teaching? Speaker 2: I really talk about teachers now because I've been a teacher for so long, you know. And I not only taught the students, but during my career, I taught adults as well. And during the lifetime of my late husband [Philander A. Gray], he and I would go out. He taught the farmers and I taught the farm woman. I taught them to make quilts. I taught them to do all of the things in their home to help improve it that they could. I taught them how to listen to your children. You know, so many people--you know, when I was a child, people used to say, "Shut your mouth, and you be quiet." They wouldn't listen, but we need to listen to our children. And just because you're an adult, it doesn't mean that you're always right. Here, what I tell my children, "I want to hear your side of it. And then, I'll give you my side of it, but in the end, I will decide what is best for you to do." My children tell you I did that, open, and it--I still do it (laughter). Even though they're good and grown. But I think we're going to have to do more listening, and see if we can't develop stronger leadership in young people, you know, and give them an opportunity. So many of us who are old, we want to hold on to what we've been doing so long. We don't want anybody else to do anything. I know in my church--I had a little girl named Jessica Kyles [ph.]. She was a very smart girl. And I had taught Sunday school for all those forty-some odd years. And I said to the superintendent of the Sunday school, "Do you have any objection if I train Jessica Kyles to teach the class that I've been teaching so long?" I said, "She's thoroughly capable." "Well, we don't know about that, we don't know about these children doing so and so." I said, "Well, how is she going to ever learn unless she's trained?" "Well, you can try it and we'll see." And so, I started training the girl, and I gave her an agenda, you know, that she was to follow. I said, "This is the same agenda that I've been using with you all." Come to find out the child to me was doing it better than I was doing it. So, we had--and she's now a teacher in that Sunday school. Story_ID: 208309 Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you've lived your life, and what's most important to you? Speaker 2: I tell you, I think the most important to me is that I had a will to work. I think everyone should be willing to work, and not be given everything that you get. When you have worked, you know how you got it, and you can say it was because of my work, I was able to do this or that or the other. Speaker 1: And how do you feel about the way you've lived your life? Speaker 2: Well, to tell you the truth about the thing, my adult life has been a good life. Maybe as a young person growing up, I wish it could have been better. And it would have been if my parents [Millie Williams Armstead and Henry Armstead, Sr.] had been well-educated, and if they had been able to acquire better jobs where they could have supported us in a better manner, and that sort of thing. And then, I don't know whether, even if they--we had gotten more, whether we would have done any better than we did. Story_ID: 208310 Speaker 1: What advice do you have for people who are interested in becoming educators and aspiring teachers? What advice do you have for them? Speaker 2: I think the teacher should have a love for children, and you should be willing to learn everything you possibly can like, not only in your field of education that you're in, about anything else. I try to keep up with current events, what's happening in the world, and that sort of thing. I tell my daughter all the time--I say, "Phyllis [Gray Hallmon], you know something?" And she has a degree in law. And I tell her all the time--"Phyllis, you don't read enough, you should read the paper more." "Mother, I read--I"--and she said, "I know that's the first thing you do is grab the paper" (laughter). I said, "Well, I want to keep up with what's going on--that's the only way that you keep abreast." Naturally, I know you can learn so much from TV and then, the other sources of the media, and that sort of thing, but I love to read. Story_ID: 208311 Speaker 1: What do you think your life would have been like had you chosen another career path? What if you would have followed your initial dreams of wanting to become a dressmaker? Speaker 2: I don't dwell on that now because I wasn't able to go to New York City [New York] to study dress design. And I always said that I have been a dress designer because I taught so many girls to sew. And some of them have become tailors and that sort of thing, and I have been a dress designer by teaching so many girls who learned to sew. I've had students to come back, and they come to visit me, and they will say, "[HistoryMaker] Ms. [Edith Armstead] Gray, you know one thing? I rear a family of four or five children, and I instill the same values in them that you instilled in us when we were in school." Story_ID: 208312 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to be remembered that I gave to my community, and to all of the young people that I taught everything that I had. Many people ask me--"[HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Edith Armstead] Gray, don't you regret not teaching school?" I say, "No, not at all," I said, "because I gave it everything that I had." I didn't hold back anything--anything that I learned, I taught to them so they could pass it on to others. Story_ID: 208313 Speaker 1: Is there anything in your life that you wish you would have done differently? Speaker 2: I can't think of anything differently that I did because I was married to one of the finest men [Philander A. Gray]--I think that God has ever made, even though our married life was short. He died early. He was just forty-five when he died, but we had a beautiful family life. He was a man who loved his family and he loved, he loved us, he really loved us. Story_ID: 208314 Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important? Speaker 2: Why what? Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important? Speaker 2: I think it's important because history, as I see it, whatever has happened before, I feel that it's going to happen again. And it's the only thing that we can look back on and say, this happened before. And-- Speaker 1: And why do you, why do you think it's important for us, as African Americans, to share our history as your grandmother [Amy Hawkins Williams] did with you, that you did with your children, and your grandchildren? Speaker 2: I think it's very important because it seems as if we, as African Americans, we don't know enough about what went on before, and we should stress our history. As I was telling you about Phyllis [Gray Hallmon], she doesn't like for me to tell her about, you know, the difficulties that I had when I was in college how my shoes would--the sole would wear out. And when it was time--see, because I stayed at Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] the year around. I didn't go back home until I just had to go, you know. That was during my--just before my senior year. And I told her that the soles of my shoes would wear out. And sometimes, I would put cardboard in them, you know, so I'd have something. But back there then, when your sole would wear out, it wasn't like the shoes now--they make them--the sole would flap back, you know. It'd roll back under the shoe, and you couldn't half-walk in it, and that sort of thing. And she doesn't want to hear that. I said, well, "Phyllis, had I not struggled as I did, I said, I don't know whether you'd be here today," (laughter). Story_ID: 208315 Speaker 1: And what would you like for your legacy to be? Speaker 2: That I had a good life, and that I shared it with others. Story_ID: 208316 Speaker 1: So, [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Edith Armstead] Gray, in that one--that's the picture at your brother's wedding, so if you could just tell us. And I think it was taken in 1987. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, if you could tell us who's in the photo? Speaker 2: Okay. That's my son-in-law, Morgan [Hallmon]; and I'm next to him; my brother, Otis [Armstead]; and my sister, Marion [Armstead McDaniel], who resides in Houston [Texas]. She's the only one that's living. Speaker 1: And what, what's everybody's last name--Morgan? Speaker 2: Morgan Hallmon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then, my brother's last name is Armstead, Otis Armstead. And my sister, Marion, is McDaniels, Marion McDaniels. Speaker 1: Okay, great, thank you. Now, the next one is of you-- Speaker 2: And my grandsons. Speaker 1: No, no, just that one is just you by yourself-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --in 1984? Speaker 2: Did she say that was at my home? I'm trying to-- Speaker 1: Yes, she said it was in Evergreen [Alabama]. Speaker 2: In Evergreen, yes, that's me. I don't know whether it's Easter Sunday or when it is. Speaker 1: Mother's Day-- Speaker 2: Mother's Day. I got on a big hat so I (laughter). Speaker 1: --in 1984. Speaker 2: In 1984 on Mother's Day. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you, [Edgar] Carey [Lane]. And that's the one with your grandsons. Speaker 2: Yes, that's me and my grandsons. That's at Phyllis's [Armstrong Hallmon] house--was it on Cherry Road [ph.], I believe. Speaker 1: And that's--we said 1984? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Probably 1984. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I don't know if that's, that's at Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] (unclear) class of 1940. Speaker 1: No, this is great. Speaker 2: What did she-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) that little (unclear) in the background. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: One more, Carey. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Um-hm. (Unclear) the same class. Speaker 1: Class of 1940. Speaker 2: You can just say-- Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). That's not your classmate. Speaker 1: That, yes, that's my classmate. I'm there for my sixtieth year class reunion. Speaker 2: Okay. So we'll just--you can just say, this is my class reunion-- Speaker 1: At Tuskegee Speaker 2: At Tuskegee, and this was in 2000. Speaker 1: In, in--that's right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was my sixtieth year class reunion. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 1: So, when Carey gets that one, Ms. Gray, you can just say, this is my--some of my classmates (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From my sixtieth year class reunion. Speaker 1: Right, and taken at Tuskegee-- Speaker 2: Taken at Tuskegee. Speaker 1: --two thousand [2000]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: It's ready--Mrs. Gray? Speaker 2: These are my classmates taken at Tuskegee for our sixtieth year class reunion. Speaker 1: And it was taken in 2000? Speaker 2: Taken in 2000. Speaker 1: And you are right here. Speaker 2: That's right..