 Story_ID: 73936 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please. Speaker 2: Okay, Audrey Ross Grevious, G-R-E-V-I-O-U-S. Speaker 1: Okay, what about--can you spell your first name? Speaker 2: A-U-D-R-E-Y. Speaker 1: And Ross is R-O-S-S. Ma'am, is there any particular significance to the name Grevious? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. Speaker 1: You don't have any--there's no story? Speaker 2: It's a married name, so I don't know the history behind their family name. Speaker 1: Okay, and can you give us your date of birth? Speaker 2: 9-3-30 [September 3, 1930]. Speaker 1: Okay and place of birth? Speaker 2: Lexington [Kentucky]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: A retired educator. Speaker 1: And you're also the President of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] here. Speaker 2: I was at one time during the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Okay, here in Lexington. Okay, and can you give us today's date? Speaker 2: Why would you do that? December the 11th, '02 [2002]. Speaker 1: All right. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: You're at my home, at 948 Effie Road. Story_ID: 73937 Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, there are five "People" Magazine-ish type questions we always ask. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And they just require a short answer. The first question is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Chicken. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I like black a lot, I wear black a lot. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Anywhere overseas. I belong to a travel group and we used to go someplace all the time. Matter of fact, we've been all over the world with the exception of China and Japan and Australia. So we've been on all the other continents. Speaker 1: Okay, and what's the name of the group? Speaker 2: We don't have a name. We went through the AAA [American Automobile Association], the person who organized the group, Mrs. Finch, did it through AAA. And there were a number of us that traveled every summer we went someplace. Speaker 1: Mostly schoolteachers? Speaker 2: No, just a mixture of people who wanted to go places. And we, we'd get together and sometimes we'd be gone a week, two weeks, and one time we were gone a whole month. And just enjoyed one another's company. Speaker 1: Okay now do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No. What is that that I used to say with the children all the time? That anything I want to do, I can do it. It may take me a little longer, but eventually I'll get it done. I guess that would be the closest thing that I, I used to say that to them all the time when they would worry about not getting through or not being able to do something, that you can do anything you want to do. Story_ID: 73938 Speaker 1: Ma'am, tell us about your family history. How far can you go back with your family? Speaker 2: Well my mother's [Martha Ross] living and of course I have a brother who's, who's, who's living. And all the other relatives just about now are deceased. Speaker 1: But is there--are there--do you know the history of your family? Can you tell us about what the family was doing back in the 19th century or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Before slavery was over or Reconstruction or any of that? Speaker 2: No, and I had never thought about it until you asked then, you know we were just so concerned with what's going on now that we never did. That may be something I need to look into. Course I don't know who could help me now, but it never was a part of, of our--everybody was concerned 'bout what was going on now and today. So we didn't pursue it. Speaker 1: Okay, well no stories passed down about it? Okay. Speaker 2: No. I, I knew that my father [James Washington] was a, a teacher in, in Monticello [Kentucky] when he met my mother. Speaker 1: And where was your father from? Speaker 2: Frankfort [Kentucky]. Speaker 1: Okay. And did, did, did you know your grandparents? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Were, were they from Frankfort too? Were they born in Frankfort? Speaker 2: Well I'm not sure whether they were born in Frankfort, but they lived in Frankfort when I was growing up. Speaker 1: Okay. What about your mother's side? Speaker 2: Monticello--they--she was from Monticello. Speaker 1: Monticello, Kentucky? Speaker 2: Kentucky. And we had an opportunity to go visit there a number of times, small community, poor but happy. Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us your father's name and spell it for us and his date and place of birth? Speaker 2: I do not know the place, date of birth, I cannot give you that. Speaker 1: But he was--as far as you know he was born in Monticello? Speaker 2: No, he was born in Frankfort. Speaker 1: Frankfort, that's right. Speaker 2: My mother was born in Monticello. Speaker 1: Okay, and what, what was your father's name? Speaker 2: James Washington. Speaker 1: Can, can you spell it for us? We do this for the transcription. Speaker 2: Okay, J-A-M-E-S, W-A-S-H-I-N-G-T-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I had a stepfather. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Frank Ross. And I have a brother. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 73939 Speaker 1: Okay, now can you tell us about your father [James Washington]? You know what, what kind of person was he, what did he like to do, you know. Speaker 2: Not really. I, I did stay with him and my stepmother sometimes. I visited my grandmother in the summertime in Frankfort [Kentucky]. They lived--my father and stepmother lived here. He taught school for a while. That's how he met my mother, he was teaching in Monticello [Kentucky] at the time. And pretty nice person. When he stopped teaching, he went into insurance. And he liked people so that was the ideal job for him to, you know, have because he had an opportunity to meet people. But other than that-- Speaker 1: Do you know where he went to school at all? Speaker 2: Whatever the school's name was at, at Frankfort. And they changed the name. I'm afraid I'll say the wrong one because they had changed the name of the school in later years. But that was where he went to school. Speaker 1: Okay. So you didn't--you weren't really raised with your father. Speaker 2: No, my mother. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Is there a--you said that they, they met when he was teaching school? Did they have a story about how they met or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Do you, do you, do you know why they split up? Speaker 2: They weren't ever really together. Story_ID: 73940 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your mother [Martha Ross], you know. What did she like to do, what was she like? Speaker 2: Good, hard-working, loving person. She, she had two children, I have a brother. She worked in families with children for, for years and years. That was, that was her specialty, taking care of, of babies. And then after they'd get so old, she would find another baby to do it because she liked that. But very hard-working person, caring person. Determined that we were going to have an education and stay out of trouble. She was easy going, but still hard and firm. There was no messing around. If you got in trouble, you knew you had to pay for it. Speaker 1: Now what, what was her name? I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Martha Ross. Martha Sandusky Ross. Speaker 1: And could you spell--can you spell her name for us? Speaker 2: M-A-R-T-H-A R-O-S-S. Speaker 1: Okay. And did--do you--did she talk about where she went to school or how she, she was brought up or-- Speaker 2: Not really. Hard working family in Monticello [Kentucky], poor, poor family and-- Speaker 1: In the city or in the town, or do they-- Speaker 2: Well Monticello was just Monticello, you know just small, very small community at the time. And I think all of it was a combination of, of city and county. I don't know-- Speaker 1: So it was kind of rural. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right, so they--did--were they, were they really poor, or did they-- Speaker 2: They didn't have any money. Yeah because she, she came here to live when she was about eight, eighteen. We had a cousin who had moved to, to Lexington [Kentucky] and she came, came here then. Speaker 1: So were you born in Lexington? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay, that's right. So tell us, keep telling us about your mother now. What did she do? She, she bab--she took care of children. Speaker 2: She took--she loved to take care of children, so she was, she was--they call them nannies now, but just took care of, care of children. And then after they got so old, she would look for another baby, you know, to take care of. She was very interested in us learning and, and, and staying in school. That was just something you had to do. And she liked to read. She loved to read. And, and I think that helped us because we were able to read early. Matter of fact I, I think I was destined to be a teacher. I was teaching when I was in the first grade. I'd come back home--whatever I'd learned that day in school, I came back and taught all the smaller children in the neighborhood whatever I had learned that day. But her interest in education and seeing that we got one was an all-time high project for her. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you know how she met Mr. [Frank] Ross? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: She never talked about that? Now, what was Mr. Ross like? Speaker 2: Well now my father was James Washington. And--I did say because-- Speaker 1: Okay, now I was asking about your stepfather and what he did and what, what he was like. Speaker 2: He worked for--with horses and, and of course I was very young when they separated even. So I don't know you know, too much except when he would come back to town. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: So she did the raising of the two of us by herself, basically. Speaker 1: So she--shortly after they were married, they were separated. Okay, all right, okay so I thought, I thought maybe he raised you. Speaker 2: No. No, she did the raising herself. Speaker 1: Alright. Story_ID: 73941 Speaker 1: Okay. Well can you, can you reflect back and give us an idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of being raised in the neighborhood that you were raised here in Lexington [Kentucky]. What, what was the name of the neighborhood? Speaker 2: East End on Ray Street (ph.). Right across from where they built Aspendale [Housing Projects]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I was young, it was racetrack. That was where the racetrack was. And I'm not sure how old I was when they finally moved the racetrack somewhere else. And it wasn't too long after that that they said that they were going to be old homes for people who, who needed them because we really did live in, you know, not the poorest neighborhood, but it--for example our toilet facilities were in the backyard, some were on the back porch, whatever you know the case may be right there in that, in that neighborhood. Very few people had bathrooms during that time. And so we were looking forward, you know, really to this, the change. And excited about it. They tore down some houses on Thomas Street, which was right across from Ray Street. And, and started building and we started planning to, to move into these fantastic new homes that were built for us. Unfortunately, we didn't get a chance to move in because your teachers and professional people were the ones who moved into Aspendale first. Speaker 1: About what year was this? Speaker 2: This would be in the '30s [1930s]. In the '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: So you were a little girl during this time. Right, okay. And was this--okay so this was during the Depression and basically. Speaker 2: Well it was af--yeah, yeah it was around that time. Speaker 1: Were these--was, was this housing like a, a New Deal Program or-- Speaker 2: Well they, they really--we, we thought--we had been--we had been told that they were going to be for people who, who needed better homes, you know in, in the community. And, and this is what we were looking forward to. And it just didn't turn out like that. Everybody was getting excited and, and what happened, you know, your professional people and your teachers--it was loaded with, with the teachers and the schools up there at the time. They got, you know, the first choice. And then if anything was left, then, then some other select people in, in the city moved up there. But nobody that thought the houses were being built to replace what they were living in, had an opportunity to live up there for years. Speaker 1: I was just wondering if this was federally supported then? Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: Part of the New Deal, you know. Speaker 2: It was, but it didn't work out that way. Speaker 1: Now it's interesting--the people talk who were raised during that time talk about the new federal housing and the fact that, that it was the black middle class that took advantage of it. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Instead of the poor. Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, some of those people that you've talked to were the ones who lived [unclear]. Some of your teachers. Story_ID: 73942 Speaker 1: So what was, what was your neighborhood like when you were--did it change at all or--? Speaker 2: It was, it was a pretty nice neighborhood. There were restaurants and things there. Of course the children weren't allowed to go in the restaurants. Like now they can go wherever they want to, we couldn't because we knew the people who owned them and, and they knew our families. So it was off limits. But I think if I had to really describe, I would say that it was a safe neighborhood simply because everybody looked out for one another. The most horrible thing that I can remember during that time and, and, and which has caused me to have some feelings about rape and child abuse, is that when I was about eight or nine, I found a little girl crying on Fourth Street between some houses that had been sexually abused. And I picked her up. I did not know at the time what it was, I just thought she had fallen and hurt herself because she was crying. And I'm packing her around the corner to bring her to some of the women who, you know, lived there, cause they looked out--everybody looked out for everybody else's child. And it was many, many years later that I found out what had really happened to her because they quickly took her from me and, and, and took her to the doctor. We had a doctor that lived on Third Street, Dr. Wendell (oh.). And they took her, ran there and took her to him. And it was much, much later that I found out, you know what had happened. So there was that closeness in the family that everybody was your mother and your father. So--which made it kind of hard in that you had to be on your Ps and Qs all the time. I remember one time going to the grocery for people and, and if anybody asked you to go to the grocery, you went. And I went and came back and as soon as I came back, somebody else in the neighborhood--now they knew where I was going 'cause they heard the person ask me. And I think I went about four times. Well the fifth time that I went to the grocery a friend of mine from Aspendale [Housing Projects] came along and we were on the other side of the street just talking. And my mother [Martha Ross] came home that night and wanted to know what was my problem. And I'm wondering what in the world could I have done? All I did today was run back and forth to Third Street to the grocery. And she informed me that one of the neighbors told her that she didn't know what was wrong with that child of hers, that I had gone right past her and hadn't spoken. Well I'd spoken to her the other four times. Sure if I did not, you know first when she told me and I kept saying "yes mother, yes I did". And then it finally dawned on me that I was on the other side of the street and my friend and I were talking. Well, since I'd already spoken to her four times, I didn't feel like it was necessary for me to do, you know the other time. And she kept saying are you telling me the truth? And I kept saying yes, because that was one of our rules. I'd take my punishment, but I, I never knew how to lie. I still don't know how to lie. I just take my punishment with, with whatever it is and tell you the truth and, and, and go on. And I became so angry because if my mother and I had not had that relationship where the truth was a part of, of it, I would have been on restrictions, serious restriction. And I didn't walk down Ray Street, I would go down Fourth Street, up Chester Street and back up Third Street going to Third Street for about a month to keep from having to speak to her, you know, again, which now when I think of it, was so silly. But that was my way of getting back, back, back at her. But this just kind of gives you the--an example of how people in the community kind of looked out, out for you and, and you had to answer to them. Speaker 1: That's really fine tuned. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The fifth time. Speaker 2: Yeah you know really I had gone and waved at her and spoken to her. And, and, and she was telling the truth. I did not speak to her that time 'cause we were talking and laughing and just having a good time on the other side of the street. But anyway, and, and, and I was much, much older, I was a grown person when one time I stopped by there and I shared that with her. And she says I had no idea that I'd caused that much, you know, problem. And we were okay, but she thought we were okay but we weren't okay. But anyway you remember those things because during that time, people in the neighborhood helped to raise you. And, and you had to toe the mark and do whatever they expected you to do or they thought that your parents wanted you to do. And so you were always you know, walking a thin line of, of not disappointing, you know, anyone. And, and many of us felt like our parents were working--and most of the mothers were working so hard, they didn't need to hear all those crazy things that children can do to, to make them have to worry about what was, you know, really going on. But it was a, it was a neighborhood that when you think about it, it was pretty nice. Story_ID: 73943 Speaker 1: Now what were--what, what were some of the sights and smells of the neighborhood? Can you remember? Speaker 2: Some of the sights? Speaker 1: Sights and smells I guess. Sounds you know, of the neighborhood. Speaker 2: Well, there were some restaurants there, so you heard music all the time, you know a, a lot of times. And then like I said they were building Aspendale [Housing Projects] over the new, you know, during the time that I was, I was, I was coming up. So there was that change. But the first thing that I remember when I was even younger, was the horses that were over there at the track. Because it was a track there, I remember them. And I remember one horse that got out, jumped, jumped over the fence. And the time they were having to, to catch him. And they couldn't catch him, they had to really go ahead and kill him because he ended up breaking his leg, you know, running, you know how they do. I don't know if they still do that, but during that time, it was nothing they could do so they would had to put him out of his misery. And then there was the Charles Young [Community] Center, the park on Third Street that's still there, that was kind of our-- Speaker 1: Charles Young, now, now who is Charles Young? Speaker 2: No, I never had thought about wondering how it got that name, but there's a reason for the--for it being named that. Speaker 1: There was a famous [Colonel] Charles Young from Wilberforce [Ohio] that they named, named for a black Colonel. Speaker 2: Well it might be. It, it really might be because that's how we all, always known--Charles Young Park and Charles Young Center. And so it was there. This was our going place, you know, at, at, at the time. And then of course Dewey Street (ph.) was a busy street then. And we used to have to go to the movie at the [unclear] and the state. We could not go to the Kentucky and the Strand [Theatre]. We had to go upstairs in those two that we, we went to. And, and then they built the Lyric [Theatre], which gave us our own, you know, theater. But there was strictly segregation, but it didn't seem to bother you as much simply because you stayed within your own little group, you know, anyway. And, and you, you did things together. It was only--I think--and I remember this very, very well. We were so disappointed when we were allowed to go to the, to the white theaters. I don't know what we expected. But there wasn't that much different and matter of fact it wasn't as clean as, as, as ours upstairs. You know it was kind of a disappointment, you kind of thought you were going into something--I don't know whether we thought they had satin seats or, or what it was. But--and, and it was just the matter of being able to go. And, and then after it was open, very few people you know, did, did go like I said because the Lyric became a reality. Story_ID: 73944 Speaker 1: Did people really have that--you know I've heard people say that, that during segregation there was always the attitude that the white man's ice is colder, ink is blacker, everything is better, you know, because it's separate. Speaker 2: You just wondered, you know, what was the difference, what were you missing out on, you know. And it was quite a shock when you found out not much of anything. Matter of fact when--I think that sometimes when we thought about some of the things that we were doing and involved in, it was so much better than, than what they were because there was that involvement of our adults with the young people, especially at the Charles Young [Community] Center and the park. Some of those people were--did quite a bit to mold us to becoming what we were--we ended up being. And assuring us that we could do anything that we wanted to do. And I remember that in, in school even with the segregation and, and we got our books, I cannot remember but one time in my elementary school of having a new book. All of our other books came from the, the other schools when they would get new books. And sometimes the worst filth would be written in those books. And sometimes we would tear them out and then after the teacher discovered that we were doing it, she, she suggested leave them in there and look at them and kind of compare what you are and what that person might have been who wrote that filth in, in the book. And that's what we began to do. And it didn't bother us much. Because sometimes you had to look on somebody else's book or you couldn't get that lesson because that--we'd torn that part out because it had such filth written in it. But a new book was--I, I remember very few new books when I was in elementary school. Speaker 1: Now was the, the kind of thing that they'd write in these books, were they, were they racial? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Filth that I care not to repeat. Story_ID: 73945 Speaker 1: It's hard to stay away from this place. There's something fantastic about Lexington [Kentucky]. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: You know it's just, it's a, it's a small city, small town in a big city, all combined and just depending on what it is that you are looking for that you can get, you know here. And even with, with, with changes, and even long time ago it was a, a pretty nice place to, to, to come. Dewey Street was going and, and that was our--and, and Georgetown Street, we had restaurants on Georgetown Street as well. Speaker 2: Now what do they call Dewey Street, there's a nickname for it or something? It's a--somebody was saying do anything you wanna do street or something. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, okay I was trying to think wait a minute [unclear]. Yeah, you did anything you wanted to, you could find just about anything, anything there. But it was the strangest thing. There was a restaurant, the Ballard's Drugstore and, and the man [William H. Ballard, Sr.] who ran it would let us come in. Course we weren't supposed to be drinking beer and stuff and we sneaked and, you know, we could buy it, but we would get one of the [unclear] you know and you had to hide it and keep your pop in the front so that they would think that you were, you know, well-- Speaker 2: When you were a, a teenager? Speaker 1: This when we were teenagers you know and it was really a, a, amazing how people looked out for you even during that time. Everybody knew that our curfew was 12:00. And so about 11:15 he would announce 11:15, you know, so we knew just about how much time--11:30. And 11:40, I don't care what you had, you got yourself on out of there, you know and, and it was strange. Some of the people you see, you could hear--they could tell it was getting close to 12:00 cause they could hear the feet running down Dewey Street, up Lace Street and, and down Third trying to, to make the deadline. Because the deadline really meant--not one minute after 12, any time before that. But if you one minute after 12:00, you may not be able to do anything for a month. And, and it was good; we needed that. We also needed some place to go and that was the only place to go was, you know, right, right on Dewey Street. And some of the restaurants we couldn't go in, you know. And at the time the drug store was about the only place that teenagers could, could really go, even though adults were in there as well and older, you know, people. But it was kind of our little place. And, and I just remember so like now all restaurants have to have bathrooms and things. But they didn't have bathrooms. There was a bathroom up the steps right in between Second and, and, and Corral Street that we'd have to go out wherever we were and go up those steps, you know to, to, to the restroom. And nobody thought anything about it. You even went by yourself or you carried somebody, you know, with you because everybody looked out for one another. I--some of the things that I hear happening to young people now, I, I find it disturbing because we didn't have those kind of problems because everybody--like I say, everybody kind of looked out for one another, you know. And, and, and, and meddled with, with you. Now that's what we called it, but it was really looking out for us because they'd be sitting on their porch. You just have fifteen more minutes, you know. And we running as fast as we can run trying to get home, or up there. But the few times that I have, have, have, have gone out in the, in the later years, evidently there is no curfew now because I see them really young still out, you know, doing things. And I think that that is one thing that makes me remember Lexington and east end of town, is the way they kind of looked out for one another. Story_ID: 73946 Speaker 1: Now, now was your, was your mother [Martha Ross] often away? I mean was she, was she away from home a lot? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Her work didn't really make her, I mean have her stay over at people's homes? Speaker 2: Not--just every now and then, but not often. And when she did, then we had my cousin who lived right across the street from us. And, but Ms. Dora (ph.), the lady that lived next door, and, and then there was Ms. Frances (ph.) next door. So we did--didn't have to worry, you know, about anything. 'Cause I used to hear children talk about being hungry, and I can never remember being hungry because Ms. Dora always kept a pot of beans on the back of the stove for us in case mother was running late and we were hungry. We just go on over there and, and eat. And, and, and so I just remember that as if it was yesterday, you know, that--because I--sometimes when we get together and we talk and, and, and they would be talking about, you know, not having enough food and blah, blah, and this and that. And I can always truthfully say that that wasn't a part of our--got kind of tired of beans every now and then, but, but they filled you up, you know, anyway. So you didn't--didn't need anything. Speaker 1: Now what kind of little girl were you when you were coming, coming up. You seem like now--school made a big impression on you. Speaker 2: Yes. Bossy, very, very bossy. Demanding, headstrong, those are my good points. And all, and--but a caring person. And, and as I said I had a younger brother and, and, and my cousin. And we kind of looked out for one another. I more, more so than they, 'cause I was older than they. I was just a few months older than my cousin. But it was more that he was younger than, than, than I. And we just kind of enjoyed things. And, and really it was just the whole neighborhood was kind of a, a close family in that you knew--everybody knew one another. Everybody knew what your parents would permit you do and what they didn't want you to do, and let you know it. They meddled in your business as I said before. That's what we thought it was then; it wasn't. They was really looking out for our best interest, but we thought it was meddling. There was a caring thing. Church going, most, most of them, you know were in--most of them went to the churches right around there. Shiloh [Baptist Church] was there on Thomas Street and, and Liberty on Chestnut, and then First Baptist was there and East 2nd Street we went. And then there was another church and I can't think of the name of it, that was at Corral and, and Ray Street (ph.). And so we all just kind of--you knew, you know, you knew one another and you played together and then I think one advantage we had that we all had to go to school together. Story_ID: 73947 Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the name of the school that you-- Speaker 2: Constitution [Street School]. Speaker 1: Constitution. And that was a all-black school. And-- Speaker 2: And then we went--the seventh grade, seventh and eighth grade, went to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School] in a, another little part it was kind of separate from the high school but, you know just had six rooms I think. And then you can wait to go to the big part when you got in the ninth grade, and then it was like you were really going to Dunbar, you know, then. Dunbar was the central school where all the elementary schools sent their students when they went, went over there. Speaker 1: So it's the, the high school for the black kids. Speaker 2: That was the high school for the black kids. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Fantastic teachers. Speaker 1: Now-- Story_ID: 73948 Speaker 1: Yeah who were some of the teachers that you remember? Speaker 2: There was Ms. Ray (ph.) and Mrs. Taylor (ph.), Ms. Wolfolk (ph.), Ms. Yancy (ph.), Mr. Passmore (ph.), Ms. Bailey (ph.). Gosh, any other time I'd be able to just rattle them off like, like crazy. And maybe I'll think of some more and if so you can, when you edit it, you can put it in. But you knew that they cared. And they saw something in you that you really didn't see that--and, and they more--they--I believe that they could if their life depended on it, they could tell you the ones that were going to amount to something and the ones who were not. It was that evident. And I was fortunate in that Mrs. Taylor had grown up--she was Dr. Wendell's (ph.) daughter, with her--at on Third Street, she lived at Third and Ohio and I was more or less like their little other daughter. But I'd go, you know there. And so I was kind of spoiled from that angle and was allowed to do some things and didn't mind doing. And, and I had the privilege of working in the office during, during the time. So I thought that was just like you know, walking steps in heaven. It was just so fantastic. And you knew what the expectations were of you and so you did everything that you could to live up to them. And only a few that they expected to make an accomplishment, didn't. And, and they were able to talk to you and, and, and tell you, you know, some things. Cause life wasn't that easy for them. Here they--these were these fantastic teachers that could only teach at the black schools. And then when they did integrate the schools, the thing that always irritated us more than anything else, they took the better black teachers and put them in the white schools and sent the worst white teachers to the black schools; it was so obvious. It, it was--some of them couldn't even discipline the children, you know, when they, when they came into, to, to the system. And of course natural some children took advantage of it cause they had to toe the mark before the, the integration thing, so they were having a ball being able to get away with things. But if you wanted to get a fantastic education, you had the opportunity to do so within our schools. We were very fortunate in, in that. And would--at the time I thought it was horrible, but as I got older, I realized how fortunate we were. There were about five of us who were top students. And, and we had time on our hands. And later--and the teacher who taught Latin and I almost had a name, didn't want us to be roaming the building and things. And so she, she taught us advanced Latin, advanced everything that you can think of, so that we wouldn't be roaming the building and, and, and not doing--there was that caring of, of seeing possibilities in people and not letting you go the wrong way because I, I was fortunate enough to, to have worked at the Caroline College (ph.), which is on the corner of--it's not there, it's not there now. But it was a little--it was a restaurant and she would fix lunch for us cause we didn't want--we felt like we were too old to go to the cafeteria and eat, you know--didn't want to do. And so one day we were in there and she was there by herself and trying to wait on--the line was real long and, and I--and I went back and I told her I'll, I'll help you to, you know. And I helped her to serve the food and so it became a job for me, you know, after that every day I would go and, and, and do this and, and then I worked on Friday, Saturday at, at the restaurant. But anyway, you had an opportunity to, to accomplish something if you wanted to because it was expected of you. And if you needed some time to get away from everything else, somebody would let you have a part in their room where you could quietly, you know get, get to do because I, I seem to think of, of those of us who were in the top part of, of the class. I don't think that there was one of us that was looking forward to going to college 'cause there was no money. You know even with a scholarship we would not, you know be able, able to do it. And so this group of teachers began to do some--whatever they were doing. We never did really find out what they were doing. And made available some scholarships that paid a little bit more than was available at the time so that some of us who wanted to go to school would be able to, to, to really go. Story_ID: 73949 Speaker 1: Now, now you said that you were one of the best students. Speaker 2: I didn't say that, not the best; I was a good student. Well I guess I was too, I was in the top class, okay. Speaker 1: And so when, when you were in high school, did, did you have an--a sense that, that you were gonna go to college? Speaker 2: No. There, there was--that never even entered our mind because there was no money available. Speaker 1: Did, did--so they didn't make any of that money--or raised. Speaker 2: Well I mean it was only when, when some of us began to talk about it, that these group of teachers kind of got together to see what, what could be done about scholarships and, and what have you, and, and kind of made some, some money available. And of course compared to what it was now, it was just a little dab that you had to pay, but it was more than you really, you know, really had. And I think that when, when, when I went to school, there must have been maybe about ten of us that, that went away to school. Speaker 1: Out of what kind-- Speaker 2: I think there were about 50 or 60, 65 in, in, in the class. There were a whole lot, though a lot in the class. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And you, you, you graduated around 1947 or-- Speaker 2: Forty eight [1948]. Speaker 1: Forty eight [1948], all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I went to Kentucky State [University, Frankfort, Kentucky] that year. Speaker 1: Was there a particular teacher at Dunbar [High School] that took an interest in making sure that you got a scholarship? Speaker 2: Well yeah, Mrs. Claire Taylor (ph.), Ms. Ada Taylor (ph.), Mr. Guthrie (ph.), cause I worked in the office while I was kind of--and I'm trying to think who else. Mr. Passmore (ph.) gave me that encouragement, Mr. [unclear] also encouraged if it was, you know at all possible, you know to go. And, and I think part of, of, of it extended to me because they knew how interested I was in helping other of the students. Story_ID: 73950 Speaker 1: And I think I was destined to be a teacher because as I mentioned before, whatever I would learn, even when I was in elementary school, that afternoon when I'd come home, I'd teach the little children in the neighborhood. And it made awful hard on the teachers when they came to school, because they'd already had it. And, and, and it, you know, and, and never--it never even occurred to me one way or the other that instead of helping them, I was hurting them. Not really hurting them because they still knew it. But I was making it difficult for them to adjust to what was going on in, in, in the classroom. And they were becoming bad boys and girls because they were bored. So they were punching, you know and talking and doing all those things that they were not supposed to be doing because they already knew all that. And it was only after it had gone on for a little while and, and the teacher was wondering why are they acting like this, you know. And, and had an opportunity to, to realize that--well they already--that was the reason they were bored to death. So then they formed some little special groups and let them learn in, in advance. And this went on, you know, from, from, from time on. But you, you don't--and I, I, I kind of tell people now to be real careful. You want to help, but be careful in your helping that you don't do more harm than, than good if the teacher that they have is not sharp enough to realize that they're not bad boys and girls, but they're bored. And, and, and I, I've shared this many times with--over the years with, with some parents who seem to have been having trouble with their children in school. And I would tell them look at that, and then--because this, this living room right here used to be the playhouse of the village. I didn't have any children, but I did have children. I had all the neighborhood children. And we would meet here and play here in, in the middle of the floor. But the time you were playing, you were also learning. And, and they were having--they were going to Douglas [High School?]. And some of them were having difficulty because they were becoming problems, but they were bored. And, and so we, we did that and it made a difference when they realized that--but I would tell them all the time when they would come that they had to do whatever that teacher put on that board. Story_ID: 73951 Speaker 1: Now ma'am, can, can you tell us about Kentucky State [University, Frankfort, Kentucky]? Now what, what was Kentucky State like, like when you went there? Who was the President and what was the-- Speaker 2: Gosh, who was the President? Speaker 1: [Unclear] know that but like what, what was it like? What, what-- Speaker 2: It was a fantastic education institution. Speaker 1: This was a black state-- Speaker 2: It was black. Had some of the best teachers that you can imagine there because it was the only place they could teach. And, and they saw to it--and as I look back over the years that they were wise enough to realize that, that sooner or later a change was going to come. And, and they prepared us for the change. And the only ones that didn't get prepared or were not ready for the change were those who could care less anyway; it didn't make any difference. But they got from you the very best that you had to give. They were just--I wish we had some more like them. I really do. There was no room for piddling a--piddling around, playing. I mean it was like they, they could envision the change and they wanted their former students to be ready for the change, which was similar to what was happening in, in the high school at the time. We had teachers who were sharp enough to realize that this cannot continual to go on. There has to be a change somewhere. And, and, and then they prepared for us (unclear). And I think that this might have been one of the reasons that I pursued, tried to be a part of change and stuck my neck out many times. Speaker 1: Ma'am did, did some of the teachers participate actively in trying to change conditions in the, in the community and, and in the school? Speaker 2: No, not really. They did--let me see how can we describe this? They did by encouraging you to, to do. But as I said before, things were so here and there, that they couldn't take a chance on losing their job; there was no job for them. And I, and I just remember very well being a part of the--President of the NAACP, telling them this; that we appreciate, you know, you wanting to do this. But don't stick your neck out and take a chance on losing your job be--because of this. Because at the very beginning of the pursuit of integration, there was an awful lot of hostility. I mean from, from all over, top on down, you know. And, and the, the--some of the, some of the teachers who made the change and cause they sent a few of the black teachers to--I'll call them white schools first. It wasn't that easy for them at first. I mean it was just like, you know you're here but I don't have to, to be bothered with you, you know. And to the point that some of them wanted to come on back until they were encouraged not to do that. Speaker 1: [BREAK] Speaker 2: It was--it prepared some of the most fantastic teachers all over the country that you can even imagine because we had good teachers there. I mean teachers that could have gone into any institution and been one of the top teachers. And as a result of, of knowing what the limitations were, they went out of their way to prepare those students who were in their classes to be ready for the change if and when it, it came. It may come within--as they used to say, within your time when you were still working, but--and it may not. But you'll still be able to help those who are going to benefit, you know, from it. And it helped; it made a big difference in, in what was going on. I go down now and, and, and, and, and, and when I see and some of the things that I hear kind of disturbs me a little bit, and it's not something that I can, you know, really kind of talk about. But it's different. And, and I think that part of it is because our youth have been so used to sharing everything, they've never known what it was to be denied things. And they don't realize that they need to better prepare themselves to, to lead somebody else. Story_ID: 73952 Speaker 1: Now ma'am, how was--is--was Kentucky State [University, Frankfort, Kentucky] different from it is now in terms of what, what things are they doing when you were in school that they don't do now? Speaker 2: Well see I don't really know everything that they are doing now. I know some students who are there and, and I'm not impressed with what I'm hearing from them when they talk. And I can't do that--okay, okay. Speaker 1: Mr. Sykes (ph.) who's [unclear] thank you, but-- Speaker 2: We were in school together. Speaker 1: Okay. Well they were saying that the, the males and females were separated, separate lines for different--and I know that's not gonna [unclear], so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Is there anything else like that? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was definitely separation. Speaker 1: Like a curfew. Speaker 2: There was a curfew. The light went on at 15--11:30, 12, 12--11:55 was your time to be in and the lights started going on at 11, 11:30. Freshman--anyway and she stood at the door. Now, my understanding doing everything under the sun that they want to. They have a little bit to me, too much freedom. At the time, we resented it. But as we look at--back at it now, it was the best thing that could have happened to us because we know that it--some things did happen to some of them who was sneaking, you know doing, doing little things. Well if you'd been allowed to do it, I guess more of us would have gotten in trouble than, than the few that, you know, did during, during that time. And, and a lot of times when restrictions are put on, even by your parents or neighbors or the church or whatever it is, you resent it at the time, but when you get old and you look back, you're so thankful that they do those things for you because you didn't realize how weak you were in some areas. And there was, it was--you know-- Speaker 1: So what kind of activities did you engage in at Kentucky State? When it's all done on campus and-- Speaker 2: The first year, no because I worked, I worked for the Chemistry Department. And so there wasn't too much time to, to do anything during that time. And I did not have the extra money really to, to participate in, in a, in a lot of the things. And then, a lot of the activities that were there during the time were by, seeing it, controlled by the seniors, you know, anyway. And, and they had made up their mind that they were gonna make it hard for Lexington's [Kentucky] girls coming down and we were just determined that we were not. So none of us bothered to, to get involved in anything. Not, not one person from Lexington in, in, in '48 [1948] pledged sorority because we'd heard what they had planned to do to us, which was going to be beyond the regular, you know, initiation. So we decided we didn't have to do that. And so we didn't, and they lost on some good, good young ladies that should have been a valuable part of, of their organization just because of some of those things that they, you know they were, they were saying. And, and I had an opportunity to talk to, to some the next year--during the summer and I shared with her why we didn't, cause she wanted to know why we didn't and I told her and they made a change the next year, but I didn't get to go back as a sophomore. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I, I'm not sure what all, you know, what the changes were. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 72878 Speaker 1: Now you didn't go back to school [Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] your sophomore year and why not, what happened? Speaker 2: Well I had gotten a job and, and, and, and, and just enjoyed making the money. And so I, I just kept on working. I did not go back to school until fifty--'55 [1955] when my brother and sister-in-law came home [Lexington, Kentucky] and went to school. And I decided well it--there's something good to do. Cause I was working at night with the Recreation Department. And so I, I would go ride down with them each day and I went ahead and, and, and like I say, I finished the, the three years in two and a half. Speaker 1: Okay, so how, how, how many years was that from when you stopped? Speaker 2: That was a long, long time. I would say about ten. Speaker 1: Ten years? Speaker 2: Ten, between ten and fifteen. I'd have to look on my diploma and see when--what, what the date was to be absolutely sure [1957]. Speaker 1: So you say in the late '50s [1950s] I guess when you finally--you finally finished in the late '50s [1950s]. Story_ID: 72879 Speaker 1: Now, now how did you get involved in the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: I, I joined the NAACP during, during the time that I was in school [at Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky]. And they had nobody to send to the national, to the convention you know. And, and the lady that, that I'd gotten involved with, she was just kind of like my mentor. And--I was just trying to think of it. I was trying--it, it may come to me. Speaker 1: She was involved in that-- Speaker 2: But she got me involved in it. Speaker 1: At Kentucky State? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Here in Lexington [Kentucky]. I had--I met her somewhere, some place. And we liked one another immediately. And so she start carrying me to the meetings with her and I, I joined. And so when we--I, I went, went, went, went to, to New York, that's where the convention was. And a young man and I were coming back this way. And they asked us if we'd do some testing for them. Yeah, you know, young, ambitious and you know could care less. Didn't wanna come back home and go to work anyway. And so we did. And we, we drove through the area and then through Washington, D.C. and just kind of way around about. Speaker 1: This happened in New York, they asked you in New--we may be going too fast here 'cause I wanna get your impression of that convention. You, you went to the convention. Speaker 2: Well, being that young and, and it was just a--it was just a way to get away during that time. And until they asked us to, to do this, I wasn't that impressed with--you know I was just had an opportunity to go. Speaker 1: You didn't have many thoughts about the NAACP then. Speaker 2: Not really, it was just something to do. I liked the person who got me involved--it almost came to me--who had gotten me involved and I was really doing it to please her. That was really--you know as far as getting involved in it, I could have cared less at that time until we came through and we'd stopped to eat. That was our plan to see how many places we'd be served. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And some of them wouldn't even let us in the door. And then some would say they would fix something, but we had to take it out to eat. Speaker 1: Now this was between New York and Washington D.C.? Speaker 2: Yes. And cause we took a roundabout way and came on, you know, on, on down. And so--and the plan was to go back to New York. Not come all the way home--we could come home if we needed to, if nothing happened, you know. If nothing happened, we didn't have to go back. If something happened, we were gonna go back. And so it happened so much all the way to Washington, DC from, from New York that we decided we were gonna go back. And we went back and we shared with them. So this time when we went, we were not on the bus. We had a car. And I had furs and I was just dressed and he was in a suit and we had a chauffeur. Speaker 1: And so NAACP provided all the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, provided all this, this, this for us. Speaker 1: So you give the impression of wealth. Speaker 2: Wealth and foreign stuff. And they said do you know any foreign language, and I said uh-uh, I know pig Latin. So I--we spoke pig Latin. And, and they weren't quite sure what we were saying, you know, you know some of it's weird when you, when you're saying the things. And so they were so sure that this was some ambassador's wife with, with her chauffeur, that they began to try to serve us. They served--well matter of fact, we did get served you know in the places when we went back to, to do this. And-- Speaker 1: When they thought you were regular Americans-- Speaker 2: They never did find out. Speaker 1: African Americans, they wouldn't serve you. When they found out-- Speaker 2: Yeah, see the first time when we went through, we went to the very same places. But this time I've got furs on and you know he has a suit on and you know like he's caring for me, you know, thing. And like I was some foreign ambassador's wife, you know, something because I'm, I'm in my twenties, you know during, during this time. And, and, and the more we thought about it as we got there, you know, I said you know this doesn't make sense; we the same people that just came the other way and we were clean; we wasn't dirty. You know, this does not make sense, something is wrong with this. And this is what we talked about all the way, you know, back. And so all the way back on the plane, 'cause they flew me back home and I kept thinking change has to come. And when I came back, I was way up here ready to see what could be done about a change and we got involved in, in jobs. Story_ID: 72880 Speaker 1: Because see the--we had many, many groceries in our neighborhoods that had no black people working except mopping the floors and cleaning up. Speaker 2: Now I wanna go back a little bit to the NAACP. Do, do you remember who you worked with there, or who-- Speaker 1: The young man? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I, I, I cannot remember his name 'cause see we talking about fifty, sixty some odd years ago. Speaker 2: Now did you get a chance to meet Roy Wilkins or anybody? Speaker 1: No, I didn't meet him. Speaker 2: Thurgood Marshall. Speaker 1: Thurgood I did. Speaker 2: Jack Greenberg, or-- Speaker 1: Greenberg, I don't remember him. I'm trying to think who was even the President of the NAACP during that time. Speaker 2: Walter White I think. Speaker 1: Walter White. Speaker 2: Might have been Walter White then. Speaker 1: That sounds familiar. Speaker 2: He looked like a white man, but he was black. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah I think, I think that's who it was too. Because we're--this is in the--let me see I'm trying to think when was this, this was in the-- Speaker 2: Late '50s [1950s]. It could have been either Wilkins or, or Walter White. Walter White, I think he was, he was the Executive Secretary up until the late '50s [1950s]. I'm not sure exactly when he retired. Speaker 1: Okay, cause this was in the '50s [1950s]. I know it was in the '50s [1950's] because you know I, I had been to school, you know. And it was--it, it caused me to look at the situation, even though segregation was here in Lexington [Kentucky], we all had our own places that we liked to go and it didn't make any difference. Speaker 2: It worked out how they--to deal with. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know you, you, you knew where you were going and who cared about going to those other old places? And then after that when I, when I really came back and, and then we started on the thing with, with the lunch counters and, and things because see you--they always had a little section there where we could stop and buy what--everything they got--but we had to take it out or stand there at that little section and eat. Story_ID: 72881 Speaker 1: Now how did you get started with this? When you came back and you were a member of the NAACP? And I suppose there were some others here in Lex--Lexington [Kentucky], right? I mean the, the lady that sent you to that--or who, who went to the conference with you. Speaker 2: Julia, Julia Lewis was--she, she was a member. And we had--well thinking of, of starting CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]. That was the beginning of CORE also. Speaker 1: Tell us about Julia Lewis-- Speaker 2: Most fantastic, dynamic young lady that you, you, you can imagine. Didn't mind sticking her neck out and, and doing. Had to keep her kind of calm every now and then. She was a little more forceful, you know, physically than, than I. So the two of us made a good team, you might say. But she was really interested in change and, and, and, and her job and my job both were in jeopardy cause she worked at Eastern State [Hospital] at the time, she was a nurse. Speaker 1: Eastern State. Speaker 2: Hospital. And see I worked at Kentucky Village [Reform School, now Blackburn Correctional Complex], you know teaching. And, and so we were--we--our jobs were in jeopardy all the time. And we both had made up our mind that they--if they did fire us for our participation, they were gone have a suit on their hand that, that was gonna set the whole world on fire. And, and I don't know if anybody slipped and told them or not. But they didn't. But, but I think sometimes people know who you are and, and, and how far they can, can really go. And, and I never brought the Village into any of our things and she never brought the Eastern State Hospital into it. So it was a whole separate--it was our own private life that we were, you know, involved in. And I really believe that that was part of what kept us from being called on the carpet. Because we do know that some people did lose their job or were threatened to lose their job. And when they did that, we'd tell them don't go on the [unclear] with us. Pass out, count folders and things, but don't, don't be visible 'cause we can't, we can't take care of you. And so that helped you know an, an awful lot. Story_ID: 72882 Speaker 1: Tell me about the first action that you all planned and how did it--how did you get started? How did you get started? Speaker 2: Well like I said, but we were both--I was president of the NAACP and-- Speaker 1: How did you become pre--president? Speaker 2: I was elected. Speaker 1: Yes, but I'm saying you came, come back from New York. Speaker 2: With ideas and willing to work and-- Speaker 1: How many members were there here in, in Lexington [Kentucky]? Speaker 2: I'd say about--active members, I'd say about fifteen to twenty active, active ones that came. There were a whole lot that claim they were members, but I never saw any of them in the meetings or anything, so you know. To me you weren't, but if wanna say so, that was your business. Speaker 1: How long did it take for you to become the president if you came back in-- Speaker 2: Just a few months, few weeks. They knew they had a sucker on they hands. Speaker 1: Well there was nobody really excited to be president-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I came back. I mean I was so enthused with what I had seen, what I had heard, what I had experienced, you know, and, and, and all. And, and, and so they said okay if you willing to, you know, do this then let's--will you serve as president, and stupidly I said yes. Speaker 1: Now this was 1950-what? Speaker 2: This was the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Late '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: Not, not too late. I'd say about the middle '50s [1950s], somewhere in, in there. Speaker 1: Now this was before Montgomery bus boycott? Had that taken place yet? [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. Speaker 2: Seems to me like it was around that time, 'cause seem to me I was always enthused over that, you know that too. So I would, I would say--I might be wrong, but I would say it was all around that time when everybody was, was busy, you know-- Speaker 1: [Unclear] situation. Speaker 2: Yes. And, and so you know you're saying if it can happen there, why can't it happen here? And like I said, we were fortunate here in, in, in Lexington that we didn't have any physical violence. And we had a police chief that was willing to cooperate. Story_ID: 72883 Speaker 1: Okay. I just wanna backtrack back to the date. Now how did you all plan to--I mean who suggested the first action and how did you--how did the group like determine what it was gonna do and-- Speaker 2: [BREAK] Speaker 1: Okay, yeah we were talking about the meeting that determined like what action you all were gonna take first and what you-- Speaker 2: Well when I came back, you know I shared with them what had happened on, on, on the trip. And, and we talked about how the situation was here in, in, in Lexington [Kentucky]. And we first we just decided to see about jobs. You know you kind of felt like if people making--having decent jobs would make, make, make all the difference. And in the meantime this was--soon afterwards when CORE became in existence. And then Julia [Lewis] and I--she was you know as I say on NAACP at the time. And we decided why don't we just go city-wide on, on, on the project and, and get, and get something done. And this is what we ended up doing. And, and we chose, we chose the ten cent stores because they all had lunch counters. And they had this little corner on the end where you could stop and, and buy. And if you wanted to stand up and eat it, that would be fine. But then there was this long counter all the way down the store that you, that you couldn't, you know, stop and eat. Speaker 1: All these polished red stools. Speaker 2: Yes, you know fancy stools. And so we went back--had a, had a CORE meeting and decided that was gonna be our, our first big CORE project. And that's what, what we did. And so we walked in and, and sat down so fast, that they didn't realize what had happened. And--but they didn't serve us, we just sat there. And which was costing them business 'cause we weren't moving, and we weren't doing anything. And, and Julia and I had been smart enough to contact the chief of police and kind of shared with him what was going to go on and all. And he had promised us that unless we broke the law, got real involved in something, that they weren't gonna bother us; that we could, you know, still do this. Speaker 1: Now was segregation part of the law of Kentucky, or was it just (unclear)? Speaker 2: I think it was a combination of both. You know that it might have been an unwritten law, but it was practiced 100 percent. You know you just, just, just [unclear] you were okay as long as you stayed in your place. Speaker 1: I was just wondered if by sitting at the lunch counter, you were actually violating city or state law, or if you were just violating custom. Speaker 2: I think it was more custom. I don't think it was a law. I mean I don't--I don't even remember anybody bringing up the fact that we might have been breaking law. I hadn't thought about it until you just, you know, mentioned that I think it was just the custom. Because you could stop and buy whatever they had, but you, you know, couldn't, couldn't sit down and eat. Story_ID: 72884 Speaker 1: And then after, after that we had another (unclear) that was right next, next door to them and we decided we were going to, to, to do that. Well the first time we got in, we got the seats because it was just kind of open and you just going down the aisle. And we took up all the seats. Well then see the customers couldn't, couldn't--and she couldn't wait on anybody, but she wasn't gonna wait on us. And she became so angry and aggravated that she took a great big bowl--jar of iced tea and turned it over on my new suit that I had just bought cause I was going someplace afterwards. I still have the--it's up in the attic now. It's a souvenir of the [Civil Rights] Movement. And, and I just--and, and I just sat there just like nothing--red--every time I think about it, I, I can still, still picture that. And so the next week when we came, they had this rope all around the lunch counter. And the, the manager was sitting at the rope and he would let his white customers come in and then close it, close it right back. And so I was kind of at the front of the line and he had this little string on it, and he was hitting it and it was hitting right across my, my leg. It was really hurting something, something bad. And, and the men--there were a few men on our line and of course they wanted to take the, the chain and wrap it around his neck. And so we had to send them outside 'cause they were really getting angry because it was hurting, you know. I'm, I'm doing this the whole time. Each time he did that, I'm, I'm feeling it. Speaker 2: Like [unclear]. Speaker 1: Yeah. And, and so they went on--reluctantly they went on out and we, we, you know we stood there. But for--I would say for about twelve to fifteen years, I suffered with my leg right down at that, that--like right in that area. Anyway, and they couldn't find out what was wrong. I think it was all up here in my head. But we stayed, stayed there then. And then we--finally we--wasn't too long after that, that we were able to get them to, to make the change 'cause they could see that we weren't giving up. And we're being so quiet and so refined and so top notch. And that they had no complaint, you know, about it. That they--we felt like that one of the stores had hired some--we, we called them hoodlums and that--which isn't really quite fair to them, but they act like hoodlums anyway. Who were coming by and they would have a lighter, and they would cut it on and get it as close to our hair as, as they possibly could. I guess just to try to get us, but we just sat there, you know, anyway. And it wasn't too long after that that they realized we're being stupid. We might as well go ahead and when we had a meeting, they, they agreed to go ahead and, you know and do this. Speaker 2: You had a meeting with the store owner? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Story_ID: 72885 Speaker 1: The thing that always concerned me about the Civil Rights Movement here in Lexington [Kentucky] was the fact that the churches were not involved like they were every place else. With the exception of, of Pleasant Green [Baptist Church], and that was Reverend [William A.] Jones [Sr.] and, and Julia [Lewis] belonged there. And he would let us meet, you know at his church and he would come down even, you know sometimes. And, and one time they even--the churches--the members just got together with the department stores and the lunch counter people, and they were meeting at Schulte United. And Reverend Jones always came down to give us kind of moral and spiritual support. Even though he--we, we knew he was there someplace in that, in the building. And so he was walking on down and happened to go into Schulte United and the manager said [unclear] you a little early. And he says I was coming down, he says what time is it? And then they told him, you know, what time. He says well they said they were gonna have it--and I think it was about 1:00. And he says I'm gonna walk around and look and see what's going on and I'll, I'll be back. And so he came back up to us and asked us if we were supposed to attend the meeting. And we told him no, we had not heard anything about it. Well a group of the black ministers had gotten together and they were gonna meet with him. Speaker 2: Now this is the owner of the store? Speaker 1: And, and some managers of the other stores. Speaker 2: They decided they-- Speaker 1: They were going to, to-- Speaker 2: --black ministers instead of you all. Speaker 1: Well now it seemed to me--and I gathered from what he said that the ministers had gotten in touch with them and told them they could put a stop to us. Speaker 2: The ministers told him. Speaker 1: Yes, 'cause like I said, they were not involved in the [Civil Rights] Movement. And--which was so different from every place else. Because every place else the ministers were, you know your leaders and everything else. Speaker 2: Well people were trying to make a deal. Speaker 1: The ministers here were, were, were doing that. And only because Reverend Jones who was our mentor, happened to, you know, be down there, he found out about that. They hadn't even contacted him to tell him. He didn't even know it. And they were shocked when they walked in and saw him sitting there, but they couldn't ask him to go out. And so they kept on talking about what needed to done, be done and, and, and how it shouldn't. And so he finally he told--he, he says let me say something right now before you go any further. He says it's fine for you all to be concerned and all, said--he's talking to the store managers. He said but you're talking to the wrong people right now. You need to talk to those two young ladies who are leading the Movement. And of course the ministers weren't very happy with that. He says because they're the only ones that can make a decision right now about what was going on because we really, with the exception of some of the members who said they could have cared less, that their ministers couldn't tell them what to do, were a part of our group of sitting in and marching. You know just, just some of them. And, and what's surprising, the ones that, that were doing it, you would have never thought some of them who did it, would have been interested enough to do it. It, it, it--and a lot of the older women were involved. We didn't have very many men who, who were involved. And, and as I said that many of them who were working had been threatened by their job. And we told them that they must not you know, do it. And, and some said they were gonna do it anyway, and if they lose their job, they just get another one. And, and this was the way it went. But as a whole, it wasn't too bad. Story_ID: 72886 Speaker 1: And like I said we only--you know, ended up in jail just, just that one time. And we didn't end up in the--did we end up in a cell? Yeah, they did lock us up while they were writing-- Speaker 2: That's when you all demonstrated in the theater. Speaker 1: They, they, they did arrest us then. And the policeman got in, in trouble over some of the remarks that he was making to me then. Speaker 2: What did he say? Speaker 1: Well we would check--you know writing, filling out the things, and he made a, a, a remark about seeing to it that we got--we had a bath, bath. And I made him repeat it 'cause I thought I know I didn't hear right. And I said--am I not allowed one phone call? And he says yeah I guess so. And I said would you please dial Chief Hale's number? Well he turned as red as, as you can imagine. What do you want with Chief? I said I have a call; I want to call Chief Hale. And so he, he, he rang it and Chief Hale came on and I told him you know, where I was. And he laughed and he says what have you done? And I said we didn't do anything; we were--that the theater called and had us arrested. And he says well you know that was the only way that we said, that I said that they could, you know, pick you up. And I said, I said but that's not what I'm calling you about. I'm calling you about whatever his name was on his, you know little tag, and I said I'm calling you about the man who's checking us in. And so when he told--and I said he's implying that I'm dirty and smelling and all and I said and, and you know how I look when I go out. You know and he just kind of laughed. And he said are you looking like you usually do? And I said uh-uh. And he says put him on the phone please. Now what he said to him, I do not know. But he turned red, purple, green and every color under the rainbow. And his whole attitude was a whole lot different when he came back. And so we were due to be in--this was on a, on a Friday. No, no this wasn't on a Fri--this was on a Thursday I think, one of those rare days that we went in the middle of the week. And we were due at court on Friday. And so we all showed up, you know, Friday. But they never even called our case. And, and I know Chief Hale was the one that told them don't make that mistake. Don't call those ladies up there 'cause you're not gone want to hear what, what, what she had to say. Because I know it had to be him because he called me later to see if I was okay. And I told him yeah, we, you know didn't--but he never you know said--and I didn't pursue it. All I know we didn't have to go and, and, and it--because we were ready for them. We had, had some camera men in and everything. We were gonna tape all that they would permit us to tape in court. So we weren't quite sure how they would do that. But that was our only run-in with the, the police the whole time that we were doing, you know, anything. Speaker 2: The police never even tried to cut you off, pull you off the [unclear] or remove you. Speaker 1: 'Cause we were not doing anything. Just perfect little angels sitting on the stool was all. You know, clean, and, and, and had something to read 'cause we knew we weren't gone be--and we didn't have comic books or anything. I think I carried a Reader's Digest all the time. And some of the others, you know, had the Jets and other things. And we would just, you know, sit there and read. But the other customers couldn't, couldn't get over you know, to, to do. A few of them kind of supposedly accidentally spilled some stuff on, on some. And it kind of blew their mind that that person didn't jump and hit them upside the head. Story_ID: 73753 Speaker 1: So we're at the next day after the arrest, okay. Speaker 2: And the next day we had to go to court. We were all there, but they didn't even call our, our, our case at all 'cause they knew. And, and we always felt that they felt it was better not to call attention to what was going on simply because we didn't do anything anyway. We were just standing in front and nobody could get past us 'cause we were in line. They had two windows and we had somebody in, in each one of the windows and, and see we just didn't move. Speaker 1: That was the Strand [Theatre]-- Speaker 2: That was at the Strand. And so finally they had one of the young ladies that was at one of the windows to go in and sit on a stool right where they would be taking tickets, and she sold them tickets. And so of course we sent some in there for that, but she didn't sell any tickets. But it--and, and really you know the thing that was so very, very amazing about it. For many of us we had not been in either one of those theaters, the Kentucky [Theater] or the Strand, and we were so disappointed when we got in it. You know I think when you can't do something or can't go someplace, you expect it to be so different. Well it wasn't anything setting the world on fire, we just laughed. Cause I--and I don't think that I have really unless it was a special program, in all these years I don't think I've been to any of them since then. So they just got my one, one time money that I was fighting so desperately for. They'd have been out of business if they were waiting on me to continue to go. Story_ID: 73754 Speaker 1: Remind me what--I heard that the, the one black theater in town [Lexington, Kentucky]. Speaker 2: The Lyric [Theatre]. Speaker 1: The Lyric, is kind of a casualty of the Civil Rights Movement in the sense that it didn't--it, it died after that. I mean sort of, didn't it? Speaker 2: Well, you know what happened? Let me tell you what really happened with them. After they opened up the other theaters, the--they, they made some kind of arrangement, what it was and how it was, that if they were gonna let the Lyric have, have the things that they weren't gonna do business with them. And they would not--the Lyric didn't get to get the good movies. They got the ones that nobody wanted to go see. We tried, but after a while it got to the place where you're just throwing your money away 'cause you walked out before it was over. They were just--they weren't even B movies. They were D's and E's, they were just that bad. And that was what really, really did it because they were slick enough to make some kind of arrangement so that the movies were not available for, for the Lyric. And, and there was no way that--'cause I don't remember--and I'm trying--and I'm racking my brain--it--what was said when we approached them about it because we didn't do it as a group. I mean somewhat as, as individuals. And they were saying something about they didn't keep them long enough or something silly, you know. But, but that wasn't what it was because we had a, a white friend who told us you know what it was, that they said they may have done, got in it, but they weren't gonna give them the, the--because my thing was--it was just a choice whoever had the movie that I would go--I would wanna go see it. I didn't go to the movies very much anyway, but if you had it. So to me, they weren't losing any business by opening it, it up. Matter of fact, if they had used they head and let the Lyric have the good movies, they wouldn't have had to worry about us [unclear] anyway. We would have gone to the Lyric instead of going to those other, other places. Story_ID: 73755 Speaker 1: Yeah, but I know we, we talked before I think off camera that, that maybe sometimes in these communities--some of the places we'd been, the people involved in the [Civil Rights] Movement have intimated to us that a lot of the white businesspeople really were practicing segregation because of pressure, but they would really have rather made the money. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The whole community. Speaker 2: Yes, this is the same thing, you know, here. Because one--I, I just remember one Saturday so vividly. That we were marching out in the front on, on one side, side of the street. And he had a lunch counter at one of the ten cent stores. And he finally came, and he was waiting, waiting for me and, and Julia [Lewis] to come. And he called us up and said first thing we said lordy, what has happened? We thought maybe somebody had turned something over in the place, you know what, what it is. And he says you know, he says I've told you all repeatedly that I am behind you, but I have to go along with the rest of the businesspeople on, on the street. And I said and, and I remember us telling him, I said well we told you that that doesn't make sense and we just kind of laughed. And he says but let me tell you what's really upsetting me. And I thought maybe the managers were saying something. He says you all are out here at the front, you're sitting in and your people are coming in our back door buying stuff. And he says I would rather they support the whole Movement. See we need the Movement, and I'm gone tell you right now yes we wanna them to come on in and spend the money. Said but it'd be so much better if they just did what they needed to do and not come in at all. Says but they sneak in the back door and go out the back door. 'Cause when he first started talking, I said well no we haven't seen, you know--cause he was saying we still getting customers. And I said no, nobody's gone through. He says no, they're coming in the back. And then somebody says well you know should we send somebody in the back? I said they're gonna have to live with themselves. Let us just stay right here in the front. We don't have enough to really do both and do it well. And so we just let them go, go in the back. But we let them know that we knew--we didn't know the individuals, but we let them know throughout the community that there was some who were doing this. Story_ID: 73756 Speaker 1: Now you got some other interesting reactions from white people, you know during the [Civil Rights] Movement I think that you were talking about before. I think one was the--'cause I asked you at one point if your job was in jeopardy, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, well at the time I was work--teaching at, at, at the [Kentucky] Village [Reform School]. And because we had, had marched up here at MRS on Georgetown Street, he lived--the manage--the owner at that time lived out there where our principal did. And so he made it a point of informing him that I had been, you know, marching up, up and down. And said, and, and said you told me that--I was surprised when I found out that she worked out, you know, out here. So I'm telling you what's going on. So he to me made the mistake of saying something to me. At least he always claims that that was the biggest mistake he ever made. One of the biggest mistakes he ever made where I was concerned. And I, I asked him, I said was this between 8:00 and 4:00 Monday through Friday? And he says no. I said then you don't have anything to do with what I do between those hours because you're not paying me and I'm not on duty to you and I don't advise you saying anything to me about what I do on my free time as long as I don't have a sign that says Kentucky Village on it, then you don't have anything to do with what I--well he turned red as a beet 'cause he was really--I don't know what he expected. But he didn't make the mistake of saying anything else to me about--and then from then on, I'd go early. And usually we were just two or three--I'd, sometimes I'd be walking up and down in front of the, the store by myself until the rest of them came just because he made it his business to try to get--I feel like he tried to get me fired. And, and, and a couple of times it was just raining and they would say we, we, we can call it off. I said you all go ahead and call it off. And I got me some cellophane paper and wrapped it around my sign and I'm walking out there in the rain because I was really, I was pretty angry about that, and even more so with him saying something to me, you know, about it. That was the biggest mistake he ever made. 'Cause at least he would have had that free day of nobody being there in the rain. But I was there in the rain. My family were not very happy, but I was determined that I was going to, going to do it. Story_ID: 73757 Speaker 1: There was another conversation I think with your principal that you--head of the, the [Kentucky Village Reform] School there that you had that you were tell-telling me about where you, you told them that they were next. Speaker 2: Yes. Well see part of this, you know, had, had happened, you know--pretty much close, close to this. And because the place was segregated. Speaker 1: The school was. Speaker 2: The school was segre--the place, the whole place was segregated. And, and including, you know, the school. And-- Speaker 1: So those were correctional facilities. Speaker 2: And so I, you know I informed him whatever you were talking about at the time, that not to worry about it because we were gonna be next. And he wanted to know what did I mean by, you know, gonna be next. I said because everything is segregated here. I don't have any white students in my room. And they don't have any black students in their room. So you only had the two black teachers, and so all of them had to come to this irregardless of what grade they were. I had in my classroom students who were functioning on the second all the way up to the tenth grade, which was not really fair to them, especially those tenth graders. Well [unclear] either because they were too old to be in the second grade, but that was the level that they were functioning. And so he, he was really kind of concerned about that, but he wasn't surprised when it happened. Because the superintendent and I had talked and, and, and, and it was the strangest thing. As I said when we were talking, that he and I had made an arrangement to talk that Monday. It was just strange, like it was a planned thing. But you know you know something was gonna happen and it's gonna, gonna come out. And so when we got there and, and, and I had been arrested and name was all in the paper and you know, all of that, he, he, he knew what, what was going on. So we talked about that for the longest time. And, and I kind of shared--he wanted to know what I was doing, what it was all about and you know, and all. And that's when I, you know, informed him that this is the reason I wanna talk to you, because there needs to be some changes here at, at the Village. Story_ID: 73758 Speaker 1: How many different types of actions were you involved in? Speaker 2: Gosh. I have no--I, I just can't even give you a figure because they were, were a number of them. Some were big, big things and some were very small things where all it took was a meeting, and, and talk to. And I think in the ones where it only took a meeting, it was because they weren't quite sure what was going to happen. And all they could see was what they were seeing on TV where the violence was and all. And, and we were just-- Speaker 1: You mean in Birmingham [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Yes. See and, and this isn't what they wanted to be a part of. And, and so when we assured them that this was not the thing. And not only did we have to assure them, we had to assure our people too, that this was not the direction that we were going in. Speaker 1: Now, now you and Julia Lewis basically partnered up CORE and NAACP. And you were able to desegregate the lunch counters-- Speaker 2: The jobs. Speaker 1: Theater, different jobs, the schools, and now anything else? Speaker 2: Well, anything that happened had been segregated then, made a change even if we didn't get to them. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And there were some things that really-- Speaker 1: Started the ball rolling. Speaker 2: So we started, and, and, and I think what happened in, in, in some of the cases that--with the change in the theaters and, and, and the job situation, that many people who were practicing segregation, saw that nothing drastic had happened. If anything, it helped matters. And, and surprisingly--well it's not surprising because there's good people in the world everywhere. Many people were, were glad because they saw what was going on. They did not agree with it, but they were in business to make money and stay in business, so they had to go along with what the majority were doing, pretty much like it is now, you know, without us realizing or admitting it. We still do pretty much what the majority of the people, you know, are doing. But it was worse, you know even then, and more involved. Story_ID: 73759 Speaker 1: When the changes began to become a reality and there was not any violence involved, people realized well, this makes a whole lot of sense. Because other than the time when some young people went in the Phoenix Hotel dining room and because they were not waited on, threw salt and pepper--dumped it out on the tables, there was never any violence at all in our movement. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's pretty lightweight for violence. Speaker 1: Yes. Cause we were pretty upset with them having done that. And I think the part--and I know when Julia [Lewis] and I were talking with some of the other people who were officers and, and active involved in it, the thing that, that made us want to go in this direction was that we didn't want anybody to get hurt. And you could get hurt. Because--and, and I, and I was always glad that when they did whatever they were doing out there in my front yard, that they did it after I had gone to bed, rather than if I was in the house and going to the door and I saw them out there. I cannot guarantee what would have happened, 'cause I have a gun. And, and, and I would hate to have shot somebody over something, you know. Because if they started coming to me, I know that I'm gonna run and get it and protect myself. And, and so I, I think that sometimes things that happen, happen for a reason. And we don't realize what the reason might have been until much, much later after we, we think about it and I, and I do believe that all that mess that was, you know, in my yard, that that would be, you know, part of the problem. And the thing about it that always amazed me--I didn't have a garage at that time, I had a carport. They never did anything to the car, the tires or anything. It was just that filth. I guess they thought that hurt worse cause I could have more tires put on. But to have to clean up that--. Every time I think about it, it just makes me sick, I wanna vomit. But that was the only thing that really--and phone calls. We were loaded with phone calls, you know, and, and of course that's the reason I can hang up so very, very fast. Story_ID: 73760 Speaker 1: About the relationship with CORE and NAACP--you, you were explaining off camera I guess about that--how, how unique that was 'cause the Congress of Racial Equality and National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, nationally really didn't have a relationship. Speaker 2: No, they didn't. Well I think because Julia [Lewis] and I were friends beforehand and, and she was a member of the NAACP before, you know before she got involved in CORE. And then when, when--and I cannot remember those. I was trying my best when I say remember those people's name--came in with the CORE, you know, organization, and she wanted to be a part of that. And, and we both did. And, and then she was elected chairman of, of, of that. And, and, but--and we just continued to work together. We even went to--we went to a convention one time together--NAACP. And I mean we really upset the whole convention because they could not believe with the friction that seemed to have been going on, that these two people from the same place were at this convention together. And so we started talking. You know whenever we'd get a break or something, we'd would have a whole group to, you know just come in where we were. And we tried to talk--we talked to them. And some, some of them tried it and it was successful in some places and some it wasn't because too much animosity had gone on between the two for them to ever, you know, join. And, and so she, she was able to go to NAACP convention with me and I went to CORE convention with her, you know this-- Speaker 1: Now the head of CORE at that time was James-- Speaker 2: Farmer. Speaker 1: Farmer, F-A-R-M-E-R. Speaker 2: James Farmer and his wife stayed here in, in my house when they came here for convention, when we had the convention here. Speaker 1: And CORE had a reputation for more actions, right, direction actions, demonstrations. Whereas NAACP was more for legal-- Speaker 2: And so we, we showed them that if you get involved with both, and as a result of it, here in Lexington [Kentucky], we became more involved in closed discussions, meetings and things, in addition to the active walking and picketing and, and what have you. And I think this is part of the reason we were so successful here. Cause we really were--if you talked to any of the, the members. Some of them wouldn't even remember, you know, anything about it 'cause most of them are in--that are in now were the younger people who were involved maybe family members. You know they may in--but we didn't have any, any problems at all with it. It was unbelievable. When we would talk about it at, at, at the conventions, their eyes would just big like. And every time we--we didn't have a chance to even get a break because soon as one group would leave us alone, another one would come and wanna know how did you do it. And, and there wasn't anything that we could really say that we did this, this, this, this and that. It just seemed to have just fallen into it--and I think it was because of the people who owned the stores wanted it to happen, but didn't know how to go about doing it on their own. And I know Grays and Cox (ph.) was one of them because they at the time even had a, a black salesperson. He--legally he was the stockperson. But if came in to buy something, he could sell it to you. But officially on the books he was not, you know. And, and, and so they were the ones who were really very vocal in a positive way about the change that might be made and why it should be, be made at the time when they were in business. Story_ID: 73761 Speaker 1: How long did this era last I guess, with these demonstrations and--how, how long did you do this? Speaker 2: It wasn't, it wasn't even a year. Speaker 1: The whole, the whole era of-- Speaker 2: Well, I think including the meetings and everything, I guess maybe--I, I still don't believe it was quite a year. 'Cause see we talking about such a long time ago. Speaker 1: I was like, you know, I guess from the mid-'50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: Seem to me-- Speaker 1: It was over by when do you think? By, by 1960? Speaker 2: No, it was over before then. It, it was over before then because like I say, if somebody had been here in, in Lexington [Kentucky], they would, would probably say to you that we didn't have a problem simply because we had been so used to having our own, our own restaurants that we wanted to go to. We had some ten cent stores in our various communities where a few, one or two blacks might work, you know, in it. So you say you had them where they, they worked. And it, and it wasn't something they could have cared about one way or the other; they were doing all right. It was only when--came back and, and saw the difference and, and how little interaction there was. And, and how much I was really being denied. I think the--as, as I said before, the thing that really got me and sold me was when I went back and put on those African clothes like I was an African prince or something, and they served me and they didn't serve me when I just had on regular clothes. That blew my mind. I mean it really--I thought about it all the way home. I mean even--if I remember correctly, I might even have cried about it, you know a little bit, because it disturbed me quite a bit. And, and I'm saying to myself, and I said it to the young man. And this is what it's all about. I remember that just like it was yesterday, you know, saying this to him. And he says yes, and said this is what I have had to go through all my life. And I said well I haven't had to go through it simply because we had places here that we could go to, and we preferred to spend our money, you know, with our own people rather than go like it ended up when we started going to the places. Many of them ended up having to close up because they didn't get that volume that we had because other people were going, you know, to the other places just showing that it could be done and, and they had made a mistake and, and we didn't realize that we were hurting our own until it was too late. And then, then we realized it, that, that it had. But you know even, even with this and, and I remember saying this, you know at, at the meeting that I just don't feel denied things because I could still do things until they start pointing out some things. Well you know can you do this, and can you do--and I'm thinking no I can't. You know and, and then it dawned on me, we had Douglas Park, which was so clean that it wasn't even funny, you know. And, and, and the pool was, was, was there. You could--I mean you never had to worry about trash or anything being in there. You know we just had things that were ours and, and it didn't make any difference until we began to realize well yeah, this is ours too, but maybe I don't want to go there. Maybe I wanna go here, there, and, and it shouldn't be a difference. Story_ID: 73762 Speaker 1: How did this era affect your, your later career? Did, did it affect your later career at all? Speaker 2: In teaching? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No, because you know like I said, after I was arrested that time and, and the superintendent of the [Kentucky] Village [Reform School] called me at work. I told you we'd had a meeting, you know, anyway. And, and we talked about it. And, and he says, "Well I've been thinking about it, you know, for a long time but I didn't know how it was gonna go over." And there was some very prejudiced ones there on both sides, you know. And, and, and the separation was complete. I mean when I say complete, I mean complete. Even dining room, every- they didn't even eat, you know. And, and that's what I was telling him, you know, that--well I had made up my mind that I was going to eat in the dining room. We ate--they had a small--another one and it was--well it was so clean it wasn't even funny. You know you could almost eat off the floor. And, and I had made up my mind. I don't know what made me think of it over the weekend. And I had said Monday morning when I go to school, I'm not going to go in the--where the children eat. I'm going to sit down and eat in the dining room that's for the whites. And the young man from Paris [Kentucky] would catch the bus up here and I'd pick him up on the corner and carry him on to work, you know with me. And I told him, you know, that this was what I was going to do. And so he didn't say anything. He just looked and he says, "Oh, Audrey." And so when the time came, we went in and he had made up his mind that he wasn't gonna let me go by myself. And so he came and sat with me at the table by the door. I got by the door in case I had to run out. But he sat, sat there with me. And it upset some people so badly, now these are people who have been saying hello to you, how are you, you know, and just being rather friendly with you, that they actually threw their food in the trashcan and stamped out of the dining room. And some of them who did it would, would have--if anybody had told me they would have been the ones who'd have done it, I would have said no way 'cause they had been so friendly, you know. But they were the ones who got up and threw, threw it out. And so after that--that was the beginning of the, the integration of the, the whole, whole, whole place. And then after that--and then that's when I went to talk to the, to the, to the superintendent and I said, "Well that was my first step. And the next one is to integrate the, the schools." And he says, "Huh?" And I said, "Yeah." I said, "It doesn't make sense to, to waste talent like you have here and not be sharing it." I said, "They need to know what I'm teaching and my students need to know what they're teaching. And so that's gonna be the next, next step," and he says, "Well will you tell me when?" I said, "No, 'cause I don't know when." I said, "Just one day, it might be when I walk up and, and say this is the day and take my students and we'll walk over, over to the, the school and that's where we're gonna--they'll have to find a room or we'll just sit in the library, you know, during the time." And then after we talked about it and he said, "Oh don't do that, that to me." He says, "You got me in the--." I said, "Well okay. Do you have a room?" And he says, "Yes, but it's in the basement." I said, "It doesn't make any difference. Just let me have the key and I will bring my students over and we will--," and that was the way we did. And you could have heard a pin fall in that building; there was so much tension that day that it was not even funny. And these are people who normally, "Hello, how are you," you know and all that, but it was the separation that was, you know there and they wanted to, to, to keep it. And, and at the time I only taught the black students and, and the other male. He only taught. But it--then, then, then we integrated the whole, whole school. Story_ID: 72897 Speaker 1: Ma'am, we're rolling again. And I just wanted to ask you--just follow up now the rest of your teaching career. Speaker 2: Well my first, first teaching job was at, at Kentucky Village [Reform School]. And I had always been interested in working with delinquent boys and girls. I don't know why. But I--that was, that was what I really wanted to do. And, and I remember when times were getting kind of rough as far as finding the money to go back to school. And, and, and I, and I was just praying. I can almost see it, you know, today that, give me an opportunity and I wanna work with problem children. And so I had been hired for Constitution [Street School], second grade Constitution. And, and the job--a friend of mine I knew was on the board at, at Kentucky Village and she knew that that's what I, I wanted. And she had talked to them and, and made arrangements for me to, to go out there and have an interview. And, and then I was hired to work with the girls first. And so after I had worked with them successfully and moved--and I kept on to the family. I said that it didn't make sense for me to have to come all the way across campus to bring my students to the library if I wanted to, and there was a big library and a big building. And so he [school superintendent] says well there's a room, so he put me down, down, down in, in the basement. So he said it was [unclear]. I said well there are two other, three other classes there. If they can be in the basement, I can be in the basement too, it doesn't make any difference to me. So we went on. And, and that was where I started really getting, getting involved with the--classes were still segregated. And after a while, we kept on, on, on working and, and, and talking. And, and our meeting, you know, with him. And, and had gotten involved with the [Civil Rights] Movement. And I told, told the, the superintendent, Is aid you know it's rather hard for me to go and talk about integration and I'm working in a segregated situation. Hey, that rhymes. But anyway--and so he listened and he says can we just think about it and can we talk later? I said we, we, we had [unclear] for the next, next, next week. And, and decided that that was the direction that we needed to, to really go in--of really integrating the thing. And there were those who were not very happy, even the principal wasn't very happy. And so--and they had problems because it was an adjustment, you know, to make. They had fights. Because the dormitories were even separate. And as, as we worked along with it, calming it down, we were able to get the dormitories joined and you know some other changes and, and all. And, and of course when, when I was made principal, that, that really did the thing. I mean there were some very sick, sad, sad people there, but it was the best thing that ever happened to them, later they were saying. 'Cause they didn't know what--they knew I was strict and, and everything, and, and liked things done a certain way. And a lot of them were goofing off, you know, not doing anything. But if you're going to teach them, you need to make them ready to go back when they go back home. But--and so everything, you know, kind of worked out very, very well there. Story_ID: 72898 Speaker 1: And then Fayette County [Public Schools], we kept on working on it for Fayette County to assume the school within their system. And we did that for a while, but it was--it didn't last too long because they closed the [Kentucky] Village [Reform School]. It ceased being a school for delinquent boys and girls. We weren't you know, getting too awful many. And it was becoming very, very costly. I never could see how it was any more costly than it always was except people were demanding more money. And I guess that was you know, bringing it up, up too. But it wasn't too long after that that they closed it and I worked at the central office for a while, bored to death. And when a class became available, I grabbed it. They could not understand why anybody would come out of central office and go back in a classroom, but that was what I wanted to do; I wanted to work with children. I didn't smoke and, and, and I didn't drink coffee. And that's what they were doing. So I left out. I was left out completely, you know. And I didn't like the smell of the smoke and didn't like the smell of the coffee. So I couldn't even really go into the, to the room without gagging and, and coming out of the, you know, little teachers' lounge for a while. And so when, when, when it became you know, available. But the principal there and, and, and I had taken a class together. And, and we talked and, and got to know one another and kind of liked. I liked what he was getting ready to do because they had just remodeled the school. Well really they rebuilt the school. And, and I had gone over and, and saw what it was and I was just fascinated by it. And he said he needed a sixth grade teacher, I told him he had one. But we had to almost fight for it because they did not want me to leave central office. I don't know whether I was the token something or not. But anyway that was what I wanted. 'Cause it was either that or I was gonna find me job in one of the little small towns and classroom, 'cause that's what I wanted. Speaker 2: Now I understand--can, can you spell Fayette County for us? Speaker 1: F-A-Y-E-T-T-E. Speaker 2: Okay, okay that's good. Now so long did you teach? Or you were a principal at this point. No, you were a teacher. Speaker 1: No, I was teaching. Gosh. I think I taught for about thirty years. Story_ID: 72899 Speaker 1: Well have you--when you look back on the things you've done, I mean what do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: I think the young people that I was, was involved with. At least according to them. I hear from a number of them. And, and they have good, positive things to say about the difference that I made in their lives. And I also hear from the parents the same, same thing. I think that also that the successful integration of things here in Lexington [Kentucky] was a positive thing to have been able to be a part of getting it done without violence. And without--I guess I have to say really without the support of the majority of the, of the churches. And, and, and I used to laugh and, and try to find a name for them and one of the, the, the ladies who was in the room, said just call us the little people. Because it was a lot of mothers and grandmothers and aunties and things that marched and sat-in, and it was not really the, you know--but yet and still there is one church here that marched from the church down Main Street one time and so they claim that they did, you know, quite a bit. And, and, and one thing--some people were upset about the claim. And I said but if they, they know what they didn't do and what they did. If they can live with trying to take credit for something they didn't do, let them do it; they need it. And, and, and let it, let it, let it go. But it was awful hard for me not to blow my top at the (unclear) when I heard about it, you know this-- Story_ID: 72900 Speaker 1: Now did, did, did you and Julia Lewis receive recognition? I, I know you have to, just to a certain extent, but did Julia Lewis get-- Speaker 2: Not really, because even I haven't, for what I should have, for what was done. And, and, and we didn't really do it for that, you know. That wasn't, that wasn't the reason. And, and when something was, was suggested a number of times of recognizing us, she and I both would say no, there were other people involved. How you gonna pick out just the two of us? We couldn't have done it by ourselves. And, and we'd say no. Speaker 1: Do you, you think it was maybe a tendency to overlook what you've done because you're women? Speaker 2: Not necessarily--I don't, I don't know. I think because we didn't make a big production out of it. There was no beating, you know like I say the one time that we were arrested. They were just a little too smooth. And, and, and if, if you belong to a minister or group saying some of the southern things and they can talk about all this stuff that was done to them and, and you can't, you know because that wasn't the case here even if you were involved, you know, one way or the other. And it took us quite some time to get some of the, the, the ministers to even make our announcements, which that bothered me more than anything else in the world. That really, you know, and, and like, and like I say, I really went to one of their ministerial meetings and, and I, and I told them that Julia and I will gladly give it up. All we need is just for somebody else to step forth and, and, and take over. We can follow them all the way to the end. But nobody volunteered to get--stick their neck out. Story_ID: 72901 Speaker 1: Now what did your, your, your mother [Martha Ross] and brother think about your activities? Speaker 2: They were concerned all the time. They were concerned. My brother became involved in, you know, in other things. He, he would not go on any of the marches and things he said because Audrey, if I would see them hit you or something, he says I cannot guarantee that I would not hit them back. And for that reason I said don't go, you know. And, and my mother felt pretty much the same way when--if we were walking downtown and I needed people to walk up and down, she would, you know get in that. But she wouldn't sit in, you know on, on, on the things because when she looked at my suit that--my brand new suit that had all this grape juice all over it, it really upset her quite a bit. And so--but as far as being behind me and backing me and me having their support, it was 110 percent. And, and that helped. And, and I, and I'd rather it was like that way than for me to be wondering if they were in another building, was somebody bothering them because knowing both of them, I know that if somebody had done that, you know, to them, I know that she would have taken something and thrown it right back at them. See I know that. Story_ID: 72902 Speaker 1: Now, now you've, you've had occasion here--and you were, you were speaking off camera of using this very room we're sitting in as a classroom for young people to teach them about the Civil Rights Movement here in Lexington [Kentucky], that they didn't know about it. How, how did that happen? Speaker 2: Well I--you know as I say I had no children. And, and all my neighbors, my friends had children. And so it became the playhouse. We'd sit in the middle of the floor and play jacks and cards and just carry on and talk and walk and bicycle riding. It was nothing to see me going up and down the street, you know, some like child on, on the bicycle. And that's how we, you know got, got, got involved with them and which also gave, gave the parents a break. Except a couple of times it kind of--well it did kind of backfire and I had to have a talk with them because they were beginning to compare me to their parents, of not being--and so when I heard this, right here in this, on this floor, we had to talk about your parents have to wash for you, they go out and work for you, they cook and do all this stuff. I don't do anything. What do I do when I get tired of you? They were crying 'cause they know I was fussing at them. You send us home. I said yes. And I don't have to open the door if I don't want you in here, your parents can't do this. So that stopped that. But they had begun to--they wanna play games and mother been out to working and cooking or doing whatever she was doing and she was tired and didn't wanna do it. And they were making some kind of, you know, remark about it. So we put a stop to that quickly. So-- Speaker 1: But they were--the parents were sending them over to ask you questions. Speaker 2: No, we just--they just knew I liked children. Speaker 1: No, but you said earlier though that they, they sometimes sent the--asked, asked the kids to ask you about the [Civil Rights] Movement. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah because they didn't know anything about it, you know. And, and, and they knew that I was, you know out, out in that. And so we, we talked about it and, and the change that needed to be. And, and how it was at other places because it was just like when I was growing up, I didn't know about other places, so whatever was going on here, I thought was right until I got old enough to really go to places and could see and experience the difference. Then I realized hey, Lexington's is not as much on the ball as I think, you know. And so that was--and, and this was the thing. And so I, I said, said to them with their permission, that we needed to talk about these, these--because they're gonna have children and they wanna be sure that if we are to make the big change, that they don't do anything that's 'gonna cause it to go back to what, you know, by accepting, you know, some of the things. But--and I also had--with the NAACP, had a, a youth group that was involved in, in, in some things that, that we were doing. I let mine stop being actively involved when we had this group that I was telling you about who went into the Phoenix--Lafayette Hotel I think, one of the two, Lafayette or the Phoenix, and poured salt and all that mess over the--on, on the table. That's not what, what we wanted to do. And so I, I did--I wouldn't let mine, you know participate in, in, in that sort of thing. So we did, you know, some other fun things. Story_ID: 72903 Speaker 1: Now this is different from legacy, but how, how would you like to be remembered? Have you thought about that? Speaker 2: No. I really had not. Because I, I think--I don't know because even now, I run into former students who have children and when they're introducing me, they remember things that went on. Even some who were in, in, in Kentucky Village [Reform School], you know, in trouble. And, and I guess ever--however they remember seeing me if I made a difference in their life, would be okay with me. I think I would like to say that I wasn't one who complained about things all the time and never tried to do anything about it. I, I, I think that would probably be the only thing because I did stick my neck out, you know a number of times, and still do at, at times if something's not right and, and I happen to know about it and involved in it, either directly or indirectly, I'm gonna say something, you know, about it. May not cause a change, but they know that I'll say something about it. Speaker 1: I think we, we're certainly grateful for what you've been able to do. Thank you very much. Speaker 2: You're more than welcome..