 Story_ID: 81281 Speaker 1: Alright. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My full name is Jacquelyne Dolores Grimshaw, J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-Y-N-E, middle name Dolores, D-O-L-O-R-E-S, and the last name is Grimshaw, G-R-I-M-S-H-A-W. Speaker 1: Okay, and can you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 15th, 1942, in Macon, Georgia. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm transportation policy advocate for the Center for Neighborhood Technology. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: My official title is vice president for policy, transportation, and community development. But what that amounts to is policy issues around transportation, environment, community development issues. And I, I work at the local, state, and federal levels. Speaker 1: And you've been involved in government for a long time, and-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-[Harold] Washington Administration and the [Richard] Daley Administration. Speaker 2: Well, I was really never in the Daley Administration, but I got started in government actually with the state of Illinois through my good friend, Al [Albert] Raby, who was working for Governor Dan Walker. And at the time, the Department of Children and Family Services in 1972, when the Walker Administration began, had never had a contract with its service providers, so the state was responsible for all of these wards of the state, a lot of children in protective custody and things like that. And they would just put 'em in, you know, Homemaker Services or group home, whatever without any kind of contract for the services to be provided. The director for Governor Walker was Mary Lee Leahy, who was an attorney, and so obviously the first thing she was interested in is contractually what's our arrangement, and there was no contract. So it-- Speaker 1: We don't wanna get too far into it-- Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry, okay. Speaker 1: But, but just to state you've been involved in government a long time. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: And what's today's date? Speaker 2: Today is January 10th, 2003. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 81282 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish kind of questions that I am compelled to ask you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the first one is, and they just require a short answer. The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, wow, turkey. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: What is your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Pompano Beach, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Wow, I use so many. It depends on the circumstance, but you want a short answer. Oh, wow. Speaker 1: It can be a long saying, if you prefer. Speaker 2: Larry, you've stumped me. What would a favorite phrase--see, you should have given me some time to think about that one. Unbelievable, I'm forever amazed at things. It's unbelievable (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay, one question I forgot to ask you is where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in, in Chicago, Illinois, 1900 South Michigan. Story_ID: 81283 Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now, I, I wanna ask you about your family background. How much do you know about your ancestors or you know, where your family came from? You, you know much? Speaker 2: Well, on my mother's side I know more than on my father's side. My father's side I know very little. My mother's side, she is a descendant of a Native American Cherokee woman and an Irish indentured servant whose name was Gabriel, and her mother's name was Nina I do believe, Nina I think. And this was in Virginia that they originally came from. And I'm not sure exactly of the migration from, from Virginia, but you know, somehow or another migrating from Virginia, you know, down through the Carolinas into, into Georgia. Then my mother ended up here in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, so her, was it her mother or father who was part Irish and part Indian? Speaker 2: Her mother. Speaker 1: Okay and the father was black? Speaker 2: Her father was black, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And they--okay. Speaker 2: Not Nina, Nellie. When I said Nina it was wrong; it was Nellie. Gabriel and Nellie, those were her great-great-grandparents. Speaker 1: Great-great grandparents. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did she--is there any, are there any stories about them that were passed down through the family? Speaker 2: Not too much about them, but some of her other like cousins, aunts, uncles. You know, being in the South and coming from that ancestry, you know, they had a, you know, they ranged in coloration and characteristics, from Native American looking to actually Irish looking. And there were instances in the family where some relatives, particularly female relatives, were essentially killed, lynched because they were with--they looked like they were Irish or Caucasian being with folks who actually looked of African descent. And so there are several stories like that in the family of, of that kind of you know, unfortunate thing. Speaker 1: Is there one in detail that you can tell or is it more of a just a, just a general-- Speaker 2: No, because my, my grandparents, although I know, I knew both my grandmother and my great-grandmother and great-grandfather, they would talk, you know, like when we would go and visit them in the summertime. You know, sometimes they were talking on the porch, and something would come up, but it would come up offhandedly that, you know, you couldn't get them to really tell you a story. But you know, things would just come out, usually with the adults talking and us kids kind of listening in and overhearing things. But they didn't talk a lot about those kinds of things. So, no, I can't give you specifics and--but just kind of like impressions we got as kids listening to the stories, particularly my older sister and myself. Speaker 1: Okay, so there's not--you, you don't have very much information about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: No, un-unh, my father came from--I mean his, his, his mother and father had several children; I, I think it was like about five or six. And my father would talk about 'em, you know, but you know, I never got a chronology. My father is dead now, but he still has--his youngest brother is still living here in Chicago. But, yeah, I know one of his brothers drowned at, at some point. He only had one sister. But yeah, I don't know like the ancestry or where they came from or anything like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 81284 Speaker 1: Now for the record, can you spell your mother's name, and give us her date of birth and place of birth and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --same for your father? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Lovia, L-O-V-I-A, Kizzie is her maiden name, and my father's name was Lane, so it's Lovia Kizzie Lane. And since my father's died, she's remarried, and her name is now Thornton. Speaker 1: What was kit--how do you spell Kizzie? Speaker 2: K-I-Z-Z-I-E. And she was born July 29th, 1921, and she was born in Jeffersonville, Georgia, I think. Speaker 1: And your father? Speaker 2: My father's name was James Lane, L-A-N-E. And I can't remember exactly where he was born, but his birth date was May 8th, 1921. Speaker 1: Okay, well, can you tell us something about your mother? What kind of person was she? What did she like to do? What did, what did she do for a living? Speaker 2: Well, she's an only child. She was an only child. She, as an only child, you know, grew up in--she went to public grade school, but a private high school. She went to a business college. She--what did she like to do? She likes to worry about all of us as children. She and my father had six children, so there's six of us. And so I think that's the main thing likes to do, keep up with us, but she also likes to travel. And you know, she likes to keep up with her friends. She's a very loyal person. She still has class reunions. Her, her high school graduating class has reunions at--meeting in different cities where they've all migrated to, or you know, doing something, you know, like on a cruise or something like that, so. Speaker 1: Where did she graduate from high school? Speaker 2: It was a high school called Ballard Normal High School in, in Macon, Georgia. Speaker 1: What about your father, any reflections about his side? Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my, my father loved to cook. In fact the reason why I'm not a cook is my father (laughter). I would ask him for--how to make something, and his response was I'll make it for you. So, yeah, I remember at my--my parents gave me a graduation party when I graduated from high school. And there was this dip that he made, you know, just some potato chip dip, that was just delicious. And all of my friends, everybody was saying this is great. Want some. And so I asked him, you know, like, how do I make this, you know? What's the recipe? You know, everybody wants it. He says: well, when they want some just let me know. So, yeah, that was his thing, was cooking. He was a trained tailor, and you know, he was Dapper Dan. You know, he was always dressed to the nines, as we say, you know, from head to toe. And you know, as, as kids, you know, I guess we were always dressed to the nines too, you know, my mother was, again, you know, that way of, of growing up as I did, you know, starched dresses, and pinafores, and lace, and white gloves, and patent leather shoes, and you know, that kind of thing, so--from both of my parents, you know. But I, I think my, my father with the clothes thing, you know, he was--that was him (laughter). He was a guy you saw him, he was gonna be dressed, you know. Things like blue jeans and khaki, mm-mm, not him, you know, was--and he, he worked at Hart Schaffner and Marx, where they made men's suits and things like that, so, yeah. Story_ID: 81285 Speaker 1: Now, now how did your parents meet? Did they, did they pass along the story of how they met? Speaker 2: Wow, no, I don't know if I ever heard that, but I remember that my mother would talk about my father as kind of, you know, he was, he was like the catch. You know, like there's always a guy in any kind of social situation or school situation, and he was kind of the guy. And I don't know if even then he was into the clothes thing, that that made him stand out or something, but you know, there was--you know, that kind of, you know, attraction, you know, so to speak. But I don't know if they ever talked, you know, like it was on this day or this situation or anything like that. I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But they met in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, while they were both were in high school. Speaker 1: In Macon [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, now you were born in, in Georgia, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But you basically were raised here. I mean-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How did your parents come to move to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, I think it was a result of the war, World War II. And I'm not sure of all of the circumstances, but I know my father was at Fort Sheridan. I think it was Fort Sheridan. And-- Speaker 1: And that's here in Chicago. Speaker 2: Here in Chicago, yeah. It was right in Hyde Park. The--oh, no, it was Fifth Army. I'm sorry about that--Fifth Army at Fort Sheridan. I get 'em all confused. But Fort Sheridan was up north in the northern suburbs, but the Fifth Army was here. And there was some relationship between or among those. I-- Speaker 1: Was, was the Fifth Army station ov--over on Cottage Grove and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) armory or some-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was somewhere here in Hyde Park--I mean here in, in that part of the city. So I'm not sure if it was really in the Army--I mean in the armory that's in Washington Park. But I remember, you know, just in terms of him talking about it. So the Fifth Army was here, and then Fort Sheridan was up north I think in Glenview [Illinois], something like that. So it was some relationship like that, but the details--'cause I was pretty young with they, when they came here. So, I, I guess I never really asked the questions. Speaker 1: Okay, did they--but this is right after the war the whole family ended up here, I guess. This-- Speaker 2: Yeah, or even before the war was over. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was about--you were, so you were born '42' [1942], so you, you, you had to be about three or four I guess when-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that happened. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 81286 Speaker 1: Well, well, tell me about growing up, you know. Can you give me an idea of some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up in, in the neighborhood that you grew up in with your family? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the first place I can remember living is on 51st just west of Cottage [Chicago, Illinois], right in front of Washington Park, which was a wonderful place to be for a kid. But the thing that I remember most was walking along Cottage Grove and seeing all of the, the stores and the groceries, and--you know, like if you go to New York, New York City [New York] now, you have all those green grocers with their, you know, their fruit and their vegetables and stuff there kind of laid out. Well, that's the way Cottage Grove was, I mean what I can remember of Cottage Grove. So you can like, you know, walk down the street, and you say oh, that apple really looks good, you know, that kind of, you know, experience of walking, walking along. And you know, there was a lot of street life. In fact, it--you know, my memory is somewhat like going to New York now, you know, and some places in New York where you just have, you know, constant activity and all kinds of, you know, act--inaction--encounters--on, on the, on the sidewalk, you know, seeing somebody you know or running into somebody. And I can remember, you know, with my mother--I mean I was still pretty young--you know, walking along Cottage. And it would take forever because she would stop and talk to people as we tried to go from one place to the other. You know, she was doing whatever shopping she could do, she needed to do. So that was on, on, on, you know, right on Cottage Grove. But going into the Park, you know, Washington Park was just so beautiful, and you know, seeing the horseman, the trails were--the horse trails were very active, and you know, seeing, you know, people on the horses going through and having, you know, the activity and all kinds of stuff. But you know, just, I can just remember the beauty of the place, flowers and you know, trees. And I think that's why I like spring now. I mean it's, it's like my favorite time because, to see, you know, the buds coming on the tree, and the trees opening up, and the flowers coming up, and you know, things going from kind of ugly, and brown, and gray, and overcast to you know, colors, and brightness, and sunshine, and things like that. So, you know, it's all fond memory. Speaker 1: I know that-- Story_ID: 81287 Speaker 1: --The administration just tried to refurbish that area over there, the fountain and all that. Wa, wa, was it all--was, was it, was all that working when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Well, see now the fountain is on Drexel. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, 51st. Speaker 2: See, I didn't have much recollection of going east of Cottage Grove. It was kind of my orientation was Cottage Grove west. 'Cause we went to Corpus Christi Church, which was on King Drive or South Parkway at the time. So, you know, I--we never went east of Cottage. You know, it was always Cottage Grove and north and, and west. Speaker 1: Was the city, actually was that a dividing line or what-- Speaker 2: I think it must have been-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I mean I didn't know that-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --to be the case, yeah. Speaker 1: --the University of Chicago side of Hyde Park. Speaker 2: Right, right, at 51st Street, yeah, east of, east of Cottage Grove. So, you know, Drexel, I don't think I ever remember being over on Drexel as a little kid. As I got older, obviously, but as a little kid, no. And so when we--we moved from 51st and Cottage Grove to 45th and Prairie, where I really spent most of, most of my years growing, growing up, I think when I started my kindergarten or first, first grade we were still on 51st Street. But I think when I got probably about second grade, third grade, something like that, we were on 45th and Prairie. And we stayed there until I went off to college. So I went to college from 45th and Prairie. But then while I was in college my parents moved to Hyde Park, to 51st and Ingleside. Speaker 1: Okay, what was that neighborhood like? What, what did it look like and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: At 45th and Prairie? Oh, I loved that. You know, Prairie was originally called Grand Boulevard. And the reason it was called Grand Boulevard, 'cause it was a big wide street. So in summertime parades would happen all the time. And my sister and I, you know, had the front bedroom and you know, we would be in there playing or reading or whatever, and you'd hear the, the bands and the music--say ah, it's a parade, and so we'd open up the window. We lived on the second floor--opened the windows so we had a perfect view of parades that would come by all the time. And it was kind of a regular occurrence. Where all the parades were? I don't know, but they would come, and we would sit there and we would enjoy it. It was kind of like your favorite summertime activity, particularly when, you know, they were unexpected, unannounced, spontaneous as far as we were concerned. So, that was, you know, that was kind of a neat feature, being on that street. Story_ID: 81288 Speaker 1: The other thing about the neighborhood is that they were--I just remember my friends. They were lots of kids. In fact, in our building the family that lived on the third floor was another family of, of six. And their cousins--it was right on the corner, and the building went around the corner onto 45th Street. And so they had cousins that lived on the, the 45th Street entrance. So we would always have a huge, you know, whatever you wanted to do. You wanted play baseball, there was always enough people to play baseball, and you wanna play dodge, you know, whatever you wanted to do. I mean it was just a kind of, again, spontaneous--spontaneity was, was, was always possible, you know, so having, having friends, having, you know, the ability to, you know, just be social at--and doing whatever, you know. And so it was a mixture of boys and girls. And so, yeah, my, my closest friend was upstairs. You know, she was a twin. It was an interesting family, a family of twins, and there, and there are six. There were two sets of twins, and one set of twins was my younger sister's age, and the other set of twins were my age. And so they were fraternal twins, which was very nice. So, you know, the, the girl--her name was Annette--and I would go off and do things. But then she had these cousins around that also were girls, and then there was a set of boy twins, you know, and so it was like that. And we were all pretty much of the same age group, you know, youngest to oldest probably five to seven years difference. So, you know, it was, it was, you know, kind of a fun time. We'd get on our bikes and ride. And we went to Corpus Christi; they went to St. Elizabeth, and you know, so we'd had this kind of like rivalry going on too between the two schools. And you know, then we'd go to activities at St. Elizabeth; they'd come to activities at Corpus Christi. And you know, it was, summertime was just lovely, although our parents kept us, yeah, pretty much under control. We didn't have the free reign of the city. We had a very small area that we could operate in. But, but there are folks, you know, like in the neighbor at the time I was growing up like folks like Sam Cooke was in the neighborhood. Story_ID: 81289 Speaker 1: Or I guess really my favorite thing about growing up--I should mention when I say Sam Cooke--was I was a Girl Scout. And one of the activities of the Girl Scouts in the--was to participate when the Regal Theater had stage shows, because when they had stage shows they would have collections for a charity called, I think it was called Variety Charities. And so, you know, stage close--stage shows--when you get, you know, the largest attendance, and they would, the Variety Charities, you know, would pass a can, you know, to--in the intermission, you know, to whatever, you know, charity they were promoting, and so they'd need somebody to pass a can, so they used the Girl Scouts to do that. And so as a result, I was able to go in and see all the stage shows from the time I was growing up. So I got to see, you know, Count Basie, Ella Fitzgerald, Pearl Bailey, Nat King Cole. I mean it was, you know, whoever came to the Regal, we got to see 'em. And all we had to do was pass the can, so I got to see 'em for nothing. And you know, so there was always a movie and a stage show. And when we do that my mother would let us stay, so we would go from the first show and stay until like--I can't remember how many shows they did, but you know, we could go in. There was some cutoff time; like, we couldn't do the midnight show or something like that, but you know, we would be able-- Speaker 2: You could stay all day--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right, we could, we could stay there all day and just have to pass the can. And so, at the time, I tell you my favorite was Pearl Bailey. I had--she just made me laugh. I, I just really loved it. And you know, it was, it was, it would be Pearl Bailey and then Louie and, and the Band, and so Louie Bellson on the drums. And he could really, you know, beat some drums, and so I would like be laughing, then you could bounce around and, and you know, enjoy the music and stuff like that, but. Story_ID: 81290 Speaker 1: Yeah, so, that was the--and then, you know, just being on 47th Street, and we could do everything on 47th Street, you know, you know, the South Center Department Store, you know, the Walgreens, and I could a, you know, a milkshake, ice cream soda, yeah-- Speaker 2: That famous Walgreen's that Lou Rawls made famous (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Right, right-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --right, right, right on 47th and South Parkway. And you know, the jitney cabs, that was the other thing. Going to school we couldn't be late, and my sister to this day is late. I mean we tease her she's gonna be late for her own funeral. And so my mother would send she and I to school, and we had to go together. And you know, she was always late getting out of the house. Then we'd have to get from 45th Street to 49th Street, and oftentimes, you know, it would be--and she could walk faster than me. I was never very good. She was, she was, could get out there and, and get walking, and so sometimes I just couldn't do it. And you know, we had our lunch money, and sometimes I'd take my lunch money and spend it on a jitney cab to get me from 45th to 49th on time, you know, so. But then I wouldn't have money for lunch after I spent my lunch money because my sister made me late, you know. So that was the downside (laughter) of, of growing up. But other than that, it was, it was a great childhood, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Tell, tell me about school now. What kind of a student were you? You seems like a--it seems as though you were a serious student if you would pay a jitney to get you to school on time. Speaker 1: Well, that was not, not just because I wanted to get to school on time, but you got punishment if you didn't get to school on time. Yeah, no, no, no, this was, this was the rules. You could not be late for school. And not only that, it's that we went to mass every morning, so you could not be late for mass, so-- Speaker 2: Were your parents Catholic? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, you know, that was all part of the routine. That was part of the discipline of being in parochial school, you know, rules and being rules, and things like that, so. But no, I was a, I was a good student. I was always top of the class. You know, I graduated first of my high school class. You know, there was a little cadre of us in grade school that, you know, we'd have our tests; and the teacher would post our test grades, and so we would compete about who would be on top, things like that. But yeah, it was, yeah, I was blessed in that way, so. Story_ID: 81108 Speaker 1: Can you tell me, you know, what teachers in school really influenced you the most of-- Speaker 2: Well, there are several. I remember my second grade teacher was Sister Albertilla (ph.). And I think the thing that I remember most is that she fed my curiosity. And I think what I ended up with was a good appreciation that, really, you know, I, I, I set the limits of, at least in terms of awareness, intellectual achievement and things like that, that, you know, it was me. There were no artificial barriers, and I think I got that from an early age, and, and thanks to her, who, you know, if I had a question, if I wanted to explore, if I wanted to do something different and eve--than even my classmate set, you know, I really had the opportunity to do that. And then on the other hand, you know, one of the teachers in terms of rules I was talking about, my third grade teacher--my sister and I, I think we must have got--been with my grandparents. And we got back after the start of the school year, so I missed the rules for third grade. And having just come out of second grade and mastered manuscript writing, that when the assignment was given by my third grade teacher to, to, you know, write your name and do whatever the assignment, I did it in my nice manuscript. And as the teacher walked by and saw me doing this, I got this ruler on my knuckles. And I said, what did I do? You know, did I get it wrong? I, I didn't know. I was like oh, my gosh, and all--here it--here I am trying to catch up and I'm--(unclear)--with what I'd missed and during the assignment, and I get my knuckles rapped, and to find out that the reason was that in third grade you did not do manuscript. You had to do cursive writing. And I didn't know how to do cursive writing. So I ended up with a cursive writing chart right on my desk, and so I had to painstakingly, you know, go from manuscript, which I'd mastered and thought I was pretty good at, to doing cursive. And so that was my painful third grade, was learning to, to do the, the, the cursive writing. And I guess in terms of the content, the teacher that probably had the most lasting, you know, kind of--you know, you have--you know, there's formation when you're a kid. And so my second grade teacher got me started in terms of, you know, just being, you know, inte--intellectually vigorous to my eighth grade teacher with Sister Sylvia, who really kind of gave me an outlook and a perspective on life and who I was as a young lady, and you know, the responsibilities that, you know, being, you know, a Christian, educated young lady would offer me. And so, and that was the way she would talk to us, like young a lady. So, you know, that, that emphasis on the, the lady part, you know, really got into my, my, my thinking. And I think has served me well in, in, in my being comfortable and understanding my place in the world. So yeah, that was a formation I think. Story_ID: 81109 Speaker 1: When I got to high school, probably my favorite teacher was my science teacher, because--I, I guess I should do a, a little bit of a parenthetical. You know, I talked about my Girl Scouts and you know, the one part--the fun part of it was going to the Regal Theater. But the other thing is when I wasn't going to the Regal Theater, my godmother was in charge of the labs at Michael Reese--at Provident Hospital. And so [clearing throat], again, I (unclear) say, you know, my mother had cons--you know, constraints on what, what we could do, and where we were, and knowing where we were. So after a Girl Scout meeting, I--if my godmother was working on Saturday at Provident, I could go over and spend time with her in the labs. Speaker 2: What was her name? Speaker 1: Her name was Harriet Thompson. And so I would go over to Provident Hospital and the labs. And I think, you know, being there and you know, the, the, the, the curiosity thing, again, sparked my interest in science, and medicine, and things of that sort. So, you know, you by the time I got to high school, I was pretty clear that, you know, just the, you know, science, and the discovery, and the, and, and the curiosity was, I mean it just really took hold. And so my, my science teacher in high school was, again, you know--I had the--the same teacher taught me chemistry and physics. And you know, the thing is I'd--people talk about science--ooh, it's so hard, isn't it? You know, it is kind of a like a scary thing, and particularly a girl. I went to an all-girls high school, and so, you know, it was just another course. You know, there was no, I mean there were no pressures that said that I shouldn't be interested in science, or I shouldn't be good at science. And she really did feed it, you know. The ability that, that we had to not only, you know, do the prescribed text, but go beyond it. And so she really had us doing I think, you know, not--if not all of us, at least some of us, you know, who had the interest in doing, you know, college level experiments, you know, in high school. So, yeah, I just had a, a wonderful science education, you know, and you know, stood me in good stead. Story_ID: 81110 Speaker 1: In fact, I toyed in going, in terms of going to college and whether or not I wanted to go to a medical school or you know, some other field. And you know, I ended up getting a scholarship to the pharmacy school at University of Illinois. But University of Illinois at the time was right here in Chicago [Illinois], and I had made up my mind that I really wanted to go away to college, so. I said I don't want this scholarship (laughter); I don't want it. And so I decided that I was going to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor]. And so when I got accepted to University of Michigan I was very happy, except the nuns were very unhappy with my being accepted at University of Michigan because they didn't think that I should go to that huge school. And-- Speaker 2: It's not a Catholic school. Speaker 1: And it's not a Catholic school. And so they convinced my mother if I went to University of Michigan, you know, I would be a atheist or communist or whatever, whatever. So, you know, they had their plans for me to go to St. Mary. I had all these St. Mary's of the Wood, St. Mary's of Notre Dame, St.--aah, so I--(unclear)--(unclear), you know, to, to a girl's high school. I was not going to a women's high school, so we compromised. And so I ended up going to Marquette instead of University of Michigan. So I still got my, you know, I still got my blue and gold. It's very interesting (laughter). But I had a, a friend actually who had gone to Marquette, and so he had convinced me that it was a good place to be in, so. You know, so I didn't lose anything. But the things is that I still had this University of Illinois scholarship, so I said well, I'll go to Marquette for two years and then I'll come back and do the last three 'cause pharmacy school was five years. The last-- Speaker 2: Now, just to backtrack a second. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You graduated from high school in '60' [1960]? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That, you know, I, I would spend a couple of years at Marquette, then come back and go to University of Illinois and use my scholarship. But I ended up, you know, staying at Marquette and, and, and you know, giving up the scholarship, but I had, I had other scholarships. So, you know, the, the other thing is that, you know, the Mayor [Richard J.] Daley, the first Daley, had a scholarship that they presented to graduating high school students, and so I also won that scholarship. But the requirement for that scholarship is that you had to stay, and it had to be used in Illinois. And so I said mm (laughter). So, so here this--here I am, you know, and turning down scholarships all over the place, but you know, I just had my kind of--and see, that's what I learned (laughter) from these teachers was that, you know, I was in charge, in a way, and you know, I had the, you know, I had the--my destiny in my own hands. And so, you know, I was pretty determined that, you know, I didn't wanna stay; I wanted to go away to school; and you know, I, I wanted to pursue, you know, something that would make me satisfied in--intellectually. So I ended up doing a, a degree at Marquette in biology and chemistry. But you know, I, I think those--I had wonderful teachers for the most part. I can't say I had any bad teachers along the way, but you know, the ones that really stand out I think are the ones that I, I, I mentioned. Story_ID: 81111 Speaker 1: Okay, what about at Marquette? I mean, when you were there, when you were at Marquette, I suppose the country was going through the--the Civil Rights Movement was a big deal. I know a lot of people in your age group got involved in it on one level or another. Were you involved in, in the Civil Rights Movement, you know, during that period? Speaker 2: No--well, I should say yes and no. Again, you know, I was in school, and I was in a pretty rigorous program, so that kind of limit my ability. Like, you know, I had friends who went on the Freedom Rides and things like that. You know, there was no way that I could, you know, keep up. And I, I didn't see it as, as, as something that was not gonna be there, you know. It was like, yeah, you could do it now or you could do it later. And I always had the sense that this is something that I could do later. You know, so I'd go ahead and I-- Speaker 1: This is gonna be a protractive struggle now. Speaker 2: Exactly. And you know, so I didn't have the sense that it was, it had urgency, that I had to, you know, get, get out of school and you know, go down and do Freedom Rides or anything like that 'cause you know, this is gonna take awhile that--to have happen. So, you know, although, you know, I, I supported friends and did other things like letter writing and yeah, there would be, you know, little support things, mainly fundraising kinds of things going on for, you know, to raise money for--and so I did that kind of stuff. But you know, I, I never did the proactive, you know, going into the South fighting some of those things, so. And it wasn't as long a protracted struggle (laughter) as I thought it was gonna be (laughter). Story_ID: 81112 Speaker 1: So, so--I mean I guess that's good, but yeah, the yeah, the, the, the whole [President John F.] Kennedy assassination, yeah, I was in, I was in school at the time. I remember exactly where I was, you know, at the--I was in the, the Student Union, a break between classes when the first news of him being shot came through, you know. Yeah, it, you know, it was--for at least a young person, a young impressionable person like me, which had, had never really experienced personally anything of that magnitude (unclear)--the assassination of a president. And then you know, I had this kind of like personal, you know, relationship with Kennedy because I discovered, quite by accident on the radio, the Democratic National Convention. And it must have been '56' [1956] it was, 'cause he, he was president--he went--he ran for president in 1960, right? So that must have been '56' [1956] when it was a Democratic Convention, and what attracted me is on the radio was, you know, hearing the music happy days are here, here again. And I didn't know really what it was, but you know, their singing speeches, and you know, I just kind of like got mesmerized listening to this whole stuff. And you know, my mother tells me what it is--it's a Democratic Convention--and what was going on, and you know, kind of that was--oh yeah, that was Adlai Stevenson Convention, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: And so he was from Illinois. And so, you know, it was kind of like wow. I mean, again, there's curiosity. And, and so, and then 1960 then, when Kennedy was running, you know, and the whole--I mean I, I had discovered politics, so to speak, from this '56' [1956] experience. And you know, the fact that, you know, all the controversy about him being Catholic and you know, being Irish and you know, that whole thing, so I kind of like followed that. And so, you know, he was kind of like my president, and--'cause I didn't know--(laughter)--he (unclear)--as I mean Adlai Stevenson was--if he'd been president, that'd been okay, but he, he didn't get, he didn't get to be president. That's in Illinois. And so, you know, so there was this connection I had felt, you know, with Kennedy, and you know, to have that assassination, it was, it was traumatic. And you know, being a Marquette, you know, they--and it was just the Thanksgiving holidays were coming up so, you know, I was able to come home and be with my family actually. And during the, the funeral, I think I was just glued to the TV for three days. I mean I saw Jack Ruby get shot. I mean I was watching the TV when, when that I happened--or Jack Ruby shot Lee Harvey Oswald. But-- Speaker 2: (Unclear)-- Speaker 1: --you know, it--so that was part of my--Marquette so, you know, it was the Civil Rights Movement. It was also the Kennedy assassination, which I associate it with my, my college years. Story_ID: 81113 Speaker 1: But yeah, being at Marquette [University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], you know, it was, it was a different kind of environment. Most of the black students there were athletes, and the non-athletes were very few in the freshmen class. So, yeah, it was a, a different environment than I had really been exposed to, you know, just being almost in a totally quiet world. I mean, you know, Loretto Academy was an integrated high school. My grade school was totally black, although you know, we had white teachers, so I was never in, I was never in a totally black environment. But going almost to a totally white environment was, you know, a new ex--a new experience. Speaker 2: Were there very many black students at Marquette at all? Speaker 1: No, not--I mean there were a number, but as I say, a lot of them were, were athletes, and the non-athletes were very few at that time. Speaker 2: Well, this is the first school you'd attended, you know, in a long time that had like male and females going to the school. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, I mean did you date at, at Marquette? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm, yeah. Oh yeah, and also, I'm not sure how we did this. We also met people from, from Milwaukee, and--woe I me; I can't remember how we met these, but I remember there were, particularly young guys, so it's probably, you know, young guys coming to--these were black guys coming to Marquette looking to see whatever. And so they were very, very few of us. But yeah, so yeah, I dated. There was this, this kid who, you know, made just kind of the difference, you know, like why I appreciate, you know, the, the kind of self-awareness that I got in grade school and, and high school was that there was just this kid from, he was from Tennessee, a black kid, brilliant kid. Yeah, being in the sciences, you know, I had to not only do--the sciences I had pretty good, but also math. And [clearing throat] although in high school I'd had up to trig, I'd never had calculus. So when I got to calculus, it was like, oh my God, what is this language (laughter) that I'm supposed to be learning here? And this kid was a math genius, but--and so we would study together. And he got me through calculus, so I had (unclear). But you know, he was--you know, so we, we, you know, we'd study together, and we'd go out together and things like that, but the thing was that he just had this totally inferiority complex. You know, he didn't recognize his genius; he didn't recognize his skills; he didn't recognize his worth. And we would talk for hours, you know, but growing up in the South, you know, he had just had this, his place, and he couldn't get beyond his place. And you know, talk as I might, and you know, plead as I might, I mean I couldn't get him beyond that thing. You know, he really wanted to, he really wanted to be an engineer. And at the time, he just said yeah, blacks can't be engineers. And I said why the hell not? But you know, he was just convinced that engineering was, was beyond him, and I, I just--any, anyway, so he was just somebody I knew because you know, I, I, I, I mean I couldn't relate to, you know, this total defeatist attitude, particularly somebody so skilled. I mean if he--I mean he was gis--getting by or getting along or--you know, but yeah, he was none of that. And I don't know whatever happened to him. I think about him. And then you know, there was this other guy, Richard Nixon. Speaker 2: Richard-- Speaker 1: Richard Nixon played basketball. He was from Waukegan. He was in (unclear). He was on the basketball team. He was an awesome player, but--yeah, that name. At the time, you know, he was just Richard Nixon, but then we got the other Nixon. I said oh, you know, what a name to have (laughter). But-- Speaker 2: So a black Richard Nixon at a Catholic school when Kennedy was president, right? Speaker 1: Right, there you go, there you go, there you go. So yeah, let's see, who were some of the other--oh, there was, there was a guy that was on the football team. The first year I was at Marquette they had a football team, and then they got rid of the football team, so basketball was it. And we had a rivalry with uni--oh, with the University of Wisconsin. And we had a song about 'em (laughter), as all the colleges have songs about their number one rivals. Speaker 2: Do you remember the song? Speaker 1: Yeah, let's see. Speaker 2: (Unclear)-- Speaker 1: {Singing] "Way across Mendota's waters comes an awful smell. Stands an old abandoned outhouse called Wisconsin U." (Laughter) And then it went on from there (laughter) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: That's (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter). Story_ID: 81114 Speaker 1: And so, so you, you graduated in '64' [1964] I guess it was. Speaker 2: Well, actually I graduated in, in '65' [1965]. I've--yeah, this is--the thing is that I finished all of my coursework and--well, all except I think two, two courses or something. And I came back to Chicago, and I went to Loyola. Actually, one course I took was German 'cause I still had a language credit to do and oh, a theology or philosophy or something like that, and so I did 'em at Loyola. And I was supposed to, of course, get my final stuff up to Loyo--I mean back up to Marquette. I could do it at Loyola 'cause they're both Jesuit schools. And I don't know what I did, but I failed to get my stuff in on time for '64' [1964] graduation, so I ended up with the January '65' [1965] graduation, but, yeah. My adherence to the rules fail, failed me (laughter). But you know, it was just an opportunity to be, you know, here, although I wanted to go away to school. You know, after a while, you know, you wanted to come back home. And so I only had these last two classes to do, and to stay up there to do 'em I thought was kind of a waste. And actually, and it was a cost too of staying, you know, living in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] for two classes, so I did it down here. Story_ID: 81115 Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you do when you got back and finished your coursework everything, what did you do? Speaker 2: Well, actually, one of the, one of the things that I did, from the time I graduated from high school, the U.S. Post Office had this job arrangements where you could be, they call 'em short-hour substitutes or short-hour clerks or something that you could work for four hours a day, or you could just work the weekends. And so I started as a--when I was--after I graduated, you know, to earn money to go to school and have spending money and actually clothes money to buy my own, my--more clothes than my parents were gonna get me to go to school; you know, I, I, I worked. And so started that summer after I graduated from high school, when I, I left for college. And then Christmas was always a big thing, so since I had the experience, I could come back at Christmas. So when I got out of the school, you know, for the Christmas break, I went to the post office and I worked. And so I was doing this kind of, you know, working at the post office, going to school. Vacation breaks I could, you know, they allowed me to come back. It was really an awesome. So--oh God, what was the question? How did I get into talking about that? Speaker 1: What you were doing af--after you-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, so-- Speaker 1: --graduate-- Speaker 2: --so after I, I graduated from college, you know, I came back, and I didn't know what I was gonna do, didn't have a, didn't have a job. I, you know, as I say, I took these general degrees of biology and chemistry that, you know, with a bachelor's degree, you know, you gotta go to the master's if you really wanna stay in the field. Story_ID: 81116 Speaker 1: And so, you know, taking a break from school, so I was still working at the post office. So I'm on my way to work at the post office one day, and I'm driving on Lake Shore Drive. And a car stops, and I stop behind the car, this, you know, 'cause it backed up. And somebody who wasn't paying attention ran right into the back of me. Well, needless to say, I ended up with a whiplash and in Michael Reese Hospital. And when I, I go to the emergency room, they said do you have a physician? I said yes. Well, it turns out my physician was a, was a physician I had as a kid, Dr. Jefferson, who was a pediatrician. I said well, he no longer a baby, you know (laughter). And so I said well, you know, I don't have a doctor. And so my mother had a doctor at the time who was at Michael Reese, and him--by the time we got a hold of her, she got there. So, you know, this Dr. Newman was name--it was his name--became my, my, my physician. So after I'm released from the hospital and I'm seeing him follow up, and so he's asking me what I wanna do. And I said I don't know. You know, I got this degree. And he said why don't you come here and work at the hospital? And I said what can I do at the hospital? And he says oh, we have all kinds of positions. So, you know, he took me to personnel or sent me to personnel. And so they need research, research technicians, and I said oh, I can do that. I'm very good in a lab. So I ended up in the hematology lab, not knowing anything about hematology, but I absolutely had lab procedures. And so I ended up being a, a hematology research tech at Michael Reese, you know, so it didn't take long to learn about blood. And so I got to, you know, learn, you know, about hematology and serology and things of that sort. And, and so that kind of launched me into, you know, kind of like what I was interested in, you know, and almost took me back to my godmother. You know, like I was doing things at Michael Reese that she taught me how to do as a kid, as a Girl Scout, you know, so--I mean in terms of the procedures, using pipettes and things like that, you know, and even with blood. I mean I would--she'd let me look at blood under the microscope and things like that, so. So that started me kind of liking direction of, of health and medicine and science. And I, I did that, and you know, it's like life is full of its unfortunate events, but also, you know, can be opportunities. And so what ended my career at Michael Reese was my great-grandmother dying. And unfortunately, (laughter) as my supervisor at Michael Reese saw it, she had the nerve to die while I was on vacation, and at the end of my vacation. So of course, my vacation got extended, you know, obviously, as-- Speaker 2: It doesn't look good to the supervisor (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Right, and so when I get back after--and the, the thing is that she also, if you can believe this, had the nerve to die when there was--I can't remember if it was the pilots or control--air controllers were on strike, but there was some kind of mess with the airlines. And so we were in Miami Beach. We had gone to the Bahamas. We're in Miami Beach and couldn't get a flight. So I finally got a flight. My husband couldn't get a flight, and he ended up getting a driveaway car. You know there is this, this custom of, you know, people, particularly out of New York, would fly and they'd want their cars, and they'd have somebody drive the cars back and forth. Well, actually, he found a car that was going to Detroit from one of these places, and so he, he drive--he's--(unclear) it's a long drive from Florida, and so I got back late. And he, this doctor who was in charge of the labs, you know, just jumps all over me. And I said wait, what are you talking about? You know, I've been in touch with my supervisor. She knew where I was. You know, my grandmother died--my great-grandmother died. You know, I had no control over that, you know. "But you're delaying my research schedule," and he just ranted and raved. And I said take your research schedule and stick it. I'm out of here, and I left, you know (laughter), just walked out. And so I say yeah, you can really deal with your research schedule now. And so then I go home and I'm crying to my husband and saying, what am I gonna do now? I don't have a job (unclear). He says oh, don't worry about it, so I didn't (laughter). So we went off, and it was still summertime. We went off to the beach because at that time he was teaching, so he was free and clear and easy. It was--he had no schedule. So we went off and did something. And I said hey, I can do that; I can teach. And so that started me on a teaching career. Story_ID: 81117 Speaker 1: I was gonna backtrack a little bit and ask you how did you meet your husband. Speaker 2: Well, actually, you know, I was talking about this post office thing; so, you know, he was also a short hour substitute. But he went, he was going to school here in Chicago. He was at University of Chicago, so he worked all year-round, you know, doing four hours a day or weekends, depending upon his school schedule. And you could go back and forth. They allowed you to, you know, work five days for four hours or work the weekends, you know, eight hours. And the thing is that you always worked more than that 'cause there was always overtime. So, you know, it, it was a full-time job; so, you know, when I, when I would come in for, for the summers or for Christmas, you know, I would work eight, ten, twelve hours. And so it was there at the--it was, it was full of students of all sorts. And so we--you know, there was a group of us, you know, whichever shifts. You know, we would hang out together and things like that. So it was in that environment that I, I, I met him. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 81118 Speaker 1: Well, to your teaching career, your (unclear) teaching career. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that's where we left off. Speaker 1: He suggested you teach. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, he said you could do this. So I went to the Board of Ed and said I wanted to be a teacher. And there was a teacher shortage, and if you had a bachelor's you could teach in the Chicago public schools, didn't matter what. The requirement, though, was that you had to take teaching methods courses. So I was hoping that I could teach biology, chemistry, general science, even math, and they told me no. Without having the teachering--teaching methods courses, I could only teach grade school, could not teach high school. And you know, then I was talking to my husband about it. I said how ridiculous is this? And so, you know, he started talking about some of his friends that had also got in there--(unclear)--University of Chicago, physics majors, math majors, chemistry majors. We were also teaching in grade school. And, and so I said well--you know, and, and I ended up with a fourth grade classroom, where some of these folks had, you know, kindergarten, first grade, you know, where you really have formation for children in terms of learning and you know, readiness to learn and things like that. You know, what does a physics may--major know about kindergarten? Nothing, but here was one of my husband's friends as a physics major teaching a kindergarten class. And so I said, you know, a generation of screwed up kids came from this board of education policy at the time that said you know, you may be brilliant in physics, but we're not gonna let you teach a physics class; you're gonna get a, a kindergarten class, you know. So, but for me, I did, I did go and I did my methods courses. My fourth grade classroom that I was first assigned to was at Woodson North. Woodson North was a school, 40--44th, 45th, between 44th and 45th and, and Evans. It was a nice teaching environment 'cause it was built as a pentagon, you know, three clusters of pentagons three stories high. So, you know, it was, I think the, probably the, the methodology in terms of the design was to have team teaching and things like that, although it really was not being used, at least in the middle school. I think in the grade--in the, the primary grades, the first through third grade, they were doing that. But in the, in the, the middle school there as not that kind of team teaching. But you know, being my first experience and being new, the other teachers in my little pentagon, you know, offered to be helpful and things of that sort. Story_ID: 81119 Speaker 1: So, you know, the--you know, we got ready for school, and I thought I was all ready. I had my lesson plans and got into this whole thing, knew what curricula would, curriculum was for, you know, each of the, the studies, the subjects, and so, did my bulletin boards perfect, right; I mean I just, all these things that I knew from my own childhood experience of going to school, I mean I, I remembered all of that. So first day of class the kids come in, and I didn't realize, as I was mentally getting ready for this, that these were gonna be different kind of kids than I went to school with when I was in grade school. So they come in--and you know, when we were kids (laughter) in grade school, you always stood up for the teacher, you always replied yes ma'am. These kids came in - none of that. You know, it was like I was a nonentity in the room. I mean they were into their own little things, into their friends and playing. And I just sit 'em down, and I, I, I get 'em focused. And we start our day, and I'm talking to 'em. And they're all sitting there, you know, very quiet, looking at me and not saying anything. And I'm trying to engage them and ask 'em questions, and trying to get 'em to respond. And you know, nothing is happening, and they're just, they're kind of like staring at me. So and my, my fellow teachers on the, on the pentagon said if you need help, let us know. So recess time I go over to 'em. I said I can't get these kids to say a word, you know, 'cause they, they weren't really trying to--they were gonna help me if I had discipline problems. And I said it's not that. You know, they're sitting there like wooden soldiers, you know. So one of 'em said I'll come in after recess to see if I can figure out what's going on, so he did. And yeah, he observed, you know, me and the kids in the class for about five, ten or so. And he called me to the back of the room, and he said, the reason they're not responding to you is that they have no idea what you're saying. I said, what? What are you talking about? He says you know, if you're gonna communi--you have to communicate at their level. He says the commun--he says you're talking up here; they're down here. He says you gotta use simple words; you gotta slow it down; and you gotta be very direct, and give them a chance to understand what it is you want them to do, because it was everything from, from the accent, from you know, the monosyllabic words to--I mean the polysyllabic words to, you know, the, the vocabulary. Everything was just like passing them by. And so he said you're their entertainment, you know. They, they are just trying to figure out who and what you are. So I said okay. So I learned how to speak at a fourth grade level. It took awhile, but we did okay. Story_ID: 81120 Speaker 1: So I, I had fourth grade that year. The next year I had fifth grade, and the fifth grade curriculum was studying Canada. And again, you know, I'm still pretty naive (laughter) as a teacher, in spite of being there a year. And so, you know, my nature is spontaneity, and so in spite of the best laid plans, you know, the spontaneity comes out. So I said offhandedly, as I was inquiring whether or not kids had been to Canada. Nobody had been to Canada. And I started asking, okay, how many have been outside of the city? How many of you have been downtown? How many been to the lake? Now, you know, we were less than a mile from the lake. Most of these kids had never been downtown, or to the lake, much less out of the city, out of the state, out of the country. So this is where I got into trouble. I said well, how would you like to go to Canada? And of course, everybody wanted to go to Canada. I mean, you know, it was like--so okay, well, maybe we'll go to Can--we'll take a field trip. You know, field trips are part of school, right; you know, you do field trips. My thing is that we do a field trip to Canada. So little did I know, (laughter) you don't just and take a bunch of kids to Canada. You know, you don't take 'em out of state, out of the city, out of the state, much less out of the country. And so by the time I got through all of the rules of the board of education, discovered this was not possible, you know, the kids were very disappointed. So we said well, what about if your parents take you? Well, parents can't go. So why don't we go and talk to the parents, so I got all--I had said get your parents to come in after school on whatever day, and most of the parents did come. And I said hey, we're studying Canada; kids really wanna go; board of ed rules said I can't take 'em on a field trip to Canada. So the only way I can get 'em there is that we go after the school year, but can't take 'em after the school year unless you're willing to participate and willing to. So parents thought it was a great idea. They were interested in going. They had never been to Canada so, you know, we agreed that, you know, we would raise the money because, you know, these were families, most of 'em poor, most of 'em on welfare--raise the money to go. So there was a train that went out of Dearborn Station. It was--you left on Friday night. You arrived in Canada on Saturday morning. You know, you spent the day in Niagara Falls, which is where, you know, we could go; and then you ride the train back on Saturday night; and you're back in Chicago on Sunday. So it was a nice kind of perfect thing, didn't have to worry about hotels or anything. You could sleep on the train, and yeah, just the train ride was a good experience. So, you know, we raised the money through bake sales, and car washes, and selling candy, and all those kind of things you do to raise, raise money. Story_ID: 81121 Speaker 1: And we must have had about seven parents, and in addition to that I got you know, my sisters other friends to, to go so that we had more than enough chaperones for, for the kids. And so we went and you know, we had a great time, you know, playing games, singing, all those things you do on a you know, back to my camp experience days, you know, with these kids. So, you know, there was no sleeping (laughter). I think if we got three hours sleep we were, we were lucky. And so we had a, had a bus that picked us up from the train and took us on a tour of Niagara Falls, or, or, or the, of the city, and we went down to the Falls, and you know, we had arranged for lunch. And you know, it was just a, a, a, a great day. And so, you know, as my groups of kids and chaperones got back on the bus, I'm doing the head count, and there's one kid missing. So I tell the bus driver lock the door, don't let anybody out, left a couple of chaperones on the bus, and the rest of us spread out to every place that folks--you know, all of the highlights. I mean it's not a huge place, you know, the, the tourist area of, of, of the Niagara. So we go looking around, and I finally--you know, we're at the American Bridge, and I see this little figure way across. And so I say to some of the other chaperones: is that Robert 'cause there's a little kid walking by himself right on the bridge. And I said, could that be him? And so we all go and look, and sure enough, here is Robert just jaunting along, you know, not a care in the world, you know, looking at the Falls, looking at the water. And I'm calling to him, "Robert, Robert, get over here." And you know, he finally comes--"what's wrong?" And you know, like you wanna strangle a kid (unclear) he have to put you through this, this kind of turmoil, but all I could do is hug him and scream at him at the same time, you know, that, you know, 'cause I just had these visions of here's Robert at the bottom of the Falls. How am I gonna explain it to his mother 'cause his mother wasn't with us, you know, that here I took her kid to Canada, and he's at the bottom of the Niagara River somewhere. So that was the only untoward experience, and luckily it was a, it was a good ending. And so it was my, my experience being spontaneous, but it all working out well, you know, that no, no tragedies (laughter)--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: About what year is this? Speaker 1: This is 1968 or '9' [1969] or something like that. And you know, the thing is that my husband and I discovered that--and we had done this two years--in '67' [1967], so again in '68' [1968] we did it. Story_ID: 81122 Speaker 1: We went to Europe in '67' [1967]. And you know, we still had our student I.D.'s since you were pretty much still, you know, just fresh out of school. And in Europe at the time, if you were a student, a university student, you could travel all over Europe for almost nothing. And so we went and you know, we were kind of like at--the University had a chartered--TWA at that point, you could do these charters to Europe. And so as faculty staff and alumni, you know, you could, you could be a part, and it was all--it was really nice. It was first class, you know, whole--it was a whole plane. It was a first-class service; I mean at--it was like, wow. So, you know, we went to Europe and discovered, you know, by using our student I.D.'s we could travel Europe and end up spending less money than being in Chicago [Illinois] because at that point the dollar was still very strong. So, you know, we spent the whole summer in Europe. I think we did ten countries from June to August, or something like that. So we said this was so much fun. Sixty-eight [1968] we did it again. So after I got over my Canadian experience, then I went off to (laughter) Europe for a much less I guess exciting trip than losing a kid at the bottom of Niagara Falls, but. So that was a nice thing about teaching. I mean I really, you know, loved having these whole summers off and things like that. Story_ID: 81123 Speaker 1: But you know, coming back though after, after that trip, you know, we had friends at the University of Chicago, and some--one of 'em, you know, told me that, you know, there was this guy that was coming in from Yale to the hospital. And they were advertising for a research assistant. And so, you know, I was still kind of missing my science, you know. Social studies was not (laughter) the same. So I, I said well, maybe I'll check it out and see, and so I went over. And this guy was from Yale [University], and he gives me his story that, you know, Yale didn't treat him right, and so he was at University of Chicago. And so, you know, he was here to stay, 'cause, you know, I, I told 'em, I said I don't wanna get into a research situation if you're gonna go back to Yale at the end of the year--oh no, no, no, no, that's not gonna happen. So I ended up doing research with him in gastroenterology. And lo and behold, after we finished our research project and actually published--I'm actually published in the, in the "Journal of Gastroenter--Gastroenterology" for the research we did on colon absorption, the ability of the colon to absorb nutrients. You know, Yale made him an offer he couldn't refuse so, you know, back to Yale he goes. And I said doggone it, I should have stuck with teacher. So I, I said okay, go back to Yale. I'm just gonna get out of this research stuff. And the thing about it is that, you know, doing that kind of research, and here I had, you know, eight to three, three fifteen, it was my school day, all summers off. You know, being in a lab, I mean I would go from seven in the morning sometimes to eleven at night because, you know, depending upon the experiment I was running, you couldn't just stop at five o'clock and leave; I mean you were there, particularly if you were doing some spectower--spec--spectric--spectometer--or something like that, that, you know, you couldn't just cut it. So, you know, you start, you'd have to stay there 'cause you--if you left, you know, anything can go wrong, and you'd have to do the thing all over again. So I went from these very short hours to these very, very long hours. And so when he decided to go back to Yale, I said going back to my easy life. Story_ID: 81124 Speaker 1: So he went to Yale I went back to teaching, and then I ended up instead of doing the whole classrooms--actually I changed schools. I, I went to Judd. And you know, Judd was, was organized more like the, the middle schools or the--what did they call 'em? They didn't call our things middle schools--but you know, that you taught-- Speaker 2: Junior high school. Speaker 1: --junior high--you know, that you, you taught a, a subject, so I start it language arts to fourth, fifth, and sixth graders. And then I became a reading specialist, and I did--I had a reading lab for fourth through eighth grade. And I did that, and probably would have stuck with it for a while. I mean I'll tell you the puberty and--the, the puberty thing is a monster man, you know, and it would, it would be two years, because I would--it would start with sixth grade girls, the last half of sixth grade. But the boys didn't pick up until seventh grade. You know, boys are little slower than girls, right. Speaker 2: Sure--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So (laughter), so, so the boys didn't start until seventh grade, and the girls were kind of coming of it, but they were still into it. So, you know, sixth--the second half of sixth grade through, you know, the beginning of eighth grade was pure hell; I mean those were ah. So I--they probably would have driven me out totally. But what, what did happen is that I took a leave because I was pregnant with my son. Story_ID: 81125 Speaker 1: I went on maternity leave and you know, I, I did a couple of things. When I was on maternity leave I said well, I can't just be home doing nothing. So I just went on back to school to get my public policy degree. And so I started doing that, but--this was about '70' [1970]--well, yeah, my son was born in '75' [1975], so, so this was late '74' [1974], early '75' [1975]. My good friend, Al Raby, who was working for Governor Walker came by and said you know, I really need your help. And I said what do you need my help for? And he says well, you know, the community, 'cause what I was doing when I was teaching school was that I got involved with TWO, The Woodlawn Organization, 'cause we were still living on the University of Chicago campus. And the University of Chicago was trying to create a buffer for the south side of the campus from all of those folks who lived in Woodlawn. And so they were trying to empty it out. And so, you know, as part of the community at TWO, we were, you know, fighting the university and what they were trying to do. So, you know, I had-- Speaker 2: Who, who, who was the director that was (unclear), Leon Finney? Speaker 1: Leon Finney was the staff director. Arthur Brazier was chair of the board. Sterling Frazier was--I guess Leon was executive (unclear); Sterling Frazier was kind of the reorganizer/staff director. So-- Speaker 2: Was that the first time--I mean, you'd been exposed to community organizing as such? Speaker 1: Yeah, it really was, because you know, how I got into it was, you know, we were living really on the south, south campus, 1440 E. 60th Place in these wonderful townhouses that had been built as model townhomes for the Columbian Exposition. So they were built in a French chateau style, you know, with limestone. It was I mean just beautiful and well built. Paul Butterfield's band used to practice next door, and I couldn't hear 'em through the walls. The only way I knew he was practicing next door was to go out in the courtyard. And, and they would have their door open, and I could hear the, the, the, the, the sound directionally, but I couldn't hear 'em through the walls. I mean-- Speaker 2: Now that's a big band too. Speaker 1: Yeah, wa-- Speaker 2: Butterfield Blues Band was over-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: --ten people-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, they wouldn't do all ten at a time (laughter). No, I think they're may have been like five, six at a time that would practice there. But the thing is they had these really thick walls; I mean it was really awesome. So (unclear) my daughter said to me, who was young at the time. I can't remember how old she was, maybe like five, or six, or seven. She said to me one day, mommy, when people get old, you know, they die. She says when building get, get--when buildings get old, they burn up. I said what are you talking about? Because there were these rash of fires that would happen. You know, like when I was a kid growing up, I had bands, parades that would come by. For Kim, it was the fire, fire engines. You know, there was fire going on in the neighborhood it seemed like all the time. And you know, a lot of these buildings were burning up and things like that. And I mean I'm not sure how much of it was arson, but I suspect that there was--this is not just, you know, natural occurrences that you'd have these fires. So-- Speaker 2: Now, now for the sake of history, just to set this up, Woodlawn was--is adjacent to Hyde Park and (unclear)--at that time, you know, there was a lot of gang activity in Woodlawn. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Jeff Fort was the-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --he was a Black Stone Ranger-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and all that, and I'm just trying to (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: Right, that's, that's all true. Story_ID: 81126 Speaker 1: So you, so that was part of the reason why the University [of Chicago] wanted to have this, this buffer, I think, was because--and it was only the Black Stone Rangers. There were two gangs: the Black Stone Rangers; and there was also the Disciples. And the Black Stone Rangers were to the east, and the Disciples were to the west, you know, like, 'cause 63rd Street, you know, is kind of like the, the demarcation. And so the Western gang was the Disciples; the Eastern gangs were the Black Stone Rangers. So, so that was going on, and then you know, these fires. And so it was, it was that, and then my husband at the time had decided to get his PhD. And he had spent time in the Army, so he had a scholarship at the University of Chicago tuition, and they get a scholarship to--whatever, but it was tuition reimbursement as a veteran for University of Illinois. But yeah, he was interested in political science, and the only place you could get that was in Champagne-Urbana. So he had become a student here, so he was kind of like a commuter from Urbana to Chicago. So I would be, you know, home with Kim most of the time. And you know, so she's--you know, these fires are starting to worry her, and they're starting to concern me too. So I, I went up--and, and the other thing, I complained to my husband, but--I have these little kids all day long, and then I come home to this little kid. And I said my mind is atrophying, you know, not having any adult conversation (laughter) I could have. So he said well, do something, and so I said okay. And so I used kind of like my being bored and just needing to, to have some adult interaction, then I got involved with the Woodlawn Organization. And it was, it was a, it was be--through the Woodlawn Organization, I also got involved with Model Cities, which was one of President [Lyndon] Johnson's, you know, initiatives to try and you know, revive, or you know, create some, some options for people, you know, in inner cities and things like that. So you, you know, besides being an educator, I had gotten this whole community experience. And so Al [Albert Raby] thought this was a valuable kind of background to support the work that was going on in the Department of Children and Family Services. Story_ID: 81127 Speaker 1: Now just pause a minute (unclear)--Al Raby, can you spell his name for us? Speaker 2: Al, of course is A-L; Raby is R-A-B-Y. Speaker 1: And can, can you give us something about, about his background 'cause he's, he's very important and to, to the civil rights struggle in the city of Chicago and-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--for Dr. King and all that. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: I just want you to kind of maybe give your perspective on him. Speaker 2: Well, Al Raby was an organizer, an activist, an advocate. You know, he was one of those people that was forever creating something or being involved in social change in a variety of ways. He, for example, was part of the Triple C [Coordinating Council of Community Organizations]. You know, I, I never did get those C's right, even in the midst of it. But the main thing that they did was got Dr. [Martin Luther] King to come to Chicago. Chicago was not the South, but it had, in some ways, more problems than the South, particularly around in the area of housing, jobs, opportunities. So the thought was that if Dr. King could come here and, and do kind of a Civil Rights Movement in the North, then you know, we could start to have the social equality-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: --and, and equality opportunity and so forth. So it took a--it took some convincing to get King here, but he finally, you know, did agreement to come. Speaker 1: And there as opposition too-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was opposition-- Speaker 1: --organized--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --from the, from the black community because, you know, [Mayor Richard J.] Daley--this was a--you know, the Daley machine, you know, was very, very, very strong in, in the, in the black community. And you know, Daley saw any kind of Civil Rights Movement in the city as a challenge to his power base. And so those folks who were loyal to Daley obviously didn't want Daley threatened because that was threatening to them as well. So yeah, there was opposition out of the black community as well as out of the established community for King to come here. But King came anyway, and you know, it was a, you know, it was a, an interracial group of, you know, ministers, civil rights leaders, etc. that was behind the effort. And you know, Al was with King when he got stoned in Marquette Park, for example. Story_ID: 81291 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was asking you about The Woodlawn Organization [TWO] and Al Raby-- Speaker 1: Al Raby. Speaker 2: --Al Raby and his importance in the-- Speaker 1: Right, so, so Al, Al Raby got [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King here. You know, they had their meetings with [Mayor Richard J.] Daley. You know they created--you know, they had a list of demands for Daley, and Daley essentially ignored 'em. I mean, yeah, he'd met with them and things like that, but in terms of any real commitment, it didn't happen. But it did energize the community. You know, there was a huge, huge outpouring of people for a rally in Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois], where King was just brilliant in terms of talking about, you know, the, the, the need for people, you know, to, to be responsible, you know, that, you know, they don't have to except things, you know, that they can change things. And you know, as part of it, you know, there was a--I can't remember the sequence of events now in terms of the, the chronology. But you know, part of raising awareness was going into Marquette Park and you know, kind of like claiming it. You know, this is part of the city. It's part of America You know, we should have the freedom to go into, to any, you know, part of the country. Speaker 2: Part of the problem in Chicago was that there were neighborhoods that-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --black people were (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Excluded from. Speaker 2: --that they couldn't even walk through. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You knew you shouldn't even walk through there. Speaker 1: Right, exactly. Speaker 2: If you crossed, you, you come across this viaduct, you're dead. Speaker 1: You're dead. And there were lots of examples of that in Chicago where, you know, people were killed for being on the wrong side of the street. So, you know, there was a march through Marquette Park and of course all of the, the, the racists and exclusionary type people were out in force and throwing rocks and things like that. And both Al and, and Dr. King were, were hit in the head with these flying objects in the park and things like that. But-- Speaker 2: Interesting. This never even happened to him in the South; he never got hit with a rock in the South. Speaker 1: No, no, good old Chicago. Speaker 2: In Chicago. Speaker 1: Exactly. Story_ID: 81292 Speaker 1: So, you know, so, so Al, you know, was the civil rights leader. You know, he was also, he was trying to organize and alt--alternative teachers' union here. You know, the, the teachers union in Chicago is the American Federation of Teachers, and he thought, you know, that the leadership of that organization was essentially extension of, of the unresponsive political machine. So he was organizing a national education association union here in Chicago. And-- Speaker 2: Is that how you met Al Raby? Speaker 1: I don't remember how I met Al. Yeah, Al was also, you know, working with the Hyde Park-Kenwood Community Conference. You know, so I, I, you know, I have to think hard about where I first met Al, but you know, it was through one of these en--encounters. I mean I knew him obviously from the news and from, you know, the [Reverend Martin Luther] King and stuff like that. But I think when we first got to be friends it was either the teacher's thing 'cause I was, I was a teacher. And you know, the, the union I thought was not responsive to the needs, particularly of, of, of folks like me, you know, not certified because, you know, I was doing this substitute thing or whatever they called us at the time. So, so that was, that was it, but I was also living, you know, in the Hyde Park-Kenwood-Woodlawn community at the time, and so I had a lot of interaction, although, you know, at, at the time that I was doing this teaching, I can't remember now--well, no, if I think hard enough about it in terms of time frame. We moved to Hyde Park from Woodlawn in 1973 because you know that we finally lost our battle with the university and the south campus. And so they claimed they needed this part of Woodlawn where we were for ex--their expansion to the south campus. Well, 1973--this is now 2003, right? So, that's almost thirty years. They have just used this property that they claim they needed thirty year ago, so-- Speaker 2: The border--just to be clear--the border seemed to be the midway-- Speaker 1: Right, yeah. Speaker 2: --between Woodlawn and Hyde Park. Speaker 1: Right, yeah, and so if you were south side of the midway, you're in Woodlawn, and that's where we were. We were just off the midway. And, and so, you know, between 61st Street and the midway; it's 60th Place, you know, so that was our, our address. And you know, the university needed it like right then back in 1973. And you know, it took thirty years for them to really need it, but be that as it may. So at the time that Al was organizing the union, organizing for the union, we were still in Woodlawn. And when he was actually working the for the Hyde Park-Kenwood Community Conference he was still in Woodlawn. But when he got me to go and work for the Walker Administration, we were in Hyde Park. Yeah, so if I (laughter) put all these little things together. So, so did I meet Al first with the union or--I think I may--no, I think I may have met him first with the Hyde Park-Kenwood Community Conference. Speaker 2: Now-- Story_ID: 81293 Speaker 1: Would you say that he [Al Raby] got you involved in politics and, or-- Speaker 2: No, what really, it was really that stumbling onto the Democratic Convention as a kid in 1956, and then the Kenne--Kennedy campaign and [John F.] Kennedy assassination, although you know, I, I think the first president I ever voted for was Lyndon Johnson because you know you had to be 21 to vote. And so I, I think I was--by the time Lyndon got to be president, I was--ran for president, I was finally old enough to vote. Speaker 1: Do you remember that, that convention in '64' [1964] and the drama around SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] bringing Mississippi voters up there and all that and the television coverage and (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, absolutely 'cause I, I mean I, I watched these conventions. In fact, you know, this, this last convention I finally gave 'em up, you know, but (laughter) around 1956 until 2002--or was that 2002--when it was, 2000, 2000, you know, I was--I'd never missed, missed a, a convention, but-- Speaker 1: Are, are they different now than they used to be? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, man, it was, it was electrifying. I've been to, actually participated I think in three conventions where I was actually there on the floor, you know, part of the whole thing. But you know, at that, that convention where you really did have, you know, candidates fighting it out for nomination on the floor, you know, like the--you know, when--the, the first convention I actually participated in was a convention where we threw [Richard J.] Daley out of the convention. There was a [George] McGovern convention in 1972. The, the Democratic Party had changed the rules for the selection of delegates. And you know, the Daley machine essentially said, you know, we're gonna do it the way we always did it. And John Schmidt, the guy who just ran for governor, was our trade general. Bill Singer were attorneys a--Wayne Whalen--and so they challenged the way the Daley delegation were put together. And my husband and I were actually on a vacation up in the north woods of Wisconsin. And I come back to Hyde Park to the Hyde Park Commun--the Hyde Park Grocery Store, the co-op, and everybody's saying to me congratulations. And I'm saying congratulations, for what? And so by the time I get home and got through all of the mail and all of the, the, the messages, discovered that, yeah, there had been an alternative selection process for delegates to the convention according to the Democratic Party rules, and I had been selected as a delegate. I said oh, wow, wee (laugh), you know. Story_ID: 81294 Speaker 1: So my husband, it was in Miami [Florida], of all places. So my husband and I you know, pile in the car, and we go down to, to Miami. By the time we got there, you know, most of the delegation was already there, and they had assignments and things like that. And so, you know, one of the assignments and things like that. And so, you know, one of the assignments that was left to still be done was the Arkansas delegation. And so my job was to get the Arkansas delegation to agree to see these alternative delegates rather than the, the Daley delegates to the convention. So the head of the delegation was, was the governor at that point, Governor Dale Bumpers of Arkansas. And so, you know, all of the, the delegations have their hotels, and so he was at the, I think the Fountain, Fountainbleau Hotel. And so I tracked him down, and he was in the swimming pool. And so, you know, he said he had to get in and swim because that was the only time he was able to swim. And so I said that's okay. So here I am all dressed up, you know, walking up and down as he's swam laps in the swimming pool, convincing him why we ought to be the delegates, rather than the Daley thing. And so, you know, I was trying, what I was trying to do was to get okay to come and talk to the delegation at that caucus meeting. So he finally, he said somebody who is this dumb, in the hot sun, dressed up in, you know, the heat of Miami, you know, in a pool, you know, yeah, come and talk. So I got to go to the caucus meeting and plead our case for us being seated, rather than the, the Daley delegation being seated. And so, Arkansas, when they do the roll call, was at the beginning of the roll call, right. So, you know, when the delegation went in our favor, I mean every--you know, like our, our handlers, you know, Wayne Whalen, Paul Wolf--who else as--I can't remember who all. So yeah, they were like keeping track of, of you know, the, the votes we needed. So yeah, they also had intelligence of who was, who was still hanging. So we got Arkansas, so my job was done, right. I thought I could watch--say no, no, no. So they said we're having trouble in, in, in Texas, so you gotta go to the Texas delegations. So I said okay, I got the, the, the, the lowdown on who are the, the key people in the Texas delegation. I go over there, and so I sit with the delegation and I'm talking to 'em as all the votes going on, and convincing them that we ought to be seated rather than the Daley thing. And so, you know, it was, it was nip and tuck, but I got the Texas delegation as well. And so, you know, they were, they were down towards the end of the alphabet by that time, and it looked like we were gonna be able to pull it off, and sure enough, we did. So we--but you know, like that stuff was real, I mean. Story_ID: 81295 Speaker 1: You know, now conventions are--'cause the one here in Chicago [Illinois], I was at this one too; in fact, I was gonna go to the one in Los Angeles [California]. And you know, the, the, the, the thing, you know, I just, I had my ticket and my, my hotel, and, and it was like all was so prearranged that I said, you know, I don't need to do it, and so I just didn't, didn't go. But you know, here, I mean it was, it's all a done deal, you know. There is no entry. There's no on the floor, you know, argue--I mean arguments in terms of persuasive, debatable arguments, you know, going on, I mean real live, you know, energy/synergy, you know, about (unclear)--and, and, and making the case and, and pleading your case, you know. I mean that stuff went on in spite of, you know, like I've read things like the, the [Harry] Truman, the Truman Convention that took place here when Truman was elected, you know. It was then like smol--smoke-filled rooms, back room deals and things like that. But you know, there was a period in which it came out of the back room onto the convention floor, and you know, it was real stuff going on. Story_ID: 81296 Speaker 1: I mean the, the, the convention and, and the [Walter] Mondale Convention in San Francisco [California], when Harold [Washington] was there and you know, Ed Bradley. You know, that's another memorable moment when Ed Bradley, you know, essentially ambushed Harold on the floor of the convention with, with these questions about [Edward] Vrdolyak and, and-- Speaker 2: He actually brought Vrdolyak there, didn't, didn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, yeah, I don't know if he was--'cause I was--at the time that the interview happened, I was not in the delegation because I was part of the management team on the floor. And so I was on the walkie talkie, and when I got on the, on the, on the headset, what was going on 'cause I got a call from the Illinois delegation that Bradley was there and that Harold was, you know, was, was, you know, angry (laughter). So I went flying from one side of the Moscone Center to get to, get to the, the delegation to, you know, see what I could do to intervene, but I don't why. I mean Harold could handle (laughter) any situation probably better than me. But you know, I didn't want anybody else in the delegation, you know, taking a swing at Bradley or something like that, so. And it was kind of like part of the, the, the ca--con--control ne--you know, the delegation as well as Bradley with, with Harold, so. But you know, at, at that convention the issue was who was going to vice--be the vice presidential candidate. And there was--you know, Geraldine Ferraro was not a done deal in terms of the votes going on. So yeah, there was still, you know, kind of as floor debate of delegates trying to pull him over to, you know, go for Ferraro in, in that, in that convention. So yeah, I mean it's, it's changed a lot, you know. And then when I see that, that Philadelphia, you know, stage show that Bush pulled off, I mean that was just so disgusting, you know. That was just a political advertisement. You know, it was not a convention. So anyway, I have--there are very different now than when I first had my listen in 1956 convention, so. Story_ID: 81297 Speaker 1: How did you really get in, first get involved in the politics in the city [Chicago, Illinois] too? I, I guess you were involved, you said, before you met Al Raby? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: But Al Raby took you on another-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, actually, you know, that's a, that a-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --as I think about it, another kind of cross section with, with Al. What really got me started on the political thing was the work with TWO [The Woodlawn Organization]. And you know, here you're trying to do things--I mean doing things backwards in life. You know, model cities required citizen participation; that was one of the, the things, and so there had to be a Model Cities Council. And the way it got negotiated out here is that, you know, [Mayor Richard J.] Daley wanted to appoint the whole thing. Well, you, you couldn't appoint it; you know, it had to be selected by the community. So there was a compromise that half of the council would be appointed by Daley. The other half would be elected by the community. So TWO put together a slate to be elected by the community, and so they asked me to be a part of the slate. And so, you know, as I said, I'd only really voted once, for [President] Lyndon Johnson, and you know, had not been involved except listening on the radio to political camp--didn't know anything about putting together a political campaign. So my first political campaign was my own, was to get elected to the Model Cities Council, and Alice Tregay and Barbara O'Connor were kind of like our campaign managers. So my lessons, in terms of politics, came from Barbara O'Connor and from Alice Tregay. So, you know, they were the ones that taught me everything about the election process. And so from there-- Speaker 1: Can, can you spell their names for us--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, Alice Tregay, Alice, A-L-I-C-E, and Tregay, T-R-E-G-A-Y; and Barbara O'Connor, B-A-R-B-A-R-A, O'-C-O-N-N-O-R. They were both experienced, you know, political organizers and campaign managers and things like that. Alice Tregay at the time was involved with Operation Bread Basket and [HM] Jesse Jackson. And Barbara had been involve with a lot of the progressive, independent voters of Illinois campaigns, which is the oth--which is the thing that occurs to me, is that I also met Al in the process of IVI [Independent Voters of Illinois], Al Raby that is, in the process of IVI. So, you know, Barbara had come out of kind of the liberal Hyde Park progressive political thing and Alice, of course, coming out of the civil rights, you know, voter registration, you know, political empowerment of blacks kind of thing. So, you know, it was a perfect combination to--for me, in terms of learning, you know, like the full spectrum and, and perspective. And so I--that's when I learned about precinct captains and how the precinct captains work and how, you know, they had their little control system and how to get beyond that and you know, the whole thing about door knocking and you know, counting votes; I mean that whole thing, you know, came from that. So that's how I actually got involved in politics. And, and the thing is that, again, out of unfortunate circumstances, opportunity. Story_ID: 81298 Speaker 1: So my assignment on that election day for the Model Cities Council was my own precinct. And job was to do poll watching, make sure that the votes weren't stolen 'cause they told us all about how the machine stole votes and things like that; and you know, make sure that, you know, the folks we knew were voting for us, to get 'em out to the polls and all this. So I go into my precinct and I'm gonna do some poll watching. And I'd done my things outside, got my votes coming in and things like that. So I go on the poll watch, and I turn in my credentials. And there is this woman there who said--oh, shoo, shoo--I was already poll watching by the time she showed up at the precinct. And she asked the judges, "Who is that?" So they said, you know, a poll watcher. And so she kind of ignored me and went about doing her thing. And her thing was breaking all of the board of election rules, you know, in terms of electioneering, and in terms of touching the election materials, and in terms of telling the judges what to do. So I said to her, "Who are you? You know, you're wondering who, who I am. Who are you?" And so she wouldn't tell me. She wouldn't tell me who she was, wouldn't tell me what her name was. And so I'm saying to the judge, you know, it's against the rules for her to be touching this material, against the rules for her to be, you know. And so they're ignoring me, and so I'm getting--hey, you can't let her do that. And I'm getting more and more upset at what all the violations that were going on. And so, you know, I tell the police officer: Police officer, they're breaking the rules. You know, you gotta enforce the rules. They're not supposed to be doing this. And so the woman said to the cops, throw her out; if not, I'm gonna throw you out. And I said, what? And they said arrest her. I said you can't arrest me. And so they started making a move like they were gonna arrest me. Well, I went running out of the polling place and back to the office in tears, you know, crying at Barbara and Alice, and telling what's going on through my tears, I mean just (unclear)-distressed. You know, how could--and so then they sat me down and said that was probably the precinct captain. We told you what they do, you know. You're now seeing it. Well, the result of that was I was so angry that this is the way the politics work and the voting took place in the city that I had to change it, you know. So it became my personal mission to get rid of the Democratic machine in the city of Chicago [Illinois]. So that's actually how I got started. Story_ID: 81299 Speaker 1: That's, you know, that-- Speaker 2: So from then, from that election on, whenever there was an election I was there. And my first--you know, I made it a, a, an achievable goal. I set my first sight on running that lady out of my precinct, or at least I was gonna get control of the precinct. So I was gonna be the one that controlled the election in the precinct, not her. And so I, I, I watched her, and you know, and I, and I, I, I, I became familiar with her, her, her, her tactics, you know. So she had, you know, her people, her voters, they were--she would call them by name: how's so and so? I'mma get my laundry over to you, you know, when, when, when you wanna pick up, you know, whatever, you know, garbage can, canned goods, you know, whatever; I mean there were all kinds of stuff. And so I said well, obviously I didn't have any of that stuff. You know, I wasn't gonna do anybody's shirts, and I definitely was not, you know, and didn't have the ability to give people garbage cans. And so the thing is that, well, you know, I had learned somewhere along the line is that, you know, people are reasonable, and that you have to, you know, make things personal so that people understood their investment and what was going on. So, you know, whenever there was an election, you know, it was--you know, I, I put together kind of my, my door knocking strategy of why it's important for you to support A rather than B. And so, you know, I got--developed the ability to, you know, know the voters. And so the thing--the other thing that I discovered is that you just can't go at election time. So it was nice working in Woodlawn and having issues, that I visited these people all year round, all right, so I got to know 'em, and they got to know me. So when it came to election time, I knew what their hot button issue was, or I knew what the persuasive argument would be, you know, depending on whether or not they were married, unmarried, kids, job, no job, you know, on welfare, not--you know. So I got to know 'em, and so I could make the argument so that it was something that, you know, resonated with them. And so I beat her, and so I, I, I was successful in, in, in controlling the precinct. Story_ID: 81300 Speaker 1: And by that time I was hooked up with IVI [Independent Voters of Illinois]. That's why I say, you know, Al [Raby] was another person at IVI, so that--you know, they, they said oh, this is a really good precinct captain, you know, IVI precinct captain. So then they gave me an area. So then I went from precinct to area, and so I did the same thing. You know, I, I figure I couldn't go door to door and get to know people, but I found people in those precincts that could do that. And I taught them my methodology for getting people in the precinct, so then pretty soon I got control of my area. And so-- Speaker 2: This is, this is basic community organizing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But I, I learned it from the political side of things rather than from the community organizing. Although, you know, I was in--I mean I was aware of the politi--of the community organizing thing from being involved in TWO [The Woodlawn Organization]. I never went to the [Saul] Alinsky Schools or anything like that, but you know, I'm working with organizers. And you know, they would do their own little leadership training things and so, I mean, I was getting exposed to all that stuff. So, you know, it was, it was through that kind of gradual process that, you know, I learned the political stuff and got--went from, you know, running from a precinct crying to, you know, running the city of Chicago and electing Harold Washington mayor, so. Speaker 2: Okay, what-- Speaker 1: Humble beginnings. Speaker 2: Yes, well, that's a dramatic be--it is a good story 'cause that's what--yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): For people not familiar Illinois politics, maybe we could annotate IVI and Alinsky (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes, right, we should. What's IVI? Speaker 1: IVI is an organization called the Independent Voters of Illinois. And you know, it's, it's interesting, I think, historically is that when you have a power base, you know, there develops an anti to the power base. So IVI was an organization that had its strength because so many people were disappointed, disillusioned, disgusted at the Democratic machine. And so, you know, people were looking for an alternative to be involved in the political process. And so, you know, during those years, IVI was a strong alternative to the Democratic machine. And you know, IVI would go through a process of soliciting candidates, grooming candidates, or endorsing candidates, supporting candidates, trying to elect them as alternative to the Democratic machine candidates. And so we were successful in some communities, and you yeah, pra--primarily, you know, kind of progressive communities up and down the lake front, you know, from the north to the south side. Story_ID: 81301 Speaker 1: You know, some of the campaigns that I got in, involved in with IVI [Independent Voters of Illinois], you know, particularly by the time I got to the point of being an area chair with Len Despres, Fifth, Fifth Ward campaign. Speaker 2: Can you spell his name? Speaker 1: Len Despres is, actually Len is a shorten for Leonard--Leon I think is his full name. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: But Despres-- Speaker 2: He was Hyde Park alderman, right? Speaker 1: Hyde Park alderman, Fifth Ward alderman for a gazillion years, just (unclear)--celebrated I think his 92nd birthday. Speaker 2: He was the, the gadfly of the--they did-- Speaker 1: Of the city council for a long time. And the Despres is D-E-P-R-E-S [DESPRES], Leon Despres--Bob Mann, Bob Mann was a--well, actually, before that, from Barrett O'Hara, from--for the second congressional district, Congressman B-A-R-R-E-T-T, O'Hara, O'-H-A-R-A, to Abner Mikva, who was in the general assembly and then went on to become congre--to a congressman, Abner, A-B-N-E-R, Mikva, M, M-I-T--oh, gosh--okay, M-I, M-I-T-K-V-A [MIKVA]. I think that's right. I may have spelled that wrong--to--after Abner Mikva, Bob Mann took over the general assembly seat, Bob Mann, M-A-N-N. And the person who took over Bob Mann's seat actually was Carol Braun, who became the U.S. Senator, B-R-A-U-N, [HM] Carol Moseley-Braun, M-O-S-E-L-E-Y. Speaker 2: Now, IV-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --I was all--they had a sister ownership, IPO. Speaker 1: IPO really came out of the Dick Simpson 44th Ward people's assembly. The--IPO stood for the Independent Precinct Organization. Dick Simpson was an alderman in the 44th Ward, and he started this organization in the ward of having representatives from each of the precincts come together in a people's assembly. And they were kind of like his cabinet, in terms of identifying community issues, identifying things that he should be trying to get changed in the city council and things like that. Speaker 2: What--where, where was 44 in the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: The 44th Ward was on the north lake--north lakefront as you went north from the central area of the business district, which was the 1st Ward, and then you--the next ward up was the 42nd Ward, and the next ward up was the 43rd, and the next one up was the 44th. So they kind of like went in order of the, of the lakefront. So it was essentially Lakeview, the communities, the Lakeview community, I think some parts of Wrigleyville communities that we know now--so, so IVI, IPO. But that merger took place later. I can't remember exactly, well, maybe about the '70's [1970s] or so that it became IVI/IPO. Story_ID: 81139 Speaker 1: Saul Alinsky was an organizer. He came to Chicago [Illinois] actually in a community called Back of the Yards, and it was a, and it was Back of the Yards because it was back in the stockyards. As a community, it surrounded the Chicago Stockyards. And I don't remember now exactly the issue that they were organizing around, but they were trying to do some community empowerment to, to hold their community together and not be overtaken by the power structure. And so, you know, that was the, the community in Chicago where he first got started with the community organizing thing. And he was invited into Woodlawn. This was before I got started, but he was invited into Woodlawn because, you know, there was racial change going on in the community. It was--Alinksy, I should say, has always been a churched based kind of infrastructure, that the organizing takes place through the churches in the community. So the, the Woodlawn Ministerial Alliance invited him into be a part of kind of helping with the transition of the community 'cause it had gone from white to African American and Hispanic, and you know, it was trying to settle out. Was it gonna be a Hispanic community or was it gonna be a black community? Like when I went to school, Loretto Academy, my high school was actually in Woodlawn. And when I went to high school there, it was still probably, you know, just at that beginning to change over era. So, Alinsky created this organizing methodology that would challenge power and confrontationally, if necessary. And so, you know, there was a strategy for doing it. I never went to any of the training things, because what I observe was that to be a successful Alinsky organizer, there was a kind of like, I wanna say kind of a deconstruction of the person. I mean you had to like, you know, break down your own belief systems and your own views of, of, of issues of people of power, and then you know, you'll be kind of reconstructed or, or re, rebuilt as an Alinsky organizer. And you know, that never quite set with me, that I wanted to, you know, be exposed to that kind of total, you know, change. And so, you know, I worked with the, with the-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --organization and you know, with the, you know, a lot of the Alinsky organizers and things like that, but just couldn't become one myself. But you know, it was--you know, the, the strategy for how to identify issues and the leadership development and things like that is what I used in the political organizing, you know, realm. So, you know, all of these experiences, you know, I just kept taking 'em in and reshaping and reforming 'em to, you know, suit, you know, whatever situation I was in or, or condition I was in and things of that sort. So, you know, I don't, I don't put it down. It was just not for me. And I work now with, you know, Alinsky type organizations, you know, whether or not, you know, it's a Gamaliel organization, which I work more with than Industrial Areas Foundation. But I know people who are in that and groups that are part of that, that network. Story_ID: 81140 Speaker 1: So, you know, and, and another network I work with is, is the Midwest Academy. And the Midwest Academy was started by Heather Booth, who wanted to get into organizing and wanted to--you know, went to the Alinsky folks or the Industrial Areas Foundation and be an organizer. And she was told that, as a woman, she couldn't be an organizer. So I guess in a way I didn't have an option (laughter) at the time. I didn't ask. She asked and got turned down, and so she went off and started her own organizing school-- Speaker 2: She would have been better with-- Speaker 1: --the Midwest Academy. Speaker 2: --organizing in the South (unclear) SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. Speaker 1: Right, exactly. Speaker 2: And, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --exactly, yeah. So, yeah, she did do the Freedom Rides and things like that. So, so anyway, she started the, the, the Midwest Academy, and so that's another--in fact I'm on the, on the board of the Midwest Academy. Story_ID: 81141 Speaker 1: I mean this is--these are the foundations of your community-- Speaker 2: Right, and political organizing. Speaker 1: --political-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, thrust here in-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --(unclear)--the, the sit--the crowning jewel of all of this is the Harold Washington campaign. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So may-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --maybe we should just, we should maybe try to focus on what led up to you, your getting involved in that and what--why you thought it might work, 'cause people had doubts. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well, you know, actually you, you have to--if I could, I'd like to start a little bit earlier than that. As I says, most of my time growing at 45th and Prairie, that was in the 3rd Ward. The alderman of the 3rd Ward through I think most of my, my youth was Ralph Metcalfe, M-E-T-C-A-L-F-E. So Ralph Metcalfe was the alderman and [clearing throat]--excuse me--alderman and, and the committeeman. And you know, there were a lot of--well, the other part of the story is that, you know, besides being a tailor, my father was also a waiter. And so, you know, in, in those days, and particularly with six kids, you work more than one job. So, you know, he would be a waiter on evenings and weekends and things like that. And so one of the places he was a waiter at was the Parkway Ballroom. Parkway Ballroom was on 45th and South Parkway, which is two blocks, you know, straight up 45th Street to, to Parkway Ballroom. So on Sundays after church there was a brunch that would happen at the Parkway. And so my mother would oftentimes take us from church to the ballroom and we'd eat. And you know, my father would be there most of the time, you know, waiting and things like that, but there would also be these politicos there, Ralph Metcalfe, [HM] John Stroger, Harold Washington, Sam Patch, on and on and on, so--and Ralph also belonged to Corpus Christi Church. So sometimes at church I would see, you know, some of these same politicos. So, you know, see, Sunday afternoons, you know, was like, you know, adult talk, and we were kids, and so we were supposed to be off doing our own thing, but you know, I was always curious. I couldn't help but be curious. And so, you know, I would usually, you know, listen in to what the adults were talking about until they'd notice me and then shoo me away and things like that. So, you know, I got to see these political folks, and, and not as I guess a kind of a power arrangement, but you know, as people in the community. Story_ID: 81142 Speaker 1: So as I, you know, grew up and understood politics and elective offices and all the rest of that, you know, by the time I got out of college, Harold [Washington] was, you know, at that point, you know, Harold was just a, well, now just a precinct captain, you know. He wasn't an elected official, but by the time I got out of college, he was. He was--he had been elected to the Illinois General Assembly and what they call the bedsheet ballot, you know, that every ten years you have to redistrict and things like that. And the General Assembly couldn't, after the '60' [1960] election couldn't figure out how to--couldn't agree, (unclear) figure out, couldn't agree on what the map would look like. So they had to have an election, but they didn't have any district boundaries, so everybody ran from the General Assembly on one great big ballot. And so, you know, the people who--I can't remember how many were--people got elected at the time, but you know, the, the top whatever of that number got elected, and so, Harold was in the top whatever on the bedsheet ballot. That's what they called it, 'cause the ballot was so huge 'cause they had all these people in it. So he was, he was elected to the General Assembly. And you know, the, the thing is that, you know, I didn't really have a lot to do. I mean, I knew he was there and kind of knew who he was. But you know, he was over there in kind of Englewood, and I was over here in Hyde Park, and you know, we didn't really meet up, except when doing some of the model city stuff. I got to have another interaction with him on another level and you know, got to know him as a politician and as a person, which you know essentially as a kid, you know, I didn't have that. I was just, yeah, kind of aware of him, but got to know him at that point in time. And when he was--he, he, he ran for the Senate and got elected as a senator. Story_ID: 81143 Speaker 1: And lo and behold, you know, [Mayor Richard J.] Daley dies. And you know, there is this big fight for who's gonna succeed Daley. And not only that, it was the, the affronting of [HM] Wilson Frost as a president pro tem [of City Council]. And the custom had been president pro tem was the acting mayor. And so, you know, the politician in the town couldn't bear to have a black man as acting mayor, so they totally dissed Wilson Frost, which created a big uproar in the community. And you know-- Speaker 2: Actually-- Speaker 1: --it was not, it is not because of any love of Wilson Frost, but it was kind of an affront, you know, that a black man couldn't be acting mayor. Speaker 2: Didn't, didn't they actually lock him out of the fifth floor? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, oh yeah, oh, it was-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --it was, it was raucous in terms of the way they treated him. So, you know, even folks who politically didn't agree with Wilson were just outraged, and I was one of those. I mean Milt--Wilson was a machine guy--I mean was anything but a machine guy, but, you know, this was outrageous. So, you know, the, the, the, the cry in the community at that point is that they can't do it to us. And you know, Al Raby and Martin [Luther] King [Jr.], you know, with this Northern movement, I think did raise the awareness and you know, that, that sense that we don't have to take it, so that, you know, then--you know, coupled with this outrage that happened that, you know, the black community, you know, was crying out for something different. So who should run for mayor, you know, after Daley died? And so through a, a whole variety of different circumstances, including Ralph Metcalfe deciding not to run, that, you know, Harold [Washington] ended up, you know, running for mayor in 1977. Story_ID: 81144 Speaker 1: [Ralph] Metcalfe decided not to run back in 1975, which is the last time [Richard J.] Daley ran. And you know, Harold [Washington] had been very loyal, supportive of Metcalfe. And you know, Metcalfe was--had by that time broken with Daley because of police brutality, that--you know, Metcalfe's own dentist, Dr. [Herbert] Odom, was-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --roughed on Lake Shore Drive by cops, you know, just made up, trumped up reasons. So, you know, Daley--I mean Ralph finally broke from the machine and became an Independent. And you know, Harold was, was in the machine, but never of the machine, you know, so that, you know, when Ralph broke, you know, Harold broke too. And so Ralph was gonna run for, for mayor against Daley in 1975 and decided not to. And the best I could figure out is that he had been a long time member of the zoning committee. And there were all these rumors that, you know, of corruption and kickbacks and things like that, that you know, my person opinion--nobody ever told me this: my personal opinion was that, you know, he was really kind of afraid to run because, you know, all of that stuff, where if there as any stuff, would come out. And so, you know, that would--you know, he would end up in jail (unclear) (laughter) instead of political office or whatever. But, but Harold was very, very disappointed, and so he kind of soured on Ralph after, you know, Ralph didn't run for, for mayor. So in 19--you know, so--you know, the folks who did run in, in '75' [1975] were Dick Newhouse, Bill Singer. And the combination of votes from Dick Newhouse and Bill Singer exceeded the vote for Dick Daley. But, you know, with three in a race, you know, you only had to get more votes than anybody else. So, you know, Daley really lost that. And, and we, you know, as, as watching the whole--you know, and we didn't run--supported whoever ran against Daley for all these elections. So, you know, knew that Daley was vulnerable. So we figured we had him, you know, in '79' [1979] at the next election after seeing what the combination of Singer and Newhouse did. So in '77' [1977], when the election was over after Daley died it was '76' [1976], you know, we knew we could, we could at least make a statement, you know, so we had the, the, you know, already the, the, the aftermaths of the, the, the King visit, you know, the affront that happened--I mean the, the, the--Daley's election results of '75' [1975] and the affront that happened with [HM] Wilson Frost in '76' [1976] that, you know, we had an opportunity to at least raise the awareness and the possibility of having a black mayor. So, you know, Harold was a reluctant candidate, but we got him out there anyway. Good old [HM] Gus Savage, you know, was campaign manager. And you know, cussin'--and Gus Savage, who was [clearing throat] Harold's good friend from Roosevelt University, where they were in school together, you know, was campaign manager. And we got out there, you know, no money, no strategy, nobody--I mean Daley was not expected to die, you know, and he was--we were, if anything, looking to 1979, not 1977--so, you know, throwing together a ragtag organization. And so I--that was the first time I actually worked for Harold in the political campaign, was putting--working as precinct coordinator for that '77' [1977] election. And what we, what we, we did in that election--obviously we didn't win, but we saw that in the black middle-class community--'cause they really had broken from the machine. We won all of those wards, you know, 8th Ward, 21st Ward, you know, 6th Ward, 17th Ward. You know, like those were, those were available if you had a real alternative to the Daley machine. Speaker 2: This was real, this was revolutionary in 1977-- Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 2: --in a machine city. Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely, so. Story_ID: 81145 Speaker 1: So, you know, we didn't win, but we knew, we had a base, and I think they knew we had a base, so 'cause what did they do? They put up--you know, there was the machine, the machine blacks, Jim Taylor, you know, was, was one of those loyal genuflectors to the machine. So the thing was challenging Harold [Washington] for his General Assembly seat. And you know, they put another guy named Washington. This whole thing was just saw with the Jackson and the Shaw brothers, well, you know, this was, this was played against Harold. There was another Washington in the race, and they put two or three other ringers in the race. But the one that Jim Taylor was really pushing for is this guy named Clarence Barry, you know, that they were gonna try and take Harold out. Well, you know, we slapped their faces, and Harold won reelection. So, you know, by the time we got to the '83' [1983], which, again, you know the affront. You know, we, we, we get Michael Bilandic, who's eventually elected mayor after [Richard J.] Daley dies. The black community had been dissed. He got his comeuppance when he got a blizzard he didn't know how to deal with, and he lied to the people. Jane Byrne took advantage of that, ran for mayor. You know, black folks got behind her because she was not the machine, and you know, she was not Bilandic, and elected her. I mean blacks elected Jane Byrne. And what did Jane do? She get in the office and she dissed the black community through the appointments to the, the Chicago Housing Authority Board and appointments to the school board. Speaker 2: Yes, those are two critical ones. Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely, and so-- Speaker 2: It was Charles Swibel and the-- Speaker 1: With the, with the Chicago Housing Authority and you know, the, the-- Speaker 2: The Bogans-- Speaker 1: The Bogan broads (laughter), as they got to be called, went into the board, board of education. You know, I guess, you know, we, we had our slogans. But, but it, it, it enraged, you know, the community. I mean so, you know, you had, you know, this, this, this tension that was out there, you know, as I say building up from the [Martin Luther] King thing and more and more awareness and more realization that you know, why are we, you know, being stepped on? You know, we're kind of like the backbone of this community, and we're getting nothing but the dregs. And so, you know, the energy after--you know, against Bilandic and for Jane, and then after Jane, you know, wiped us out, you know, with the, with those two I mean really institutions that were important to the black community, you know, the community organizing. And [HM Lutrelle] Lu Palmer at that point had his radio show, and you know, he, he was in--increasing the awareness all the time. And you know, the drumbeat, drumbeat started. Story_ID: 81146 Speaker 1: Now, one of the other things that happened before that '83' [1983] campaign, of course, is that we had the national campaign. So we elected Harold [Washington] to the Congress in 1980. And as Harold told us on election night as we were all gleeful about him going to Congress, you know, he's sour. And so I said Harold what's wrong with you? You know, what the hell are you doing sending me to Congress when I got this Neanderthal, [Ronald] Reagan, for a president? What do you expect me to do? And so, you know, this was Harold. You know, he's already looking at what's gonna be happening in the Congress and you know, the, the votes aren't finally counted for his (laughter) election. So I said okay, reality, Harold, go ahead, you know (laughter), like slap us around. So-- Speaker 2: This, this was exciting, 'cause Gus Savage was elected-- Speaker 1: At the same time. Speaker 2: --as congressman of the second-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --dist--district at the same time. Speaker 1: Right, yeah, so, so, you know, there was this, this kind of revolution in terms of getting rid of the machine folks here in Chicago [Illinois] and to go to another kind of machine, and this is a Republican juggernaut that was happening, you know, nationally with the, with the Reagan election. And so Harold runs--has to run again in 1982 as, you know, as the representative of Congress. And one of the big local races at that point in time was for states attorney. And the candidates for states attorney, Ed Burke and Richie Daley [Richard M. Daley]--Richie Daley was the senator, state senator at the time. And so Harold and Richard--Richie had served in the General Assembly together. And I guess Richie kind of assumed that there'd be these old, old school ties, and Harold would endorse him for, for states attorney. But Harold was always thinking: so what does this mean? So what Harold saw was that if he endorse Daley for states attorney--and you know, he had no reason to endorse Burke, so it wasn't a choice between the two--but if he endorse Daley for states attorney, then he would be on record as having endorsed Daley, and he knew that Daley's ambition was to be mayor. And so, having endorsed him for states attorney, what is he gonna do when Daley comes back for mayor and say well, I ain't gonna endorse you. So Harold created the litmus test. And so Harold's litmus test was that he was not gonna endorse anybody for any office that did not support the concept, the concept of a black mayor in '83' [1983]. And Daley couldn't pass that litmus test, so-- Speaker 2: No, 'cause he wanted to be-- Speaker 1: So Harold never endorsed Daley for, for states attorney. And so, you know, the litmus test got out there in the community. And you know, Lou's on the radio. He's talking about the litmus test, and so that became part of the milieu for the elections in, in 1982. At the same time, you know, the call is that we need to have a black candidate, and you know, the, the, the, the whole movement towards having a plebiscite, you know, who would be the, who would be the, the best black candidate to go in. And you know, Harold came out on top of that, and Harold was again the reluctant-- Speaker 2: We will see in '83' [1983]. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, so then it be--you know, Lu's thing: We will see in '83' [1983]. And so, you know, this drumbeat was going on. And so I, I used to tell Harold all the time is that you got question on the horns of your own (unclear) 'cause you started this (laughter), this litmus test for '83' [1983] that led to "We shall see in '83' [1983], and you know, you can't say no. So he, he eventually did say yes after many months of saying, saying no. Story_ID: 81147 Speaker 1: So, you know, it was, it was kind of like once I started with Harold in the '77' [1977] campaign, running his elections, you know, then I, I kind of ran his elections, every one, since that, the, the reelection for Senate, both of the congressional campaigns, and then when he got ready to, to run for, for, for mayor. And you know, the, the, actually the campaign manager starting off in that was [HM] Renault Robinson. Renault Robinson was a classmate of mine at Corpus Christi, so I've known Renault most of my life--Renault, R-E-N-A-U-L-T, Robinson, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N. Speaker 2: And he stands for-- Speaker 1: For being head of the, the, the black--what is it called-- Speaker 2: African American-- Speaker 1: African-American Patrolmen's League, which was kind of like the fraternal order of police for African-American police officers. And so Renault was the, the campaign manager, but you know, Renault didn't know anything about running campaigns and was very (laughter) obvious he didn't know anything about running campaigns. But you know, and so I would say to Harold: Harold, you know, this is not working, and you know we gotta really get somebody into, to, to manage this campaign. And so, you know, Harold finally agreed that Al Raby should be his campaign manager. And so, you know, Al managed the, the first campaign, and I did all of the precinct coordination. So, you know, it was Al, you know, as campaign manager, all the administrative stuff, but really getting the votes and all the things related to getting the vote, you know, is what I responsible for. Speaker 2: This is way--well, in the--tell me if this makes sense. This is the--it seems as though that the agitation for a black mayor, you know, came through I guess Harold Washington's own candidacy in '77' [1977], and then [HM Lutrelle] Lu Palmer on the air hitting it hard with, you know, his organization in the, in the early '80's [1980s], and then--but, but once the--I mean the campaign itself, once the campaign starts, it's, it's, it's basically the, the people that had worked on his campaign before that that really got it, you know, that got in there and had to strategize and fight every day. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, you know, it was, you know, like the whole movement. So you had this whole plebiscite, and all the folks who were involved in the plebiscite and you know, all of the, the kind of street energy on this campaign. But then at the same time you have to run a campaign. I mean, and that's like a business, you know, so. You know, and that was part of the tension we had in '83' [1983] is that, you know, the street folks wanted to, you know, sound the noise is what I used to call it, you know, that they wanted to get out there; they wanted to make, you know, like my, my parade coming down, down Prairie Avenue when I was a kid. They wanted to get out there and beat the bushes and--but the same time, you know, you, you had to be scientific. You had to know, you know, you--you know the way I always looked at campaigns that all you had to know on Election Day. I, I would say is--say this to my, my campaign workers is that when you go to bed the night before the election, you need to know whether or not you won or loss, because once you start election morning it's only execution, all right. But you need to have the votes counted the night before the election. And if you don't know going in six o'clock in the morning when the polls open whether or not you got the votes to win, you've lost, okay. Story_ID: 81148 Speaker 1: So, so for me, it was like knowing whether or not we had enough votes to win. And how do we figure out enough votes to win? And you know, and this is all (laughter)--I don't know how much you wanna get into the minutiae of-- Speaker 2: Oh--(unclear)--yeah, go ahead. Speaker 1: --of the campaign. But you know, we had taken every precinct in the city of Chicago [Illinois] in terms of their election history. And we figured out from the way these precincts had voted where our likely precincts were. And that's the way I organize the campaigns in terms of putting together precinct workers and things like that. Now, I, I must say that that's the way I started. It--by the time we got to Election Day, there were 10,000 people that I knew about that worked on Election Day. But there was probably twice as many people that were out there on Election Day. So, you know, we started off with this very organized, you know, scientific, you know, in the terms of the science of the politics, the organizing strategy for, for election. But you know, the emotion by the time we got to that was such that, you know, actually I knew I had won, not because I could count the votes--I mean I had the votes, but I knew I had won because I couldn't control it. You know, it was like total chaos out there in terms of the enthusiasm and the energy that was, that was coming from people. I mean my phone was ringing off the hook. Usually a campaign the night before your phone's ringing off the hook as I--what's my precinct? You know, where am I supposed to be on--my phone would (unclear)--(unclear) saying I'm going to be, and I'm gonna do, you know, people calling in, you know, giving me, you know, what they have decided, I mean people that I, I--some people I knew about from the, from having worked on campaign, a campaign; other folks, I had no idea who they were, but they would call me up 'cause they want--they wanted Harold to know. Tell Harold, you know, I'm gonna be--okay (laughter); that's all right, you be there. And so, you know, it was, it--as we, we got the campaign up and going, it was this, you know, kind of like we can't just go out there and you know, have rallies and you know, have bullhorns on street corners, and cars, you know, driving through communities 'cause we'll never know on Election Day, you know, what our vote total was--our vote totals were gonna be. So, you know, that was part of what I had to do, is, is to balance those kinds of tensions throughout the, the, the fall of '82' [1982] and into '83' [1983]. Story_ID: 81149 Speaker 1: So, so the, the organization of this, as we got started, is that we would sit at my kitchen table and you know, the folks around the table would be people like [HM] Monica Faith Stewart, Al Raby, Jan Roland--oh gosh, I should have started calling names 'cause I'm, I'm gonna leave somebody out. But you know, it were--it, it was kind of like the, the inner core, people who had been with Harold [Washington] and around Harold for a while, although Monica hadn't been around all that long. But you know, during the congressional campaign we had an office that included Monica Faith Stewart when she was running for the General Assembly. So, you know, from 1980 on Monica had been kind of like part of the, the inner circle of folks around, around Harold. So we would sit in the kitchen and figure out, you know, how we were gonna get this, get our hands around this thing. You know, we now had Harold out there as a candidate and you know, we can't leave him hanging. So we had this--so we started, you know, doing the thing about, you know, organizing the, the precincts and things like that, but--oh, I, I got interrupted in terms of targeting. So, you know, we had--you know, as we got into the campaign, obviously day one we didn't do this, but as we went into the campaign, we had a guy who was really good with doing the Election Day numbers. So we got the voter history, and we targeted precincts and targeted areas that we wanted to concentrate, that if we got--if we maximized our votes in these area, and if we got some votes out of these areas, then we would have enough to win, not only because we had enough votes, but also we would deprive the other candidates from those votes as well. And so we looked at the, in the black community, obviously Hispanic, and the lake front community. Those were kind of like our target areas. And so we went harder and aggressive in identifying people in those areas that could be, you know, part of the campaign. And from there, you know, we, we had such a rich history of Harold in terms of, of, of his service to the community; that, you know, we had readymade accomplishments that we could speak to a whole variety of different constituencies in the city. And so then we started to organize around those constituencies as well. You know, 'cause Harold had been involved with women's issues, with consumers' issues, with civil rights issues, with fair housing issues, you know, with--as, not so much as, as a elected official, but as a community leader with police brutality issues and things of that sort. So, yeah, we started--oh, and his brother was into the arts, and his mother was, you know, into the arts, and so you had the whole arts community. And so, you know, we organized all of these different constituencies, you know, teachers, I mean--you know, education, you know, was a big, a big thing with Harold. So, you know, we were, we were, we were organizing at the precinct level, but we were also organizing around constituency groups; so we had Teachers for Harold; and Artists for Harold; and, and you know, you name it for Harold, even had Honkies for Harold (laughter). And so, you know, we, you know, we had--and the advantage of these groups was to, you know, do outreach. You know, so when we weren't finding people knocking on the doors, we would find them because they were a teacher, they were artists, they were a social worker, they were whatever, whatever, and also as a, as a, a fundraising see--you know, one of the things that Harold said we were running against Jane Byrne, who had this obscene amount of money--and he could say obscene like nobody else could say obscene--but she had millions of dollars, and we had nothing, although one of his, one of his requirements before he would run for mayor is that he wanted commitments for a half a million dollars because, you know, one of the things he had done after, you know, this kind of like hurry up and run in '77' [1977] was that he looked at the history of successful and unsuccessful black mayoral campaigns. And he identified what the elements that were there when, when candidates were successful and, and, and what elements were missing. And so the key things for him is a voter registration base. So he put the voter registration challenge on us and then the money challenge, and then the commitment of the, of essentially the black establishment because that was the source of the, of the money and power in the black community. So, with those three things, if we produce those, then he would run. If we didn't produce them, he wasn't running. So it was like the litmus test he gave to us that, you know, the crucible through which, you know, his candidate--candidacy would be, would be based. So-- Story_ID: 81150 Speaker 1: How was--can you tell me how, how [HM] Ed Gardner was convinced to fund the voter registration campaign? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: How did that happen? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I think, you know, Ed was a, a community conscious guy. I mean he came out of, you know, selling hair products door to door. And you know, seeing, you know, the misery and you know, the powerlessness of, you know, black people I think spoke a lot to--and, and as he became successful, that you know, he was, he was into change, and he was into giving back and things of that sort. I think the, the person that got him involved was, you know, to, to do the voter registration thing I think it was actually Tim Black, if I remember correctly. You know, Tim went to him and you know, wanted to, you know, get him to, to invest in funding this voter registration drive. And that was--oh gosh. There as a slogan for one of these voter registration drives, and wouldn't you believe it, I--person I, I forgot. But (unclear) Tim got Ed Gardner to, you know, get involved in the voter registration thing, and you know, out of that, you know, Ed ended up on the finance committee for the campaign, along with Al Johnson and yeah, [HM] Dempsey Travis, and you know, essentially the black elite and the black millionaires, you know, [HM] Johnnie Johnson, you know, were (unclear) part of the, the finance committee. Speaker 1: Was John Johnson (unclear), I mean-- Speaker 2: It was actually Andre Rice I think that was--Andre Rice is Linda's husband, Linda Johnson Rice. I think it was Andre. But, yeah, I mean there were some Johnson. I didn't fool around with the finance committee. I just deal with the finance (unclear)--that this what I need (laughter); find me the money. So I never went to any of those finance committee meetings. But you know, Bill Barry--gosh--the Johnsons I mentioned--oh gosh. Speaker 1: Cirilo McSween--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Cirilo McSween, yeah. Thank you very much. Speaker 1: [HM] Jacoby Dickens--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Jacoby Dickens, yeah, yeah, all those guys, they we were there, yeah. So, so anyway, so, we, we targeted the precincts, you know, so we knew where we wanted to, wanted to work. We, we had the precinct organization; we had the constituency group org--organization; and then, you know, we did the, the thing, you know, we--you know, there had been a big voter registration drive, as I say, you know, during--in fact that was one of the things that people never quite got, is that when Adlai Stevenson was running against Jim Thompson for governor, you know, they had governor--they had Thompson winning in a landslide. Well, you know, Thompson ended up winning by less than 5,000 votes, and why? Is that we had done all of the registration, all of the--in the black community. And these posters did not know, and I think still don't know how to poll in the black community. So they had never recognized that there was a sleeping giant that was out there. And you know, the, these voters were Democratic voters so, you know, Kenne--I mean Stevenson almost beat Thompson, so there'd of been a little bit of, more effort in other parts of the state. You know, we wouldn't have had twenty-five years of Republican rule that we've just broken. But, be that as it may, you know, we, we continued to do voter registration because, you know, part of doing, you know, the, the early analysis is, is that we knew from population of the black community to registration in the black community there was a huge gap, so there was a huge potential. And so the idea was to keep working towards mackum--maximize the potential to get, you know, the maximum registration rate of the black community as, as we could. Now in a Hispanic community it's a bit different because a Hispanic community, the, the history had been to support the--well, there was two different Hispanic communities. In the Mexican community, the tradition had been to support the people in power. So, you know, the--they're not, you know, a kind of a, a progressive community. They're kind of conservative. Puerto Rican community, on the other hand, pretty much operated the same way the black community did in terms of change. So, you know, we had, in terms of organizing in '83' [1983], you know, we just wanted to be even, you know, in the Mexican community. But we really wanted to make sure that, that we got the, the Puerto Rican community. And then, of course, the, the liberal community along the lakefront was, you know, going after the, essentially IVI, IPO, you know, kind of constituency, and the women's vote up there. And so that was a way our campaign strategy was organized, and so our, our, our materials, our election materials, the printed materials, the, the ads on radio/TV, you know, all were around those three groups. Story_ID: 81151 Speaker 1: Now yeah, I could talk for days about [Harold] Washington campaign, but let me give you some of the, the salient points. You know, we had our own pollster, Pat Caddell, and who had a reputation for being a good pollster. And it turns out that he was right on the money in terms of predicting, you know, what we needed to win and what our final outcome would be. So, you know, he was, he was pretty accurate, but the, the, the--there are I think two key turning points in the campaign because, you know, what our polling was telling us was that people really liked Harold, but they didn't believe a black man could be mayor. So that was one of the things we had to overcome. And, and then, you know, the other thing we were, we were--had to do with the white community was, you know, is he really qualified to be, be mayor of the city? So, you know, we had these kind of two arguments that we had to overcome. So the key turning point that kind of answered both of those questions was: one, the debates. Now, we knew that Harold was smarter than both of his opponents put together, had more experience in terms of-- Speaker 2: It's not an exaggeration. Speaker 1: No, it was not an exaggeration--had more experience in terms of the legislative process. You know, he really didn't have any executive experience, but--and that's what I used to always say: Harold, you're sure you wanna be a chief executive? 'Cause he loved being a legislator, you know, and the whole legislative process. But, so, you know, the, the thing was to have a debate in a situation that we could play to his strengths and expose the weaknesses of the other candidates. So we, we got that in a, in a standup debate between the three, Jane Byrne, the existing--the, the, the sitting mayor, and Richard [M.] Daley, the son of the former mayor. And you know, that debate in terms of who won was not at issue. I mean it's very clear that Harold was--had heads and, and, and eons ahead of the other two candidates. Story_ID: 81152 Speaker 1: The other big turning point was the rally at the [University of Illinois] Pavilion. And this was a brainchild of one of our, our, our folks, Sid Ordower, who had done the "Jubilee Showcase" on TV. You know, there's a, a Jewish guy that really was into gospel, and people knew, knew Sid, O-R-D-O-W-E-R, because of being on TV and, and "Jubilee Showcase" and all the gospel singers and all the rest of that. But he was also a union organizer, and he was just in organizing. He was a production man, (unclear) doing big productions and shows, I mean, yeah, so he had all of those skills. And so he had this idea that we really needed to demonstrate it. And also he had been involved at the, the [Martin Luther] King rally in Soldier Field. And you know, these 110,000 people show up on the lakefront for King. So, you know, had these kind of visions of grandeur that we needed to do something that would demonstrate the breadth and, and the diversity of the Harold Washington support. So he said we should have this rally at the Pavilion. And so we looked at him and said: You know how many people the Pavilion hold? Thirteen thousand, of course he knew (laughter). How are we gonna do this, you know? Sid had us--Sid had a plan how we were gonna organize and how we would get 13,000 people into the Pavilion. And so, you know, Al [Raby] as campaign manager and me as precinct coordinator, and even Harold as cand--candidate, we're not quite convinced that we could do this. Sid Ordower was undeterred; he was convinced we could do it. Okay, well, you know, we'd done everything else (laughter); let's do it. And so we decided to go with this rally at the Pavilion that, you know, we filled twice over. You know, it was a stupendous organizing feat of just getting the people in, but actually filling the halls, having the program that we had, that the program, you know, represented the political leadership of the country. We had all kind of, you know, Congress people and, and you know, national leaders that were into labor, to--we didn't have so much in terms of business except black business, but you know, we had black and white and Hispanic, you know, so-- Speaker 2: Who, who showed up actually and spoke and represented--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: That represented what? Speaker 2: I mean, you know, some of these groups you mentioned (unclear) labor and-- Speaker 1: Bill, Bill Lacy from ASME, Senator Allen, Allen-- Speaker 2: Cranston? Speaker 1: Cranston from California. See, you're testing my memory now (laughter), Larry, making me remember all these-- Speaker 2: I'm just trying to get some, some of them because-- Speaker 1: --these names. Oh, yeah, we had-- Speaker 2: --I remember Cranston, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah, and we, and we had a whole delegation from the, the, from the Congress. You know, John Conyers was like my running buddy, you know, like as, as I was out in the precincts organizing things, there was [HM] John Conyers. John Conyers I think spent more time in Chicago [Illinois] than he did in Detroit [Michigan] or in Washington [D.C.] during, during that time. So--oh gosh, oh, it'll, it'll come to me as we go--but it was it was, it was a program, you know, that, that represented, you know, the constituencies that we were trying to speak to here in Chicago, and with their, their national league (unclear) coming in. So, so that rally and the debate answered the two questions: Was he qualified? Well, debate clearly showed he was qualified; can he win? I mean, the enthusiasm coming out of the Pavilion said that the energy level was such that it was gonna carry us through, and in fact it did. Story_ID: 81153 Speaker 1: You know, the--I had on Election Day school buses of college students from around the Midwest, from Ohio, from, you know, Wilberforce, from Central Valley, from, from Michigan, from Downstate Illinois, from Wisconsin, from Iowa, you know, it--you know, these students, mostly black, but you know, diversity of students coming in on these school buses. And on election night, you know, that was my biggest concern. Besides counting the vote was making sure that all of these students--'cause I had--remember I had my, my fifth grade Robert Charman (ph.) getting lost in the Niagara story. So I was not gonna have a single college student (laughter) lost in Chicago, so, you know, getting all of these students back on their buses going back to their campuses, and counting the votes. So I never made it to the victory party, 'cause, you know, those, those two organizing tasks had me busy, so I didn't get to party. I watched it all on TV (laughter). Speaker 2: That's (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: But I, I didn't make it to the second-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --victory party in '87' [1987] either 'cause Harold had this thing. Harold would not declare victory until there was no mathematical possibility that it was a mistake. So he kept me with the precincts, with the election totals until mathematically it was impossible for him to not win. And so that was one thing, you know, so I--and he would call me on the phone, he was calling me on the phone like every ten minutes, you know, what's the total? What's the total? What's the total? And so once I gave him, you know, the, the number that, you know, three candidates--you know, here is his 30--35 percent of the vote. I think that's what he ended up with, 35, 37 percent, that-- Speaker 2: This is, this is just my personal observation being outside of that, being with it, but not in the core of it. But people did things I'd never seen before, in terms of producing campaign materials, groups produce their own buttons, their own slogans-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --their own-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: And they brought 'em to the-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --and I think that-- Speaker 1: That's why I said, you know-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --there was-- Speaker 2: --real (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --there was 10,000 people that I could account for, but there was twice as many that I had no idea. And that went on--I mean people were walking to the office, having had a fundraiser, bringing in money from a fundraiser that we knew nothing at all about, you know, and so it was, you know, that kind of energy. You know, we would get--in fact, I have a picture of the, the buttons I collected, and most of these buttons were from other folks. They were not buttons that were produced by the campaign. So I, I just had a, a vest I wore at the time, and as the folks would give me buttons-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --I'd (laughter)-- Speaker 2: --we'd get 'em--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (Unclear) the city-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that kind of-- Speaker 1: Right, right, in fact I still have a, one of those big, like those big popcorn cans, you know, when you, when you get 'em full of popcorn. I had it full of buttons, you know, from the Washington, the two Washington campaigns, so. Yeah, no, this was absolutely a movement that once the snowball started rolling--and I said, you know, as I said, once we got over this, you know, "is he qualified?" "Can he win?" you know, it was just snowball rolling downhill after that; it was awesome, absolutely awesome. Speaker 2: I mean (unclear)--so you're in the office doing a, performing organizing duties all night when everybody's in Donnelley Hall jumping up and down. Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 2: And how did, how did you feel that night? Speaker 1: Oh, I was on the top of the world. I was on top of the world. Actually I had the best seat in the house (laughter), you know, so maybe in the midst of that crowd I probably wouldn't have seen anything. But you know, I got to see the whole thing from the point of view of TV, you know, so, you know, my, my memory is probably a lot different than a lot of other folks, but. Story_ID: 81154 Speaker 1: What was your reaction to the media's analysis of it? 'Cause I remember people like Dick Kaye, Andy Shaw, and other people just-- Speaker 2: They didn't believe it-- Speaker 1: --couldn't-- Speaker 2: --they didn't be--I mean, I mean it was like--and I remember I--we used to get, you know, these--David Axelrod was working for the "Tribune" at the time. And they would talk about the chaos of the campaign. I mean they couldn't understand, you know, like all this stuff that--I mean and what they saw on the outside, it really did look like chaos. And then Al [Raby] would just play off of that stuff: yeah, you know, chaos is a theory of relatively, you know (laughter). He would, he would, you know, he would have fun with it, but you know, it, it was, it was chaotic. But we also, as I said, we had our structure; we had--you know, I knew, you know, that, you know, what the votes were, you know, when I went to bed that night, if I got to bed that night. I don't remember if I did or not. I probably didn't get to bed that night. But, you know, at any rate, you know, my, my, theory held that I knew that we had enough votes to win. The question was whether or not we're gonna get all those votes out to the polls. And I had a pretty good feeling we were because of the phone calls I was getting that it was not--and I was gonna have to hold people back from the polls and I'd get 'em there, you know--so, you know, that, that kind of, of energy that these people in the media--I mean they'd, they'd never seen it before; they didn't understand. I can remember even at the inauguration--now see, this is what I say, you know, sometimes being in the midst of stuff you miss out on things. But you know, I was at the inauguration, but people who watching the inauguration on TV were telling me about Walter Jacobson and Bill Curtis. Walter Jacobson, Harold was being sworn in, and still is not believing that, you know, he is the mayor of the city of Chicago [Illinois]. So, you know, it was, it was a learning experience from them, but the thing is that, by the time Harold died, is that they had all come around, you know; that they realized the brilliance of the man; they appreciated his skills; they appreciated his vision for the city, so that, you know, that during those very hard days of, of after Harold dead--died and you know, just having these folks live in my face, you know, throughout that entire period is that, you know, they, they did, I mean they did come to the other side of that. You know, but--you know, Dick Kaye will tell you now about--I mean he'll get him rem--reminiscing about Harold stories. And you know, you know, he I think came to fundamentally appreciate, you know, the, the, the things he did for the city. Story_ID: 81155 Speaker 1: You know, one of the people who got to be one of my good friends, Lynn Sweet, the [Chicago] "Sun-Times," a reporter of the "Sun-Times" at the time, you know, in the midst of the campaign, did--this was while Harold [Washington] was (unclear). It was lighting the Christmas tree, and, and, and that was the other thing, is that my son grew up with Harold. Harold was like his grandfather. And you know, Chris had Harold wrapped around his little finger. You know and Harold--Chris will walk into Harold's office, and you know, Harold was always getting gifts from somebody. And Chris would see something he wanted, and he start looking at it, and Harold say, you want that, boy? Go ahead, take it. Or when, you know, Harold would call my, my house and Chris would answer the phone, you know, as a little kid, and (unclear) he'd say, Chris, this is Congressman Washington. I wanna talk to your mother. Ma, Harold is on the phone. And Harold would say, teach that boy some manners. Tell him to call me congressman. I said okay. I said Chris, Harold wants you to call him congressman--okay, Harold (laughter). And so it was that, it was that kind of, of relationship. So Chris decided it was--you know, he's home from school, Thanksgiving, you know, story on the TV, Harold's gonna light the Christmas tree, so--and I get--I'm working. And you daughter tells me this story later that Harold [sic, Chris] calls up Dolores, who was Harold's secretary, and said I wanna speak to Harold. Harold's busy. Oh, I need to talk to Harold. Would you tell him to call me back? So Harold calls Chris back, and Kim answers the phone. So I know this is what happened. Kim tells me this, that Harold called and said Chris called and said he wants to talk to me. And so Chris is in the backyard playing football, and Kim--Chris--Kim calls him in, and, and Chris comes and tells Harold that he wants to light the Christmas tree. Oh, okay, well, be down here at four o'clock or something or another. So, you know, Chris is now--and I go out to the Christmas tree lighting--no, actually before I go out to the Christmas tree lighting, Kimberly shows up in my office with Christopher and one of his buddies. And I say hey, hi, you guys. What are you doing? What's up? And Kim tells me this story, that Chris has called Harold and said he wanted to light the Christmas tree, and so they were (laughter) coming down to light the Christmas tree. So I go downstairs, 'cause my office is on six. I go down to the fifth floor, and sure enough, Harold was waiting for Chris to show up, and they had the, the, the Christmas Carol characters, Tiny Tim and, and, and lighting the Christmas trees. So, you know, Tiny Tim, and Christopher, and Mike Holewinski's kids were just in the office. Mike Holewinski--don't ask me to spell that--was assistant to the mayor. And so his kids were there, so we all went out to the Christmas tree. And so, you know, Harold gets--Harold loved kids. All the kids are around. He gets up the platform to light the Christmas tree. So the next day, the story in the "Sun-Times" was "Children of clout light the Christmas tree." Well, you know, I call up Lynn Sweet, and I said Lynn, you don't know what you're talking about. I--and you know this was not children of clout. I didn't know my son was coming. He is the clout that lit the Christmas tree, not me. I had nothing to do with that. And so I said talk to him. And so Christopher tells Lynn how he ended up lighting the Christmas tree. It had nothing to do with children of clout, so. Anyway, so that started my relationship with, with Lynn Sweet. But, yeah, the media, it took 'em awhile. You know, they didn't know what they were running into. I mean they didn't know what they were witnessing until it was over, and then I think they came to appreciate it. Story_ID: 81156 Speaker 1: Now, now what was your role during the Harold Washington Administration? What was it like (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, I started off as assistant director and ended up as director of the mayor's office of intergovernmental affairs, and that was the office that dealt with all of the governments that are called terminus to the city of Chicago [Illinois], along with, you know, the legislative bodies here. So essentially, my responsibility was the city council, the general assembly, and then all of the governments, Cook County, Board of Ed [Education], RTA [Regional Transportation Authority], CTA [Chicago Transit Authority], McCormick Place. Speaker 1: Park District. Speaker 2: Yeah, Park District, all of those kinds of, of governments, along with the Congress, so, you know, all of those policy positions. And my job was to translate city policy to these other, other governments, and to--with the city council and general assembly of the Congress obviously was to advocate for the city's positions on, you know, whatever, you know, legislative stuff that was, that was going on. So, so, yeah, it was, it was in some ways like a campaign, you know, like there were a lot of different, you know, stuff that was go--going on all the time, you know, the, the, the, the city council, of course, we started off with this 29-21 battle. So, you know, that was, that took a lot of energy until we got to 86 redistricting. And then we were able to get the majority in the city council, and so that flipped, and so the energy level going in the city council, you know, was lessened. But you know, we also had fires that were always going on down in Springfield. And then [Edward] Vrdolyak tried to take the 29-21 to Springfield, you know, and tried to create some divisions there. And so we had to fight off that battle. In the Congress we never had to fight those kind of battles, but it was really--you know, it was more, you know, the Reagan, you know, policies that we were fighting in the Congress 'cause we had this whole thing about revenue sharing, and he took that away. And you know, Harold, actually in working on these federal policies, you know, went to other cities in Illinois. And we went to those cities like Peoria and Rock Island, stuff like that. They said they had never seen a Chicago mayor before. And so they were just ecstatic 'cause Harold Washington--you know, Mayor [Jim] Maloof of Peoria, you know, I'll never forget him, you know, was one of those people when Harold died, you know, he was up here for the funeral--but just so pleased that a mayor had come to Peoria--mayor of Chicago had come to Peoria. Story_ID: 81157 Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, Ma'am, can you give us today's date? Speaker 2: Today is February 7th, 2003. Speaker 1: Right, and your name is? Speaker 2: Jacky Grimshaw. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois, 1900 South Michigan. Speaker 1: And I'm Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer. Scott Stearns is our videographer. And we're picking up where we left off last time. Story_ID: 81158 Speaker 1: Tell us about the closing (unclear) days of Harold Washington's first term. I mean what were things looking like then, because you know, we, I, I know we, we had like council wars going. You were talking about council wars last time and how that was different from dealing with him as a congressman. 'Cause you'd been a staff member--you'd, you had been on staff with him in other situations, and you weren't used to all this fighting. Speaker 2: Well, no, I was never actually on staff with--on his political staff. I was only on his campaign staff prior to his becoming mayor. So the first time I worked with him on his governmental staff was in the mayor's office. But after we had the court decision that changed the, the, the, the makeup of the city council by changes and redistricting so that the blacks and Hispanic in the city had more of a chance at representation, we were able to elect aldermen to give Harold the majority in the city council. And from that point on, we were able to really move his agenda forward, particularly in getting appointments to the various boards and commissions that had been frozen out by the 29. So as we were coming into the reelection in 1987, the, the--Harold had been able to establish himself as leader of the city. Not only that, but during that time, Ronald Reagan was president. And one of the things that Ronald Reagan had done was to eliminate revenue sharing, which had been a federal program that provided funds to, to communities across the country. And Reagan decided to take back all that money. Well, Harold, you know, I think, you know, still having the juices of being a legislator, wanted to respond. And so he started a, a crusade almost in Illinois, getting the, the mayors around the city to--I mean not--I'm sorry, around the state to, to actually protest what Reagan was doing. And so, you know, he went around to a lot of the towns and cities in Illinois, places that had never seen a Chicago mayor before. And they were enthusiastic because, you know, like the city of Chicago was taking a big hit, and it was gonna impact their budget. For some of these smaller communities it was even a bigger impact; so, you know, they readily followed his lead. And he went up to Washington [D.C.] to testify in front of the Congress advocating for the restoration of a revenue sharing. So, you know, those kinds of leadership things he was able to do, and not having to worry all the time about fighting to maintain, you know, the, the city going forward in the right direction. Story_ID: 81159 Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, now the redistricting fight was a court battle basically. So the administration had allies in the, in the judiciary (unclear)-- Speaker 2: [Coughing]--Excuse me. No, it wasn't that it had allies. It was just the law. You know, there is the federal law, one person, one vote, that govern the, the reapportionment and the redistricting of, of political jurisdictions. And what the city council mapmakers had done was to ignore, you know, the population of, of non-Caucasians in the city. And they tried to maintain a power base for the white politicians, to the detriment of blacks and Hispanics, and the court said you couldn't do that. You know, it was against, you know, the civil rights laws. It was against one person, one vote, and they had to draw the lines more fairly. And when that happened, more black wards and more Hispanic wards were created. So it wasn't, you know, favoritism. It was just judges upholding the law and the Constitution. Speaker 1: Okay, well, you know, having lived in Chicago a while, just that sometimes that you, you can have enemies-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --even if you don't have friends (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: --so I--that's why-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I was asking about that. Because some, sometimes things that are supposed to happen by law don't happen (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Exactly, that's true. Speaker 1: They just don't. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Documents that you should see or have a right to see by law you, somehow you can't see or the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--can't find it or some-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, a lot of-- Speaker 2: Well, I, I think also that, you know, if anything, and I can't speak for the judiciary, but this was a case that was going to keep right on going. And you know, there had been a nun--a number of successful challenges, you know, in federal court that had got all the way to the Supreme Court. So, you know, in that sense that, you know, who wants to go down in, in history, you know, as a judge that is gonna have his case overthrown because it was so violently violative of a constitution. So, you know, they may not have been friends, but I think, you know, operate in their self-interest. And you know, this was a losing case if they hadn't ruled the way they did. Speaker 1: Okay, well, that sheds more light on it, yeah. 'Cause I know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --dynamic going on is a push and pull there somewhere. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 81160 Speaker 1: All right, so in, in '87' [1987] then, you were saying that Mayor [Harold] Washington was--people were fairly optimistic then I guess going into '87' [1987], his reelection. Speaker 2: In terms of the reelection, yes, we were, we were pretty optimistic because we had a record to run on. You know, we had solved the deficit problem. You know, we had cleaned out, you know, the, the, the--I don't know how to say--you know, just the, the supply of nonessential workers that were on the city payroll that contributed to the deficit, yeah, we cleaned that up. You know, we had people on the various boards and commissions that were supportive of Harold's policies in terms of, you know, the government being for the people, not for the, the benefit of those in office, you know, having reinvested in neighborhoods and shifting away from, you know, the total concentration on, on downtown. So, you know, the, the record was there, and we took it to the people. And we were, you know, pretty confident that, you know, he would be rewarded with reelection. And you know, the other thing is that, you know, we, through polling and various surveys, you know, got a clear sense of the people who were rabid in opposition in 1983 were taking the position of they weren't gonna support him, but they weren't gonna come out and oppose him either. So a no vote is a yes vote, you know, as far as we were concerned. So, you know, we, in, in spite of, you know, Jane Byrne getting back in for a hot minute, Tom Hynes getting in, you know, people like that, that we were, we were not overly concerned about reelection. Always, when you go into election you're concerned, but you know, it was not at all like '83' [1983], you know, nail biter. What's gonna happen? Are we gonna be able--you know, it was not that kind of election. Speaker 1: In '83' [1983] you had the stigma of him being the first black mayor-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --or the--it kind of loomed over people. And I'm, I guess I'm referring to Bernie Epton's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, "before it's too late." Speaker 1: --"before it's too late," yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And--but it was too late, and he got elected, and people saw that the city didn't crumble. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, and in fact we prospered. So it was, it was a good feeling going into reelection. As, as I said before, I always like to, in elections, know before the polls open whether or not we won or loss. Well, you know, in the, in the case of '87' [1987], you know, it was like going into the campaign. You know, I had a sense that we'd won, you know, before we'd even structured it or, or the opposition became clear. You know, and we had some ups and downs along the way. I mean it wasn't smooth sailing through the '87' [1987] election. But you know, the thing is that we had enough of a grip on the government, you know, enough of a grip on the electorate that, you know, we weren't overly concerned with that election. Story_ID: 81161 Speaker 1: Can you give me an analysis of the opposition, maybe starting with Tom Hynes, if you would? Speaker 2: Well, Tom Hynes was, he was, was holding office as a Cook County assessor. He was a Democratic Party committeeman, the 19th Ward, a stalwart in terms of the regular Democratic Party, you know, longtime committeeman, had a campaign organization, you know, South Side Irish, you know, kind of a support base. So you know, he was nothing to be sneezed at. You know, he was able to raise money, you know, so he had, you know, the financial wherewithal to run a campaign. But you know, the, the, the--I think he came across as, you know, appealing to--trying to appeal to a white vote, you know, to continue where Bernie Epton left off of, of having this, you know, choice for people, you know, that--you know, Harold [Washington] was a fluke, and you know, we just, what we need is a great white hope. I think that was the role he played. I think Jane Byrne, you know, she realized her mistake. You know, she was, she, she really had the ability to be a long-term mayor, but she was a one-termer because she had abandoned, you know, the principles and, and values that got her elected in the first place. I mean she got elected as someone who was going to respond to the people, that was, that was going to, you know, change the way, you know, business was done in the city. And she ended up joining that evil cabal that she talked about. And so I think in '87' [1987], you know, it was an attempt to try and redeem herself, to go, you know, back to who Jane Byrne was when she was this feisty, you know, commissioner of consumer affairs, fighting for the people. But you know, at that point she had lost her financial base. You know, she still had a core group, particularly women and older women that, you know, was still a base of support. But you know, there was just not enough there to put together a citywide coalitional campaign that elected her I the first place. Speaker 1: Okay. So in the--now, am I--let's see, am I recall this correctly? Jane Byrne ended up at some point switching her allegiance to the Washington campaign? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, she did. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know, I mean I think once she got out there and tested the water, and saw her fundraising capacity, and you know, saw the support base, that there was no way that, you know, she was gonna be able to do it, and I think also in analyzing how she won in 1979, that a large part of the reason she won was because of the black vote, and that was not available to her in 1987. So, you know, there were not enough non-black voters, and really non-Hispanic voters, non-black and non-Hispanic voters to, you know, put together a successful campaign. She could not, you know, rely on, you know, the way they said, you know, these three candidates, you know, Byrne and Daley on one hand and Harold on the other. And Harold was able to walk down kind of the middle of these warring, you know, white factions to be elected; that, you know, she could not repeat that scenario. She was not gonna be the person that was gonna be able to walk down the middle and, and be successful. So yes, she ended up coming over and supporting us. And Tom Hynes, yeah, really did too. You know, he, he realized before the, the election day that, you know, he had no chance of winning. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, you, you would never know it by listening to the media though I mean in those days. I mean they-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --pushed Tom Hynes right up to the, the end, you know. Story_ID: 81162 Speaker 1: But, yeah, but Jane Byrne--did Tom Hynes and Jane Byrne represent some kind of a split in the white community, and especially in the Irish community? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. You know, Jane Byrne was really not of that Democratic machine, you know. She just made the accommodation with some of those aldermen that are in the chine--in the machine, like [Edward] Vrdolyak at the time. But you know, so she was not one of the boys; you know, she did not belong to that club, and she was North Side Irish, which is very different than the South Side Irish, you know. So there was that, that kind of split that was, you know, part of the culture, the political and social culture of Chicago, you know, North Side Irish versus South Side Irish. So, you know, the, the, the, the two of them were never in the same pod, you know, sort of speak. Speaker 1: That's, that, that is interesting, 'cause I know, I heard that analysis in those days. But I think in the black community we often see, you know--first of all, we see white people as white people-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: --and don't see 'em as ethnic groups or--you know, but it, it, it, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it helps to have an analysis (unclear)--deeper than--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no, that's true. And usually, you know, you have, you know, the white community that--just like the Epton thing, you know, they coalesce. But you know, in the primary, you know, you--everybody is every person for themselves, you know, sort of speak. And you know, if Jane Byrne had won, Hynes would have been there supporting her. If Hynes had of won, you know, Jane would have been there supporting him in the general election or whatever. But you know, in the primary, you know, it's like I'm the best person to beat this black guy, and neither of them were the white--right person to do it. Speaker 1: So in, in this election, though, Richard Daley, Richard M. Daley, didn't participate-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --as a candidate. Speaker 2: He was State's Attorney, and you know, he essentially was State's attorney, although I think, you know, in his heart of hearts, you know, Tom Hynes was his guy--again, South Side Irish allegiance, longtime, you know, part--you know, Hynes was part of the Richard J. Daley, you know, machine. So, you know, that--you know, they were definitely out of the same pod versus Jane Byrne, who was never part of that group. Story_ID: 81163 Speaker 1: Okay, and the final, the final candidate in the general election I guess against Harold Washington that at least got a lot of publicity was his old nemesis, Ed Vrdolyak, from you know, Southeast Side, so. Can you talk about what-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, there was all-- Speaker 1: It was his last hurrah when--(laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but there was also Donald Haider. Remember Donald Haider. Speaker 1: He was the Republican. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, right. Speaker 1: But you know in Cook County nobody takes a Republican seriously anyway. But Don Haider, right, he was--right-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --he sure was. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: H-A-I-D-E-R. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And it's very interesting because Haider had been the budget director under Jane Byrne, so you know, there was (laughter)--I mean just if it had played it out, it'd been interesting if it had of been Jane Byrne versus Don Haider, to see how that race would have gone. But you know, a Democrat would have won. As you say, it's hard for a Republican to get elected in Chicago. But anyway, so the, the--I think that '87' [1987] election is what finally convinced Ed Vrdolyak that he had no future in the Democratic Party. You know, and he switched over to the Republicans and you know he's been there ever since. Speaker 1: (Unclear) he made the switch as a political ploy to run in the general election, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But it didn't do him any good. It was too little too late I guess, yeah. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: What-- Speaker 2: Good riddance. Speaker 1: What, what's your assessment of him? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Ed Vrdolyak. He, he seems to have a--I mean there, there are people that say he isn't all, really all that bad. Speaker 2: Well, Edward, he started off running as an Independent. You know, we talked about how I got involved in electoral politics, and there was a woman by the name of Barbara O'Connor. Well, Barbara O'Connor in some ways, you know, trained Eddie Vrdolyak. And one of--Barbara told me this story. But in one of the--I think it was one of the either congressional or state rep campaigns. It may have been congressional with somebody like Barrett or O'Hara or somebody like that. But she actually worked, or Vrdolyak worked for her in terms of learning the election process and, and you know, being an Independent (laughter), or at least a progressive Democratic. And so to come from there to this, you know, Machiavellian, you know, control freak of a, of a political, you know, operative, you know, is a, is a big, a big stretch. I think that Vrdolyak probably isn't as racist as he appeared, you know, that 29-21--I mean they use race because it was convenient. It was really all about power. And so I don't think any of them were the down out racist, you know, that, you know, their actions made them appear to be. You know, I, I had to deal with all of these guys, all of the 29 up close and personal because that was my job. And you know, they'd come into my office, and they would be regular guys, you know. I mean they didn't come in with chips or being hard, hard (unclear) or anything like that. I mean they were coming in, doing the city's business. So, you know, it's--(unclear) say what kind of guy is Vrdolyak? I think he is a guy that enjoyed power. You know, I was never in his, in his Democratic headquarters office. But people would tell me the story that he's sitting there surrounded by a bank of phones, and as--and one time is on half of the phones, you know, talking to one person and the other. And, and I think, you know, that was his thrill, you know, is to be able to have that kind of power and control and the center of attention and things of that sort. So, you know, he's, he's not, not a personal friend of mine. I mean I got to know [Ed] Burke much better than I got to know Vrdolyak. So, you know, I, I don't wanna, you know, try and present that I understand his character, but he is a complex individual. He's, he's not, you know, you can't pigeonhole him as a, as a raving racist or anything like that. Speaker 1: And he went on to become the host of a liberal talk show (laughter), FM radio I think. Speaker 2: I mean his, his best buddy was John Davis, a black guy. You know, so, you know, he--it was, you know, the 29 was really about who was gonna be in charge. Remember now, Jane Byrne had, had essentially turned the city over to Vrdolyak; I mean that was that evil cabal, so now he was enjoying that power of being, you know, the mayor without portfolio, sort of speak, of wanting things. And then you got this guy, Washington, when he was inaugurated just said hey, those days are over. I'm in charge, right. And you know, that was, you know, that was a gauntlet. Story_ID: 81164 Speaker 1: Now what about the other Ed, Ed Burke? Speaker 2: Ed Burke? Speaker 1: What was your impression of him? Speaker 2: Ed Burke is a very smart guy, and so when, whenever you're dealing with very smart guys, you know, (unclear) very smart people (laughter), you know, male or female, that, you know, you, you have someone that you can work with for good or for ill. And so, Burke was one of those people, you know, knew the finances of the city. If you needed to know anything about municipal budgeting or funding or anything like--you couldn't find a better expert. But at the same time, you know, he realized that, you know, Harold Washington was not somebody--he was not a Jane Byrne, that they were not going to be able to roll him and you know, to usurp his power, that Harold understood who he was, what the mayor's office was, and was not going to, not going to give it up. Story_ID: 81165 Speaker 1: So, well, how did you feel going into the '87' [1987], that, that campaign? I mean how did you--you, you felt that, you felt optimistic you said-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, absolutely. You know, we, we, we approached the campaign very much the same way we approached the '83' [1983], identifying where our votes were, where our opposition was, what are the number of votes we thought we needed to win, putting together coalitions, you know, you know, care and feeding of our base, you know, sort of speak. So you know, the, the campaign wasn't as in, intense in terms of the organization and the structure as the '83' [1983] one had been. But at the same time, you know, it was, you know, we had the mayor's office, you know, and we could use, you know, the mayor's office as the bully pulpit. You know, we could, you know, we had access to things like free TV. I mean the mayor calls a press conference, you know, who's not gonna show up? You know, we could stage events in terms of how we release things that we were going to do for the city so that, you know, it, it played to its benefit. So, you know, the power of incumbency, it gives you a lot of options that as a, as a challenger you don't have. So, you know, we recognize that, and we made use of all of the opportunities that we had to foster not only the government of the city, but also, you know, the mayoral campaign as well. Story_ID: 81166 Speaker 1: Okay, now you--from what I've read, you were, you were not supposed to be in charge of the campaign, but you, you served in that capacity for a time because of the absence of someone who was chosen for that role. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, no, I was, I was a deputy campaign manager for the '87' [1987] campaign. But I had to, you know, essentially act as, you know, the campaign manager until we were able (laughter)--actually it happened in both campaigns. You know, in '83' [1983], we started off with Renault, and, and you know we ended up with Al Raby, and the, the same thing with '87' [1987]. Ken Glover ended up, you know, in the final analysis being the campaign manager. And Ken Glover was someone who had started off with us, but had gone on to be an investment banker in New York. And so it was, you know, kind of a transitional period to--you know, he'd never run a campaign before and--but you know, he had managerial experience. And running a campaign is very much like running any kind of major enterprise. So, yeah, that's a--you know, I, I had both roles, as, as campaign manager and as deputy campaign manager. But also, I never gave up the precinct coordination because that's my love. I mean that's how you really get to influence the election, if you have control over the, the vote gathering apparatus. And so, you know, that was, that was my focus, you know, although, you know, as campaign manager you gotta worry about everything; you gotta worry about, you know, the, the, the public relations; you gotta worry about the, the media; you have to worry about raising the money; you gotta, you know, worry about campaign committees that--you know, all that other stuff. But you know, I still (laughter) focus in on where are my votes and who's getting them, you know, and counting 'em up. Speaker 1: That's basic, basic (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: --election you, that's something that, that's what you started doing back in Hyde Park, way back in-- Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Speaker 1: --the old days. Speaker 2: Getting, getting the votes, finding out where they are, and making sure that on Election Day you can count on those votes. Speaker 1: Now do you see that as a, as your major contribution to the election of Harold Washington? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. I mean the other stuff, the strategy. You know, probably the, in the, in the '83' [1983] campaign, you know, the, the, the biggest decision we made was that debate, that first debate, and not only the debate, but how to approach the debate, to go right in there, you know, with a knockout punch to Jane Byrne, and you know, debating and coming up, you know, and deciding that that was the way--you know, was probably one of the more exciting things. You know, and then the other thing is just taking a chance on that Pavilion rally, you know, and the, the strategy behind that I, I think were--you know, those two things, you know, really made the '83' [1983] election. Eighty-seven [1987], you know, didn't have anything as, you know, (unclear) in terms of strategy as those two decisions in 80--in '83' [1983]. But you know, still, you gotta find the votes, and that, that's always the key to the campaign, you know, knowing where those votes are coming from. And you know, the, the other thing is that, you know, the, the campaigns from the time I first started to, to '87' [1987], which is the last major campaign I, you know, I've done. I--you know, since then I've only done little things. You know, I've, you know, done Election Day stuff for candidates, or I've done film banking. But you know, I haven't taken on any--yeah, my heart just isn't in it. You know, it was--it, it, it takes, you know, to a lot of dedication, a lot of belief, a, a lot of, you know, giving over of your soul to a candidate, you know, to, to be in a big fight like that. And you know, I just haven't have the fire in the belly since '87' [1987] to, to do that. Other than that it's, you know, I've supported candidates. I've given money, you know, that kind of stuff, but twenty-four hours a day, haven't done it since. Story_ID: 81167 Speaker 1: Many people who worked on the [Harold] Washington campaigns have not done as much since. And they say that they just don't feel it, you know, anymore. And I mean how--and you said basically the same thing. Does this take a--does--how does this take a toll on your family, I mean this kind of activity, and, and-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, when you have essentially a movement, and that's what I saw at Harold Washington's '83' [1983] campaign and his administration and reelection. And it's really kind of movement that it's not something that you do nine to five. You know, it's something that becomes your life; it's all encompassing. And as a result, you know, everybody in the family has to be a part of it, otherwise, you know, you, you lose, or you'll hear people who'll say well, you know, I lost my husband, or I lost my wife as a result of a campaign. And so, for us, it was a family affair. You know, my, my husband was part of the kitchen cabinet, you know, kind of the strategy team for Harold. You know, I was talking about, you know, the whole issue of the debate and the Pavilion. And you know, we met where the, at one of my neighbors' house on the Southside on the debate issue. And you know, there were a variety of people, including Bill Zimmerman, who was the, our media consultant, Wayne Whalen, Tom Coffey, Marilyn Katz, Al Raby--seems like I'm forgetting somebody. You know, and we met and we hashed through some of these, you know, major decisions. And once, you know, we had figured out the pros and cons--because if you take an idea to Harold, you had to be clear on the rationale, you know, the, the potential downsides, you know, as well as, as the positive side, because he, he was a, a political strategist himself, I guess, and so, you know, he understood, you know, these, these things almost instinctively. And so, you know, you had to have a good case to take to him, particularly if you wanted to do something that was not, you know, like obvious in terms of--you know, of course this is a way you would behave. So if it was anything out of the ordinary, man, you'd better, you know, you'd better be right there. And so, you know, my husband was part of that, you know, in terms of deciding on, on campaign literature; in fact, he wrote some of the, the literature we used, ideas for, you know, posters and things like that. So he was right there. As I mentioned before, my son was taking those bags of blue buttons to, you know, his school and passing them out and you know, putting them on all of his friends. And you know, he was a proselytizer for Harold. My daughter was away at school at the time, so she was not as directly involved, but only kid of peripherally when she would come home and things of that sort. The other thing for us is that every Christmas, you know, we would go because that was a time that kids were out of school. So mid-December to early January, we would go off to St. Croix. And the Christmas of 1982 was the first time we had not gone since my son was two years old. You know, so, you know, it was a whole change in kind of the family, family tradition and what we did. So, you know, as, as I would work these long hours, you know, and my, my husband would get involved, we had good friends. You know, my son had good friends, and his parents became his substitute parents. So as, you know, we were off doing something, you know, we didn't have to worry about him. He was safe, you know. But it was part of that constellation of people that were drawn into us and to the, the campaign. Story_ID: 81168 Speaker 1: So, you know, as we, you know, progress into--you know, we got through the campaign into the administration, you know, in a lot of ways my hours didn't decrease all that much, you know, that, you know, working for Harold [Washington] was a twenty four-hour a day operation. And, and probably the most vivid example of that is, you know, one, a trip that I missed (laughter), you know, the, the perks of being in government, you know, is that Harold was on his international thing. And he had been invited to, to China and Japan, and I was scheduled to go on that trip with him. And I was all excited because I had wanted to go to China since I was thirteen years old. But part of my job as intergovernmental was to have responsibility for all of the other governments and Cook County, and, and one of those governments was the board of education. And so when the board of education and the teachers' strike got to impasse--I mean teachers union got to impasse, and you know, in their negotiation, I couldn't go to China. I had to stay here to deal with that policy issue. And so if China is twelve hours in terms of time difference ahead of us, so when Harold and the crew traveling in China and Japan were starting their day, is when we should have been going to bed. But because I knew he was gonna be checking in, I was (laughter) I was on a 24-hour cycle, right. But then at the same time, you know, in terms of negotiation, you know, they were going 24 hours as well. So, you know, it was, it was a, an opportunity lost for me in terms of, you know, being able to experience, you know, an international, you know, governmental experience. But at the same time, you know, being involved in, you know, that negotiation between the union and the school board was also in some ways--I don't wanna say exciting because it was exhausting, but you know, it was a different kind of experience, where you really see, you know, policies being decided that are gonna affect the lives of, you know, really millions of people. Because you know, the, the children and the school system, you know, what happens there really does impact the, the entire city of Chicago whether or not you have children in the system or not. So, you know, it was like, you know, two huge opportunities competing, you know, in my life. And you know, I had to focus on one versus doing the, the other. But you know, some of the, the down sides, though, of, you know, having a family and in this consuming thing is we have--my, my family had planned a vacation, a European vacation. And it was after my son got out of school, so it was scheduled for June, and you know, my--also when my husband got out of school 'cause he's a, he's a professor. So, you know, we had planned it thinking, you know, this was end of the General Assembly session; you know, we were--we'd be free to go; you know, nothing was happening in the city. And don't you know that the General Assembly couldn't reach con--consensus and end the session when they were supposed to. So we went, you know, into July--yeah, in fact I guess our vacation was scheduled for July, and we, we were due to end the session on June 30th. Well, you know, couldn't, couldn't reach agreement. I can't remember now what the issue was, but it was probably about budget, which is normally a thing that holds, holds things up down there. And I couldn't leave, you know. 'Cause if I left, you know, the cities, the cities' well-being is tied up a lot of what the General Assembly does and decides, and particularly if its financial. So, you know, I had to stay on the job in Springfield. So my husband and family--children took off to Europe. You know, and it was actually my son's first visit to Europe. My daughter had been there before, but his first visit. So I got to miss that, which was, again, an opportunity lost as I was tending to the, to the city's business. Story_ID: 81169 Speaker 1: I, I mean it's, it's something that you wouldn't, you wouldn't miss those kind of opportunities again I guess for--I mean is, is there any cause that you can think of now that you would miss that kind of thing? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No. Now, as I look at my, my grandchildren, my daughter's young children, and you know, there is nothing that would make me miss an important event in their lives. In fact, you know, I was in, I was in Arizona--I'm sorry, New Mexico, up in Carson National Forest on, on assignment. And the only time that my daughter could schedule her daughter's christening was one of the days, it was a day before I was due back from, from New Mexico. And the difficulty was is that up in the forest, you know, it was a group and you know, it was fifty miles to the nearest airport, so you had to--you know, they had a van to pick us up and all the rest of that. And so, you know, they said you couldn't leave early, and I said no, I gotta leave early. If I can't leave early, then I'm not coming. And so we worked it out, but I was able to make my escape and get back to the airport to get home for her christening. So, yeah, there is, yeah, there is definitely, you know, I, you know, I, I, I ask myself, you know, like if I had that kind of thing, you know, like would I have given up the city's business and given up Harold--you know, those tradeoffs. But when you're in the midst of it, you know, like I was, you know, and everything was a crisis it seems, or at least a lot of things were a crises. Yeah, and you know, I said okay, Bill, can you handle this with Chris while I do this? You know, and so he was always there, and he would handle those things with Chris, but you know, there are things that I really missed out with my son, you know, because of, because of the campaign, and because of not only the campaign, but also the government. But on the other hand, you know, when--other years when we were stuck down in Springfield [Illinois], and you know, Chris was out of school, 'cause his school went out early in June, so that even if we didn't go over session, you know, he would come down. And he and Matt Braun, [HM] Carol [Moseley] Braun's son, you know, would also be there. And you know, they had their own little social group, you know, the children of the legislators. And, and my son--and you know, like some of those nights when we'd go until midnight, and you know, they'd be up and (unclear) playing with the, with the secretaries, you know, with--they would ball up little pieces of paper and use pencils and they would play baseball games and things like that. So, you know, it was, it was an experience for him that, you know, you--yeah, how many kids get to do that? Not a lot so, you know, there were some positives for him along with the negatives of not having his mother around all the time. Story_ID: 81170 Speaker 1: Now, I think Frederick Douglass said, "If a movement does consume you completely, it does nothing." Did you agree with that? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. That's what I'd say. You know, this was not--you know, to be in, in the movement that was a Harold Washington campaign and administration, you know, was not a nine to five operation, you know. Harold used to, to tease. A lot of folks didn't know that Harold was a Cleveland Browns fan, in terms of football, and I'm a diehard Chicago Bears fan. And, and you know, this was, you know, his administration before everybody had cell phones, you know. There was, is--there were some car phones, but not really portable cell phones, but everybody had beepers. And so I, of course, had my beeper, and I'd go off to Soldier Field for Bear game and my beeper would go off. And so I'd look at it, and it's Harold home number, and I said psst, gotta go take this call. So I'd make my way down underneath the stands and phone, a public phone; I'd call up and say yes, sir, what do you need? And he would hear all the noise, you know, 'cause it's never quiet at a Bear game. Where are you? I'm at Soldier Field. Call me when you get home and hang up the phone, right (laughter). But he knew that was my passion. That's how I, I, you know, kind of like let the stress of the job, and so he, he respected that. And you know, when I got home, sure enough I called him. And whatever the crisis was, it was able to maintain itself for the couple of hours I was at Soldier Field. And you know--but you know, we would--sometimes he would go to the, to the game because he had access to one of the boxes. And you know, he would talk about and compare, you know, like Walter Payton to Jim Brown. And that was why he was a Cleveland Browns fan was because of Jim Brown. And so, you know, we would get into these debates. Now, you know, Jim Brown--I mean I was kind of aware of him, but you know, yeah, that was Cleveland. I didn't know that much about him. And--but Walter Payton and Gale Sayers, now, you know, I--that's how I cut my football teeth, except for my father, who was a Cardinals fan. But then the Cardinals abandoned us, and so it's only the Bears after that. So, you know, it was, it was, you know, kind of those, those moments when, you know, we'd go to a Bears game, and all of the problems of the city could be held at bay for a while. And it's, you know, just kind of total enjoyment. Yeah, we went out to San Francisco when the Bears, you know, were--one of the--(unclear) the--their lead-ups to eventually win--winning the Super Bowl. And we were the guest of Mayor Feinstein, Diane Feinstein, and she, you know, really, you know, rolled out the red carpet for us, and so that was kind of awesome. But then after we lost, you know, my husband and I were gonna--you know, we're due to come back later in the day, and we lost, and so we took the red eye. I said can't stay in San Francisco another minute, then we got on the red eye and came back home. First time I'd ever done the red eye (laughter). I can't say it was the last time, but you know, (unclear)--like I'll never do this unless I absolutely have to again, but-- Speaker 1: This a playoff in '86' [1986] or-- Speaker 2: No, it was be--this must have been like '84' because-- Speaker 1: Oh (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --we--yeah-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: did before. Yeah, we lost this one to the 49ers, but the next year I think is when we-- Speaker 1: In '85' [1985]. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: So by then we, we all went down to, to New Orleans for the Super Bowl too. And so that's another fun time with my son and, and Harold, that Harold had this ten-gallon hat. I can't remember who gave it to him, but he was wearing this hat, and my son took it and, and to put it on. And the hat just dwarfed him, just (laughter)--but you know, it was one of those fun, fun times with the Frigerettes and you know. Speaker 1: The Refrigerettes, I forgot all about them (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, the Refrigerettes, you know, to go along with our Frigerator (laughter), William Perry. So, yeah, that was, that was fun. So New Orleans always has a big, warm spot in my heart. Our one and only Super Bowl was in New Orleans, being on Bourbon Street, and, and getting those Patriot fans, and calling 'em names and things like that (laughter). Story_ID: 81171 Speaker 1: But tell me about the, the Harold, Harold Washington's second term, and what things were you able to accomplish, and what role did you play in those things and that, that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, one of--you know, the brief second term. One of the big things that was going on at that point in time was CHA [Chicago Housing Authority]. And again, we still had this [President] Ronald Reagan in the, in the White House and his--Pierce, Sam Pierce was the secretary of HUD [Department of Housing and Urban Development], and this was black guy. But for some reason, you know, he was intent upon taking control of CHA away from the city and nationalize it. And so, you know, we had to fight him off to keep control of the Chicago Housing Authority, you know, with the city and not with the feds. So that was one of the big things. The other big this is that, you know, we still had this education issue going on. And so Harold had decided that what we needed to do was to get more parental involvement in the school system, that, you know, the bureaucrats who were really running the system, and they were running it for the benefit of the bureaucracy and not for the benefit of the children. And so the one way to change that was to get more parents involved. And so we had organized this kind of community event of, of getting, you know, parents and community folks interested in education and involved in kind of a parent summit. I think that maybe what we called it the Parent Summit or something like that. And so, you know, we were going in a direction of laying the basis for reforming the public school system by having these series of events. And we were in the midst of that when, when he died. But it led to, you know, the reforms that came out of Springfield that now are the local school councils and all the rest of that. But you know, it was part of the momentum that he started, you know, that last year of his life. Speaker 1: Okay, so you see that as a major, as the major I guess contribution of the last part of--I mean his '87' [1987]--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean as really, you know, reforming the public school system and you know, getting it refocused on the children and not on the bureaucrats and not on the staff and all the rest of that, but you know, instructional improvements. And so you know what--you know, the legislation--the first piece of the legislation that created these public school improvement councils or something like that actually passed before he, he, he died, but it was like the first step. And then we--you know, the General Assembly went back a year later and created what finally became, you know, our current structure. But it was kind of like a two-step process. Story_ID: 81172 Speaker 1: Okay, and, and you mentioned getting feedback from the community and going out in the community and trying to get people involved. Did, did community organizations have a lot of access to the [Harold] Washington Administration-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --in terms of-- Speaker 2: --absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Community organizations and people. You know, it was a, a very open administration. I know, because all those people (laughter) would be in my office, you know, 'cause it said Mayor's Office. That it said Intergovernmental Affairs never stopped anybody. And so, and I was on the sixth floor, and you know, the mayor's office was on the fifth floor, but they had the cops guarding those doors. (Laughter) So you could only go so far. Although we had cops on the sixth floor too, but you know, it was a lot more, more open and you know, you didn't have to, you know, pass through the same kind of scrutiny. You know, you could just walk into our office. You couldn't just walk into the mayor's office. But yeah, no, and then Harold was also in the community. You know, he started this thing of, of taking, you know, the--going out to the community to hear people's vision, wishes, desires, problems as we crafted the city's budget, you know, so that you know, there was this whole series of budget hearings. And he would go around the city, and he would take all of us out there. And we would have to go and account for ourselves in terms of what we'd done over the last year, as well as listen to where we had not, you know, given the people what they wanted, so that, you know, we'd have a realistic basis on which to do priorities for the, for the city's budget and actually the, the strategy for the upcoming year. So, you know, that was another way of keeping in touch, you know, with, with the community. And I, I found it very valuable. I mean I, I enjoyed it. I got to know parts of the city that I had really never been to before, didn't know anything about, you know, got to be aware of, of, you know, you know, different cultures and you know, kind of what's important, you know, to different parts of our community. So it was, it was an invaluable experience, you know, being in the administration for me just personally. Speaker 1: Now did, did you play any role in the development of the Chicago Cultural Plan, 'cause that was I think one of the last things that, that-- Speaker 2: Uh-un, no, uh-un-- Speaker 1: --that developed-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was Lois Weisberg and Madeline Rabb that were involved in that, you know. My, my portfolio tended to be more governments, policies, you know, legislative bodies, things of that sort. Speaker 1: I thought of it because the process was similar. They went out to every neighborhood and asked people what they wanted to see. They, they came back and put together a plan with the help of the people that they-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --picked up along the way. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 81173 Speaker 1: And--but speaking of culture, one of the things that I was involved in and that was what eventually became the Harold Washington Library, you know, the whole search for what did we do with--what do we do? The li--the library's to small. We need a bigger building. Should we go to Goldblatt's building, which was empty at the time; you know, should we build a new building, you know, that whole debate, and then getting down with, you know, Liz Hollander as a planning director--commissioner, you know, had ultimate responsibility. But you know, there was a lot of, you know, aldermanic input, you know, which put it into my bailiwick, and you know, debates of, of various sorts. We also dealt with the, you know, the library board in terms of appointees and things like that. So, you know, it was--you know, we, we had got down, then okay, final decision, we'll build a new library, and the decision that we would go with a designed build. Because, you know, one of the things that happened with government projects a lot of times is that, you know, you, you bid it out for a price, then you have all these overruns, you know, and changes and things like that. So the decision was that, you know, we can't afford to have an escalating cost. So they had the design build strategy for the library, you know, competitive design. And you let the people, again, have input. And it's there library was Harold's attitude. And so we were in that process when he, when he died. And I tell you, you know, it's one of those, those things that--I, I walked into the library when it was finally dedicated for Harold Washington. And you know, they put plaques when things are completed. And so the plaque for the Harold Washington Library doesn't say Harold Washington. It says Richard Daley, you know, in terms--you know, the folks who were responsible for it. And you know, it's like, to say Harold Washington, I mean the pain and you know, the suffering that, you know, he put into, you know, the debate and the decisions and all the rest of the process of, you know, fighting all kinds of people and, and politicians with all kinds of ideas, you know, and to get the process started, but then when it's constructed it says Richard M. Daley. Speaker 2: Well, at least it's still the Harold Washington Library. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: It's, it's the kind of monument to our mayor. I mean they, they couldn't--I don't know if there could be a mayor that-- Speaker 1: Oh, it's a perfect-- Speaker 2: --who deserved a library named after him-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know, I mean in terms of-- Speaker 1: He loved to read. Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: And so, you know, to have, you know, the, the, the largest--well, at the time--oh, I think it is, it still is the largest library in the, in the country. Speaker 2: Facility wise. Speaker 1: Yeah, right--that to, to be in honor of a great reader, you know, who probably has read (laughter) half the books that are in there. I mean he was a voracious, voracious reader. Yeah, we'd go to Washington, and there was a bookstore there, Kramer's Bookstore. And no matter what else we were doing we had to make a stop at--and he discovered, you know, this bookstore when he was in the Congress. And so, you know-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --it was perfect. Story_ID: 81174 Speaker 1: Now tell us about those, the last days of his [Harold Washington] administration, maybe that last day, you know, how, how you felt, 'cause that all hit people, you know, suddenly, just like--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, it's very interesting. I was--that was Thanksgiving week, and I had taken the time off for vacation. And so I was home. I was having work done on my house, and, and I was trying to get it all cleaned up for Thanksgiving and stuff like that 'cause of plaster dust everywhere and things like of that sort. So I, I was not, you know, in the office that week, but I was in touch with him. I mean I was never off duty. And he spent a lot of the week before Thanksgiving at home because he thought he had the flu. And so even when I was in my office he was at home, and I was talking to him back and forth at home. And he'd go out for appearances and stuff like that for the mo--but for the most part, you know, that week, you know, he was, he was taking it easy because he hadn't--he wasn't feeling well. And I remember I had done a Channel 11 show. I, I can't remember the topic (laughter) right now. If you give me a minute, I could think about it. But I remember I had gone down to Channel 11 I think it was on Monday to do, you know, "Chicago Tonight." And you know, there had been, like a lot of times, you know, I'm there because I'm Harold's staff person. You know, the issue of Harold and the administration came up, and so, you know, was, it was, again, the opportunity to talk about what a wonderful person he was. And my last conversation with him was actually after-I did that on Monday, so I talked to him on Tuesday, was my last conversation. I hadn't talk to him on Wednesday, you know, 'cause he had started off early. He was in the neighborhood, and I had thought about going up 'cause he was gonna--he was doing a groundbreaking for a new housing development, and it's right up the street from me. And I thought about going, and I said what am I going up there for, you know? The cameras are gonna be on him, it's not much, so I, I didn't go. Story_ID: 81492 Speaker 1: You were saying that on that Wednesday he [Harold Washington] went out to do some groundbreaking, and you were-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --able to talk to him that day. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And describe what, what happened next-ish. Speaker 2: Well I was--I got a call from my administrative assistant that said--I mean in a panic, saying, Jacky, you know, they're ambulances here, and they've taken Harold out on a stretcher. And I said oh my God. I'm on my way. Before I could get dressed to get out of the house, [HM] Brenda Gaines called me. Brenda Gaines was then the deputy chief of staff, and she called me and told me I had to get down there. I said, Brenda, I'm on the way. So, you know, by the time I actually got down to City Hall, you know, the news was pretty grim. They had not pronounced them, but you know, all the reports we had gotten, and you had asked me earlier about Ed Burke--was that, you know, Ed Burke being on the police department, you know, had friends in the police department, the fire department and so forth. And so I guess somebody from the paramedics or fire department had essentially told him that, you know, they had worked on him in City Hall, and they really couldn't re--resuscitate him. So, you know, it was pretty clear by the time I got down, downtown that things were pretty bad. And again, you know, the, the thought of going to, to the hospital at the time, or going into City Hall, and yeah, Brenda and I talked about it and said well, noth--ain't nothing really we could do at the hospital, you know. That was a medical thing, but you know, getting control of the government and making sure that, you know, things didn't get out of control because of rumors or anything else was, was the immediate task. So, you know, that's what I did. I went into the office, and you know, we started right away, you know, doing kind of a checklist of crucial areas, you know, of concern, and you know, just making sure that, you know, we were conscious, you know, it was front brain, that you know we wouldn't lose track of anything. Speaker 1: So this was you and Brenda Gaines and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, it was the senior staff, you know. Speaker 1: Jim (unclear) and--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Ernie, Ernie Barefield-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --was, was, was the chief of, chief of staff. You know, Lottie Edwards, who was the Board of Health, had been involved (unclear) when the resuscitation was over at the hospital. The police department--oh, God--ran for-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --ran for sheriff on the Republican ticket--I'm-- Speaker 1: Mart--Martin. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Leroy Martin. Speaker 2: Leroy Martin. You know, so, so that, you know, that kind of check down. Where was everybody? Was everybody in place kind of thing. And then, of course, we started getting the phone calls from--you know, condolence phone calls, you know, so that it ended up that, you know, just being on the phone, you know, until some ungodly hour. I, I remember at some point or another my husband and son came down in the midst of it. And so, you know, I was (laughter), I was talking about [Ed] Vrdolyak doing--dealing with ten phones. I mean I was in that situation, you know, like people coming in, you know, phones ringing, things of that sort. So, you know, there was like twenty-six things going on, and I'm crying through the whole thing. And, and I remember they, they came in and drug me out of the office, and we went across the street to Counselor's Row to just eat, 'cause I hadn't eaten, you know, all day, and you know, just to get me out of the environment and to, you know, kind of like get a grip on, on me, as I was handling all of these, all of these other things. It was one of the worst days of my life. There's no doubt about it. Story_ID: 81493 Speaker 1: And you know, in the, in the midst of that, you know, the, the political jockeying started. I mean I--to this day, to this day, I still don't understand that, you know, how you could get into who's gonna be, who's gonna be the next mayor, you know and--but it did, it happened. Speaker 2: I think it baffled a lot of people, I mean this, the--it seemed crass and-- Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely. I mean we're just trying to deal with the fact that he's gone. And people are calling me about meetings that are being called for that evening, and so it was, it was doubly hard for that reason, you know. But somehow or another we got through it, you know, all of the decisions around arrangements. There was just a gazillion details in terms of place, and time, and what was going to, to be the program, I mean just everything, and it's a holiday. First time I did not have Thanksgiving dinner with my family, the one and only time that I missed Thanksgiving. Thanksgiving Day I was on the fifth floor of City Hall dealing with Gene Sawyer, Bob Shaw, Bill Henry, and Bill Beavers. What a way to spend Thanksgiving. Speaker 2: What was, what was their position, or were they-- Speaker 1: Well, Ernie Barefield was chief of staff, you know, because of all this stuff that had happened right away on Wednesday, had me call Gene Sawyer some point or another Wednesday evening to say: Can you come in tomorrow so we could just put this stuff about succession on hold while we plan a funeral. And so Gene said he was going to Thanksgiving service at Vernon Park Church of God, and he would be in after that. So he said fine. Before he gets there, Bob Shaw is in the office. Where's Gene? I don't know where Gene is. Bill Henry, shows up. Where's Gene? What are you doing here? Why are you looking for Gene here? Go down on the second floor. That's where the aldermanic office is--Bill Veres (ph.): Where is Gene? He ain't here, go away. But they were there because they didn't trust Gene to meet with us alone. They were his bodyguards, all right. So from the very beginning, you know, I guess somewhere in their jockeying they had decided--and the reason I--we were dealing with Gene was that he was president pro tem, right. So, you know, we were just trying to, to say put this stuff on hold. They were already hatching their political succession plans. Story_ID: 81494 Speaker 1: Now, just for the sake of those who, who are doing research with this or whatever, being president pro tem of city council means that you sit instead of the mayor when the mayor is absent, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And in case the mayor expires, then the president pro tem is interim mayor for a while. Am I correct? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, until--all right. It doesn't mean there'll be, they will be the next mayor-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but they're at least the interim. Speaker 2: Right, well, you know, that was the way it had been with Richard Daley, Richard J. Daley. And you know, at the time Wilson Frost was president pro tem. Speaker 1: He's a black alderman. Speaker 2: He was a black alderman, and they locked him out of the mayor's office. So actually what happened between then and you know, this experience in '87' [1987] is that the city council created this position called vice mayor. I think that's what it was called, vice mayor. And the person who actually held that position was David Orr, and so that's why David Orr actually became the interim mayor and presided over the selection of the--I guess acting--you know, these terms--acting mayor. And then, you know, the person that was selected finally on December 2nd was the interim mayor. I don't know. I can't-- Speaker 1: He was acting, acting mayor it's called. Speaker 2: --get, get those-- Speaker 1: Yeah, interim mayor I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: But it was, it was actually David Orr. But see, David Orr, you know, was not into this succession battle. You know, so I mean David Orr was working with us trying to get all of the details of this thing together. But you know, it was this other cabal which Gene [Sawyer] was the titular leader because of his position on the city council. So in spite of--you know, when Gene finally got there, which was later than he said, so, you know, given, you know, hindsight on what happened on December 2nd and you know, the whole: is Gene going to be a candidate? Is Gene going to accept the position, all of the, the need--weakening knee bending and all the rest of that? Is that I suspect that, that happened on Thanksgiving morning, that you know, he didn't quite know what to do, what to say, etc. So he delayed showing up because he ended up coming into the office a couple of hours after he told us he was going to be there. So, yeah, we talked, and we said you know, Gene, can you just get these guys to be quiet, be still, have some respect of the man. Let us plan this funeral and then, you know, there's plenty of time to decide who's going to succeed him. Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, I agree, I agree, blah, blah, blah. But did things stop? No. That entire weekend it was all full of the same stuff. You know, my phone is ringing either because somebody wants to be of help, wants to express condolences or whatever, or it's about political crap that was going on, you know. And so it was like between these two poles that we were just being buffeted the entire time. Hard. Story_ID: 81495 Speaker 1: So did--as I re--remember that weekend, Harold Washington's body, you know, wound up lying in-state, right at the--in City Hall. Was that, was that on-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Thursday, right, on Thursday? Speaker 2: No, un-un-- Speaker 1: Or with (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No, I think we brought the body on Friday. Speaker 1: Friday. Speaker 2: Friday and Saturday there was viewing in City Hall. It may have been, also been Sunday. The funeral was Monday, so it may have been all weekend. But, I mean people kept coming. It probably was all weekend 'cause people wouldn't stop, I mean. And it was, it was just like the weather we have right now, frigid cold weather. But yeah, people stood out there, you know, just to say final goodbyes all weekend, from Friday till whatever time we closed it down. Rayner closed it down to get ready for the funeral. Story_ID: 81496 Speaker 1: And meanwhile, this, this political-- Speaker 2: Machinations, yeah. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--still is, is, is percolating to a boiling point now, like-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the rumor is that the coalition, the Harold Washington coalition, which included, and tell me if I'm right, 25 alderman, with Harold Washington as a swing vote, right? Or was it, was, was that it, or-- Speaker 2: You mean in terms of the city council? Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: No, no, no, there were 26 votes. Speaker 1: Twenty-six? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: There were 26 aldermen, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, 26 to 24-- Speaker 2: Four, yeah. Speaker 1: --at this point, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so there was rumor that the coalition was breaking up, and people were realigning themselves, you know. Speaker 2: Well, actually, Larry, you know, in '87' [1987], '80--in '80--when we had the special election in '85' [1985], it was 26-24. When we had the, the--after the election of '87' [1987], it was a much larger majority than that. I (unclear) can't remember exactly what it was, but you know, because, you know, Harold was firmly in con--charge by '87' [1987], you know, more people ran with him than ran against him. But I, I don't remember the number offhand. I mean it was of no consequence at Cook County at that point. But yeah, I mean it was definitely a, a Washington council at that point. Speaker 1: And it seemed that--well, I mean what was analysis of this coalition? Was this a, a real progressive coalition, or was it, was it--what was it? Speaker 2: No, it was, it was--all the black aldermen supported Harold, not so much that they supported Harold, but their constituents did, and you know, they couldn't go against them. At one point, you know, in the first term, we were dealing with the issue of how to, how to allocate Community Development Block Grant funds. And some of the aldermen--Marian Humes was alderman of the 8th Ward at that time, I think Perry Hutchinson, who was alderman of the 9th Ward. Bill Henry, who was alderman of the 24th, decided that they wanted the Community Block Grant funds to be used for their own purposes. Well, Harold had developed this community process. There was a Community Block Grant Advisory Committee, where all the proposal for Community Block Grant funds went to this committee, which were citizens representing variant constituencies and, and diversity of the city and, and so forth. You know, they would screen all these proposals and make recommendation back to the city committee, which were various city staff that had responsibility for Community Block Grant funds. And then they would take the recommendation of the citizen committee, and you know, prioritize them, and give it to the commissioners for, you know, inclusion of Community Development Block Grants. So, you know, it'd been a Democratic process, getting to these grants, how to, to deal with these grant funds. Well, you know, some of these aldermen wanted to ignore all that and do their own thing. And so they, when they came up for the city council, you know, they raised their opposition and their, their options and so forth. And Harold is saying no, and so becomes this big fight. You know, here are Harold's aldermen, you know, fighting him. So, you know, Harold just had a press conference, and talked to the cameras, and talked to the people out there about priorities and process and all the rest of that. And when these aldermen got to their office, they were surrounded by their own constituents saying do what Harold says, you know. And to this day, if you were to ask the ones that are still alive that is, they would claim that I organized that opposition. I did no such thing, you know. Harold talked to the people through the media. People reacted on their own, telling their aldermen what to do. We had nothing to do with it, other than Harold talking to the folks; you know, he did that, but people reacted that way. So these aldermen, you know, may have wanted to be somewhere else, but after that, they clearly understood that people elected them to support Harold. If they weren't gonna support Harold, they were out of there, okay. So that, you know, this--you have some people that were part of the Washington coalition that believed like Harold did. There were others there only because they had no place else to go, and then of course you had the opposition. So that, I mean that's the way I would describe the three factions that were in the, that were in the city council. So although he had the majority, it was in numbers, but not majority in terms of mindset. Story_ID: 81497 Speaker 1: Okay, so this tenuous kind of coalition began to-- you know, people started to break up based on their political--what they thought-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --their political fortunes were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right. And that's why, you know, the [HM Eugene] Sawyer, Henry, Shaw, Beavers, you know, they were more aligned with the Dick Mells and you know, the, the, the folks who wanted, you know, the power, the ones who wanted, you know, to get a hold of the, the largess of the city for their own purposes, you know, to, to reinstate patronage and all the rest of that. So, you know, that was one side, and that was black and white together, and then there were the Harold Washington folks, the ones who really believed government serving people, you know, having fairness and equity in, in terms of hiring and distribution of services and all the rest of that stuff. Speaker 1: And they were probably the minority-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and look at the whole (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: When we see December 2nd, they're definitely, were the minority. Story_ID: 81498 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, well, did you have any sense at that time of, of how--well, I guess you had some sense because they were in your office, you know, I guess pushing. But from what you describe, [HM Eugene] Gene Sawyer's potential as leader of that was not really the actual leader of it-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --in the sense that-- Speaker 2: No, he was definitely the follower. Speaker 1: Okay. Did, did he seem anxious to, for this selection process to take place himself? Speaker 2: No, I think Gene was scared to death. You know, he was, he was a pawn, and there were forces greater than him that were in control, and they were moving him around. So, no, I mean I think Gene would have been very happy to go along (laughter). And I mean I don't think it was his ambition, although, you know, it's (unclear), so I said we're gonna make you mayor. Well, well, yeah, I'm for that. So, and I don't think he was strong enough to say no, you know, that no, you know, that that's not what I wanna do, or that's not the best thing for me to do, or I'm not the best person to do that, you know. And so he was, h was an easy pawn. That's the way I see Gene. Speaker 1: Now, what were the dynamics of this split? Can you explain from what you understood, and, and maybe tell me what your role is in all this? I mean what were the dynamics of the split? I mean who went where and why? You know, we, we have--our cast of characters were Tim Sawyer, (unclear)--I mean-- Speaker 2: Tim Evans. Speaker 1: --Tim Evans; Eugene Sawyer-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you got David Orr as the, as, as the vice mayor-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You got like the--Ed Burke on the other side, a big player in orchestrating this; Dick Mell, who jumps on a desk at a certain point and raises his arms and stuff. But how did you see all of this? Speaker 2: Wow, you know, there were so many different little cells of things that were going on that weekend, and you know, again, not participating in any of 'em, but hearing reports back. You know, there were meetings on the South Side; there were meetings on the North Side; there were meetings on the West Side; you know, there were--you know, some of the more vocal leaders of the various meetings that were going on. There was a meeting I remember out in the 17th, 17th Ward that was actually for the--yeah, if we could--easy, you know, in terms of identifying, you know, the, the--Gene Sawyer versus Tim Ac--Tim Evans, you know, supporters in terms of who was going to succeed Harold. So these--this was a meeting of the Tim Evans supporter types, of which Shaw showed up and created--you know, this is, again, hearsay since I wasn't there--but created, you know, kind of a tension in battle in that little group as they were-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--like Allen Streeter's ward. Speaker 2: Right, 17th Ward. You know, it was his ward office and how it--the meeting came to be, I don't know, but that's where it was. And I remember Alderman [HM Dorothy] Tillman was there. And you know, Tillman is one--never wanted to back down from a fight. So, you know, she, she took on Shaw for being there and, and not being a supporter of Tim and all the rest of that. Then there were, you know, some of the, the North Side folks that, you know, (unclear) and Schiller and you know that, that group. And then there were the West Side folks, you know, Beavers--not Beavers, but Henry-- Speaker 1: Henry. Speaker 2: Yeah, was, you know, kind of the consolation, and then the Northwest Side. You know, not only it was Dick Mell, but it was also Al Ronan. Al Ronan was a longtime member of the general assembly, had since become a lobbyist, you know, that, you know, (unclear) saw the, you know, the power of the city. He'd also been, you know, kind of like the Springfield, you know, lobbyist for Jane Byrne, you know, and--so with Harold he had lost that position. So, you know, he had his own self-interest in getting somebody back that could further his, his private career. And so, you know, there were all of these little cells that were going on. And you'd read the "Tribune" or the "Sun-Times," and they would have description of, you know, these meetings that were going on all over the place. And so besides, you know, talking to Gene, the other thing that I did to try and get this under control is that I talked to George Dunn, who was still, you know, Democratic Party chairman, to, you know, to say to George, who was on vacation at the time. We tracked him down in Wyoming or some place or another, you know, to see if he could get, you know, the white guys to, you know, cease and desist to get through the funeral. And so, you know, George Dunn agreed that it is totally disrespectful, wrong timing, all the rest of that, and said he would do what he could to try and you know, reign some of this stuff in. The other person I talked to on the, on the, the, you know, the white guy side was Bill Lipinski. You know, so George was overall, but Bill Lipinski in terms of South Side former aldermen, you know, committeemen relationship with these guys, to say, you know, Bill, we need some help diffusing all of this stuff. And so, you know, Bill, too, said he would try and be helpful. Now what they did, I don't know, but at least, you know, they gave a commitment that they would try and calm some of this energy that was going on that was just misplaced and ill-timed. So, you know, in terms of the, the, the planning and the strategy for succession, I really wasn't in the midst of it. Most of what I got were reports, and I tried, you know, through using these various levers to try and cool it, but you know, I, I don't know what impact they had, what effect it had on any of these guys. And I don't think that much, because you know, they had their candidate, Gene Sawyer. They had their strategy, and what they were doing all these meetings were trying to line up votes. That's what, what they were trying to do. I mean both sides were trying to line up the votes. Story_ID: 81499 Speaker 1: As this is going on, on a periphery of what you're doing-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what was the center of your activities at that time? Speaker 2: Well, planning a funeral. You know, we had, you know, people--we had cablegrams and telegrams from around the world, you know, people--you know, the folks--the Congress wanted to send a delegation, you know, general assembly, you know, because of the work that Harold [Washington] had done on the Revenue Sharing, mayors from around the state, you know, Hollywood people because of, you know, the fundraising and the support that Harold had got in '83' [1983]. You know, he was a leader in the U.S. Conference of Mayors and the League of Cities, the World Conference of Mayors. I mean, you know, just handling logistics of, of his funeral was just a nightmare, and then a place, you know, what place was going to be big enough. And we came up with the only sanctuary in the, in the city that would be big enough with--was Johnnie Colemon's church, Universally--Universal Temple. But you know, Johnnie's faith tradition is that you don't have dead bodies in the church. And in fact, just before Harold passed, Johnnie's mother had passed. And although they had the funeral at the temple, her mother's body wasn't there. Well, (unclear) you know, he said well, you know, we can't have a funeral without Harold's body being in the sanctuary. So I didn't handle that. I, I don't remember who handled it. It was Jim Montgomery or somebody handled it with Johnnie and you know, somehow or another negotiated having, you know, the, the body in the church. And so, all right, so we had a place. Then how do we deal with all these people, you know? How do we do crowd control? Oh, you know, just, it was phenomenal, you know, the details that we had to do in terms of, you know, seating. And you know, then it was what was, what was the program going to be? Story_ID: 81183 Speaker 1: We were talking about the funeral and the arrangements for the funeral-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --being held at Christ Universal Temple-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --on a 119th and out-- Speaker 2: Somewhere out there-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --(laughter), yeah, and just off of Interstate 57. Speaker 1: Yeah, [HM] Dr. Johnnie Colemon's church. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And all the celebrities and all the people-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and dignitaries from all over the world that came. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You were handling that kind of-- Speaker 2: Right. So I mean, so that was our job. Our job was not to deal with, you know, all of these little cells of activity around, you know, who was going to succeed Harold Washington. And for us, actually it was more important to give him the kind of burial that would be respectful of the person that he was. So, I mean that's where our heart and soul went. And you know, instead of twenty-four hours a day trying to get him elected, it was twenty-four hours a day trying to say goodbye respectfully. So, you know, somehow or another, you know, I, I mean I, I remember being blown away by, you know, the people who when we went to see him at City Hall, that actually in terms of the procession out to the church and then back to the cemetery, I mean I was like blown away by the people along the route, total silence except for "Hey, Harold." You know, the Harold chant was everywhere: "Bye, Harold," "Miss you, Harold," "love you, Harold," or just nothing, people just standing there, you know, like I think in shock. So, you know, you had those two kinds of, of folks who along the--who lined the route that, you know, just had to express, you know, their feelings and those who were in disbelief and in shock. But there were lots of 'em, boy oh boy. I don't know, the numbers. I'm not a gauge of a crowd, but there was not an empty space along the route, not filled with people. Speaker 1: And Rayner [& Sons] Funeral Homes at 69th, near Indiana-- Speaker 2: No, it's on 71st and-- Speaker 1: 71st and-- Speaker 2: --Calumet. Speaker 1: Right, 71st and Calumet, right. Speaker 2: But we, we did--yeah, we went from--where did we start the procession? I guess we, we did start at Rayner's, yeah, and went out to the temple, and then from there back to Oakwood Cemetery. Story_ID: 81184 Speaker 1: In I mean the--with the outpour from people like that, I mean who really--did you get a sense that people really understood what Harold [Washington] stood for and-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Harold was, Harold was not a mystery. You know, what you see was what you got with Harold. I mean he was genuine, and people felt it, you know, particularly kids. I mean kids have I call it a BS detector, right. I mean they know if you're genuine or not, and kids could not get enough of him, you know. So, yeah, the people, particularly black people--I can't speak for white people, but you know, I think black people knew. And that's why, you know, some of these aldermen--you supported Harold, 'cause they didn't have a choice; they didn't have a choice. Speaker 1: You see them as basically different from their constituents in a sense that-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: 'Cause you know, they're, they're into, you know, their, their personal gratification, you know, whatever they got, you know, whether or not it was getting jobs or contracts or access to power, whatever. I mean that's what was motivating them. I mean the people were motivated by having, you know, services for the first time. Hey, I got my street swept; you know, I got my garbage picked up; you know, I got, you know, my, my, my potholes repaired; I--and, and, and then people just proud of Harold. You know, here is a guy that command the attention of the world. You know, that debate, when he devastated Jane Byrne and, and Richard [M.] Daley on the first words out of his mouth, you know, was like (unclear), you know. He looks like me in--you know, that's me up there. And so, you know, there was a tremendous sense of pride I think that went through the, the black community because of Harold Washington, and so, yeah. I mean and they knew what they'd lost. They knew there would not be another like him, and there hasn't been. I mean there are, you know, Malcolm [X], Martin [Luther King, Jr.], and Harold, unique individuals. Speaker 1: So at the time, did you--I mean were you feeling that basically this movement was over at that, that point? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: It was a-- Speaker 2: --I'm not sure if I really thought about it. I mean I knew there would never be another Harold, but you know, I didn't--I mean I wasn't in despair of that, you know, what Harold had started would not continue. Yeah, I got that feeling more after December 2nd, you know, after the, the battle in the city council to choose, you know, the interim mayor to serve out the rest of Harold's term. And it was, you know, this evil cabal of, you know, these North Side white guys with, you know, this core of black old machine guys that said we're gonna have a very difficult time. So it was more then, but you know, on the 29th of November-- Speaker 1: So, well, what did you basically do for the rest of that day? I mean did you, you went to the funeral and, and-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know what I did, (unclear) probably cry in my milk. Oh, let me think. What did I do the rest of that day? I think I went home and just held my son. You know, it was, it was, you know, getting some support. You know, I had been busy holding up the city, you know, for five, six days, and so it was finally my time to, you know, just be supported. Story_ID: 81185 Speaker 1: Now, as the political wheels started turning, and they have--it really happened fast. It was a--I think it was a rally of Harold Washington coalition people to support Tim Evans at, at the UIC Pavilion. And it's a--here's a second Pavilion rally (unclear)--not quite the same thing to--did you go to that or did you-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did go and I mean there was a lot of energy, and there was a lot of anger, yeah, in the, in the room. You know, it was--well, I didn't organize it, so I can't say what the organizers, yeah, wanted to do or wanted to accomplish. But you know, my reading of it was, you know, a kind of a public demonstration of support for continuation of, you know, the Harold [Washington] legacy, and that you know, the best person for doing that was Tim, you know. And you know, Harold hadn't chosen a successor, but in various ways, you know, from making Tim, you know, finance committee chair to, you know--he was head of the, you know, political education project, which was kind of like, you know, the political education operation that Harold set up, you know, Tim was the leader. You know, Tim was the, the campaign chairman for the '87' [1987] election, you know, those kinds of things, that, you know, Tim came as close to, you know, a handpicked successor that, you know, was out there. And you know, I, I think that rally was, you know, designed to highlight, you know, Tim and to, you know, keep at bay these forces of the evil cabal that were trying to take over the city. But yeah, I don't know. I can't even remember who was the instigator in organizing that, but--mainly 'cause, you know, I just didn't focus on it. It was like one of those things that somebody put in my hand or gave me directions and said you know, you need to be here at this time, you know. I was kind of like automatic pilot: okay, all right, I'm supposed to go here, okay, here I am. Speaker 1: That's difficult to fight in the midst of grief (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it was, yeah, it was, it's really interesting that at the same time that I was making a lot of decisions and making things happen, I was probably as dependent as I've ever been in my life in terms of, you know, being direct--I remember my mother dressed me for the funeral. My mother decided what I was wearing and things of that sort. I mean my brain could not function at that kind of personal level. So, yeah, I mean was operating, you know, on two levels: one, totally in charge, and the other totally dependent, simultaneously. And, and that's a weird place to be. I don't think I've ever been there before or since. You know, having to--yeah, I, I don't know how to describe it, but it was, it was unique. Story_ID: 81186 Speaker 1: So (unclear) this, after this rally, there's his death and the December 2nd event at City Hall, the all day city council meeting. I think they--where the showdown was to take place of these forces that wanted to select a new mayor. And the--is there--what were your--did you have any kind of assessment of it? Could, could you even get, get into trying to assess what was gonna happen there at this point? Speaker 2: I had no idea, no idea. I knew, you know, that my, my reaction was to go to my office and start cleaning it up, 'cause I knew whoever was going to be mayor, you know--as I say, I could do twenty-four hours a day for Harold [Washington], and there was nobody else I could see doing twenty-four hours a day for. And so, yeah, I went and started organizing my files, organizing my office, cleaning it out, you know, and that's what I was doing. I watched that city council meeting on the TV in my office as I was cleaning it up, cleaning it out, things like that. Yeah, periodically, you know, folks would come up. You know, some of the aldermen would come up and you know, they, yeah, they want to talk about this, that or the other, and we would do that, or Ernie [Ernest Barefield] would call me down to the fifth floor, you know. I mean there was still a government to run, you know, in the midst of this, all these city council meetings. So, you know, it was, you know, that kind of thing, but for the most part, I was detaching myself from it and getting the hell out. Speaker 1: And yet you were in it-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --in the center of it. Speaker 2: I was in the center of it, absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: And here, this scene, you've got--we got like this council meeting, it's continually delayed until it starts at 3:00 (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was late in the afternoon-- Speaker 1: --two or three. Speaker 2: I can't remember what time, you know. Speaker 1: And normally it would start at ten or something, nine or ten, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, nine or ten o'clock, yeah. Speaker 1: And this starts around three o'clock, and it, and it, it doesn't end really until what, three or four o'clock-- Speaker 2: Three or four o'clock in the morning, yeah. Speaker 1: --in the morning, the next day. And in the midst of the--as the meeting starts, I mean they've got, got thousands of people surrounding City Hall basically. Speaker 2: Right, all throughout City Hall, out in the streets, around the corner, everywhere. Speaker 1: And those people are saying that [HM Eugene] Sawyer should turn down--that they shouldn't have a vote-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --no vote, don't vote, and to wait. That's, that's basically what they were saying. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They were supportive of-- Speaker 2: Tim Evans. Speaker 1: Tim Evans basically. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And they were also people supporting not to--a delay. And so you're in your office watching television and I, I guess you're aware that they're outdoors. I mean they're right outside-- Speaker 2: Yeah, or no, I mean I should say, you know, the TV is really when the council meeting started. Up until, you know, the, the, the council meeting and all of the stuff leading up to it, you know, that's--you know, the visits down to David Orr on the, on the fifth floor to Ernie Barefield on the fifth floor, you know, figuring out you know what, what should happen. You know, should this meeting go on? I mean that was all part of it too, was whether or not to, to even call the, the, the council in session. You know, so, you know, that kind of stuff was going on. But the actual debate, you know, when they finally came to the chambers, you know, I didn't go to the chambers. I couldn't. You know, I just watched it on TV. Speaker 1: Did you stay there all night? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: To the end? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, no, I went home at four o'clock in the morning or whatever that was, was. Yeah, no, I stayed there. I mean the city council is really my job (laughter), you know. I mean that's intergovernmental affairs, city council was there, and so--I mean I was on call. You know, I still had my beeper. I was there with my phone, but I just couldn't be in the midst of that thing. A couple of times, you know, Ernie called me down 'cause you know, Gene wanted to talk, or they were talking to him. And so, you know, I'd go into, you know, these little backroom sessions that were going on. But you know, for the most part, you know, I was, I was, I mean I was I guess operating on split personality again, you know, that, you know, this is all governmental affairs, and so that's my job. But at the same time, you know, my heart, my brain, you know, it was mechanical, it was--you know, my emotions were somewhere else. I mean and I was, I mean I was pissed off, you know, because of having this whole thing going on, you know. So at, at that kind of visceral level, I was mad at the world, you know. Why are we doing this, you know? So, yeah, there was a lot of that emotional anger that was going on, but at the same time, you know, Harold's not here (laughter). I don't work for these people, you know. I'll do my job, but you know, (laughter) I--you know, it's like, yeah, but no, you know. Yeah, I gotta do this, but you know, I don't wanna be doing this. I wanna be anywhere else but here. Story_ID: 81187 Speaker 1: So that night, one by one, city council people statements in support or guess, you know. I mean or support of one candidate or another or one position or another, and it seemed to me, you know, someone who is out in the street that night and listening to it on the radio too at the same time, that it was a catharsis going on almost on the part of a lot of the aldermen. They getting things off their chests and a lot of--how people really stood was kind of, you know, was coming out for I think--for some folks it was for the first time they'd ever really seen-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --this kind of thing. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. But I tell you, of all the speeches that night, the one I don't think I'll ever forget is [HM Dorothy] Tillman saying: my name is not Monty Hall, and it is--this is not let's make a deal. You know, that, you know, that kind of summed it up for me, that this was all about, you know, who can get the best deal, you know, who's gonna, you know, get the credit, you know, you know. And, and that seemed like what it was all about, you know, let's make a deal. It was not about principle; it was not about government; it was not about Harold's [Washington] legacy. It was all about let's make a deal. Story_ID: 81188 Speaker 1: So in the aftermath of this, [HM] Eugene Sawyer is elected, selected by the city, city council, a realigned city council, majority as the, I guess as the interim mayor, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. And did you--how did you feel about--I mean you have any feeling about how that was gonna play out? I mean did you--you knew Sawyer. You knew some of the people. I mean what did you, what did you think? Speaker 2: Let me out of here. Speaker 1: Okay. And I think like shortly thereafter you called a press conference. Or I don't know if you called it, but the press had you on television where you basically said that really: let me out of here. (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, you know, the other thing is that, yeah, part of the advisory team for Gene Sawyer were Irwin France, Sam Patch-- Speaker 1: Sam Patch was close to Harold [Washington]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they came out of the Third Ward, but you know, some folks (laughter), you know, like the power, you know, like the money, like the whatever. And so, you know, that's the way they operate, not on loyalty, not on principle, not on values and so forth. And so, you know, they had called me down, and you know, they essentially, you know, wanted me to pledge loyalty to Gene [Sawyer]. No, sorry, I'm not. And you know, when I went back to finish cleaning up my office (laughter), you know, they had changed the locks on the door (laughter). I said okay, all right, it's fine with me, you know. It, it was just such a low class way of acting, and so I said okay, bye, I'm gone.10:21:07:15 Speaker 1: So how did the press come to this, to, to interview you that day, or, or--I don't, I don't understand--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh no, no, I--we, we did call the media. Well, you know, the, the, the press office is around the sixth floor and the media right down on the second, on the, on the second floor. So, you know, when I said you know, look at this. Is this the way this administration's gonna be, you know, locking me out of my office? I mean what's it, what do you think is in there, you know? My purse (laughter). I'm not even sure my purse was there. I don't, I don't remember, you know, the, the--what, what was in there at all. But it was just like indicative of, you know, this is the administration we'd gone from a very open, you know, wide open, let the sunshine in kind of government to one that now, you know, was behind lock and key. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: And so, yeah, no, we--I let the media know, and you know. And (unclear) if I hadn't called the media, they'd be calling me. So it was just easier to go say hi. I wanted out of here. I guess I am. I'm out of here. (Laughter) I can't get in my office. I have no place to be, so I'm gone. Speaker 1: Now of all the people that left, I think you got the--I mean, what you said to the press seemed to speak for, you know, the rest of the people I mean. [HM] Brenda Gaines felt the same way I know, and there are others we talked to that felt the same way, that they were out, you know, after that. You know, they didn't (unclear)--(unclear). And in, in retrospect, I mean did you look at, did you look at--now Sawyer said basically he wanted to continue the legacy of Harold Washington, and he--even his inaugural speech he, he spoke directly to Harold Washington basically. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He seemed to be-- Speaker 2: But remember he was a, he was a, he was a follower. He was a follower of, you know, these other guys that had no interest at all in Harold's agenda, you know, that wanted the power, the patronage, etc. And those were his controllers. I mean Gene is not a bad guy, you know. I mean he's, he's not an evil guy. He was just a weak guy. And you know, so, I can't hold it against him for being weak. You know, he just is. And so, you know, he had these people who had much grander ambitions than he did, you know, about getting their hands on the city's budget. They had a little piggybank. Story_ID: 81189 Speaker 1: Okay, well, how did you recollect yourself after this, and what did you do next? Speaker 2: Actually, I think I just, I mean I just took time because, you know, mentally I was not ready to do anything. I mean it had been absolutely traumatic. And I, I think for the rest of the year I didn't do very much of anything. The next year, you know, just gradually getting involved in things, you know, like BEZ. I had done another--a number of shows on public radio, you know, being interviewed. And so somebody down there had the bright idea about, well, why don't we--you know, Jacky's not doing anything (laughter). Let's put her on the other side of the microphone. And as you know, Ken Davis or Carolyn Grisko, or Mara Tapp (unclear)--you have to have a day off and things like that. They called me and say hey, you wanna do this? And so I said yeah, it's something to keep my mind from atrophying. And so, you know, I started, you know, just periodically, you know, kind of guest hosting for BEZ. And then, you know, other things. You know, people would call me and you know, want some advice on a campaign or something like that, and so I'd do that, you know. Sometimes, you know, there would be folks, you know, just community organization, you know, wanted to--yeah, I did a lot of speaking. People called: come and talk to us about Harold [Washington]. I did a lot of that, you know, from both in the city and across the country of people just wanting to know about and talking about him. So, you know, I did that kind of stuff. And then there was this guy who was running for mayor in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], a guy by the name of Bird Brown. And I'm even--well, you know, I know how he felt. Me and everybody knew Harold at that point in time. And so he called and said you know, he had this campaign. It was very much like Harold's first campaign, would I come out and give him some advice. And so it was like yeah, let me--yeah, I was trying to force myself at that point to go do something. So, yeah, I went to Pittsburgh and helped him, gave him, you know, advice on, you know, his mayoral campaign, and so I mean I just kind of like that, you know, nothing--say nothing full time, you know, just kind of doing this here, doing this there and so forth. And then it, it must have been the next year, by '88' [1988], WBEZ had come up with this format about, of a regular talk show that, you know, they wanted to try. It was called "Equal Time" and they wanted to have a Democratic/Republican kind of perspective on issues of the day, but a variety show, not just totally politics, but you know, in terms of--you know, we did a lot of books, you know, like--and you know, you read a book and you're interpretation is gonna be different than mine, and you know, a liberal Democratic perspective from a conservative Republican. And so Chris Robling and I, you know, was the other side of the "Equal Time." You know, we had dealt with each other, you know, as--he was campaign manager for Donald Haider and Harold's '87' [1987] campaign. And so we negotiated things like debates and that campaign, and you know, different activities that candidates have to do together. And so, you know, like, you know, it was never any acrimony. In fact, we kind of like each other, got along and things like that. So we said sure, and so we, we started doing that. So that was four days a week I was involved in doing that kind of stuff, but I was still doing the speeches and you know, appearances and whatnot. Story_ID: 81190 Speaker 1: And so I did that up until Miriam Santos called me. And she was in a battle with the mayor about pension funds. And she wanted someone who had--who understood government, understood policy, under--particularly the legislature 'cause the whole pension thing is decided down in the General Assembly--to you know, help and advise her. And at first I said no, and she kept coming back and back, and finally I said okay, all right, I'll help you. And so, you know, her, her interpretation of the problem was different than it really was. But you know, at that point in time, you know, it took awhile to figure out what the real problems were and what her options and whether or not, you know, [Richard M.] Daley was, you know, trying to--'cause she say Daley as usurping her power as the keeper of the city's funds and finances as city treasurer, that he was trying to usurp that and take it into the mayor's office, or at least control it from the mayor's office. So, you know, I got in and did that, but then discovered that she was a, I think she was mentally a sick person, and it took awhile to figure that out. Story_ID: 81353 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, would you please state your full name for us? Speaker 2: My full name is Jacquelyne Dolores Lane Grimshaw, if you want the entire thing, but I normally am known as Jacky Grimshaw. Speaker 1: Okay, and you spell it? Speaker 2: J-A-C-K-Y, G-R-I-M-S-H-A-W. Speaker 1: Okay, good. I've, I've, I've been wrong then. I thought your name was K-I-E instead of K-Y. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: J-A-C-K-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that, that's a story in and of itself. I was in grade school, and people called me Jacky. And at the time, my mother--and this is when I guess it hit me. My mother bought towels with my sister and my name on it. My sister's name was Pat, so she had a, it was a cowgirl, so she had this nice cowgirl outfit on with Pat on it, or Patty. And then Jackie was this boy with, with, you know, all of the, the spurs and the, and saddlebags and things like that. And so I was very upset and said, why can't I have Jackie as, you know, a cowgirl? Why do I have to have a cowboy? And then discovered that J-A-C-K-I-E was the boy's spelling of Jackie, and I said well, what's a girl's spelling? And my teacher said you do it with a "y." I said okay, that's me. So since I've been third grade I've spelled my name J-A-C-K-Y. Speaker 1: That's interesting. I never heard that. I, I would-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --have thought it was the opposite spelling. You know, I didn't know. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, some, there are some boys that spell it J-A-C-K-Y, but most boys spell it J-A-C-K-I-E, and most girls are spelled J-A-C-K-I-E, yeah, Jackie Kennedy, for example. But you know, my--I started J-A-C-K-Y, and I've stuck with it, and I'm not changing now. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Heck if I know. Today is August 18--19th, August 19th, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Chicago, Illinois, 1900 South Michigan Avenue, doing this taping. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that makes sense. So we were--when we--we're continuing an interview we started some time ago. I think when last we met it was about maybe eight months ago. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we-- Speaker 2: Sounds about right. Story_ID: 81354 Speaker 1: We were--you were talking about the early '90's [1990s], and you were working in the office of Miriam Santos, yeah, for the city treasurer, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a city--she was a treasurer for the city of Chicago. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, it, my career with Miriam Santos was very interesting how I got started. At the time I was doing a talk show at WBEZ radio, the, the national public radio affiliate here in Chicago. And I started first receiving phone calls from Miriam Santos saying she wanted to talk. And so we made, you know, arrangements to talk, and then she said that she really wanted me to come and work for her. And I said, you know, why? And at the time she was working--as a city treasurer she's responsible for the city's pensions. And the, the pensions for the city employees are really controlled--the investments are controlled by the city treasurer. But a lot of the policies around benefits and so forth are really controlled by the General Assembly. And at the time, she was in a royal battle with the mayor of the city of Chicago. And the mayor had a developer friend who was trying to get access to the pension funds to do development in the, in the city of Chicago. Miriam thought that this was endangering the, the safety and security of those funds and didn't wanna do it. And so she said that she wanted to have somebody help her with a strategy for the General Assembly. Now, you know, given my prior work as a lobbyist for the city of Chicago, she thought it was transferable to what she saw needed to be done to protect the fen--the pension funds. And at first, you know, I was not all that interested in doing it, and I, you know, was enjoying, you know, the life I had on the radio. It was something I could do and have a lot of free time to pursue other activities, and not go into a full-time job. But you know, she kept calling, and kept pleading, and kept making her case, and so finally I relented and said okay, I'll, I'll do it. So I went to the city of Chicago as deputy treasurer for economic development, in addition to working on strategy for, you know, protecting the pension funds. Also, she was interested in looking at how city funds could be used to spur economic development in particularly low income and moderate income communities. So, you know, there were a variety of tools that we could use to do that, from the Community Reinvestment Act to doing LINK deposits and so forth. And so she was interested in, in having someone pursue those opportunities, which was really part of the reason why I decided to go ahead and do it because, you know, helping people who needed help in low income communities is something that I'd been working in, for in one way or another most of, most of life. So-- Speaker 1: So, so what year was that exactly? Speaker 2: This must have been 1991. I wanna say, yeah, 1991 I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But don't hold me to that. I'm very bad with dates, but it was about that time. Story_ID: 81355 Speaker 1: So, so I went over to the treasurer's office, and in fact we did that. You know, we, we did a lot of work with various investment funds because, you know, the city of Chicago, because of the amount of money we had, you know, there were a number of firms that we use for investing of city dollars and pensions. And you know, we'd looked at, you know, legalities and what can be done with pension funds. You know, and so we did all that, and we had a strategy which we worked, worked on. Then in addition to that, you know, I started the work with some of the depositors for city funds on putting together these programs to benefit, you know, communities, low and moderate income communities. And so, you know, things were going along pretty well. You know, in addition to that, you know, as a Hispanic and as a woman, you know, there were a lot of calls for her to, you know, make appearances, to do speeches, to, you know, be a representative of the Hispanic community and elected officials. And so there was a lot of that activity that was going on too that she asked for help and advice, and you know, I provided. Story_ID: 81356 Speaker 1: And it must have been--actually the, the first that I started to suspect that, you know, there was something odd about her was actually from the person who was her press secretary, who would tell me that, you know, they, they would go out and have lunch, for example, with Kupcinet. And you know, Miriam would be doing-- Speaker 2: Irv, yeah, Irv, Irv Kupcinet. Speaker 1: Irv Kupcinet, right. And so, you know, Miriam would be, you know, doing an interview or whatever, and Kupcinet would say something to Jessica her name was, the assistant. And Jessica would reply, and Miriam would get very distressed because there was this conversation between Jessica and you know, Kupcinet or whomever. And you know, Jessica found it strange that, you know, Miriam would just, you know, become very agitated and irate because, you know, she was in some ways, you know, she viewed it as Jessica was getting attention or taking attention away from her. And so, you know, Jessica would, you know, come back and, you know, just kind of letting out, you know, her frustration and, and her, you know, lack of understanding what was going on. We'd talk about it, and I said oh, Jessica, you're probably being too sensitive, blah, blah, blah. But it kept happening, and Jessica kept coming back, you know, from these kind of visits. And then, you know, I, I saw it. Actually, this, this was very interesting. We had--we were going to the city council for a budget hearing; went into the city council, you know, with myself, with Miriam, the first deputy, our investment--the deputy for investments and so forth, so you know, it was four or five of us, you know, going to the city council chambers. And I walk in and the aldermen started speaking to me: oh, hi, Jacky. Now, remember I had worked with these people for, you know, five years, and, and in some cases had helped to elect some of 'em to office, so there was this personal relationship. So I walk in and they started saying hi and blah, blah, blah, and how's this, you know, how's your son, how's your daughter, how's your--you know, those kinds of conversations. And you know, we'd get down to the business. We'd deal with the budget thing. We go back to the office, and Miriam just takes off at me, I mean, just out of blue, is like I was being attacked. And I was saying you know what is going on? And I finally saw for the first time what Jessica had been seeing all along, that there was this real Jekyll and Hyde kind of personality of, of Miriam Santos. And you know, I, you know, I, I puzzled over it, and then I said you know, Jessica is, gave--is this what you've been experiencing? She said yes, and I said okay. And so after that I would just kind of watch Miriam's mood. And if she seemed like she was in a good mood and everything was okay, then that was fine. If she seems like there was something bothering her, I tried to stay as far away from her as I could. And you know, we kind of like had this, oh, I guess borderline, you know, that I tried not to any way cross or to, to get her going in any kind of way. Story_ID: 81357 Speaker 1: But then my father, who had, who was suffering from colon cancer, you know, really took a turn for the wor--for the worse. And so my siblings and I were taking turns in the morning going by to make sure that, you know, he was okay, he had his food, that, you know, those kinds of things were taken care of. And so if I would do that, and depending what would happen with my father, yeah, I might be late getting into the office. Well, you know, the office never really had a strict beginning and end time. You know, you worked your eight hours, you know, so you start at eight or you start at nine, you know. You know, as long as you work your eight hours there was never a big issue about what time you got to work. And then all of a sudden it became an issue. If would come in, you know, at 9:15 instead of 9:00 or 9:30 instead of 9--you know, there was this big eruption that, you know, I was delaying the work of the office. Well, now the work of the office is really managing the funds. What I was doing in terms of economic development was to, to create some opportunities for how to use those funds. It didn't deal with the investment time, you know, anything in terms of the, the, the actual--the money processes of the office. But you know, she would make up these things about, you know, how my not being there at 8:00, or at 8:30, or at 9:00 or whatever, was in some way disrupting the office, which was blatantly untrue. You know, if I, you know, never did a work on economic development, it would not affect the treasurer's office at all. So, you know, again, you know, knowing that there was something quirky, I: okay, all right, what time you want me here? Okay, I'll be here. And then I worked it out, you know, with my siblings, except when my father was really sick, you know, or he really needed me, you know. I, I--that was my priority, not staying out of the, the ire of Miriam Santos. And so, you know, we went on, and my father died. And you know, I got condolences from everybody, the city council. Ed--Alderman Ed Burke, for example, had, you know, one of those proclamations for my father, and Ed Burke was somebody who I'd battled with for all the years of Harold Washington. You know, the city council recognized it. Miriam Santos never said a word, never got a card, never showed up, you know, no acknowledgement of all of, you know, the kind of grief that I was going through. I--at the time, one of the things that was coming up was [HM] Carol [Moseley] Braun being sworn in to the Senate. And having worked for Carol, had knowing Carol, you know, I wanted to go to the inauguration. It was also the same time that Bill Clinton was going into office, so-- Speaker 2: It's in '92' [1992] now. Speaker 1: This was '92' [1992]. And so, you know, I had my plane ticket; I had reservations; I had permission to go, and all of a sudden Miriam said I couldn't go. If I went to, if I went to the inauguration then, you know, I could just forget about my job. And I said okay (laughter). At that point, you know, there is--you know, I was still grieving at that time for my father. So, and I was, I was very sensitive, and this kind of, you know, irrational behavior all of a sudden, after having approved and knew I was going, you know, and having--you know, I had gone with her to the Democratic Convention in New York, you know, had supported her in making sure that she got the kind of exposure and all the rest of that while we were in New York, you know, being a fan of, of Clinton that she was, you know, having the relationship she did with other elected officials, Hispanic elected officials, you know, all that stuff--you know, in fact I even thought she was going to the inauguration, you know, up until the time that she just said no, I couldn't go. So, anyway, I went. My, my mother and my daughter were all set to go. We all went to the inauguration so I came back and-- Story_ID: 81358 Speaker 1: And at the time, you know, the Center for Neighborhood Technology had been--I, I was on the board actually of the Center for Neighborhood Technology during this time. That was part of my volunteer work. And we had done a reorganization of how the Center for Neighborhood Technology should be organized and the programs it would--it should focus on and so forth. And they had gone into a search for the kind of staffing they need to implement this plan. And the transportation area was something that they could not find the right person. They began to ask me to consider the position, and I kept saying no, no, no, I don't wanna do that. You know, I, I, you know, I, I was, I wa--it wa--I was really torn because I knew that my days with [Miriam] Santos were, were numbered be--just because of, you know, the, the history of what we had gone through. But at the same time, I really wasn't sure if I wanted--I had never worked for a nonprofit. I'd been on boards of nonprofits, but it had been my--it would have been my first experience going to work for a nonprofit. And I wasn't quite sure if that's really where I wanted to go and whether or not my head was there and all the rest of that, so I kept saying no, no, no. Finally, I came in one day from--I'm not--I, I don't remember exactly what prompted this. Oh, I should also say that, you know, the city of Chicago's policy was that you had bereavement time off that you were paid for. Well, when my father died I got my paycheck and it was just docked, you know, like ten days of salary, you know, just wasn't there. So I had to go through this whole thing with the Department of Personnel and you know, the payroll because even though I was in the, the, the treasurer's office, all of the, those kinds of issues were dealt with by the, by the, by the city of Chicago. So, you know, I had to go and you know, they were just appalled at this behavior. And you know, I, I got all of the reimbursement and the rest of that, including time off, but you know, it was just like more stress. And there was a, a--I can't say it was a, a, a sanction of any sort on her, but there was, you know, a, a report back to her that the kind of things she did was, was unwarranted, that was, you know, it was not the right thing to do. And that set her off. So I came in one day, and she had what we call the pink slip for me, that I was no longer--I, I serve at the will of the treasurer, and that treasurer no longer needed my services, and that was it. I said okay (laughter), you know, bye, you know, kind of thing. And in fact, I couldn't even take my things out of the office. She had my desk emptied, boxed up, and delivered to my house. I mean, and so it was that kind of, you know, weird behavior, that it was like, Jekyll and Hyde is the best I could describe it. Speaker 2: But during the time period I think a lot of people when--I know when Miriam Santos started going through public scrutiny around issues, a lot of people thought she must be okay if Jacky was associated with her (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --but we did--we didn't know the rest of the story--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, no, un-un, no, what was going on behind those doors on that third floor. Michael Pfleger, who's a good friend of mine, was also a good friend of hers, and you know, Michael, I said something to him one day, and he had no clue, no idea that, you know, there was these two personalities of Miriam Santos. And I had originally met her while I was still in the mayor's office. You know, she was an attorney at the time for Illi--Illinois Bell or AT and T, one of the phone companies. I can't remember which, which one it was. And Ben Reyes, who was working for the mayor, he, you know, was responsible for the--he was deputy mayor for the infrastructure department. You know, he knew her, and had--and it was really we were out at a social event, and he introduced me to her. And you know, she was a very affable, very pleasant kind of person. You know, there was this wonderful side of her. But then, when she got, you know, the Mr. Hyde came out, it was--I mean her--she was like in some ways like Dorian Gray. I mean her features would change. I had, I mean I had never experienced a (unclear) with something that, you know, was only fictional to me until I would actually see it and you know, felt it, and experienced it. And it was oh, very, very unpleasant. But, so, as a result of that, I said whew (laughter). And you know, I--the, the center [Center for Neighborhood Technology] kept pursuing me and so I said well, after I think a month or so, I said okay. And then I started my career with the center, where I've been ever since. Story_ID: 81359 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what is the neighborhood--the Center for Neighborhood Technology and, and, and what role did you take on? Speaker 2: Well the Center for Neighborhood Technology is a public policy advocacy organization. It was founded in 1978, and it came out of a program at the Senate--at Northwestern University in their center for, Center for Urban Affairs or Center on Urban Affairs. John McKnight was the creator of the program. And Scott Bernstein, who was the founder of the Center [for Neighborhood Technology], was actually a engineering student at Northwestern, and got involved with the, the, the Center for Urban Affairs programs and switched his, his major and his career from engineering to political science as a result. But the Center on Urban Affairs would have Northwestern students go into communities to actually solve real problems in community. And at the time, Scott was sent with some other interns or students over to Christian Action Ministries on the West Side. And at the time, Christian Action Ministries was interested in why they were having so many people from the community having to go to Cook County Hospital's Emergency Room. And the students then took, really took kind of a research, you know, public health type research in (unclear) the, the, the reasons for these admissions. So, you know, they looked at the records and found that some of the major reasons for people going to the hospitals were automobile crashes, pedestrians on the streets being hit by automobiles, rat bites, and vitamin deficiencies. So then, having identified, you know, these issues, the question is, what do you do about it? So why were they having dog bites? Well, it turns out that a lot of dogs were being released by their owners because the owners could affer--afford to take care of them and feed them. And so these dogs then formed packs on the street. And the way they got food was going into the alleys, into the garbage cans, and they would knock over the garbage cans, you know, leave, you know, food, food in the alleys and so forth. And so that produced a growing rat population, and so, you know, as a--and, and there was nothing happening in the city to try and control the rats. And so the rats then would end up in apartments, you know, and you know, particularly the, the, the tenement type apartments on the West Side, and end up biting kids, and kids end, end up going to the hospital for these rat bites. So the, the key to the rat bits were two: one, to control the dog population; two, to eradicate the rats. So in order to get rid of the dogs, they created this program of providing a bounty for neighborhood kids, for identifying these dog packs. And for every dog that got captured by Animal Control, the kid would get five dollars. Well, it didn't take very long for all of these dogs to be eliminated and kids claiming this five dollars. So that was one side of the problem. The other side was convincing the city that they need to bait the alleys, and that they need to do more with garbage collection. So, you know, the Christian Action Ministry and, and the leadership, you know, advocated to the city of Chicago to do the, the baiting of the alleys to get rid of the, the rats, and which had finally happened. So that was one problem. In terms of the, the people being hit by automobiles, it turns out that drivers on the Congress Expressway, I--Interstate 290--at rush hour would leave the interstate to try and go west on the (unclear) streets. Well, the problem with that is that there's very bad lighting, and the streets were not in very good condition. So a combination of, of people hitting potholes, you know, having, you know, to control the cars after their going over the pothole, pedestrians walking, you know, dark skinned pedestrians usually with dark clothes, you know, that there was a collision. So, you know, how do you solve that problem? One, better lighting on the street; two, better pothole repair; and three, you know, traffic control devices on the, on the streets that parallel 290. And so that was another advocacy by the Christian Action Ministries and so forth to have the city deal with those issues. Story_ID: 81360 Speaker 1: And then the, the, last thing was, was the vitamin deficiency. Well, it turns out the reason for that is that there were no stores, grocery stores on the West Side in that area that carried fresh produce. You know, most of the stores were a combination of liquor stores, you know, dry--canned food, dry, dry, dry foods, canned food and so forth. And the, the, the closest place to get fresh produce was nowhere within, you know, the, the ability of people to get there; you know, they had to get on buses, do transfers, so there was no easy way to get the protu--produce. So the, the, the solution that the, the students came up with was, you know, growing vegetables in the neighborhood. So they started by identifying a lot, cleaning it off, you know, creating a community garden. Well, what started to happen is that people who would harvest the garden were not the people who did the work on the garden. So then it's like okay, so (laughter) how do you, how do you control what happens to the harvest? So the, the innovative thing that came out that was creating greenhouse, but, again, a greenhouse that would be protected. And the--Belle Whaley, who was one of the matriarch of the West Side, you know, who did a lot with, you know, feeding the hungry and the homeless and so forth, had a building that, you know, she operated as her, yeah, base of operation. So, you know, Scott and the students created a greenhouse on the roof so that, you know, the access was controlled, and that they could then grow produce for the people, you know, to have access to, to fresh, fresh vegetables to combat this, you know, vitamin deficiencies that was going on. So that's a long way of saying, you know, like it intrigued Scott that you could really come up with solutions to urban problems to help people in urban communities. Story_ID: 81361 Speaker 1: And so with some of the advisors from Northwestern and their contacts, people like Stan Hallett, and Sam Sein, who are, you know, legends in their own time, you know, helped Scott to figure out what an organization could be. And so that's the origin of the Center for Neighborhood Technology. So we--our mission is to create new tools. And the technology in the Center for Neighborhood Technology was really in the low tech definition of technology, meaning tools and methods and strategies to deal with urban issues and urban problems for urban communities. So that's what we do. At the time that yeah-- Speaker 2: It's kind of neighborhood and problem solving I guess in a way-- Speaker 1: Well, you know, the, the pro--the program that I went to the center to do was to deal with the issue of transportation--now, you know, transportation in the sense that how you provide transportation options to people, how do you make trans, transportation that is affordable, transportation that is nonpolluting, transportation that will have a--will reduce impact on household budgets. So that's what I've been working on for the last thirteen or so years, was trying to answer those questions. But in addition to that, you know, we also have programs that deal with energy and what--you know, in addition to, you know, trying to solve, you know, these problems that the students dealt with, one of the first program areas that the center got into was energy. And one of the reasons for that was it was a time when energy costs, electric costs were going up, that (unclear) families were having a hard time, you know, making, you know, their family budgets handling these increased energy costs. And so the center got into a program of doing energy audits, you know, going into households, looking at, you know, where there were leakages in terms of hot air, you know, that was heating the home going out; you know, what could be done to keep--to weatherize homes and so forth? And then we, we started also with nonprofit organizations. In fact, the center did energy audits on I think really all of the buildings that were owned and operated for nonprofits in the city. We did energy audits, energy retrofits, you know, to, to try and help reduce the cost of energy, both for households and for these nonprofit organizations. And we continue to do an energy program. We don't do energy audits anymore, but we now do a program of real time pricing for, for energy so that people can control their electrical costs as, as part of the household savings. Story_ID: 81400 Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, the, the Center for Neighborhood Technology, the current energy program is to help people with real time pricing. And it's a program that the Illinois Commerce Commission is going to allow more households to take advantage of once we have electrical deregulation in 2007. And what real time pricing does is, is a different kind of meter that you have in your home that you're able to see how much electricity you're using, and you're also able to monitor, you know, how your usage is going, which then affects how much your electrical bill would, will, will be. And the way it works is that, you know, Commonwealth Edison has kind of a core price of electricity. When there is a high demand for electricity in the summertime, for example, when you have 90 degree days, and everybody's running their air conditioning and everybody's running fans, then the demand for electricity is here, which then means that elec--Commonwealth Edison has to produce more electricity, which means that it costs more. And so with real time pricing, when it goes up, when those electric prices go up, you're able to control the amount of electricity you use to reduce your, your bill. The way if you--the may most of us pay electrical bills is that Commonwealth Edison looks at their price over the year, they fix a price, and that's what you pay. You know, whether or not you use, you're using at high demand periods or low demand periods, this is the price you pay. And so the, the folks who have been on this pilot program of real time pricing have been able to cut their electricity bill by 10 to 15 percent. So, you know, if you're one of these high users, then that starts to be significant, or if you have low income. What, what we're trying to do at the center, you know, as we, we talk about tools and technologies to--for low and, and moderate income families, is that there's two ways to provide more income for a family. Either you can give them more money, or you can reduce their expenditures. Well, obviously we can't give people more money. So what we try and do is figure out ways to reduce expenditures, and, and this is just one of those programs. Another program, for example, we're looking--that we're running is car sharing. And car sharing is, is for those people who use transit and can use transit from--or can walk for most of their daily activities, but every once in a while they need a car. For most of us, you know, we have a car. It sits in front of the house or it sits in a garage except for those times when we want to go to the grocery store and carry back large, large purchases, or we go to Home Depot, or Ikea, or, or we wanna go across town then we may get in a car. But you know, for--so you're paying for that car even though you're not using it. It's just sitting there. So what car sharing does is it makes a car available when you need it, but you don't have to pay for it all the time. And so that, again, is something that allows people to have access, to have affordable transportation, but not to pay for a transportation vehicle that they're not using for probably half of its existence. So that's another program. Story_ID: 81401 Speaker 1: Another program we're currently working on is broadband, access to broadband. As you know, you know, with our broadcast--broadband suppliers, whether or not it's SBC or, or, or the cable companies, is that they're a lot of communities cannot get access, or if they have access, it's so expensive that they can't afford it. So we are doing a Wi-Fi program pilot right now in Lawndale and--to test out, you know, doing a community wireless internet that will right, right now making available to people for five dollars a month. And we are pursuing doing voiceover internet so that, that people can actually have phone service and long distance service, you know, using the same technology, and essentially providing them a much more affordable communication access than they can get from SBC or the cable companies. Story_ID: 81402 Speaker 1: And I, I guess the, the, the other thing is that, you know, we, we have used our transportation program to look at policies that will provide convenience and accessibility for people, and you know, working on nonpolluting options. For example, we just finally got the national transportation bill passed. And one of the things that we were advocating for in the national transportation bill is a program called Safe Routes to School, which allows communities to develop programs to get kids to school safely without having parents drive kids to school, which does a couple of things. It makes more congestion on the streets at the, the height of rush hour, and two, it creates more pollution in the air, so that if you can create safety programs that will allow kids to be able to walk to school or bike to school on their own, you know, with parents having the, having a sense of security for the kids, then you know can reduce, you know, transportation as well. So, you know, we look at those kinds of programs that, you know, people, you know, kind of either take for granted once they're in place or don't think about, you know, how transportation is so essential to our lives and how much it's actually costing. And for example, we did research that indicated that transportation has become the second highest household expenditure. You know, back, you know, when I was in school, or you know, or even twenty years ago, you know, the household expenditures that, that, that's done by the Bureau of Labor Statistics or the Consumer Price Survey would say housing, health care, food, and transportation would be done on the list. It's now housing and transportation, and in some communities transportation expenses exceed household expenses, if you can believe that. And as we're right now in this-- Speaker 2: What, what would typify those communities, I mean-- Speaker 1: Communities where, you know, you had to drive, that you had no transit options, yeah, you had no sidewalks, you couldn't bike, so everything you did you had to do by automobile so that you're using the automobile all the time. And the cost of owning the automobile, maintaining the automobile, gasoline, oil, and so forth, you know, that those annualized expenses start to exceed the, the housing or the shelter expenses for, for people. So, you know, we try and you know, work on those kinds of issues to: one, make people aware, and then provide the options for people so that they don't have to use the automobile twenty-four hours a day for everything they need. Story_ID: 81403 Speaker 1: Okay. So what, now, now what position do you hold at-- Speaker 2: I am vice president for policy, transportation, and community development. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, and you, you've been, so, so you've been with the center since '92' [1992]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's right (laughter) '92' [1992], '93' [1993], in that area, Larry. Don't, don't hold me to that, but something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, and so I--so you probably planned to end your work career at the Center for Neighborhood Technology I would think. Speaker 2: I do. You know, I enjoy doing what I, what I do. You know, I can really see the difference that we make. For example, you know, we created a program for all the college students here in the city of Chicago. It's called the University Pass. You know, we work with the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority]. We took the idea to the CTA. You know, we had a seminar where we brought people from other parts of the country that had done the center--seminar kind of passes for, for college students, and you know, convinced the CTA, convinced the CTA management that this was a program that could work in Chicago. So, you know, having convinced the staff, the next thing to do was convince the board, and the CTA, and the CTA took some convincing that this was a program that would work. And again, we started with a pilot, with just a few schools. And you know, the, the way it works is that the school will provide funds for all of their students, whether they take transit or not. Originally we started at fifty cents a ride I think was the, was the--fiftycents a day. And so, yeah, the--how the university got that money to provide to the CTA, they could either do it themselves--for example, that's what DePaul University did, they paid it because they wanted to use it as a benefit to convince students to come to DePaul, which is an urban university that, you know, was close to the transit, that, you know, on the downtown campus, you know, driving there was, was not an option. On the uptown campus they wanted to reduce their need to keep billing parking spaces. So, for them, they saw it as an investment to convince students to come there and to, to control the parking costs. Other, other, other schools put it in their, their student activity fee, so that you know, the equivalent of, of the cost of the transit pass went into the, the fee. And the way, you know, it works is pretty much like if you have an HMO card, you know, for health care. You know, you have the HMO card. You know, if you don't get sick, you have card. If you do get sick, you have the card and you can get health care, and the same thing that, you know, we convinced--you know, universities look at it for this (unclear) for the same reason, that, you know, students had it even if they were staying on campus; you know, they had it if they wanted to go downtown; if they wanted to go anyplace else, you know, they would have, you know, their, their transit card that they could get on transit anytime twenty-four hours a day. For the CTA, what it did was it gave, it gave them a guaranteed choice of funds. But the other thing is that it provider ridership in the middle of the day, 'cause if you look at, you know, the ridership for the CTA or a public transportation, is that they peaks were at rush hour, people going to work, coming home from work. In the middle of the day, you know, the ridership kind of like tapered off. But by providing, you know, these university students, you know, it provided kind of like even flow of transit use throughout the day so that it made--you know, you know, the buses were running anyway, and so--or the trains were running, and so this provided, you know, additional passengers, which then created this sense of security that people have. You know, they say well, I don't--nobody's riding the bus, you know, that safety thing. But if there're people on the buses, people tend to, to use buses. So, you know, that program has gone now to the, the city--the CTA currently has the largest university transit pass program in the country, that, you know, there are over 40,000 students that now have transit passes to ride the CTA. Story_ID: 81404 Speaker 1: Okay, I, I had a question I was thinking is--I was thinking about all the things that you've done, and I just wondered if, if it was more satisfying for you or more productive to be at a place like the Center for Neighborhood Technology where they're originating new ideas and progressive ideas, or to be in city government, you know, where a lot of those ideas are implemented, you know, I mean or could be implemented if, if they had the right motivation. Speaker 2: Oh, Larry, that's a, that's a hard question to answer. Well, let me just give you an example of why it's difficult. While I was at the city of Chicago, I came into my office one day and there were all these people there, most of whom I knew, you know, sitting in the waiting area of my office. And so I go into my office, and I had my assistant come in and say why are these people here, 'cause I knew I didn't have any appointments at the time. And she said they're sitting in. What do you mean they're sitting in? Well, they're sitting in waiting to talk to you. Well, why do they wanna talk to me? Well, they can't talk to the mayor, and they can't talk to anybody else, and so they wanna talk to you. Well, why do they wanna talk to me (laughter)? So she said they won't tell me. So I said okay, so I came out. And you know, turns out these are people from, from the Center for Neighborhood Technology. The majority of 'em are from the center. So I go out and so I said you know, like, what's up? Why are you here? What do you need? What do you want? And so they had said--you know, one of things that in the, you know, the, the, the [Harold] Washington Administration, or at least the Washington campaign had produced these Washington papers, which were essentially policy positions that the, the candidate for mayor was espousing that he would do in the government. And so one of those issues as dealing with abandoned housing. At the time, you know, the city of Chicago was having this epidemic of buildings being abandoned, you know, people living in them, you know, without heat, without water, that, you know, it got--conditions got so bad, they were condemned by the courts as unlivable. People would move out, then the brick thieves would come in and start taking the thieves and the--and taking the bricks, and then you'd have a dangerous building. It was also, you know, these open buildings became safety hazard because people would be dragged into 'em and raped, and beat, and robbed and things of that sort. So it was really a problem in various communities around the city. And so the Center for Neighborhood Technology had, had, had this, you know, strategy for dealing with these abandoned buildings that they got included in the Washington papers. So, you know, the mayor was in office. You know, they were coming down to City Hall to see how to go about implementing it. Well, they couldn't talk to anybody. They went to the housing department, and nobody there would talk to them. They went to the building department. Nobody there would talk to 'em. So it was just this thing that everywhere they got re--rebuffs, so they came to my office. And I said well, why did you come to my office? I have nothing to do with housing, and building inspections, and housing court and all the rest of that. And they said well, you know the mayor. The mayor will listen to you, so we need you to go tell the mayor that we need to implement this program. I said all right (laughter). So, you know, I said okay, tell me exactly what the program is. So they--we sat down, and they told me what they were proposing to do, and I said okay, all right. So I go down to the mayor and I said, you know, these folks are sitting in my office, you know. I need to do something with them. You know, what do you want me to do? So he listened to my sad tale, and he says call up [HM] Brenda Gaines. Well Brenda Gaines was the Commissioner of Housing. And he said tell Brenda Gaines to meet with him, and that this is a program we should do it, and tell her to do it. I said okay, that's cool. And he says and you work with her. I said mayor, I don't know anything about housing. He says well learn. That's the way he was. You know, for him, no is not an answer, so I was not going to get out of this, you know, so I could--may as well not even try. 'Cause when he said do it, that was it; that was then my job, to learn about housing, to get Brenda Gaines and the housing department to pay attention to these folks. Story_ID: 81405 Speaker 1: So out of this came a program that the center called Neighborhood Early Warning System, NEWS. And with the Neighborhood Early Warning System would do, they, there were eight indicators that they had figured out would lead to eventually--if all these indicators, you know, were lined up in place, this housing would ended up being abandoned and pretty much demolished. And so the, the complicating thing about these indicators is some of them were, were from departments that the city had some control over, like the Water Department. So, for example, if a building, you know, had their water cut off because the nonpayment of water bill, that was an indication it was heading to disaster. If the building had a fire, and the building was not repaired, you know, or, you know, the people were still trying to live in a building with a fire, obviously that was a problem. If the building had a lot of housing code violations, or when--were, you know, assigned to housing court, you know, that was another indication. So, you know, there are all of these things that were indictors. Some of the things that, the, the, the city does not have control over were taxes. If the taxes were in arrears, well, that's a Cook County Tax Collector. So, you know, we had nothing to do with that, but that was another indicator. Another one was housing court itself, you know, that, that was, again, the county court system, the city had no involvement with that. So these indicators were a combination of city indicators and county indicators. And so, you know, what the, what the center wanted to do was to get access to all of this data and put it in a database, and make it available to communities, particularly the community development corporations because they had the ability to intervene and, and actually be named receivers of buildings that were in danger of, of going down this, this potential line of, of abandonment. And so they could go to housing court and be named a receiver to then get control of the building, and you know, use the, the rents to start, you know, ameliorating some of these problems. So we got it in place; the program is working, etc. I then go to the Center for Neighborhood Technology, NEWS is operating, and what does it end up being? My program. So I get to the center, and now I'm responsible for maintaining the relationships with the city to keep the NEWS system operating. So, you know, it was, it was then seeing NEWS from the other side of the street as actually, you know, working with the Department of Planning, working with the water department, and working with the housing and so forth to maintain this flow of data that would allow us to, to have an up-to-date database so that, you know, community development corporations could, in fact, you know, get these buildings before they ended up being abandoned and being victimized by brick thieves and things of that sort. So, you know, that's an example by--on both sides is that: one, being in government, I was able to create a program. On the other hand, being at the Center [Center for Neighborhood Technology], was able to take that program and now we have expanded it, and you know, it's online, and you can go there right now. You know, so there's a lot of improvements we got to make, to make, yeah, this information more usable by community development corporations, by developers, by individuals, etc. so that, yeah, we can maintain the housing stock and, and not lose it. Story_ID: 81406 Speaker 1: So, you know, which was better, to create it or to operate it, to implement it, and keep improving on it? I don't know, Larry, it's, you know, it's, that's a tough question. I mean I have, I have been able to see the difference that I could make in the government, as well as, as being, you know, in a nonprofit sector. You know, in, in both, in both positions, you know, I've had to organize people, you know, involve people in what, in what we were doing. You know, at, when I was at the city it was important that the community stayed with us, and that's the way we convinced the city council, the, the General Assembly, as well as the Congress that here are some programs that needed to, to be implemented for the people. On the other hand, you know, being in the, in the, in the nonprofit sector, the same thing, you know, getting people to: one, join together, articulate their needs to those people who could, who could provide, you know, relief, solutions, decisions that would, you know, answer that need. So, yeah, working with people, I've--you know, which I enjoy doing, I've, I've been able to do in both positions and for, for the same reason. I'm getting people involved and, and making a difference in their own lives, realizing their own power, that, you know, they can, they can, they can express their needs and, and their grievances to the power sources and, and to have some effect. So I don't know, Larry, the answer to the question. I've, I've enjoyed being in government; I've enjoyed being in the, in the private sector, or particularly the nonprofit sector; yeah, it's rewarding; it's fulfilling. Speaker 2: I, I guess I'm--I guess is it-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 81407 Speaker 1: If you have a progressive idea about something or an idea where you, you think you solved the problems. And maybe if we did this like this it would solve something. I mean is it easier to be on the side of--say the center was that day when they had to--they came to your office. But they had to come to you 'cause they didn't think anybody, anybody else would listen to 'em (laughter). Speaker 2: Right, right, well, nobody else was-- Speaker 1: You see. Speaker 2: --listening to 'em, right. Speaker 1: And that's often the case in-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in community organizations that come up with a, a good idea. They've gotta find somebody that'll listen-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --you know. So that's the, that's where the frustration is there. But in city government, if, if you had a progressive idea in city government, now the [Harold] Washington Administration it might be a lot easier to, to, to implement. I mean, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But I don't know. In general, in city government is it easy to, to--you know, and idea of implemented that's, that's-- Speaker 2: I, I think in, in government, you know, if you're, if you are an employee of government, the ability to get something done really depends upon, you know, who that chief executive is. You know, if I look at Christie [Christine] Todd Whitman in the [George W.] Bush Administration, I mean here is a governor who went into the Environmental Protection Agency having been an advocate Environmental Protection Agency programs when she was governor. She got there with the Bush Administration, who was anti-environmental laws of all sorts. And she had to leave because she could not be effective. She could not be true to her own principles. So, you know, on the other hand, with Carol Browner in the [President Bill] Clinton Administration, you know, with Clinton and with [Vice President Al] Gore being environmentalist, Carol Brown was--Browner was able to not only take current laws, but to use administrative and regulatory powers to advance, you know, the environmental causes. So it--you know, Clinton protected public lands by naming them monuments, which he could do, thanks to Teddy [Theodore] Roosevelt, a nice Republican, you know, back almost a hundred years ago. On the other hand, Bush is stripping, you know, those same public lands of those protections. So it, I think it really depends, you know, when you're in government that you could only do so much as that chief elected official, you know, believes and supports, he does not get in the way of, and you know, the same thing with the city. You know, with the current administration, [Richard M.] Daley is into environmentalism, I mean you know, making the city the greenest city. That's his goal. So, you know, if that's your thing, I mean if you have good progressive ideas about how to make the city green, you know, you're gonna have a chance to go with that. And on the other hand, you know, if, if there's something that the mayor, you know, opposes or doesn't agree with, then those ideas are not going to go very far, you know, so. You know, that's kind of the constraint of being in an administration is that you have to have to have at the top receptivity, or at least not antithesis towards what you're trying to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And the, the city is greener than it's ever been. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: You know, look at it. Story_ID: 81408 Speaker 1: The [Richard M.] Daley Administration has been wracked recently with a lot of, you know, indictments, and people have resigned positions. Is the city in, in--you know, Chicago's got a reputation of being like a where's mine city, you know. And I mean is it, is it, is it worse now than it's ever been or, or is it? Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my view of city government and my experiencing it is that I don't think we have gone, at least in my lifetime, through this level of corruption. You know, like the Richard J. Daley, yeah, had Charlie [Charles] Swibel, for example, who was in charge of the, the public housing administration. And you know, it was an open secret that Swibel was enriching himself from this public office, but it was limited. You know, like he had a few Charlie Swibels that went on, you know, in the, in the first Daley Administration. You know, you had the, the same kind of thing, a few big bad apples, and these were big public kind of bad apples in the, in the, in the Byrne Administration, you know. And-- Speaker 1: That's what Jane Byrne described them as a evil cabal or something-- Speaker 2: Yes, right, right, right, but then she joined with the evil cabal. So, you know, what do we say? You know, in, in Harold's Administration, you know, you had the mole that came in to really entice people to do wrong. And a lot of people got captured in that nest of-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) have a--he didn't seem to have a hard time finding people that (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Exactly. You know, and so, you know, the thing is that, I, I guess temptation is there, you know, if you have, if you don't have, you know, really core principles and values of your own, so that if, you know, this mole, Raymond, comes in, you know, and, and starts offering people trips and things like that, which he did to me by the way-- Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Now, this is Michael Raymond. This is the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --government mole that, that--I guess there were maybe, was it four or five Chicago aldermen that were busted-- Speaker 2: Yeah, at least. Speaker 1: --and officials, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now tell us, tell us your experience with that 'cause that's really a story. Speaker 2: Well, Michael Raymond came to our office, and I was in the mayor's office intergovernmental affairs. And he came in, and he was brought there by an alderman. I'm trying to remember exactly which one came in and introduced them. And you know, he, at the time said that he was working on, on--what do you call it--waste, garbage handling (laughter) I'm (unclear)-- Speaker 1: The dump sites-- Speaker 2: No, the- INTERVIEWER: --was it (unclear), you know-- Speaker 2: --the polite name for it, but waste, like waste management type stuff. Speaker 1: Waste management, right okay. Speaker 2: So, you know, he was coming in, and you know, he had a, a scheme, or a strategy, or a plan to, to be able to move this waste better than, you know, what was currently being done; and you know, that they had this plant that was operating down in Florida somewhere. And that you know, to prove that, you know, this was, you know, a better scheme, you know, he was offering me a trip to go to Florida to see, to see this operation, and that they would pay for everything and blah, blah, blah. And I said thanks, but no thanks. (Laughter) You know, I have no interest in going to look at, you know, garbage landfill processes in Florida or anywhere else. And you know, like if I need to go, if I need to go, I said the city can send me if it's this is something that's important to do. But you know, I was, I was not interested. And so, you know, he got nowhere, and so he left me alone. I never saw him again after that, at least not in my office, but, yeah. Speaker 1: Now were you given any training in terms of how to deal with that situation? Speaker 2: Mm-mm. Speaker 1: I mean suppose--I mean what's wrong with him saying well, yeah, come on to Florida. We'll pay for your trip. You can, you can--we'll put you up at some big resort, and then you can go see the garbage for a couple of hours, and you know, that rest of the time is yours? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I mean, who tells a city official that this might not be the best idea, you know, I mean-- Speaker 2: Well, I, I think at the time we did have ethics rules that said that, you know, you don't--that, that you shouldn't, or it was forbidden, or it was non-prudent to, you know, have gifts. And, and that would be considered a gift, a, a free trip to go someplace like that. And so, you know, we were not supposed to receive gifts, or there was a limit on the, on the amount of gifts we were supposed to receive. But you know, to me I wasn't even thinking about that. You know, it was like: one, you know, why are you here? Why do I need to go see this? You know, I'm not streets and san, you know, I mean I have--my, my relationship to garbage is getting a, a policy to the city council. You know, and so what policy are we trying to, to work on here? You know, so it was--you know, he just didn't make--it just didn't make any sense for him to be in wanting me to look at garbage, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --here or anywhere else. Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause. Story_ID: 81457 Speaker 1: Do you think--we were talking about it off the camera, but why do you think the environment now is so I guess conducive to, you know, schemes, get-rich schemes in city government? Speaker 2: I don't know if I can identify a cause. But I would say this, that as the chief executive, particularly a hands-on chief executive, that it is difficult to see how this can go on and the mayor not be aware of it. So that's the one thing that is troublesome. You know, one of the, the things I think that chief executives always, you know, whether or not it's a mayor, or the county, or the president, it's deniability. You know, so it's important for the chief executive to say hey, I didn't know. And you know, in some cases that might be true, that they really didn't know. But in this case, you know, we have I think three different kinds of corruption and malfeasance that's going on. One of it is centered around this Hispanic Democratic organization. And this Democratic organization was created as a way of maintaining a community to really offset the power base that was in the black community. And the, the folks who are responsible for this Democratic organ--Hispanic Democratic organization I think operated with impunity when it came to, you know, the kind of stuff they did in campaigns and how they went after, you know, kind of the [Harold] Washington Hispanic elected officials that put in, the [Richard M.] Daley Hispanic elected officials, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah, there's some funny--I mean there--well, they're not funny, but the-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --there's a "Reader" article about how they went after Jesus Garcia and-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --with, with city workers. Speaker 2: Exactly, so, so, you know, so I think when people are pulled into a situation and it's okay to go after Jesus and to use dirty tactics to do it, that, you know, you're--that, I mean that kind of like puffs you up, that you know you can do almost anything and you know it's okay because you're working for the mayor to do it. So I think that, you know, the--you know, that kind of carte blanche to do, you know, these not quite legal things in the political campaign, then you bring it into government. You can do not quite legal things in the government, that it's okay, that you know, you're doing it for the mayor, so that makes it okay to do it for the mayor. And so I think, you know, that kind of created this, I'm kind of above the law mentality that gave people, you know, the, the kind of mindset that they can, you know, do hire--trucks for hire, you know, get your friends. You know, you wanna get into this hired truck? All right, you know, you know, okay, all right, you gotta birthday present for me? Okay. And I'm sure it started small, you know, with, you know, maybe a trip to somewhere or something like that, that next thing you know that, you know, we have this whole scandal of the hired truck thing. Story_ID: 81458 Speaker 1: And then that, that just briefly summarizes a scandal where they're paying people to do trucking jobs for a city that has a whole fleet of trucks already. Speaker 2: Right, well, now the, the city needed additional trucks, but these trucks were, were--these owners of these trucking companies were giving the operators of the program, you know, money under the table so that they could be in the program. And they'd go and their trucks are doing something else, but they're being paid, you know, to do city work, or they're sitting around getting a suntan all day, you know, doing nothing, but getting paid millions of dollars. So, you know, it was really robbing the taxpayers. So that's one kind of corruption that was going on. The, the other kind of corruption was, you know, making sure that all of the folks who worked in these political campaigns, not just the Hispanics, but all the folks, you know, who had political sponsorship, that they're people had jobs. And so, you know, that's why you had the violation, the Shakman Decree and all of those kinds of shams that went on to get people who really weren't qualified in a lot of cases--you know, eighteen year-olds as, as building inspectors? You know, of course, I mean anybody who looked at that knew that that had to be a sham, but everybody turned a blind eye because, you know, their father was whoever their father was. And so you know, he was working for the mayor so it was it was okay. So, you know, that's a second kind of corruption, you know, just the violation of the Shakman Decree and, and putting people into positions in the city government where they really weren't qualified and denying people who were playing by the rules, and qualified opportunities, and work for the city. The third kind of corruption that was going on I have never heard of in, at least in this state, of actually operating a criminal enterprise on city property, and that is selling of drugs. And in some cases, ordering, you know, bodily harm to people who got in the way. So, you know, like, you know, that is beyond the pale of any kind of governmental operation. But I think it was, you know, the, the, that level that it's okay to do this stuff, you know. We're--you know, the mayor is--you know, we work for the mayor so that, you know, that, that kind of level that, you know, of being above and beyond the law I think just kind of permeated. You know, a lot of these departments where there is political patronage that was going on, you know, people being in positions when they shouldn't of have been in and coming through the political process rather than the, the official civil service process, gave rise to this kind of milieu that it really is okay to do all this kind of stuff. And so it's, it's now, you know, that, that, you know, analogy of a rotten apple spoiling the barrel, that the whole barrel now seems to be spoiled because of, you know--what may have started off very innocent, in some ways, but you know, has turned into a real criminal enterprise in the city, in the city government, which is an ex--which is I think several levels above, you know, Charlie Swibel, you know, being the kingpin of the Public Housing Administration and those folks who wanted to--you know, for example, when, when Harold [Washington] came in, we found warehouses full of refrigerators and stoves and things like that that CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] had bought, you know, and never given to the residents. So the residents are operating with broken refrigerators, and there's a warehouse full of them, and mainly because, you know, the right hand did not know what the left hand was doing. I mean Charlie Swibel and his boys were busy buying up all this stuff. People running CHA didn't know they were buying this stuff because at the time they didn't need it, and so you know, they're sitting in a warehouse instead of being out there, you know, with the people in, in the public housing. So, you know, there was a huge level of corruption, you know, in, in that kind of administration. But I think what we're seeing now is above and beyond anything that I, I've been aware in, in government. Story_ID: 81459 Speaker 1: We always ask this question: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today? Speaker 2: Oh, you know, one of the things that I think we have to get a hold of, and this was an alarming statistic that I heard about two years ago, and that was over seventy percent of black males in Lawndale have some kind of arrest or conviction record. That, when I heard that, I mean it was like oh, you gotta be kidding. But it turns out that that's the case. So, you know, this police state that we have and the racial profiling that we have, I think is the biggest detriment to the black community because without black males, you don't have a black community, a sustainable black community. And if we're criminalizing, which then means that, you know, you are then marred for life, and your access to opportunities and your access to being a productive of society is lessened because that is now: one, you're black; two, you're black male; three, you're a black male with a criminal record. We don't want you on our job; we don't want you in our housing, and so it becomes an escalating kind of, of disenfranchising, and, and, and denial, denial of opportunity for black males. And so, you know, that's one. The other thing is the educational system, that we, we, we are still not educating black boys and girls so that, you know, they can be--take advantage of the opportunities that are available for 'em. You know, so, you know, the educational system is getting better, but it's still lacking. And one of the things, again, that's going on in the schools that a lot of people who are not in schools may not know about and that's the discipline pra--problem. You know, kids in kindergarten are being sent home from school for, as, as discipline, that they are, they are suspended for weeks at a time. Well, a kid cannot learn if they're not in school. And disciplining by suspending them and expelling them is no way to educate these children. You know, there was a, a school that had, that only went to fifth grade, only to fifth grade. And they were averaging--and I don't wanna get this--I, I shouldn't use the numbers 'cause I get numbers wrong. But there was an incredible amount of days in this K-5 school of kids being out on suspension. Now, you know, what, what, what's the learning process if you're at home in front of the TV instead of in the classroom? When I was in school, if you misbehave, you got sent to the principal's office; you got some detention after school, you know; you had to do some extra homework, I mean something or another, but you never got sent out of the school building, and that's what's happening to kid these days. So, you know, that's the other thing. The criminalization of black males, not educating, you know, kids, I think are the two big problems that we have to deal with. And you know, the--my hope for the black community is that, you know, in some ways what Martin, Martin, Dr. Martin Luther King said, is that blacks are able to realize the full measure of their potential, I mean, and that's a hope, and I think we're getting there. I think we have more and more opportunities to do that. We're you know, having people who are escaping some of the antisocial, you know, environments that, you know, blacks have been forced to live in. But you know, we're still not all the way there, but you know, I am an optimist, and I think we will get there. But it's going to take persistence, and it's going to take, you know, focus so that, you know, it doesn't become an afterthought, but that there are deliberate policies and, and opportunities for, for, for helping, you know, the black community achieve their fur--full measure of their potential. Story_ID: 81460 Speaker 1: Okay. When you look back at everything that you've done so far, is there, there, is there any major decision or, or thing that you would change? Speaker 2: Oh, boy, Larry, you ask tough questions. What would I change? I wouldn't have gone to work for Miriam Santos (laughter), that's one thing I would not have done. I don't know if there's anything I would, I would not have done other than that. I mean, everything that I've done, you know, as, as I said starting off, is that, you know, my life goal when I went to college was to actually be a scientist. And so I have, in some ways, gotten away from that, but on the other hand, you know, the training that I had, you know, has helped me in all the positions that, that I've, I've been in. You know, every position has been fulfilling in a different kind of way. You know, in some ways, you know, my natural curiosity that got me into science, you know, allowed me to go and try these new things that I didn't have any training for. When I got in the public policy, I had no idea, but it intrigued me and that's why I went back and I went to school to learn about public policy and what it was about. So, you know, when I got into education, I didn't know anything about educating, but I went back and learned about and went to school and learned about teaching and education and what, you know, the, the, the whole theory of education and how people learn was all about, which I'm using right now as a matter of fact. You know, in terms of the center, is that, you know, making the center a learning organization. So it's going back to what I did, you know, thirty years ago, whatever long it was that I was teaching school. So, you know, everything has, in some way, I think built upon what came before in my life that has allowed me to do yet something else. And who knows, although I, I intend to be at the center, and you know, when I quit working, I'll probably quit work. I don't intend to go get another job anywhere. But you know, the, the thing is, that my job at the Center [for Neighborhood Technology] is probably going to evolve at least one or two more times before I leave there, which is okay, and it'll, it'll draw on what's gone before in some kind of way. So I am not sure that I would change very much in my life. You know, I was--praise God--you know, lucky that I made the right choices when I made those choices. And you know, and for me, it's paid off. You know, I don't really regret anything. Story_ID: 81461 Speaker 1: Okay, well, here's a question, here's another doozy here (laughter), at this juncture, when you look back at everything you've done, what would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, I think definitely Harold Washington, you know, and not just Harold Washington, mayor, but the whole Harold Washington experience, from his going into the, the Senate, his running for office the first time, you know, fighting off the evils of the Democratic machine when they came after him, you know, getting him elected to Congress, you know, supporting him and some of the congressional things he did like the reauthorization of the Voting Rights Act, you know, getting him elected mayor, working in the administration, getting him reelected mayor. I mean, all of those things in some way added up to the totality of, of Harold and the experience of Harold being, you know, the elected official that he was, and actually learning so much from him. Like I said, you know, like when he made me go into the housing, the, the housing thing and learn about housing policy. You know, I had no idea, but by the time I was done, I knew an awful lot about housing policy, which I'm using now. So all of those things have, have, have benefitted me. But I think if there is a legacy, I think, you know, the work that, that we did and the experience that I had working for Harold, and you know, just what Harold did and meant for the city, that you know, in, in some way I bask in Harold's glory 'cause, you know, having done the hard work to get him elected, and then seeing how the community responded, and the pride that the community got from having Harold as mayor of the city of Chicago, you know, has--yeah, can't ask for more than that. Speaker 1: You, you were a big part of it, so. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 81462 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family. I know you mentioned your children or some of 'em. But just, just tell us a little bit about your family. Speaker 2: Okay, well, I have two children. I have a daughter. In fact I say I have two only children. I have a daughter and then I have a son that is elevenyears younger. So, you know, by the time I got through raising her then, oh my God, I gotta do it all over again. And so my, my daughter is here in the city. She's married now. She has three children. My son is down in Texas, and he's still unmarried, but I have hopes that he may settle down and get married one day. My husband is a professor of political science. He was in a longtime chairman of I think about twenty, twenty-five years chairman of, of the social science department at IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology]. And he gave it up because he was working on another book. You know he's already done two, and he's working on a third. And so, you know, he wanted to have the freedom just to do the research and not do the administrative stuff. So, you know, that's it. My, my, my, my siblings, they are, I have five siblings, two sisters and three brothers. Both of my sisters are here in town. One is a public school teacher. The other is a real estate, is a real estate broker. My three brothers, only one is in town here. The youngest of my brothers is a pilot for Northwest Airlines, so he's based in Detroit, but he's here all the time, whenever we have a family gathering. And my third brother, the middle of my three brothers, is an over-the-road truck driver, so he's all over the place. You know, we have a hard time keeping up with him. So, that's it. My--as I said my father died. My mother's still alive. She lives in the area too. So, you know, there's a lot of extended family support. In fact, we all just went to my mother's school reunion. I'm gonna mess up the numbers of years, but it's like sixty-sixty years, sixty-six somebody year reunion, and-- Speaker 1: What, what school was it that-- Speaker 2: She--this was her high school graduating class. It was a school called Ballard-Normal. It was--she graduated from--Ballard-Normal was in Macon, Georgia. And the graduates move around. They have these school reunions in the hometown of the graduates. And so this graduate was a professor at a school down in Knoxville, and so she retired down there. And there is--Gatlinburg, Tennessee, which is a Dolly Parton Center, and so the reunion was actually in Gatlinburg, because she wanted the graduates to bring their children and grandchildren and so forth. And so my mother obvious-- not obviously--but my mother ended up with the largest contingency of grandchildren. I think there were twenty-two of us from my, my, my siblings that went down to Gatlinburg for this class reunion. So, it was--anyway, it was--yeah, we, we, we do these kind of family things all the time. And the ones that didn't go, didn't go for legitimate reasons. One of my, my brother's sons plays football, and it was high school practice. So if he missed that, he couldn't play football, and so he ended up having this to, to stay behind and things of that sort. But you know, those who could go, they were all, they were all down there. Story_ID: 81463 Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything that we haven't asked you about that you think that you need to address before we ask our last question? Speaker 2: Boy, Larry, we've talked for so many hours, there--I don't see how there could possibly be (laughter) anything that, that we haven't addressed. Boy, you know, I, I would, I would say this, you know, although I don't do active political organizing--I kind of like retired from that after Harold [Washington], you know, for the most part--I still keep my hands in. And so one of the I guess the, the other great joys that I have from being involved was electing--being involved in, only a small way, in the election of [HM] Senator Barack Obama. You know, he--you know, I've, I've had my eye out, you know, like I said--you know, we have to develop a political farm team. And so from, from the time Harold was mayor, I looked at Barack as the next black mayor of the city. And so, you know, I had my eye on him. And you know, kept relationships with him to make sure that, you know, he was, he was progressing along that ladder. And then when he went to the General Assembly and was state senator there, and it was like okay, doing the right kind of stuff. And then when the opportunity to go for Senate opened up, you know, it was like, get behind him. I'm still disappointed, I still would rather see him mayor in some ways, but having him as a U.S. Senator, you know, is good. And it kind of like erased the bad taste from [HM] Carol [Mosely] Braun, who, you know, was not reelected for reasons more of her own than anything else. So, you know, it kind of like a, another, you know, I think opportunity for kids to look up and see, you know, what they can accomplish and what they can, they can become. So, you know, that, that's important--. Story_ID: 81464 Speaker 1: --And right now I think--you know, the other thing that I'm doing is, is thinking through with, with some other folks about how we reclaim this country from these conservative Republican administrations. So you know, that's an avocation, you know, that I have that, you know, I put energy into it--excuse me--as much as I can. But I think, yeah, that's kind of an important--if we're going to have the future, that's kind of an important milestone that we have to achieve, is that we have to take back the country 'cause we're going totally in the wrong direction right now, that--you know, nationally. And the only thing I can say is that I'm glad I'm living in Illinois (laughter), one of the blue states right now versus, you know, some of these--for example, I went over to Ohio for the last election, the last presidential election for, for [John] Kerry. And, and experiencing Ohio and experiencing some of, you know, the, the rabid right-wing conservative attitudes that are out there, you know, is something we don't get here in Illinois, but it was good to experience that. So, I mean that's part of the future. Speaker 2: Do, do you think that--I know "Harpers" this month has an article about how the election was stole in Ohio. Do you, do you really--I mean do you have any opinion about that? Speaker 1: Well, Ohio--no, I don't have any direct proof that it was stolen. I do know of the difficulties that we had, you know, this black--can you believe it--black Secretary of State that was doing everything in his power to retard the ability of people to vote in strongly Democratic areas, Cuyahoga County, for example, where Cleveland [Ohio] is, that's where I was, but also in the communities where college campuses were--you know, the, the lack of voting machines. You know, it was raining that day. We got a supply of golf umbrellas and rain ponchos from a factory in Arkansas. They drove 'em up overnight that we could have 'em election morning when the rain came. And we had people that were standing in line for hours on these machines that kept breaking on, on, in polling places where there were not enough machines, where, you know, the, the, the registered voters said that, you know, you should have a large supply of machines, that you'd have, you know, one, two, or three machines, you know; you'd have eight, nine hundred registered voters. I mean those kinds of things, you know, were rampant throughout Cuyahoga County where, where I was. And as we were getting from Columbus [Ohio], where the main office was, you know, reports coming in during the days of these things that were going on in other places across the state. You know, if they didn't steal it, they made it extremely difficult to, to get people out and to get people voting. And so, you know, it was, it was a kind of thing that we were facing here in Illinois back in the time when I first got started, you know, fighting the Democratic machine, you know, you know, back in 1967, whenever it was. And so, you know, I was seeing things there that I, you know, you just don't see here in, in Cook County and the city of Chicago [Illinois] anymore. Story_ID: 81465 Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Wow, I guess that I did what I could just to help people. Story_ID: 81466 Speaker 1: Okay, are you gonna write a book about some of this? Speaker 2: Well, you know, maybe once I stop working (laughter). Somebody called me yesterday about, you know, writing a chapter in a book that was being done on politics in Chicago, and I said well, if my husband wants to write it, I'll help him. But you know, right now I don't have time to sit and write. I mean I just look at him writing books. You know, it is a full-time job writing a book, so I don't kid myself. So, you know, once I quite working, maybe I'll do that, but-- Speaker 1: We've got a lot of good stories here in this collection. I mean as you get--I mean you'd be--you--we've, we've interviewed Eugene Sawyer and Brenda Gaines. I mean you can go on down the line on--Grayson Mitchell, you know, (laughter) a lot of people. Speaker 2: Great, great, a lot of folks I know (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, thank you so much. Speaker 2: Oh, thank you-- Speaker 1: okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: --Larry, for having me, and thank you, Scott, for keeping the shine off my nose. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): That was our pleasure. We were really pleased that you were able to come in. Story_ID: 81330 Speaker 1: This is one of the pictures from my high school graduation. I went to Loretto Academy, and we didn't use caps and gowns, and that's why I'm not in a traditional cap and gown. We graduated in full white gowns, almost like bridal gowns with garland and red roses in my hair. Speaker 2: In what year? Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960]. Speaker 2: This is a picture from my high--my grade school graduation. I graduated from Corpus Christi grade school in 1956. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my daughter's grade school graduation with myself and my husband on that picture. And this was I was wanna say 1982 I think or sometime around then. And that's in my dining room. Speaker 2: Actually this is myself and my sister in the background. This is my older sister, Pat, and in the foreground, the heads of my husband and my son. And that was taken in the parlor of my house. Speaker 1: This is a picture from my time with state government. The balding head that you see in the foreground is Al Raby. And the woman that he's facing is Nancy Filipi (ph.), who was actually my boss at the time. She was deputy director of the Department of Personnel. And that was a Christmas party. And the year was probably--oh gosh--maybe around '76' [1976], '77' [1977]--no, probably '75' [1975], '74' [1974], '75' [1975]. Speaker 2: This is me and my siblings at my youngest brother's graduation from Marquette University. We were sitting in the stands watching him. So left to right: I'm in the foreground, next to me is my sister, Pat, again, her husband, Larry, who you really can't see, who is hiding behind her head; my middle brother, Kevin, and my mother's second husband, Clarence, and all the way to the right is my niece, Tracy. Speaker 1: That's me at a bus stop in Arlington, Virginia. And the occasion was the Jimmy Carter inaugural, inauguration, which was 1976. Does that sound right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the Jimmy Carter-- Speaker 2: This is me on vacation in one of my more favorite spots, St. Croix, Virgin Islands, where we used to go ever winter until 1982, when we didn't go because we were deep in the Harold Washington election campaign, and I haven't been there on vacation since. So Harold stopped my St. Croix vacations, so. Speaker 1: This is me deep in a conversation at a community event during the Harold Washington campaign. I can't remember exactly where, which community we're in, but I was being quizzed and questioned about the campaign at the time. Speaker 2: Now this is actually a victory party from Harold, Harold's election to Congress. In the foreground at the microphone is Georgia Palmer, who was acting act Mistress of Ceremony, and I'm being given a plant as kind of a token for electing Harold Washington. In the background, the guy is Fritz Bush, who is a teacher at the community college. Speaker 1: Did you tell us the year on that. I mean we know it was the victory--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was '80--'80--no, this was the congressional--no, this was, this was when Reagan went into office. Speaker 1: Eighty [1980]. Speaker 2: Eighty, 1980, right. Speaker 1: And this, again, is part of my family, and we're in Virginia. We went to Virginia for my brother's wedding. His, his wife was from Virginia, so we all went down there. And left to right is my niece, Tanya, my niece, Alisa, my niece, Tracy, and myself. Speaker 2: I don't remember where this was, but it's a picture of--left to right Clarence, my--Clarence Sort (ph.), my mother's second husband, and my sister, and myself. And I think we were still in Vir--I think we were in Virginia for that, but I can't remember exactly where we were. Speaker 1: Now, this is, again, this is my brother, my youngest brother, Jeffrey's, wedding, in Detroit. And this was the hotel door. I opened the door, and, and my brother snapped my picture, so that's why it's kind of a sur--surprised look on my face. Speaker 2: Now this is a family tradition. Christmas is most time at my house. And again, left to right, in the red that's me; in the middle is my mother; the, the smallest one there is my niece, Tanya, who we just saw in the other picture; and that's mother, Cheryl, who is my, who is my younger sister; and that's my front room. And the picture in the background, by the way, is of 63rd Street. My husband gave me that as a, as a present one Christmas when I was working so long and so hard at the Woodlawn organization. So he told me he never wanted me to be without 63rd Street. Speaker 1: That is a picture of a, actually an awards ceremony for myself. That was done about '86' [1986], '87' [1987], something like that. And yeah, that's Dawn Clark Netsch that's standing next to me. And I don't, I can't remember, figure out who those people whose backs are to me. But that was done--the event was at the DuSable Museum, so it was the, the new extension of DuSable. DuSable Museum hadn't been open that long, so that may help us fix the date when that extension was done, yeah. Speaker 2: About '93' [1993], '94' [1994]. Speaker 1: Oh, maybe that's when it was. Speaker 2: And this is the same event. This is, this is the same event at the DuSable Museum where they were recognizing me. And to left to right, that's Senator Joe Moore; next to him is Dr. Bob Puaruka--arakapudi (ph.), who was part of the Indo-American or political organization that supported Harold Washington; and next to me on the other side is our county clerk, David Orr. And that was the same event. Speaker 1: This was a banquet. Again, this was a recognition banquet after the election of Harold Washington. And next to me actually to my right in the picture is my younger sister, Cheryl. And I don't remember who the gentlemen were. And that was taken at one of those restaurants that's on the banks of the Chicago River, but I can't remember the name of the, the (unclear), okay. Speaker 2: That's myself and my daughter when she had all of her hair cut off, and we were actually on a cruise ship, one of those Lake Michigan cruise ships. And it was--Harold would do a thank you cruise or a thank you event for the members of the general assembly every year, and that was one of those events down at the Yacht Club, but we actually cruised. Speaker 1: Right, same event. And that's actually a friend of the family. Her name is Francis Douglas, who was at the event as well. Speaker 2: This is kind of a two-fer. This is a picture of my daughter and my daughter's family, but also it is a brochure that was done for one of the programs that I was involved in creating at the Center for Neighborhood Technology. It's called the Location Fisher Mortgage. And the folks who put together the brochure wanted a picture of a family who actually had used the location at Fisher Mortgage. And my, my daughter had done that to get the condo that they're sitting in front of on 69th and South Shore Drive. Speaker 1: And this is a picture at my--that was take for my daughter's wedding, so that was eight years ago, whenever that was. That's one of the more recent pictures. Speaker 2: Now these are a series of pictures taken during the Washington Administration. That picture actually was taken at, in Washington, D.C., at L'Enfant Plaza Hotel. And obviously that's me with the mayor. And the other woman is Mickey Aigens, the mayor's photographer. And we were at the hotel in Washington for the U.S. Conference of Mayors meeting. And the exact year I don't remember. Speaker 1: This was a dinner for Harold. And left to right, the woman next to me is Alice Coffee. She was the wife of Tom Coffee, who I worked with in the mayor's office intergovernmental affairs. And then that's my daughter again, this time with a little bit more hair than the last picture we saw. Speaker 2: Okay, this is, again--I think this was at an event like, someplace like at the Packing House or something like that. Again- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, so, again, this is the mayor, myself, and my daughter. Speaker 1: And the year, roughly. Speaker 2: Roughly, this was probably bout '86' [1986] or so. Speaker 1: Particular occasion? Speaker 2: This was a community event. I think it was just, you know, an event out in the community with Harold, and you know, we were there Speaker 1: This at the Packing House? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was some place like the Packing House. Speaker 1: Now this is a picture that was taken in the mayor's office. And the occasion was the Conference of Black Mayors. And those are other black mayors that are with us there, but I can't remember any of their names. Speaker 2: Let's see if I can. I know who this guy is, and I can't think of--is that Johnny Ford Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Tuskegee-- Speaker 1: Yes, that's who that is, yeah, right. Speaker 2: All right, this is at one of those events where--I think this was one of Harold recognition events for the legislators, because in the middle is Senator Margaret Smith, and to Harold's left is Senator Earline Collins, then Senator Earline Connors, now Cook County Board Commissioner Earline Collins. So that may have been where that other picture with Kimberly was taken from, at that event, which was probably at one of those yacht clubs. Speaker 1: Yeah, it looks like you're all on one of those boats (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right on the boat. Yeah, it may have been taken on the boat. Speaker 1: And I think this is the same event. And this is my staff from the mayor's office intergovernmental affairs. Starting to the far right is Elaine Johnson, who had responsibilities for all the boards and commission. Next to her was her assistant, Felecia. And right next to the mayor is Anita Romengus (ph.), who was my assistant, Harold, and then next to Harold is Cappy Lang, who had primary responsibility for the general assembly, then myself, and then on the end is Sarah Howard, who was an intern with us for the summer. And I don't remember who that guy is. He was an intruder. He didn't work for me. Speaker 2: This is, of course, Harold with Mayor--oh, come on--it's, it's-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's Barry. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Marion Barry. Speaker 2: Marion Barry. See, and the name just flew out of my head. All right, so, so, yeah, this is me with Harold and Mayor Marion Barry of, of Washington, D.C. And Marion was actually here in Chicago. This was an event in Chicago, and I think this was an event around the reelection, the 1987 reelection. Speaker 1: This is here in Chicago, and this was taken at the, the Haymarket offices of Tom Coffey, who is on my left. And the guy on the right is Senator Al Gore, who came through Chicago when he was running for president the first time. So, I don't know what year that was, '82' [1982] maybe. Speaker 2: Yeah, '84' [1984]. Speaker 1: Eight-four [1984], right. Speaker 2: That's when Jesse ran. Speaker 1: Right, yes. Speaker 2: Al Gore and Gephardt and all of (unclear). Speaker 1: Yes, they were all in there, and that was--actually, I--well, the pictures that I had before I didn't--I had a picture of Biden, who came through, yeah. Speaker 2: This is me with Senator Vince Demuzio, who was one of the assistant senator majority leaders in the Illinois General Assembly. And he was in Chicago actually for one of the events with one of these presidential candidates. I don't remember which one. Speaker 1: And this is me at an event with ASME President Henry Bayer. He wasn't president at the time. He was council 31. But he now is, or most recently, was president of ASME. And this was a fundraising event, if I do remember correctly, fundraising event for Harold, obviously. Speaker 2: So this is another event with Cook County Board President George Dunn. In the middle is Paul Kirk, and at the time Paul Kirk was chairman of the Democratic Party, and he came through for a fundraiser for the Democratic Party. And that was taken also at the offices of Haymarket. Speaker 1: This is me with Jay Doherty. Jay Doherty is one of the founders of the Haymarket Group with Tom Coffey and Norty (ph.) Kaye. But I first got to know Jay 'cause he was a, one of the finance, he was the finance director for the Harold Washington campaign in 1983. And the Haymarket Group was the sponsor of a lot of national entities who wanted to come to Chicago to raise money, like Paul Kirk and the presidential can--candidates and so forth..