 Story_ID: 8714 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Bernice, B-E-R-N-I-C-E, B for Beatrice, last name Hutcherson. A lot of people want to call me 'Doctor.' I'm not a doctor. I almost had it, I came for something and didn't go back. So, I'm just Bernice Hutcherson. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: I was born on April the 14th, 1925. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, and can you spell Hutcherson for us because I think it's the tendency to misspell it, you know, so--. Speaker 2: It's H-U-T-C-H-E-R-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born in Newton, Kansas--a little town you probably never heard of. But it was a nice little town to grow up in, I think. Speaker 1: It was about--you said it's just north of Wichita [Kansas]? Speaker 2: Yes, now it's about sixteen miles because both cities have grown. But it used to be twenty miles, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, right now, I don't work for anybody because I'm retired. But I have essentially done three jobs, I guess, in my life. I've been a teacher, classroom teacher. I've been a social worker and social work supervisor. And I have taught social work at the university level. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is August the 29th, 19--I'm sorry, 2002 is the date. I never thought I'd live this long to get into the, this century, but I did. Speaker 1: The twenty-first century. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in the, the African American museum [The Kansas African American Museum] in Wichita, Kansas Story_ID: 8715 Speaker 1: [The Kansas African American Museum, Wichita, Kansas] It's a beautiful old building that I used to go to church in. It's formerly known as the Calvary Baptist Church where my, my late husband grew up. And when we came here, why, of course, we both went here until the church decided to move way out on the East Side of town. Speaker 2: Now this is the historical black community, right, (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yes, it is, yeah. This is where most of the black businesses were like barbershops and churches. And many of the blacks lived right around here. We didn't have the--I'm sure you came in you saw the courthouses that are large and beautiful. We didn't have that. We had small buildings--still a couple of them around. Speaker 2: So the public downtown buildings just, I mean, the public buildings downtown sort of spread over into this part of town? Speaker 1: Yes, they have pretty much taken over in front. They've almost taken this place over. We've got the jail running in back of us here. Speaker 2: The run of banks is the little Arkansas River? Speaker 1: Yes, the Little Arkansas. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We call it the 'Little Ar-Kansas,' since we're in Kansas. And with the, the folk from Arkansas we have a running battle about that. When it gets down there they call it the Arkansas. And we say, "Oh, well, if that's the way you want to say it. But it's really the Ar-'Kansas' River." Speaker 2: It's our Kansas river, right? (laughs). Story_ID: 8716 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is breakfast. I don't eat it much anymore, but I love breakfast. I like two pieces of bacon and an egg and a piece of toast. Now that's just getting pretty close to heaven. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is green. And I've never really understood why, but I like a little green in anything I can get it in. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is the spring when you come out of the winter and you can get outside again and begin to see things being renewed, you know. You're ready to start into a new year. And it just gives me new life. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I like Freeport in the Bahamas. There's something about that--I don't know if I was born before, but I feel very comfortable there and have spent many trips there just to be there and feel comfortable. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite saying is "I'm never alone." And it just pops into my head almost anytime. That's because I, I've always been taught that God is always with you. So I'm never alone. So I'm never afraid. Story_ID: 8717 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your beginnings. And I want to start with your parents. Can you give us their names and dates of birth and their places of birth? And if you can, too, all in the same question, if you could please spell their names for us. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, my father was Albert Ray. He was actually a junior but he didn't call himself Junior, just called himself Albert Ray. When he started having children and got a Junior, why, he called his son Junior. And that Ray is spelled R-A-Y. I've seen Ray spelled many different ways. I don't remember exactly when he was born, but I know that he was like seventy when he died and that was in 1951, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was born in around 19-, I mean, 18-. Speaker 2: Eighteen something, but I don't remember exactly. My mother was Henrietta Braden Ray. She was--I don't remember exactly when she was born, but she died in 1965, and she had, had to be, if I'm remembering correctly, she was my age--seventy-seven. But, that's H-E-N-R-I-E-T-T-A, Henrietta. They don't use a, a middle name. And so when she married she continued to use her, her maiden name, at least the initial of it. She always used Henrietta B. Ray. And I've sort of done that, too. Only I had to have a Bernice B.R. Hutcherson when I married. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did--where was your father born? Speaker 2: Father was born in Tennessee and, of course, was brought out of there fairly early in his lifetime because one of the brothers got into trouble and they had to leave there in a hurry. We don't talk much about that these days, but those things happened. You had to leave--you just left. Speaker 1: Well, it's a long time now since that happened. Is--do you know exactly why he had to leave or what, what happened? Speaker 2: No, just that one of the brothers in the family looked wrong at some white girl and somebody didn't like that. My grandfather--I can talk about him on, on my father's side. He was the son of the slave master, of course. And I was told that the slave master had two sons--had lots of daughters but only two sons. And the white son was afflicted. Now I don't know what that means--maybe like retarded--. Speaker 1: (Unclear) physical problem (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, was not able to help him very much. The little brown son, slightly brown, only slightly brown, was, was very smart. And my great grandfather, I was told, was very rich. And he allowed his little brown son to be educated--learned to figure so he could help him keep up with all of his great wealth 'cause the other son couldn't do it. And so my grandfather knew how to read, knew how to write, knew how to figure--as they, as they put it. And knew how to run a business, really. And when they had to leave I'm told that my great grandfather gave them a large group of cattle that they brought. That's how they got to be cowboys coming across the country. Speaker 1: And that would have been--oh, let's see then. If you're--let's see, if you're--. Speaker 2: That'd been middle--what, middle 1800s. Speaker 1: Yes, right. Right, 'cause your, your father was, had been born around 1880--. Speaker 2: Yeah, I want to say 1880, 1889. I know with mamma was 1889 or something when (unclear)--. Speaker 1: Well, he's got 1980. You said, yeah, from what you said he died when he was about seventy in 1950. He about nine-, 1880 or some--. Speaker 2: So when grandpa had to leave there, it was early, early, much earlier in the 1800s. Speaker 1: Yeah, and he was still driving cattle and stuff. It was--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right, so--. Okay. So they drove cattle from Tennessee to--. Speaker 2: To--they ended up in Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. They ended up there. Speaker 1: You know what town they ended up in? Speaker 2: Well, it's called Lookeba [Oklahoma]. It was a little town called Lookeba where they first landed. And then there's a little town not very far from that called Hinton, H-I-N-T-O-N. And those towns are still there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, we just sold the--my father was given the property near Hinton, and we just sold it several years ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it's not changed all that much down there. Speaker 1: Did they have any stories or any--did they have any stories that they shared with you about growing up in--or making that migration or growing up in Hinton, Oklahoma? Speaker 2: Only that--I remember dad said he was always cold because he--well, I understand that 'cause I'm always cold. I have a c--I always have a coat. And I always have to keep my neck tied up because I get cold like he did, apparently. And that they learned to eat out there. One of the fun things that we did when we were little--there was a meat called--well, we called it fatback, but I'm sure it had a better name than that. It was a pork like bacon and it had been salted to keep it cured. And he had learned to do that on the trail, and they would get so tired of it. So when they had an opportunity to get a hold of some flour, they would flour it and fry it with the outside heat. So, when we really wanted a treat when we, my siblings, were little, well, now he would get up and he would fix some of that salt pork we called it--and put flour on it and fry it and, and it was good--fried very crisp. I remember that story very well. I don't remember much else right now except that they were very often afraid because here they had these cattle, and many people thought they should not have had them. And before they could get to my grandfather who would have the papers on him giving them the right to a certain number of cattle and where they were headed and so forth from, from his father, why, they were, they were ready to kill them very often and take their, I guess they called it rustle, their cattle. And, and that I remember. Story_ID: 8718 Speaker 1: What about your mother's side of the family? Where did they come from, and did they have any stories about slavery or, or reconstruction or migration? Speaker 2: They came out of Kentucky. On my father's side were the house slaves. And on my mother's side were the field slaves. And my grandmother left Kentucky and went somewhere and got near the Mississippi River, and she and two mules somehow made it across the Mississippi River because she was trying to get away from the master who was molesting, of course, all the young girls her age. That grandmother was twelve years old when slavery ended. So, she had been born, well, both sets were born in slavery. And she had actually somehow--. Speaker 1: So she was born about 1850, I guess, 1851, 1850--. Speaker 2: Fifty, forty--forty-nine, forty-eight [1848]. And was about the time I was getting good and grown, why, she was almost a hundred years old. She came out of there and landed, landed someplace on the other side of the Mississippi and then came back from Kentucky--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Now this is from Kentucky. Speaker 2: Yeah, from Kentucky. Now I, I don't know where her travails took her with this, these two mules, but she was determined that she was not going back. And so for some reason she ended up swimming the Mississippi River--her and these two mules that we heard about. And then she finally landed--when she finally landed in Georgia, I believe, is where she met--came back to Georgia is where she met my grandpa. And they then got together and started traveling toward California where all the gold was supposed to be. And they ended up in Oklahoma, between Oklahoma and Kansas. Since he was kind of a farmer, kind of a--and he would farm here and then he would move, and then he would farm someplace else. What did they call them? Share-, sharecroppers, sharecropper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he'd stay there a season and if it didn't come out right there, why, he would move again. And so between Kansas and Oklahoma is where they were. I'm also told that she didn't get to know her mother very, very well because the mother and her sister was sold off before she ever left there. And she doesn't know where they landed. And she was more left on her own by the time she was twelve and had heard that the slaves had been emancipated. But she does know that her mother spoke highly of education, and she's the one who pushed the education for everybody. Everybody had to get as much education as they possibly could because that's what was gonna make it a better place for all of the Negroes that were needing to know how to read and write 'cause they didn't know how to read and write. And she always said if you don't, if you can't read and write, why, you don't know what's going in the world around you. So, she constantly pushed education. She had ten children and, what, eight of them, I guess, got the eighth grade education, which was like our high school now, I guess. And she instilled it in them that their children should get as much, much education as they could. So most of us have. We still push it in our family. Story_ID: 8719 Speaker 1: How did your parents meet? Did they have a story about how they met? Speaker 2: Yeah, they did. My mother [Henrietta braden Ray] went on and got her eighth grade education. She was all set to go and teach someplace. There had been correspondence back and forth to my grandfather and it sounded good. Then when the principal came to pick her up to take her to wherever this school was, my grandfather said, "He's nothing but a scallywag, and she's not going anyplace with him." So that was the end of her career (laughter). So it wasn't long after that before she and my dad [Albert Ray] got married then and began their own family. So she didn't get to teach. She had to see me teach, though, or (unclear). Speaker 1: That's good, that's good. So, so they were married in, in Newton or--? Speaker 2: No, they were married in, in a little place in Oklahoma called Hinton. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were married in Hinton 'cause by that time they lived right outside of, right outside of Hinton with my grandmother. My grandmother had moved right outside of Hinton. Story_ID: 8720 Speaker 1: What kind of person was your mother [Henrietta Braden Ray]? Speaker 2: My mother was very observant person. She talked a lot. It's like she wanted to share as much as she could with us as a ho--as often as she could. So if you got in trouble when I was a little kid, you would, you would want her to just give you, give me a spanking and let me go. But she was very logical and would sit you down and tell you this and why and this and why and this. And so we would have to listen for hours to try to understand what's logical, what's reasonable, what's ridiculous and that sort of thing. So she was the very talkative one. My father, on the other hand, was very quiet, and he observed mostly. He was the one that gave us the spankings if we needed them. The boys needed them often. I got one from my father. I don't know if that was because I was so good or because I was the girl. Story_ID: 8721 Speaker 1: How many of you are there, I mean, or were there? How many brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Well, there were, there were seven of us originally. I had an older sister who died when I was about five, between--somewhere between five and six. And so I became the only girl then in the family. And that was bad news because the boys and my father decided I had to be taken care of so they protected me everywhere I went. Everybody in town was scared of them, you know. "Don't bother that Ray girl. Those boys'll beat you up." So I didn't get to have any boyfriends forever, just little brothers following me around, you know. They taught me to, they taught me to play ball harder than anybody else. They were determined that nobody was ever going to be able to run over me. So I learned how to play hardball with the boys. I, I learned how to, I learned how to hunt, fish. Learned how to--they taught me how to shoot a .22 [rifle] and how to shoot a rabbit in the head so that the, the meat wouldn't be spoiled. And I got so I could outshoot them with a twenty-two rifle--and that's, that's pretty good. They taught me to box, taught me to wrestle. And they taught me to do something they called judo, which kind a like we call tae kwon do or something now--with the hands and the feet only it's essentially to use the weight of the other person's body to handle the other person. And I got pretty good at that, too. So, my, my brothers helped me to grow up really tough and fearless. And I still am. I go anywhere, do anything that I want to do, and I, I'm not afraid of anything. Had a little brother younger than the one that's living now. His name was Willis Howard. And he was, he must have been born when I was seven or eight. And he lived only nine hours and died. So the oldest of their children and the youngest of their children died. And the rest of us got pretty much to grow up together and got to know each other very well. And that left five of us--four boys and one girl. Story_ID: 8722 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your father and what, what kind of person is he and what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: My father [Albert Ray] was--to me he seemed small in stature. I don't know how tall he was--maybe five six or something like that and, and thin. He looked very white because he come from that white background. Actually, he looked like a--if you just saw him alone, you'd think you were looking at an Irishman. He had fiery red hair and all of the characteristics if there are general characteristics of Irish persons. But he was not a fiery person himself. He was very laid back, I would call it--very quiet. He observed more than he talked. And when he said something you had to listen because it was usually something you needed to know, something of substance, and you need some lesson you needed to learn. He loved family. He took good care of us. I think because he looked so much like a white man, he always had a job, good job. And because he knew how to work, he kept them, kept his job. He worked as a--what they called a grease cup filler at the round house in Newton, Kansas. A round house--Newton, by the way, was a very popular hub. That's what made it what it was. It was a popular hub of the Santa Fe Railroad. It came into there, and they had a turntable. And you could, they could run in there and turn on the engine and you could go North, South, East, or West out of Newton. So, if you were coming in from Chicago [Illinois] or Kansas City [Missouri], going to Los Angeles [California] or going someplace else, you, you had to go to Newton and change and you could get there. So, they had a very busy round house. They called it a round house because that's where the turntable was where they could take the engines in there and turn them around. My father had a very respon--the very responsible job of keeping the, the cups, they called it, on the motors of those engines. They had to be full, just right, of a certain kind of grease or, of course, the engine could break down easily. So that was a very responsible job that he had. And he took it seriously and did a good job at it--worked there until he became sick and had to retire. Story_ID: 8723 Speaker 1: Can you tell me about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Newton [Kansas]? What was it, you know, what was your neighborhood like and--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my neighborhood was fun, really. I didn't realize then how unique we were that in our neighborhood we had blacks, we had Mexicans, we had whites, we had middle class, we had very poor, and we had lived and worked and all of us kids there played together. We pretty much run in and out of each other's houses like kids do except one. I'll never forget it. Her name was Mrs. Speen (ph.), and she lived on the corner. She was a little white lady who seemed to have no children, no family, and she was, she would yell at us so much until especially the boys would deliberately do things to make her mad. So simple things like--she didn't want you step on her grass, okay. And when they would walk by her house they would just take their toe and put it over on her grass. So she would come to the door and begin to hol--"Ray row row row," and they would laugh and run. But everybody else--we got along very well. We--now my father [Albert Ray] had a job as I think back to the Depression time, the Great Depression that you read about--. Speaker 1: Sure, in the 1920's--that was the year of the war. Speaker 2: Yes, that was a tough time. And lots of people didn't have jobs. They just had to do whatever they could do to live. And my father had a job and so I can remember it on, especially on Sundays, we would have all kinds of people at our house from our neighborhood because the people--whoever had something, they would bring it to our house and go in there and with my mother they would all be cooking 'cause we had some meat. We had goats on the yard, we had chickens on the yard, we had a--we called it a bill I think then--they call it a tab or something now. But we had a bill down at the main grocery store where we could go and buy some pork or buy some beef every once in a while. So since we had the meat, why, the neighbors could come to bring whatever they had. And we always had us a scrumptious dinner on Sundays. But we usually had somebody else there, too--some other family or two families or three families--just whoever decided to come. So I got used to all kinds of people and being able to relate to all kinds of people and understanding that we--people are people. Human beings are pretty much the same. And I think that has served me well as I have moved to adult career of social work. I don't meet any strangers. In fact, right now I've always traveled alone a lot. Right now, if I'm needing to go into a restaurant and I'm alone and somebody else seems to be alone, I'm gonna just ask them if they would like to eat with me. I'd say, you know, are you alone, no, you eat alone? They say, yes. I, I'll say, well, would you like to meet, sit down and eat with me and then we can go our separate ways? And sometimes they'll say, no. Other times they'll say, yeah, you know. And it doesn't bother me when--whichever they do is fine. Story_ID: 8724 Speaker 1: I've always been a rather gregarious person--easy to meet. I only had one fight in my whole life. That was--I must have been in about the fourth grade and there was a little girl had come to our school, moved into where she had to go to our school. And she didn't like it, I don't think, because I got along so well with everybody and they wouldn't pay any attention to her. I--that was my reading of it. I felt that she wanted them to pay more attention to her because she was white and I was the little Negro girl in the class and--. Speaker 2: So you, you went to an integrated school? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah. She just would taunt me and taunt me and I never would--I would just say don't do that. And she didn't know what she was messing with really--this tiger underneath. And one day she actually caused a big scene on the playground during recess. We were behind something where the teacher couldn't see, and she pulled my braids on both sides and she was just going, "Many little (unclear) many nigger nigger many braids many braids." And I had just had enough about then so I showed her a few of my skills. And after that she never bothered me again. But that's the only fight I ever had in my life. Everybody I've always been able to get along with, and it's worked well for me. Story_ID: 8725 Speaker 1: What did you like to do when you were a little girl? I mean, did you--you've alluded to some of them already, but did you like school a lot when you were a kid? Speaker 2: Yeah, I loved school. I, I loved, I loved to read. When I went to kindergarten I could already read 'cause my mother had, had taught me to read. And so they--I wasn't in kindergarten but about three days, and they moved me out of kindergarten into the first grade. Man, you'd a thought I graduated from high school. My mother [Henrietta Braden Ray] was so happy. But that love of reading I think stemmed from that 'cause she said, "It's 'cause you can read. And that's what's important is reading." So I read everything that I could find. My father [Albert Ray], he'd chime in and say things like, "Yeah, you can go anywhere in the world if you read 'cause there's something written about all parts of the world." So I started looking for all that stuff, and I just read and read and read and read and read. I read everything I could read. We couldn't go--we could go to our library and check out books, but we couldn't go in there and sit down and read. And there were a lot of things that I just wanted to go in and read, you know, and leave them there, just read a little bit of them to get a flavor of what it was about. And there was, there was another girl there, Joanne, who loved to read like I did, little black girl. And we'd go to the library a lot together. And there was a librarian at one point who said since you girls love to read so much, why don't you just come on back here and sit down and read, 'cause I wa--I was tell--we were telling her, looka here, you know, we saw this and we were ready to put it back on the shelf. And she said, "Well if you like to read like that why don't you just come in the back and take some books and read back there and just leave them here. We'll put them back on the shelf." And she actually took a couple of boxes, crates they called them, and put them in the back. And when we were in there we could just slip through the back door and go back there and sit down and read all we wanted to. So that way I got to read a lot of different books and follow up on some of the things that my father had, had told me about what he had read about other places and other people in the world. So it, it just made reading just really exciting for me, you know, and I, I still read. I have eye problems now but then I got, I found out they got a magnifying glass that works pretty good, so I can still read, and I do. Story_ID: 8726 Speaker 1: Who were some of your favorite teachers in school? Did you have any teachers that stood out as mentors or--? Speaker 2: Yes, I have one that, that stood out as I think maybe a bigot as I, as I have matured, I think maybe she was a bigot. As I look back on her, I think she was upset that there had been a black girl who could move as fast and knew as much as I knew. So when I got to her class, she tried everything to make me angry or make me not want to study or not want to go to school--that's the way I read it from as I've matured. And the thing I'm, I remember most about her is that I had the word "alright" on a spelling test, and I spelled it wrong. And she made a big scene about it in the class. And, of course, that's devastating at fourth grade level, you know. And not to me I was determined I was gonna get it right, so I said to her, if you spell it right once, I'll never forget it. And, of course, I shouldn't have done that. And she shook me and made a big scene of it in the, in the class. I went home and told my folks about it, and they said--they, that's when they explained to me that there were people like that and I was gonna run into them. And they were gonna be openly aggressive toward is what they meant in a bigoted kind of way. And you just ignore them is what I was taught, you just ignore them and you go on and learn what you need to learn. You don't have to say nothing to do it. So I went from that to a great teacher in high school who when I was, I was asking about--I always wanted to be a doctor 'cause see--let me tell you about our doctor. His name was Dr. Howring (ph.). He took care of all of us black folk over there. And he was a doctor came to your house to see about you then. They didn't go to hospitals much. I think with my little brother and I--we were born in a hospital. But I think we were the first ones born in a hospital. But the doctor, he'd come to our house, and he just seem, just seemed so comfortable there. And he would, would try to find out about whatever the illness was. And I remember one time we had somebody quarantined in the neighborhood with some disease, and he went to all of our houses and explained to us what that meant and how to behave around those kids and what to do. And I just thought he was the greatest thing since sliced bread, you know (laughter). And I wanted to--I thought I'd like to do that for people. So by the time I got to high school and they were talking about career choices, why, I out with it I want to be a doctor. Everybody was shocked stiff, you know. What are you talking about? You can't be a doctor. There's nowhere you, you could go to be a doctor. I guess Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] was going then and that was a, that was for men, men doctors, so I couldn't go there even. And this one high school teacher--she said it's gonna change, gonna change. And she really encouraged me to just do whatever I could find to do and to follow my own mind and take advantage of any opportunity that came my way. And so I did that. And the other people were saying well you can forget that. You can teach school--that's about all can do. You can teach school or you can be a nurse--and that was it, they told me. So, I didn't want to be no nurse so I, I headed in the teaching school direction. And that's why I began my career. Story_ID: 8727 Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: Newton Senior High [Newton, Kansas]. Speaker 1: Newton Senior High. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You were convinced you had to be a doctor. Speaker 2: I wanted to be a doctor, but at that point I knew I couldn't be. And so I decided, well, I'll go with education, and I'll be a teacher. At least I can mingle with people that way and maybe I can help some kind of way. And that took me into the job when I finished Langston University with my B.A. degree. Speaker 1: You were probably going too fast where you getting past the, to the B.A. You need to get, go to Langstonand see what happens (unclear) just tell the story anyway. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, Langston . Langston was really interesting. It--my father [Albert Ray] bundled me up when I graduated high school, took me to KU [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas] and enrolled me. He was so happy. He had a child fixing to go and get a college degree. Now our brothers had gone to classes, special classes, and had taken some college courses, but they had to go away to the war [World War II], so they didn't get to, they didn't get to get a degree. Dad was going to see to it that I got a degree. But that very spring he had a stroke and was not able to work anymore. So when I got out of school that spring, I was determined to go home. The boys were in, all in the service. I was determined to go home and work as much as I could and help them until they could get daddy's pension straightened out or until he got well enough to go back to work. I didn't know, of course, what would happen. So that's what I did. I went home and I--what did I do? I waited--I, I drove for an attorney's family--I was the chauffeur. I served parties. I did domestic work. I worked in a, in a hotel at, at some point and made beds and cleaned the runs--that sort of thing. And I just did whatever I could find to do. Then I got a--somehow I think it was through the attorney job--there was a guy who was putting in the, the airport in Newton. He was laying the concrete, and he heard my story, anyway, that I wanted to come home, help my parents till they got straightened out, then save money and go back to school. And he decided, well, he was going to help that along. So he gave me a job doing cement work. Now that was the roughest thing I'd ever done in my life. Back then when they did cement work they had slabs of hard wire that they would lay down before they put the concrete on it, and they had tools that you could use, and you had to double the wire over itself in order to hook it together. So he bought me the special gloves you needed and the tools you needed. I went to work, and I worked there quite a while. But it's really hard, it was really hard on your hands. One day he saw me changing the blood rags up under my gloves. He just came over, took me up and put me on a machine. Took the little boy that he had on the machine and put him down there doing that--tying that wire. But I was still working--making a fortune, by the way. I made close to ninety dollars a week doing that. And back in that time that was--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah, what was his name? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I can't remember his name--'cause everybody just called him "Boss." But it was some construction company that was laying lots of cement streets, and he was working on the airport at that time. What I did on that machine was so easy. They used to have a big old machine that would go along and it would spread the cement out. And I rolled on the edge of that machine. I had a little metal plate. And when we would lay one slab on this side and then we were coming along to lay another slab, there was a--what do you call it--a crease? Would you call it a crease in the cement or seam-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) a seam, yeah. Speaker 2: --that went across the cement, the dry cement? When, when we would get to that, I would have to jump down off the machine and lay that piece of metal down so that this big band of a wheel could run over it. And that's all I had to do. And it would take a, a long time for that spreading machine, it was called, to spread the cement down until we would get to the next crease or seam and then I would jump down and, and get that seam, and then pick it up when it, when we got over it. And I did that for a couple of years, and I had enough money to go back to school on 'cause dad's pension got straightened out and they were okay. But that was ve--a very interesting time for me. I had no idea. So I can brag that I've done cement work, too, with that. Speaker 1: A lot of women in those days had, you know, tractor jobs the first time because of the war and--. Speaker 2: Yeah. We didn't have, we didn't have factory--it was the railroad town, but it was growing. And because it was growing, they wanted to pave some streets and they wanted to set up an airport, or air-, little airstrip was set up at that time. And that would have been '44 [1944] or '45 [1945], in there, yeah. And I still continue to drive for those people, and I did things on the side so I had as much money as I could 'cause I needed money for three full years of school, you see. And, and I got it. Speaker 1: Okay. Sound very busy in those days (unclear). Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, I really was. But it was good for me because it taught me--it helped me to look at systems and how systems work. It helped me to understand how commu--how important communication is. So if you have, if you have a problem, you need to let somebody know what that problem is 'cause you never know who's gonna be able to help you with it. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And it opened some of those kind of, of system doors for me that gave me to know that through the system you can get some things done if you're in, in the line with the system. See, I had that powerful attorney who helped to bring that contractor there. And he, I'm sure he's the one that told him about me and my desires to go back to school. Story_ID: 8728 Speaker 1: When did you go back to school and where did you go? Speaker 2: When I went back to school--I had enough money to go back to school, I thought about going to KU [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas], but, you see, in Newton [Kansas] we were so poor, I guess, the whole community until we didn't have segregated schools. We went from kindergarten through high school together--white, Mexicans, Negroes. Not very many Negroes, but those of us who went to school, we just went to school with them--not very many Mexicans. So I had not experienced going to school with Negroes like my friends in Wichita [Kansas] could talk about, for example. Like when my father [Albert Ray] would take us on vacation--see, he worked for the railroad, and he'd take us on vacation every year. We went someplace different every year. And I, I'd see all the Negro people and I thought, wow, wouldn't it be neat to go to a Negro school. And so he took me down and we found out about it and it sounded good. So I decided I'm gonna go to this Negro school and see what it's like. And I got down there with all those Negroes and loved it down there. I loved the professors 'cause they really seemed, they really seemed to care about where you were with your studies. They stayed right, right on top of everything. They want--it seemed like they wanted you to learn as much as you could learn in the classes, and they did everything they could to help you do that. They were always--it's like they were always available. You could go to their house anytime. Most of them lived on campus or around the campus someplace. And you could talk to them--they were available. I liked that. And so I just went there and stayed there. Story_ID: 8729 Speaker 1: Now you're in school at Langston [University, Langston, Oklahoma], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You describe it was like--. Speaker 2: I was about to describe my first day that I really got to Langston, was ready to go to school. As I said, dad [Albert Ray] had enrolled me and got me in the dorm. And I went from the dorm to the cafeteria for my first meal. Now you have to realize that I'm two years older than most of these girls there. So I'm, I'm sure I'm looking like an old woman to these guys who were just coming back from service and going to school on a GI Bill. And when I walked in there they just surrounded me. I got in line and here they come. They just surrounded me. Speaker 1: The guys or the girls? Speaker 2: The guys did. And we--they wanted to know who I was, where I was from, how old was I--this, that, and the other, you know. Meanwhile, my late husband's best friend was in there. I remember he was from here, and I already knew them. They were good buddies. And when they went back to school, they also went to school together and were roommates together. So he ran back to their dormitory and told my husband [Hubert W. Hutcherson] that, about this girl from Newton [Kansas] over there. And he, he told him, well, we know her, we know her. Come on, you'll know her. So my husband came over there and just walked right through the guys. He was known as being crazy anyway, so he just came in and he said, "Oh, Bernice Ray!" and just came right to me and stood beside me. And they all kind of fell back 'cause he already knew me. And he says, "Fellows, you gotta, you gotta let this one alone. This is my friend. We've been friends a long time. We go back a long ways." Speaker 1: He just met you, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, really, since we had been grown, you know. We used to skate together, go to church together for various--we would meet at various church meetings 'cause he was from Wichita [Kansas] and I was from Newton. We knew each other. We didn't like each other very well 'cause we were always in competition about something. But, anyway, the, the fellows fell back, and we started talking and so he walked me home to the dorm. And he walked me to the dorm for the next couple of years or so, after which we married. But I always think about how he came in like he really knew me, and we didn't know each other that well at that point. He was one of the fellows, he--the little town had one thing to offer, Newton had one thing to offer and that was the skating rink. The man who ran the skating rink at that time in Newton would let the Negroes use it one night a month. And it finally got so it was one night a week and it went on down. But when that night come, when the kids from Wichita, the kids from Hutchinson, the kids from Salina, and sometimes even the, some of the kids from Kansas City, would come to Newton for the skating rink. And that was one way that I knew him. He would come over for the skating rink night. The other way that I knew him was through church. Churches had what we called Bible drills where you had to learn a lot about the Bible and then the one who could answer the most questions got to be the winner. And we were constantly, constantly at loggerheads on that. He'd be one of the last two standing, and I'd be the other one. So we were going at each other trying to, trying to answer the most questions. And, and that's how I knew him, and that's the only way I knew him at that point. So when we got to Langston, yeah, he knew me, but he didn't know me that well. But, that was a very important time. Story_ID: 8730 Speaker 1: The other important time at Langston [University, Langston, Oklahoma], I think, was when we [she and future husband, _____________] were in a history class together. And I did not know that our history teacher, who was a--who was absolutely excellent--he just made history come alive. You could just hear the people talking, you could see what they were doing, you could feel the atmosphere. He, he told history like a story and made it just come alive. But during that process, he was--I know now an old gray-headed man who put kind of red shoe polish--I'm forgetting the name--Oxblood, that's what they called it--Oxblood [Shineola] shoe polish on his hair every morning to dye it. And so when he would get in the classroom and would begin to go through all the stories that he was telling us, he would begin to perspire. And this Oxblood would start rolling down (laughter) his face and his neck, and he would just take his hankie and dot it a little bit and just keep right on. And, finally, of course, I didn't understand what was going on. And, finally, one day I said to my boyfriend then who became my husband, I said, "What is the red stuff that keeps running down?" And that's what he told me--it was Oxblood that he used every morning to keep his hair, to keep the gray from showing in his hair. Those two things I remember vividly about Langston. Speaker 2: Now, who was your--what your professor's name--do you remember? Speaker 1: I can't remember his name. I could see his face. We had many e--, many excellent professors there at that time. We--. Speaker 2: Do you remember the names of any of them that--? Speaker 1: Well, I remember Ervin, a Dr. Ervin. I remember Dr. Moore and his wife were both teachers there. President's n--name was Parren (ph.) and his wife was there at that point. But I don't remember too many of their names. I'm sure I have them someplace. Story_ID: 8731 Speaker 1: Langston [University, Langston, Oklahoma]--is it a church school or state school or--? Speaker 2: It was a state school. It was originally the, the state agricultural school for Negroes. That's what it was originally. And as they were, were able to understand and expand and how to expand, why, they began to add different fields. Of course, music was big and agriculture was big. Speaker 1: Who was--do you know who it was named after? Speaker 2: Just named after the town, whoever the town was named after. It was a tiny little town that's still there, by the way--Langston, Oklahoma. And there are people who are descendants of the settler [Howard University School of Law founder] [John Mercer] Langston, whoever he was, still there as far as I know. But it's a, it's a thriving tiny town. It may be a thousand people plus the college. But it was named after that person. Speaker 1: So, what activities were you involved in there at Langston? Speaker 2: Mostly study 'cause I took--well, I sang a little bit in the choir, but I didn't, I did not join the choir that went all over for all kinds of trips and things--just the one that performed on campus. My point was to learn as much as I could learn there. And I always took twenty, twenty-two hours, twenty-four hours, as much as they would let me right after that first semester. They wouldn't let me take that many at first. They thought nobody could do it. And then they soon learned I could. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Was it real tough for you ? Speaker 2: Nothing was tough for me until I passed geometry and got to algebra. That was tough for me. And I got a, I got a C in algebra. And I simply could not stand that so I garnered permission to take it again and the dean was going to let me take it off of my transcript if I passed it. So, I passed it with an A. So I, I got an A on it, but I ne--I still don't like algebra because it gave me my C (laughter), but--. Speaker 1: It's an offensive math (unclear) field of study. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. But other than that, I didn't do much at Langston except study 'cause that's about all I could do. Story_ID: 8732 Speaker 1: He [Hubert W. Hutcherson] was around. He walked me home for a couple of years. And the, the third year I guess we started getting serious and decided we would marry. And we didn't want a big wedding we decided. And so one, one day we just decided that the next day we would go to Guthrie, Oklahoma, which was about ten--five or six miles, I guess, down the road, and go to courthouse and get married, and that's what we did. Came back and went on to class. Speaker 2: Did you tell your friends? Speaker 1: No, we didn't tell anybody. We just went. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We had--I don't know who--some strange person is signed on our license. We had to have witnesses or something. But we didn't know that. But that was okay with us. We were married now, legally married, and that was important. That was the year before--year and a half before I graduated. Story_ID: 8733 Speaker 1: What was graduation like and what were you thinking about doing? Speaker 2: Well, at graduation time--by then my brothers were pretty much out of the service. My oldest brother had moved to Chicago [Illinois], had gotten a job there at the--some kind of a plant and had--he had brought my little brother, my baby brother, up there at that time to get him a job. And he was working there and somebody else he had--a friend of theirs. And so when I was about to graduate, and I stayed in touch with him very much--I need to tell you something about my brothers, too, in, in a little bit. As we were riding back and forth he said why don't you and, and Hubert [W. Hutcherson], my husband, come on up here. He said I'd find out you can make a fortune up here. And I know you can't make that kind of money anyplace else. And we can all just share the rent and, and we can all make, make good money. And he was right 'cause when I found out that a teacher's salary was gonna be like a hundred and fifty or a hundred and sixty dollars a month, and we just went on up there. And when we went to go to work for the Board of Education up there, they're talking seven hundred dollars, six hundred dollars and something to start! So that was like a goldmine. So we decided we would stay there for two to five years and save money, buy a house, buy furniture, buy a car, and move back to Wichita [Kansas] 'cause that's where, that's where we wanted to live. And that's just about what we did. We went up there and pretty much saved our money and bought a new Nash--you never heard of it probably but--. Speaker 1: Yeah, the Nash used to make a car called the Rambler and--. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, we bought the, the big old four-door Nash. Speaker 1: The Ambassador? Speaker 2: It was a big one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And we bought a house, and we bought furniture--had it all moved back here. And moved back here in fifty, late '53 [1953] or early '54 [1954]--that's when we came back here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, meanwhile, I wanted to mention about my brothers. They even in the service--well, you know, they weren't making any money. They would always send me some money. It wasn't but two or three dollars, but then that was like a fortune. You could, you could go a long time on three dollars. The thing that I remember and cherish most is all of them--I needed a formal. I had never needed a f--a long formal dress before. And we were going to have a formal dance on campus this year. And everybody was gonna get formal for the first time. So everyone was looking forward to this. And I had written and told them. They all went together and bought me a forty dollar formal. That was a lot of money. So there I showed up in a forty dollar formal when the rest of my friends--most of the girls on campus had ten dollar and fifteen dollar formals. And I was really the queen of the ball. Everybody wanted to see my dress--that's my dress. It was really an exciting time. And I remember that they did that--they just did it. I don't know which one of them picked it, but one of them picked it out and sent it to me. And it really made a big boo--it gave a big boost to my life for that point in time. Speaker 1: Hum. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, what do you do here in Wichita when you get back--you got your house and everything and--. Speaker 2: Yeah, we moved back here and, well, I need to tell you a little bit more about Chicago 'cause that caused our change. We both taught school. He had an industrial engineering degree, and he taught something called shop--we used to call shop there--and junior high level I believe it was or maybe high school level. But I was running all over town doing this remedial reading, and I met a lot of kids at different grade levels who had social workers--now, remember, I had never had a social worker. I didn't know what that was. But the way they talked about their social worker--it must have been a terrible person because none of them have anything nice to say about their social workers. And so I had decided or my husband had decided that when we c--when we came back home, he wasn't going to teach anymore. He wanted to use his degree to work in the plant--Boeing, Boeing Aircraft Company, so that he could make more money. And I decided that when we came back home I was not gonna teach--I was gonna go and, and become a member of this field of social work and get rid of the whole field because it wasn't any good for people. Story_ID: 8734 Speaker 1: I was gonna reform the whole social work field. I had no idea what it was, but I knew it was a horrible thing because of the wide range of ages and children that had told me about these awful people who treated them with no respect as human beings, who would take children away and nobody knew why from their perspective, who would do things like that that destroyed families instead of trying to help families cement together. So, I came to get rid of that whole field 'cause we didn't need it. And sure enough, well, my husband got a job at the plant. I went down to have an interview--I took the test. You had to take a civil service test--passed it. Went for my interview, and that's first thing I told the lady--I told her about these children that I had worked with and some of the things that they had been telling me and what I had in mind was to just get rid of the whole field because it was no good for people. And I went on and on and on about that. And then she asked me a few questions, and I answered them. And she said, "Well, can you come to work next week?" And I said, "Yep, I can come to work next week." And that's how I moved from the field of education to social work--became a knocking on the door social worker. Now the other thing about that, though, is that coming from Chicago the teachers' meetings were pretty much open. We all went to teachers' meetings together. We all went to teachers' conventions together and heard the same thing. And got here, signed up to go to the social work convention and went to Topeka, walked into the hotel with my little suitcase and they said I couldn't stay there. And I knew that the accommodations had just been--law had just been signed, public accommodations. And they insisted that they didn't have any rooms that I could stay in. So my director from here, he, he came and he had them to arrange someplace for me to stay. And they arranged for me to stay with some doctor up there at the time. So I stayed out there, and my friends from here transported me back and forth to that convention. But by the end of that convention, they had passed a resolution that said they would never return to that hotel. And they have not returned to it. That would have been '55 [1955] or '56 [1956]. But that opened all of the hotels in Topeka because they wanted the business, of course. Speaker 2: So, yeah, things were kind of hot in Topeka then, right, because of Brown vs. the Board of Education. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yes, Brown. Yes, indeed, yeah. The, the other thing is that as I moved through the beginnings of the field of social work and began to understand what it was about, I realized that there was nothing else to take its place. And if we just got rid of the field completely, there would be a number of people who were, who would not make it--simply would die in the streets. So I began to look around and I realized that there were people all over this country who felt very much like I did--that this field needed to be revamped as quickly as we could revamp it. So, that's what we did. I sort of joined hands and minds with them and established new social work organizations, new ways of working together, and we moved ahead with revamping it. By 1963 we had had pretty much changed the basic philosophy that had ruled the field since its beginning. And we're treating people more humanely and we're trying to do some things. Speaker 2: Can you give some specific examples of ways that, that you have changed it? Speaker 1: Okay, we got the law that said it, it is, you can't just walk into somebody's house without knocking or anything like you're home or somewhere and go in the house and start looking under beds and going through the refrigerator and things like that. We set up--I helped work on a national code of ethics to put that in--it had been begun by the time I got there, but it was only in committee. And so by going to the national conventions and being active there, we added things to the code of ethics. And the code of ethics essentially saying that we're gonna keep ourselves professional--we were heading toward being more professional. We were not going to deliberately talk down to people, for example. In our training sessions, which I helped to set up many of the training modules, we actually taught people how to speak to other people. We taught them how to understand some of the slang of the day. We taught them how to encourage people through our training sessions. So I became a state trainer then, one of the state trainers. The code of ethics, I think, is perhaps the most important thing that we did was the code of ethics--set it, set us out as professionals who were not going to stoop as low as some of the persons had who didn't know any better. They just thought that's the way you treated people. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And by 1963 we had made most of those changes. Speaker 2: Did the, did the commitment to change have anything to do with the political party that's in power at the time or did it, was it pretty much independent of it? Speaker 1: It's pretty much independent of them because of our striving for professional standards. And we looked at the other professions and decided we would go with a code of ethics that would be fairly strong. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, we have--later then that we developed a legislative arm, of course. Speaker 2: To lobby (unclear). Speaker 1: Yes, to do the lobbying. We called it PACE, and I don't know what that means anymore, but it was our lobbying ar--lobbying arm. It was the arm that allowed us to pay money and help people in different parts of the country who were, were more or less on our side. Story_ID: 8735 Speaker 1: Did you have community-organizing training? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, we did. I became a community organizer. And that's a little different than just teaching people from in front of the lectern. You've got to enable people I call it. You have to help them to know first of all--what is the issue? Why is it important to us? What can we do about it? What do we want to do about it? What part of the system can help us to do this? I can think of perhaps the largest one I did was and it's a sh-, there's a street here called Shadybrook and there was a hill up above Shadybrook and when it rained the water just ran down Shadybrook and flooded it for about, oh, seventeen or eighteen blocks. And it was so bad that it would pick cars up and move them from in front of a house if it was parked on the street. It would come up and run in people's basements. It was enough water out there to drown your child if you, if you let a three-year-old or younger out there. And so the people were very upset about that. And one or two of them had voiced the concern and really didn't know what to do about. So they knew me, and they asked me if I could tell them what to do about it. And so I let them know that they had to move in specific ways to get it done. They had to decide is anybody else concerned about this. They had to go and find that out. If enough people are, then we move to meeting together and discussing what you want to do about--how do you want this thing to end. And then I can provide maybe some ways that you can begin to work toward that--some people or some ways to go in to systems that you can get in to. So for that flooding problem we actually--they decided that they would form a neighborhood group. I think they called it the Northeast Neighborhood Association. And it was just a group neighbors within that one stretch of Shadybrook there who were affected. Speaker 1: Did they call it NENA (laughter)--Northeast Neighborhood Association? Speaker 2: No. Northe-, NEA, NEA--something like that, yeah. Yeah, they did. They had--they figured out their own acronym for it. And they chose a leader who had a southern drawl but he really was able to express him well. You had to listen. But he could express himself well. He couldn't read very well, but those who could would tell him what to say because he could get the point over. So they chose him as their president, and they set up officers and they got money enough to pay for their own little typing and things that they had done and set up the whole organization. I was more or less in the background as a resource person 'cause that's all I wanted to be to them. Speaker 1: That's what--that's the role of the organizer--to be in the background. Speaker 2: Yeah. And so if they needed something else or needed to find somebody who had a typewriter or needed to know how to set up a certain speech they wanted to give, I could refer them to someone who could help them with that. And they actually went to only three meetings, city council meetings. The first time they presented the problem. I told them also that they had to have a lot of people there--and they filled the boardroom where the council met. Speaker 1: Now that's important, isn't it? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: There's a lot of people don't realize if they have a gripe or a complaint, big gripe or complaint, and they go down to city hall or to wherever it is by themselves and, and nothing happens, they think that the system doesn't work. Speaker 2: Doesn't work, yeah. Speaker 1: But if--. Speaker 2: But they filled that room--the third time they filled that room to ask again when can it be included in the budget--'cause they knew it was time. They had already researched--they had the research that said those sewer, that sewer system was inadequate for the number of new houses that had gone in there for the number of people that lived in there, et cetera, et cetera. And they had presented those facts. So that's another thing that I did in the background--you can't just go and talk about it. It's okay to talk about how awful it is, but why do you want something done about it has to include some basic facts. They got them all together and the third time they filled that room they said it would be in the next year's budget. So it was taken take of. Speaker 1: Why you think the numbers make a difference? Speaker 2: Oh, it's politics. M--from my perspective it's sheer politics. If all these people are intelligent enough to come and sit and listen to a city commission meeting, city council meeting, whatever they call themselves, maybe they're intelligent enough to vote, huh? And I've, I really think that that's the basis of much that occurs. Speaker 1: You know, many people think that the world is changed by just presenting the facts that are in a way where anyone can understand that they're right or wrong and that sort of thing. But if one person's showing up to tell the official that something's wrong, it would, it's not enough, is it? Speaker 2: Very often. Occasionally, but very often it's not. And I think my having been a part of the systems myself I think we have to realize that there are many requests, there are many issues when you're looking at a city or when you're looking at a county or a state. They have to be cognizant of the fact that they are responsible to all of the people. And that's one of the things you fit in to your agenda when you're presenting. We're a part of your people, too. I really think that's a part of what makes the numbers important. Speaker 1: When, you know, well--you know, usually, you know, even today on television, you know, a celebrity can go to meet with a big (unclear) official, and they represent celebrity and money. They might be able to persuade somebody that something--persuade the president that this is wrong or the mayor that this is wrong. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But the average person that doesn't have any fame or money, he's probably at a disadvantage going by himself, right? Speaker 2: Very much of a disadvantage, yeah. Speaker 1: So that's why (unclear). Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The other thing is that you have to help people to understand that systems work in a systematic way. And you can't go one time and be on the next year's budget. The next year's budget may have been figured out ten years ago, twenty years ago. And there may be no fat in there to wring you out a little piece. And so you sometimes have to be a little more patient than many of us would like to be. And that's a part of what I learned through the years of, of dealing with, with people and dealing with systems. And all that reading I did through the years that helped me to see how systems work. All that reading I did that helped me to see that history changes. The world is not the same as it was a few years ago. And so you can look for change and you just have to figure out how to be a part of it. And I think that came from much of that reading that I did. And much of the philosophy of my family that just said, you know, you can do anything. This is America. My family were strong Americans, strong Christians, strong Americans. They believed that this was truly a land of opportunity and that if you work hard, why, you'll make it and you'll do well. And I'd say they did pretty well under the circumstances of the years of their life spans that they were in--not as well as some but well enough to raise a good family, and that's important. Story_ID: 8736 Speaker 1: Did you get involved in civil rights at all because we're now getting toward the '60s [1960s] (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. Civil rights--you must recognize it by then I'm a full fledged state employee. And in Kansas our state employees could not be associated with party politics, okay--that's Democrat, Republican, or whatever. We could not be associated with radical movements, which was ill defined. So I had to work on, I had to work through boards and committee structures to make changes. I was not one who would have been allowed to go and sit at the drugstore, for example, during the sit-ins or some of that kind of thing. But I was in the background enabling those who could through my writing skills, through my people leadership kind of skills, through the knowledge that I had of, of the many systems. We finally, we finally got money in here to try to set up some employment opportunities working with the businesses and the people to put business and people together--people for training. 'Cause part of the problem was that so many of the people did not have skills, work skills of any kind. And so, how can I say it--the grants that we got allowed money for this business to take so many persons and train them. Then those persons probably had to work for that organization a certain length of time. The organization put in a little money and the government put in a little money for the training. And then payback was you worked a little while for them, then you could move on to something better. So we did, we did a lot of that. That organization spanned a lot of different changes like better housing conditions, like better health conditions. It was--. Speaker 1: Just pause for a second. Speaker 2: Okay (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, I was saying that those grants that we got at that time enabled us to, to actually look at the varied social problems and to try to determine what we could do to help with them--housing, better levels of education, the whole bussing matter, job skills, et cetera, et cetera. And so we, we called it WACAPI [Wichita Area Community Action Program Inc.] was the acronym--it's Wichita Area Community Incorporated, Community Incorporated I believe it was. And it did a lot of those things. And I worked as a member of that board and as its first and only black female president. I think we did a lot of good. I see people now who, who say I used to work for you. And I look at them, you know, I, I don't know who they are. But then they'll tell me that they worked at such and such a center where they were learning typing skills or something. Well, as chair of the board they thought they were working for me, you see, to keep the, the systems running. And so I'm, I'm glad to run into them, but it does feel strange to have all these people that you don't know say I used to work for you. Well, I know the social workers pretty well that worked under me and, and the supervisors that worked under me. I know those in a different way. I know a lot of the people whose doors I used to knock even and their children. I've had a chance to run into many of them in these later years. When you look back over a long active lifespan, it makes you begin to really appreciate how one individual--you and I and the next person and the next person--how small things can mean so much to somebody else, you know. And you don't really understand that--you're just moving through life. You're doing what you need to do during your lifetime. And we don't realize that we should take every opportunity we can to try to help somebody figure something out--a new way to do it, another way to do it, a new way to think about it, a new way to view the same old situation that you thought was so bad--what came out of it for you? What is a lesson that can be helpful to you in the future--that sort of thing. And that's how I've kind of tried to evaluate my life and continue to live it. Story_ID: 8737 Speaker 1: Positive people--we just don't have enough of them. Most people seem to be so negative about everything--and that's bad news. Speaker 2: Do you see your, part of your job as a social worker and as a organizer to create more positive people? Speaker 1: Yes, I do. I do. Speaker 2: Do you think that when you deal with one of these issues and achieve a victory it, it makes people more positive? Speaker 1: Yes, because it let's them know they can do it. You see, I want the other person to feel power, their own personal power. 'Cause when we feel our own personal power, at least it's been that way for me, then you can move and get things done in your own life that you wouldn't be able to otherwise. You can move to realize--you know, I can move from thinking about a sure thing, yeah, like teaching. If we had left Langston University, [Langston, Oklahoma] and come to Wichita, they already had jobs waiting on us here, you see, 'cause my husband's mother's friends were all principals and everything else by the time we got out of school. And we had jobs waiting on us here. We could have come here and been very comfortable in those jobs. You know, well, cost of living was not like it was in Chicago, of course, but we went to Chicago for a purpose, and we had the, the--can I call it internal spirit and fortitude to move ahead try it? Now our friends called us wild and crazy, you see. But we just decided it was a thing we needed to do, and we took a chance. And sometimes you have to take that chance. Many people I have found don't even realize there's a chance out there to take. And so they move through life in a kind of mediocre way when they could excel in other ways. I see so many of our youngsters, our teenagers in particular, turning to drugs now because they are positive that there's nothing in their future that can get them the kind of money or the kind of pleasure that drugs allow. That's what they tell me--there's nothing in their future that can get them the kind of pleasure if they're a user or the kind of money if they're a seller. There's nothing in their future that can get them there. And so you might as well be rich or be high--you're gonna die anyway pretty soon. There's nothing in your future. They actually use those words. And it's frightening to me to, to hear that. And I, I just feel like I must continue as long as I can to talk to them and try to let them know that there is a strength inside that they can call on and do better than that--that the-, you make your own future. And you don't let a drug make your future, you let your mind and your body and your spirit make your future because I believe that that is how we can sculpt the best future for ourselves. And so I, I use many different ways to try to get that over to them. Story_ID: 8738 Speaker 1: You retired from the state of Kansas, right, the Department of--. Speaker 2: Social Work-- Speaker 1: Social Work. Speaker 2: --at Wichita State University [Wichita, Kansas]. Speaker 1: And you taught at Wichita State University for a while, too. Speaker 2: Yes, yes--over twenty years. Speaker 1: Okay. And, but you went on to form another organization to deal with some of the problems in the streets, right? Speaker 2: Well, yes. Let me tell you about that. My career was built a lot around family and children. And then I added aging because people began to live longer, so I added aging. And so I was family, children, and aging specialist, okay. And meanwhile I would be asked to help to do something that wr--help somebody write a grant or do something about alcohol and drug abuse. And I began to learn a lot about alcohol and drug abuse. And I decided that if I could ever get far enough away from the family and children and aging part of my career, I wanted to do, spend more time with alcohol and drug abuse. And so I tell them that in my old age I've gotten into alcohol and drug abuse. And so I, I worked at the local level on their boards and committees and their state level on their boards and committees and national level committees to try to first of all understand more about alcohol and drug abuse, understand where that field is and what it's trying to do, and to hopefully keep money flowing in for them to continue to improve that field. And so I've, I did that because as I look back over my social work career with the many social workers that I worked with, that I trained, that I taught as students at the university, I see them as, as people who can go out and do positive things. But they have to know how to help the people that have all these problems. When you look at all the problems and you really look at them, you find out alcohol and drug abuse or drug abuse is somewhere at the root of that problem. And so it has become even more important to me to help with that field in any way I can. Speaker 1: Now, the country, this country, the United States, currently treats alcoholism and drug abuse as a criminal, well to, well, certainly drug abuse--drug abuser is treated as criminals basically. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And in the past they've tr--alcoholics were treated as criminals as well. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: They literally locked them up. I think we all remember the TV shows where, you know, town drunk is always locked up and then they let him out-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, and then they let him out the next--. Speaker 1: They lock him back up again. Speaker 2: --day or two, yeah. Speaker 1: And the drug abuser, though, the difference now is that a lot of people get locked for years--. Speaker 2: Years, yes, yes. Speaker 1: --for possession of minor--. Speaker 2: Minute. Speaker 1: --quantities of drugs, and it's mostly black and Latino young men that get (unclear). Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, that's true. And we are finally getting some fairly serious national Congressional committee look at, at those kinds of problems. Oh, man, his name just slipped my mind, but he was talking just last week saying that there are too many black and Latino men, in particular, and certainly too many black and Latino mothers in the penitentiary because of minute amounts of drugs. The worst offender being crack cocaine and that we were going to have to take a different kind of look--he didn't say what kind of a look--they always all in the past they've gotten to that point--we need to look higher than that. But apparently those people who are bringing the drugs into this country and distributing them from the top down are so powerful that nobody's able to buck them yet and nobody is willing to name them yet. And I've spoken to people who will tell me things like in their town they know the business people who are bringing it into their community, but they wouldn't dare tell because they are afraid that they will be killed--not hurt, killed! And so this is a powerful evil as far as I'm concerned, powerful evil element in our community that anything that any one of us Americans can do to rub it out, we need to do that. Story_ID: 8739 Speaker 1: What is the biggest issue that you've had to deal with here in Wichita [Kansas], you know, the biggest social action issue. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) During my career? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Well, I'd have to say it's, it's racism because, I don't know, I've done what I could to help get ordinances and laws and ideas established so that people could get along better, but somehow deep in the, in the heart, in the, in the spirit maybe many people of all colors--there is racism, meaning that I don't like you because your skin color is different than mine. And consequently they don't get to know what's under that skin, what's under that outer layer, you know, what's under the outer layer. And it has always been strange to me because of my upbringing. People were just people. Some of them were drunks, some of them were hobos, and some of them are great people--we met a lot of them 'cause we lived right along the railroad track. And they would stop and want to work for a meal or something and some of those people were just wonderful, beautiful people who were misplaced at that point in time. And some of them were crooks who you didn't dare take your eyes off of. And I grew up just looking at the person rather than the skin. And to suddenly be adult and thrust into trying to work with all kinds of people and realizing how deeply their personal prejudices were. It just floored me, I guess, 'cause I didn't have those feelings. If your behavior was such that I didn't like it, why, I had no trouble separating the behavior from the person. Now, I'm sure I got that from my folk and from my upbringing, but I've always been able to separate the behavior from the person. And I didn't care what color you were. You were a good guy, you're a good guy, and if you're not, you're not. If you're wrong, then you're wrong, you know. You're outside of the law, you're outside of the law. Doesn't mean you're a terrible individual human being--you might be, you know, but you might not be, too. So I'm willing to give you that chance, I guess. But then to find how deeply seated racism really was as I matured really made me speak out against it in e-, in every major conversation I had, every major speech I gave at some conference or other. No matter what I was talking on, I used it in there--that we needed to look at people as human beings. And when we reach that place, we really would have a better world for all of us because then each of us would be able to, better able to reach our potential--make it better for all of us. So racism has been a, maybe the biggest thing that I have racked my brain on how to say it a different way maybe whether I'm in a conversation with somebody in an airport or a bus station or in a restaurant or whether I'm, I'm making a formal presentation. Consequently, I've been called upon very often to come and make a speech that has to with, with racism. And I've noticed even since September the 11th, that I've been asked to do more of them more often--small groups, larger groups, classes, formal classes that somebody has gone somewhere or small church groups. They seem to be wanting to get back and take another look at, at racism and how can we, how can we really begin to view racism positively. And, you know, you'd think that after what forty something years, fifty, nearly fifty something years of, of doing that and seeing that you'd think that it'd be a lot better. It's almost like you're starting over. Speaker 1: So you don't see much growth in terms of-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I haven't seen the growth that I would expect. What I have noticed since I do travel a lot--I've noticed that everywhere I've been since September 11th people of all races seem to use their eyes to look at you. What am I trying to say--recogni--oh, there's a human being, you know, where many times before it was like you'd walk through a crowd but nobody ever saw you or didn't acknowledge you as a human being and just sort of went by you if they're white. Now I notice people in general or more willing to make eye contact. And even if they don't say hello, why, they'll nod or they'll do a quick one, you know--I see you're human, you know (laughter). And that is new--that's new. I've been in the North, been in the East, been in the South--I haven't been in the West since 9/11. But I notice that everywhere I go now. People are just different. It's like they notice you. And so, I don't know what that means--if that means we're going to be more willing to look at, passed the skin color or are we, are we just looking at this person trying to say I wonder, you know (laughter)--is this a, is this an American really? And I'm as American as they come. And I always have been. But I don't think the average white person understands what that means to walk through a group of colleagues, for example, and be totally ignored by the majority of them unless they know you on a personal basis or pro--special professional basis, that sort of thing. It's tough and it's a kind of feeling that we have never been able to really put into writing in a way that someone else could understand it. They, and so they haven't been able to walk a mile in our shoes, you see. You don't know what that does to the psyche. But I've always spoken out about it. And even though while I was working for the Social Welfare Board--it's Social and Rehabilitation Services now--while I worked for them and had to be very careful not to encroach on radical or political, I still brought it in and talked about it as a human part of our relationship that needed to be improved. Story_ID: 8740 Speaker 1: If you had something to do over again, something to change, would you change anything you've done so far? Speaker 2: You know, I wouldn't. As I look back over my entire life, it, it feels fair satisfactory. And I don't know--I might have completed that doctoral degree that I almost did complete, but a family member needed me so I left school and came back home. And when I come, came back home, I got busy and just never did go back. So, I'm not sure that I would even complete that. The only reason I was doing it was 'cause it was going to make more money. And money was, unfortunately, never that important to me. Story_ID: 8741 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: I'm with the majority opinion I think right now and that is that we have to go back to more unity of the black community. We have to go back to where we care, truly care about each other to where we really want to use whatever large or small skill we have to help our own do better. I think that that's important. I look at my grandchildren--I have two very young grandchildren. Now they're ten, twin, twin boys. And they have lots of kids that come over to play. And I see in those little children, boys and girls, some non-caring attitudes--they don't care if you're hurt, they don't care what they do, they don't care what they say. So I've always had toys around for kids to play with. And when the new one, new ones either come over, why, I'll, I'll go out and I'll say, "Time out." All the old ones they know what that means. That means they all have to come over to grandma and listen to this lecture. And so they tell their friends, "Come on, come on." So they reluctantly come on. And I tell them things like, you know, I like to see kids play. That's why I have all this stuff here for my kids so they can play and have a good time. But there are some rules at this house that are important and you have to learn. You must learn them or you can't play here. And those rules include--and I go down a list of them like, you know, I don't allow any cursing. I allow a little but of fussing, but then call me 'cause I'm a, I'm one who can settle anybody's argument. So call me--I'll settle the arguments. Now, I allow no fighting. So when fighting starts everybody else has to stop them and call me. I don't allow any cursing 'cause I don't curse, and I don't like cursing around my house. So we don't curse here. Now you know little boys curse all the time. I said, I say to them that now you may curse somewhere else if you just have to curse, but when you're here I don't allow it. And I go on down my list. And if, I tell them that if you do any of things, why, I'll come out and talk to you about it. And if you don't want to hear me, there are a couple things that can happen. You're going home and I'll take you home. I will tell your folks why I brought you home or you can tell them. Or I, if you won't go home, if you won't let me take you home, I will call the law 'cause I do not allow anybody to come to my place and not follow my rules. And you know they follow them. They follow them. I'll hear them out there and listen--one'll say, "Man, watch your language," you know--but that's good. That's good as far as I'm concerned. Speaker 1: You know, it's just like organizing, you know, in a sense. I mean, you, you know, when you conduct a meeting, if you explain the rules ahead of time, people will follow the rules. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But if there are no rules and you just start meeting, then people are liable to do anything. Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess you're right there. Speaker 1: And it's--kids are the same way. I guess if you come from a home where there are no rules, you don't (unclear). Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Nobody care about any--they curse their mothers out. Speaker 1: Their mothers curse them out. Speaker 2: Their mothers curse them out. Their mothers lock them outside of the house. I, I thought, you, you're locked out! You know, okay (laughter). Wow! Speaker 1: And that's something I just came privy to in the early '90s [1990s]--that that was going on. Speaker 2: Oh, I had no idea. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Think I heard of the crack (unclear)--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --kids had gotten locked out. Speaker 2: You didn't realize that they locked kids out of the hours--two or three hours at the time, sometimes all night. I had a little boy who had to come and sleep in my backyard and rolled up in a rug. And I run out there the next morning--there he was rolled up in an old rug I had out there sleep 'cause he couldn't get in all night. He had been home four times he said. Something is wrong. We need to get back to family, I think--the importance of family. Brothers who cut each others' throats, who think nothing about fighting to the death if necessary. It's just--they don't know any better. Life means nothing to them. They have no what I call a spirit part of their being that tunes them in to anybody else, if you, if you can understand what I'm trying to say. There's a spirit part of us that can tune into the spirit of someone else and recognize that that's a, that this is a human being over there. And if I cut it, it'll bleed, you know. And if it bleeds enough, it'll die. But we don't, we're not taught that anymore. And I think some of those kinds of human interaction basics we need to get back to. We're calling it all kinds of things. We're calling it unity, we're calling it this, that, and the other. But it's, it's basic human interaction that I think we need to get back to that is more spirit based so we can tune into ourselves and begin to know who I am and begin to try to be able to understand somebody else a little better. Story_ID: 8742 Speaker 1: I know that you're ancestors--you've got a grandmother that lived to be 106, a grandfather who lived to be 110--. Speaker 2: Yeah, another one lived 99. Speaker 1: Yeah, so live a long time, and you're still busy doing a lot of things. But what would you consider as your legacy up to this point? Speaker 2: I would just hope that if people reflect on my memory that they will see me as a person who was always positive--could always find something positive in the worst of situations, something that you could do even to head toward more positiveness in the future. I would just hope that they would think about that that's what my whole life, my whole being was about--my, my conversation, my behavior, I hope, the energy that I spend trying to converse with people, the way that I reach out to people that I don't even know. I hope that they think, you know, I met that lady on the plane. Remember that black lady I met on the plane--I got this from her, I got that from her. I want those thoughts to head them toward something positive. 'Cause I think that if we head toward the positive, we'll be okay. Speaker 1: How did your--did your parents [Albert & Henrietta Braden Ray] get a chance to see you launch your career and do some (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes, yes. They got to see me launch that teaching career. My father then died. And I--it was later than that that I moved into the social work career. My mother got to see some good moves in the social work career. And she was very pleased. She was very satisfied with that. My brothers, I think, are, are very satisfied with it because I've been able to make my own way. And I've had a, a fairly successful life. Success to me is not money. Success to me is having people who like to be around you, who care about you on some plain, who have some bit of respect for you simply because you are a human being that has brought them something positive. I think that's where I am at this point..