 Story_ID: 571401 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My name is Julieanna Richardson, I'm the interviewer. Speaker 2: Can I call you by name in the interview or not? Don't stress about it. Speaker 1: Not right--yeah. Speaker 2: Just talk. Speaker 1: And I don't want to really trip over you either. And Neculai Burghelea? Burghelea? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) That's fair enough. Speaker 1: Okay, is-- Speaker 2: That's not it though. Speaker 1: What is it? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) It's good enough. Speaker 1: But that's what's going to happen with my-- Speaker 2: Is it Burghelea? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Burghelea. Speaker 2: Burghel- Burghelaea, okay. Speaker 1: That's what's going to happen with my birth date. Speaker 2: We got a live wire here, okay. Neculai Burghelea. I'll have to work on that is the videographer and observing is Shawn Wilson and Mildred Artenor? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Antenor [Mildred Antenor]. Speaker 2: And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us. And if you could give your date of birth. Speaker 1: My name is Elaine R. for Ruth, Elaine Ruth Jones [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones], E-L-A-I-N-E Ruth, R-U-T-H, last name Jones, J-O-N-E-S. And this is one lady who doesn't usually give her date of birth and I'm not gonna make an exception here. But I will say I was born in the mid-'40s [1940s]. I will go that far. Speaker 2: Okay. And can you give today's date and our location? Speaker 1: Yes. Today is November 30th, 2006, Thursday. And we're looking in New York City [New York, New York] at the headquarters of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund at 99 Hudson Street, 16th Floor, New York, New York. Speaker 2: And your occupation? Speaker 1: My occupation is I'm a lawyer by training and I'm former head of this organization, who's been kind enough to let us use their space today. And I step down as head of LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] in 2004, two years ago and I continue to work with them on projects, but I no longer have to catch 6:00 a.m. flights and have 4:00 a.m. showers. Story_ID: 571402 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask five questions, they're People magazine-ish, short answers. I'd like to know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite food. Fish, I love grilled fish of all kinds. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color, I'm big on blues and browns. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of year, spring. Spring, Ms. Jones [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] loves the spring. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Oh something--favorite vacation destination, something exotic. Something I haven't seen. Few years ago I had been to all of the continents with the exception of, I had not been to Australia, and so I went to Australia. But now I've been to Asia several times but I want to get to China. I have not been to--tried to knock on the door and get into China some years ago, but the curtain was down and I couldn't get through but I'm going back soon. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, I have several. One is: you do the best you can, and that's all you can do. There are others that will have to come to me, because I have used them with my younger lawyers all of the time, you know. You, you know, don't get mad, you know, get even. You know when we're writing our briefs and papers, our tone, we can be just as civil as the next person, but you make it up in excellence. What we want to do is win. That's what we want to do, we want to win. And so you, all of your strategies, you harness those emotions to win. Story_ID: 571403 Speaker 1: I want to ask you about your mother. You know you had said both of your parents were very verbal. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And I'd like you to give your mother's name. I want you to tell us what you know about her growing up. Speaker 2: To describe my mother would be to describe a live wire. I mean, my mother was a teacher, school teacher and tells a lot about her when she had--she was a school teacher back in the '30s [1930s]. Mid-'30s [1930s]-- Speaker 1: Her name? Speaker 2: Estelle Campbell Jones. She was Estelle Campbell, and she was the youngest of my grandfather's [Daniel Campbell] daughters. He only had two. She had three brothers and her older sister, they were twelve months apart, not twins but twelve months apart. And she was teaching in Virginia. And Virginia has a rule there that you could not teach and be married, and she and my father [George Raymond Jones] met in 1935 and Estelle as feisty as she is, they eloped in 1937 and no one knew it. She was--continued to teach and then--and, but in going through her suitcase one day, my grandmother [Lulu Campbell] had--was a little on the nosy side, and was going through my mother's suitcase. My mother was a minister's daughter, going through her suitcase, she saw that marriage certificate. And my, my, my you know it all--so mother then had to go to North Carolina to teach, and all of that. But it's interesting my mother was feisty in that she knew what she wanted to do, and how she wanted to get it done. Today she would be a different kind of woman. My mother would have gone much higher, although we were quite proud of her as a teacher. She was a natural teacher, she was gifted. She taught elementary and middle school. But you know it's interesting, my father also gets a lot of credit. My mother had the college education. My father did not. And my father hadn't gone further than the third grade, but I mean he was, the cream suits and the fedoras and the--I mean really a sharp dresser and a hard working man. And my mother moved to Norfolk [Virginia] with her family because her father was a pastor and he was called to pastor the new church [New Calvary Baptist Church] in Norfolk, Virginia. And when the new minister came to town, the new minister had these two daughters. And my father and his brother were sitting in the congregation. They were members of the Richmond [Virginia] congregation. And so my--I understand that the story goes, my father and his brother were talking and the--my father's brother said, "Um, that older daughter [Sarah Campbell] looks interesting." And my father said, "But it's that younger one that I'm looking at." Well, that younger one became my mother. And so they were you know were from, married from 1937 until my father died in '76 [1976] and my mother died in '90 [1990], was very verbal. There were times when I was a little girl that my mother would have my father--she would sit him down, as if you know--and in a very loving way, would teach him the writing. His mathematic skills were just off the charts. He--my father was that, naturally a mathematical genius, 'cause he always knew what he had with his checkbook without ever balancing it. He knew what he had in the bank always. But with the verbal skills and the writing and expression, and 'cause he needed that in order to elevate. And since my grandfather, my mother's father was very prominent in the city, they were able to get my father, help him get, secure a job as a Pullman porter. And so he became a member of the first black trade union [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters], a Pullman porter. And--but to do that job in the early '40s [1940s] he had to fill out slips, he had to--a lot of those things he had to do and he was able to do it and retired as a Pullman porter. Story_ID: 571404 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, back about your grandfather and how far back on your mother's side, you know about the history, and was your family's history tied to you know, Norfolk [Virginia] on that side? Speaker 2: No, no. My grandfather had come to town to Norfolk as a new minister. And so he was quite as the ministers say, the master of homiletics, that means the spoken word, the sermon, putting the sermon together. And grandfather had to be good. He died before I was born, few years before I was born. But he was pastoring in Washington, D.C., Friendship Bap- Pap- Baptist [Friendship Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.] and before that he was a pastor in New Jersey. And my mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] often tells the story of how my grandmother [Lulu Campbell], my grandfather's wife would be sitting in the congregation with the kids and grandfather would announce from the pulpit, not having told anyone, "Well, this is my final sermon," (laughter). And she'd hear--he did that several times, she was hearing it for the first time. Grandfather could stay somewhere for two or three years and then he was gone you know. And when it came over him to move he just left. And so his longest pastoring, was the one in Norfolk 'cause that's where, he was pastor there for seven years and he died in Norfolk and that's the only reason the family stayed. So-- Speaker 1: Now what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: My--Daniel Young Campbell [Daniel Campbell]. He was the first pastor of New Calvary Baptist Church in Norfolk, Virginia which is still there. And when he died in the early '40s [1940s], they closed the schools and it was a big to-do, you know 'cause ministers in our community--you know Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was a minister, you know. As--but--and Martin was you know several generations--a generation after my father--grandfather. So--but the ministers carried the water for the community. The ministers went downtown to the police station to try to find the missing person who had been picked up off the street and nobody had seen them in two weeks. You know the ministers would get together and try to do a collective deal with the power structure, in a segregated environment 'cause the ministers were truly autonomous. Their salaries came from the people. No outside money, no church, state situation where the feds are giving dollars to the church, none of that. The church was autonomous so the ministers did not--his salary did not depend on anybody downtown so they could use that independence to further the interests of their congregation, which they did. The ministers' alliance was a very strong, ministers' alliance. Ministers still meet today you know most jurisdictions, they meet on Monday afternoon or Tuesday afternoon, ministers meet. So-- Story_ID: 571405 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] give you any, tell you any stories about her growing up? You know the youngest of two girl--I mean (unclear) two brothers (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two girls, yeah. She was, let me see--yes. Oh mother would talk about her family. She would talk--she--my mother was the, she was the second oldest. The oldest was a girl, Aunt Sarah [Sarah Campbell] who died as a young woman. She was forty-two when she died. Then my mother was a year younger and then my mother was followed by three brothers, so the three brothers and so there's one sibling living today which was the middle brother, my uncle, Uncle Gilbert [Gilbert Campbell] who's eighty-six now. He was a, he too was a minister of Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia]. He was a campus minister. He was also pastor of a church in Richmond, Virginia, Moore Street Church [Moore Street Missionary Baptist Church]. And so my brother [George Daniel Jones] is a minister so I'm coming from a fam- my brother is a minister, the pastor of a church in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. So her background growing up was as a minister's family, minister that traveled, didn't have much money at all, you know. So my grandmother [Lulu Campbell], who had come from--who had a little something, my grandmother was in college in the 1890s down there at Virginia--where was she at--Virginia College for Women [ph.] or something. She'd come down--her parents sent her off, 'cause grandmother's, it's amazing how you look at the African American community. My grandmother was very fair, my mother's mother was very fair, you know with this long, straight hair and--'cause her mother was Native American and her father was Italian. I mean it's--in my--we have all of this in our background--and my--and that's my grandmother's parents and they were up in New Jersey and had this big white house I understand, picket fence up--and sent her down to Virginia for this boarding school for girls to further her education. You know I think she got more than setting a table and all that. I think she really learned you know and had a value of learning. Speaker 1: Do you know the name of the boarding school? Speaker 2: I can get that. I don't, not off the top of my--my brother knows it. He knows all of that. But--and there, down there she met this young man in the seminary who turned out to be my grandfather [Daniel Campbell]. And her folks were not happy with this situation, 'cause grand- grandfather had nothing. How can a little chocolate brown man you know, full of verve and personality and charisma, you know--and her folks just had a problem with it. But they had the problem, my grandmother didn't have it. And so they went on and got married and did not necessarily have the blessing of their family with it and so that's what happened. Speaker 1: And your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Interesting, Lula, L-U-L--Lulu, L-U-L-U Marie, M, for Marie Campbell. Lulu Marie Campbell so that's the Campbell side of the family. Speaker 1: But you said your grandfather was--had passed away when you were--by the time--but before (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well he yeah, he died a few years before I was born. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, but he saw my brother. He saw--my brother was the oldest and I understand he would hold my brother up and blow in his face and say, "Keep your feet to the fire son. Keep your feet to the fire," you know. So, you know. Story_ID: 571406 Speaker 1: Now let's talk about your, on, your father [George Raymond Jones]. You know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --what you know about his you know his family. Speaker 2: Quite a bit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Quite a bit. The Jones, lot of Joneses okay and father was from Southside, Virginia, country boy. Just on the farm you know and wanted a better life and had an older brother. His mother [Sarah Octavia Jones] had nine children, six of whom lived to be adults. And so his older brother had moved to Norfolk, Virginia which was a hundred miles north of Southside, Virginia, Lawrenceville [Virginia], Edgerton, Virginia. And so at seventeen, my father left the farm and went to Norfolk and lived with his brother and worked for a dollar a week in a, it was a store. It was similar to Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], but it wasn't Sears, something and working for a dollar a week in the warehouse section. But, the reason I know so much about his people is, see my father was shrewd and if he had had the opportunity to have training he would have been a psychologist, 'cause he was really shrewd. Here I was, feisty as a young girl you know, and what daddy did was when we--when I became three years old, my sister [Gwendolyn Jones Jackson] was born that summer when I became three, my brother [George Daniel Jones] was here. He sent the two of us down to his home where his mother was and all of my cousins were. So he sent us down there and on the farm. And he sent us there every summer, every summer from Norfolk, Virginia. And so by the time I got to be twelve or thirteen when young girls were getting--could get in trouble with those hot summers, I was looking forward to going to the farm. "Daddy, when I'm gonna go?" See, I had been programmed, from three. And so here I was growing up, we would learn how to milk cows, you know; learn how to you know remove the hen to collect the eggs; learn how to get behind a slide and drive a mule going through a quarter field; learn how to--it was tobacco country--learn how to string tobacco, put it up in the barn; learn how to collect the scraps you collect to feed the hogs. Grandma would say, "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones], go feed the hogs." We'll see grandma put a chicken on the table at--she--from the yard, running around the yard to the table, people eating it on Sunday. You know I watched her do--I mean the, I mean that was farm life, pumping water, water from a pump. You know you go down to the spring and you clear the cover of the spring, the water and the water is just as clear and pure in the woods. And this was a ten acre place in the middle of the woods. There was no access--and we were about at least a mile off the main roads in a circle. Story_ID: 571407 Speaker 1: I learned about the life of the farm and how you function on the farm and it helped me later in litigation. Interesting, I had a client once, a sixty-eight year old gentlemen in Tulia, Texas that they said was dealing drugs. This man wasn't dealing any drugs but they were rounding up black folks, sending them away. Said he was dealing drugs, and they had given him a, something like a thirty-year sentence and put him away. And I went to visit him and during our interview you know he was a hog farmer. And so we talked about that, and I knew then he wasn't dealing any drugs. This was a low tech operation, single owner. The man had about two hundred hogs. As greedy as hogs are, and as often as they have to be fed, there's no way he had time to deal drugs. He couldn't. He couldn't leave the place not with two hundred hogs and I knew that and so we finally got him off along with a lot of people. But I found that, being able to reach back on that background you know I understand what a free range chicken is you know and it stood me in good stead. Speaker 2: Now did your father [George Raymond Jones], did he share stories of his growing up you know 'cause he grew up on the farm? Did he share any--? Speaker 1: Yes, he grew up. Speaker 2: Did he share any stories, you know--? Speaker 1: Some, yeah some, but it was--but he was most proud of his father [George Baker Jones], my grandfather who was the farmer down there. My Grandfather Jones in 1910 with small children, was able to put together a--had a $100 bill and went down to the farm bureau and to the land offices in Lawrenceville, Virginia and bought that ten acre parcel of land, $10 an acre, 1910. A black man whose parents were enslaved, 'cause I know of his mother and his--and how she was, 'cause his mother, my grandfather's mother you know was a very beautiful woman, was a--her name was Blick [ph.]. And she was impregnated by the white landowner. But when she got her freedom, she married my grandfather's father. So she--it all comes really from her. So she got, she married you know, so there are a group of Blicks down there who were the heirs of the white landowner and my grandmother was, had been a Blick and--but then there were the Joneses. And so we said to her, "Well we were the seeds of the husband of choice," (laughter}. Story_ID: 571408 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, when you think of your mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] and father [George Raymond Jones], who do you think you're most similar to? Speaker 2: Both of them. Speaker 1: And can you tell me what you have of both of them? Speaker 2: They--my mother and father were both very verbal people. You never had to wonder what they were thinking. They would tell you. I mean they weren't the brooding omnipresence you know, they were just, they both had a strong sense of right and wrong, what was right. It wasn't puritanical but it was just a moral code you know that they--and they--my mother for example, here we're growing up in the late '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], never gave me a white doll baby. I never had a white--my mother would scour the earth and find a black doll baby for me and my sister [Gwendolyn Jones Jackson]. And some--her mother [Lulu Campbell] would ask, "Estelle why are you doing--?" She said, "Because they will not have white babies, they will have black babies and so they have to have black doll babies." I mean that's--and you know A. Philip Randolph who was the head of the-- Speaker 1: Pullman porters (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Pullman porters you know would come to my kitchen table. And when daddy would come off the road there'd be three or four Pullman porters with A. Philip Randolph around the table discussing strategy. That was the environment that you--you didn't just didn't talk about things, you did something about them. You were strategic and you had--and education was a must. My father would say now who didn't, who luckily--maybe he got third grade. Daddy would say to us, "I not only want college, I want graduate school." That's what he would say to the three of us. "I not only want college," he said, "I want graduate school." He was talking about graduate school in the '60s [1960s]. We trying to get out of high school, he's talking about graduate school. But it was that sense and they believed in us. They--I don't ever remember them saying that you cannot do something that was mentally challenging, they never did. Mother taught us the Lord's Prayer in French. She taught us the Lord's Prayer in French and I said the Lord's Prayer, why am I learning (speaking French), "Notre Pere, qui es aux cieux?" Why am I learning it? And I--years later, after she had died you know I was in Paris [France] and went to the cathedral around Christmastime. They were saying the Lord's Prayer and I could join in. I could join in, in the language. Speaker 1: Could I hear a little bit of it? Speaker 2: (Speaking French) "Notre Pere, qui es aux cieux, Que ton nom soit sanctifie, Que ton regne vienne, Que ta volonte soit faite sur la terre comme au ciel. Donne-nous aujourd'hui notre pain de ce jour." I mean just, yes. (Speaking French) "Ainsi pouvoir c'est." Thus may it be. Story_ID: 571409 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now let me ask you Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones], what is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: I re- I was three and I was on that farm [in Lawrenceville, Virginia]. It was my first trip and I, now I understand later that I would never let my brother [George Daniel Jones] out of my sight, 'cause he was the only familiar thing I had. And I, the first memory I have is a cousin had said to me, an older cousin said to me, "Elaine, you don't know what I've just said to you do you?" And I remember that statement. And then she repeated what she had said. She said, "You just had a new baby sister [Gwendolyn Jones Jackson]. You just got a new baby--," So that's my first memory of language, mouthing the birth of my sister. And so that's the first memory. You know then I remember some of my mother's [Estelle Campbell Jones] discipline, ooh goodness. I remember I went to bed one night I was about five, with some chewing gum in my mouth and got it all over the sheet. She came in there and she said, "You have to get every bit of it off. I don't know how you gonna do it," but she said, "you got to get every bit of it. You don't chew gum." And she said--there was a little saying she said about gum chewing. It will come to me. About, "What is worse, the--," it will come to me--, "the gum chewing child or the cud chewing cow?" Then she said, "Oh, I see it now. It's the intelligent look on the face of the cow," (laughter). In other words, you know she didn't want us chewing gum and I got this gum on this thing and so I remember and one of my memories was that I had a coat hanger or something trying to scrape that gum off that sheet. Ooh (laughter)! Story_ID: 571410 Speaker 1: Let's take you back to the farm [in Lawrenceville, Virginia] and then I want to take you on to Norfolk [Virginia]. But in the farm, can you tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you, you know of your time on the farm? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I mean whenever, when I see a tomato I think of fresh--when I see watermelon, I remember cutting them off a watermelon. When I see an ear of corn, fresh ear of corn, you know--when I see fried chicken I worry now, about all that yellow fat between the--those who eat it, the fried piece and the meat. We didn't have that, you know. It's the freshness and the natural--and how we were never hungry. And I was there with all of my cousins. We were running around you know and we had plenty, and it was good, fresh food and clean water, you know. And money was short, but other things were there in abundance and they were more important you know 'cause we have all of the other things I mean, if you get the value system in place. Educate yourself, you know really apply yourself. Seize every opportunity you are given, learn how to say, "Thank you, yes, ma'am, no, sir." Polite, civil, you learn how to do those things, money will come. Money will come 'cause you know people like to be around people that know how to treat other people. Now I'm still learning, that lesson 'cause I've given everybody at The HistoryMakers a hard time. But other than that it--there's a way to interact with people and I learned that there, in terms of dealing with my cousins. Where in Norfolk you know my father [George Raymond Jones] behind our house, built a garden and it was based on what he learned at the farm. So string beans and all that stuff, we never had to go to buy it. The potatoes there, you go dig them up, they're all out there in the back. Speaker 1: Now tell me smells and sounds? Smells, do you have any smells you think of that remind you of--? Speaker 2: Cow manure (laughter). I mean you know a cow can really--so--but you know, I know the smell of tobacco growing, the smell of tobacco leaves. You know I, and I've never smoked and that's one of the reasons why. Smells? Oh, hot bread, homemade biscuits, grandma [Sarah Octavia Jones] making homemade biscuits or homemade rolls. Music, lots of music. I had a cousin who had a little juke joint, you know. She was about ten years older and her boyfriend had this little place where everybody would gather on Saturday night and all the latest music and the bumping and the carrying on you know that's--the trucks driving up to the front of it, you know. So the music, all kind of music, all the latest moves and you know. Barefoot, I didn't have shoes on a lot of the time, running around with no shoes on. After a while my mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] put her foot down and told my father, "If Elaine's [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] going up there, she's got to put shoes on her feet." Feet were getting big and bigger you know, got to put shoes on her feet (laughter). Story_ID: 571411 Speaker 1: So what did you like most about the country, you think? Speaker 2: Oh I, right now I think about--I liked the openness of it, I liked space. I liked freedom. Country to me meant freedom. It meant no barriers. You know you have access. And so I take that figuratively and literally, you know because in my mind African Americans have had nothing but barriers and lack of access so my physical need for space, you know also I think morphed into the literally, I mean just thinking about space for African American people and to be able to have our own space, you know. Or be able to share the space that's here you know. And I think that's you know that sense of freedom and access and-- Story_ID: 571412 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When was it learned? Was it in school? Speaker 2: Around the kitchen table, around the kitchen table. We did have a kitchen table, and my brother [George Daniel Jones], my sister [Gwendolyn Jones Jackson] and me and my parents, we had that dinner. And my father [George Raymond Jones] usually did the cooking, 'cause my father cooked on the railroad. And, but daddy cooked in huge vats of stuff. That's the way he was used to cooking, you know. And so when he'd come home we--he tried to whittle it down but it was still that huge vat. And my sister cook like that today. You go there for Thanksgiving or Christmas I mean there is food, ten of this and ten of that. I mean ten vegetables and ten--huge, big pots of stuff. And all delicious, so my sister cooks like my father. But daddy would do--put this meal together, and we would sit at that table and we'd have dinner around six-thirty, seven [o'clock]. And we had, I mean we had an hour and a half of really at it. And what--and I think this is why my sister and I became lawyers, and why my brother is as verbal. Each night it would be somebody's turn to defend themselves. We would pick on--and mamma [Estelle Campbell Jones] and daddy were not excluded. They too would be--each night you know, I remember my first boyfriend I had. And daddy, ooh, he didn't like the idea of my having a little boyfriend. He didn't like the idea at all. I was about fifth--fourteen or fifteen. Didn't like it, and ridiculed that boy three ways from Christmas. And boy had a little car and I would be sitting up in his little jalopy, you know coming there. And one day the car broke down in the middle of the interstate. All my little girlfriends walking home, and I'm outside beside his broken down jalopy and daddy drives by. Of all the people, daddy--my father drives by. Helps get the jalopy going, but that night at the table ooh, he talked about that car and me. I mean daddy didn't joke about it. The jest was at--you know I never rode in that car again. I did what I should have been and went back walking home with my girlfriends from school. You know he just had a--so but no, we would jump on somebody. We would jump on somebody and that person then has--it was five of us, had four other people on them, and they had to defend themselves. And I like the fact that my parents did not exclude themselves. They too you know had their moments, so it was fun. And so, we became verbal, the repartee. My brother has it, you know, that's where I learned it. We just, we was just verbal. And then the poetry, that's where we got the poetry. Mother would say, "Okay, let's see." And she's come up with something you know that--and we'd all try to learn it. Sit there, and we'd all try to work on it. She would go get the book. You know we didn't have Xerox and all then, but we would you know just try to learn it. We'd practice it for a couple of weeks around the house and we--, 'Casey at the Bat' ['Casey at the Bat: A Ballad of the Republic Sung in the Year 1888,' Ernest Thayer]. We'd catch each other in mid-sentence, you know, "It looked extremely rocky for the Mudville Nine that day. The score stood 4-6, but an inning left to play. And so when Cooney died at first and Barrows did the same, a pallor wreathed the features of the patrons of the game. You know Casey at the bat, trying to get Casey to the ball." But--and we would go around the house and come up with a sentence and see if the other person could finish it. And my sister and I still do that, you know. Speaker 1: So there was a lot of camaraderie around the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes. Speaker 1: --around the--? Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: So a lot-- Speaker 2: A lot of it. Speaker 1: So do you think that was the center of the household really was the dining room table? Speaker 2: The kitchen table. Speaker 1: The kitchen table, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: It was the center (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was the center. Speaker 1: --of the house. Speaker 2: It was the center. Story_ID: 571413 Speaker 1: Give me your siblings' names and you know and you and your birth order. But you're--? Speaker 2: Yeah, my--and my brother and sister [Gwendolyn Jones Jackson] would say, "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones], are you crazy? You have no right to give information about us. We haven't authorized you to do anything." My brother is George Daniel Jones, Dr. G. Daniel Jones and he's pastor of Grace Baptist Church [Grace Baptist Church of Germantown] in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in Germantown. He's very--been a pastor for over forty years now so he's very, very seasoned and well respected, you know in his ministries, world of ministries. My sister is a judge. She's a--she's the first African American woman judge in Norfolk [Virginia]. And we joke each other, we say, "Well, the good Lord had to take daddy [George Raymond Jones], 'cause he couldn't have stood this." I mean his heart would have just burst you know with pride. He couldn't have stood the fact that she was up there. So she's judge of the city court and was chief judge for a while, but she's still on the bench. And then there's me. Speaker 1: Can you--and you're in the-- Speaker 2: I'm in the middle (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in the middle, okay. Do you share the attributes of a middle child? Speaker 2: What are they? Speaker 1: I don't know, but they're usually fun (laughter). They say the middle child doesn't find their way, but I don't think that's the case (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no. Speaker 1: --right? Ok (laughter). Speaker 2: No, 'cause I was really the oldest of the girls, and I was the--next to my brother and so I was never--I never saw myself as being between them. I saw myself in relation to each one of them, but not as being in between them, you know. And so I don't know what the characteristics are. Whatever they are, I mean I may have some of them. I don't know. If you tell me what they are then I can respond. But (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But-- Story_ID: 571414 Speaker 1: --Let me ask, your--the--what was your--were you on a street, I mean the name, was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: I'm sorry (laughter). Okay. What was your--do you remember the address 'cause it's a-- Speaker 2: Yes. Here's where we were. Here's where we were. We were living over in a section of town renting an apartment, when I was born. My dad was renting an apartment, upstairs apartment with a sunroom that we could look out on the street. And my father was the one that my grandmother [Sarah Octavia Jones], his mother always depended on. She had these nine kids, six lived to be adults, but my father's name was George Raymond [George Raymond Jones]. Grandma would always depend on George Raymond. George Raymond would get it done, whatever had to be done (unclear). So there was a fire on the farm [in Lawrenceville, Virginia] and the house burned down. No one was harmed, but daddy went up there and assembled a team and built her a new house up there. And this is in the late '40s [1940s], late '40s [1940s]. My mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] was very happy her mother-in-law was situated, but she became irate. "I am living here in an apartment with--," she was pregnant with my sister [Gwendolyn Jones Jackson] at the time--, "with two babies and a third one on the way and you've gone down and built your mother a house. Where is mine?" (Laughter) "Where is mine?" And I--so they began saving, and we're going to get this house. And I remember looking out that porch. One day my father drove up in a big Roadmaster Buick [Buick Roadmaster] with the three holes in the side. He had bought this Buick off somebody. And mother saw this Buick, came and he said, "Estelle, look what I got!" She went off. "What? What do you need a car?" She said, "The bus is fine, we trying to get in a house." She said, "George, we're trying--." She was focused on her house. I didn't see the Buick, you know--that Buick left that week. That Buick left that week. I don't know what happened to it, but we didn't have it. So daddy got the lot, he really was industrious, got the lot, part of town that was developing over there near north of State College [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] up there and built that house. Got a corner lot and built that house. We moved in around '51 [1951], '52 [1952] and you know it--daddy understood gardens and plant, 'cause when he left the railroad that's what he did, plants. And I--we had the most beautiful lawn right there on that corner. And daddy had built this brick cape cod, you know and so mother was pleased. So that was the home that we really had our childhood in, 1035 Majestic Avenue. Speaker 1: And you were how old then? You were about what over--? Speaker 2: Oh no, this was--I was in elementary school [Liberty Park Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Right you were about seven? Speaker 2: I would say that I don't remember exactly how old I was but that's close. Speaker 1: You said it's-- Speaker 2: That's close (laughter). Speaker 1: You said '51 [1951], '52 [1952]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's close. Speaker 1: And now this was a big deal though, when you moved over this-- Speaker 2: Oh this was a big-- Speaker 1: --over to the house. Speaker 2: Oh, big--and big deal. I mean daddy--and it was sweet. He was proud of himself but we--mother was quite proud of him 'cause he, I mean was quite proud of him. He had to deal with the contractor and architect and we--she never had a home. This was the home. And I remember the day we moved, it was so exciting and I think about it now. Here we were on, way on the other side of town. We were about four miles, four or five miles away, okay. My--the movers were coming and my mother had the baby, my sister you know and she and her daddy were going to move with the movers from the apartment. And they said, "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones], you and your brother [George Daniel Jones] get your bicycles and we'll be over there later tonight, but go on over to the house." Now here we are you know children, got our bicycles, my brother and I, and we rode over to the house, new house all right, and let--got in, let ourselves in and when momma and daddy and my little sister showed up late that night with the movers, we were in there asleep on little, on blankets. But that was the world then. You could send the kids off on bicycles and not worry about it. They're going to be there when you get there. And that's what happened, that's how we got over there. Story_ID: 571415 Speaker 1: Tell me about other family times you know in the house. Well, like first of all were there neighbors? Was it a--? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a developing area. Everybody--and it wasn't cookie cutter, 'cause everybody built their own house so everybody had different styles and what have you. And so then the junior high school principal moved over. He built a ranch on another corner you know and then the-- Speaker 1: Do you remember his name? Speaker 2: Yes, Preston, Albert Preston. Mr. Preston was my middle school principal and so he lived a block over. And then you had Dr. Wilson [ph.] the M.D., lived up on another corner, and you had--you had teachers moving out there and you know it was called Broad Creek plat, P-L-A-T. And it's a route--it's about ten blocks or so from Norfolk State College [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] now, that's where it is, in the heart of the African American community, still there. Speaker 1: Well wouldn't that have been sort of considered a middle class you know, sort of stretch there, right? Speaker 2: It was. It was. Daddy [George Raymond Jones] had leaped from where he was. And it was a leap. Story_ID: 571416 Speaker 1: You know I'm curious too. Your father [George Raymond Jones] was a Pullman porter, now. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What was his schedule 'cause you, you know it sounds like-- Speaker 2: He had to go. Speaker 1: --he was always there. I mean you know, you have-- Speaker 2: No, I know with the cooking and all. But no, but he was fortunate to be able to get a local, a run from Norfolk, Virginia to Roanoke, Virginia and that means he would leave one night, a Monday night. He'd be gone Tuesday but he was back Wednesday morning, you know. Then if he had back to back shifts then he would have to leave Thursday night, be gone Friday, he's back Saturday morning. So he kept that run for years. Now initially when he got the job as a Pullman porter he'd go way out to Salt Lake City [Utah] and he was, California, everywhere on this train. But as time went on he had that run, that Nor- Norfolk/Roanoke run which enabled him to have a family life you know which was a good thing. Speaker 1: Now did he--do you remember stories he told about his experiences there, you know the--? Speaker 2: Yeah I do. Speaker 1: Can you--? Speaker 2: The level of the racism was just thick as a--I mean it was just, you know the Pullman porters, how they would--you had the conductors who were right--white, the Pullman porters who were black, you know. And the Pullman porters were--although, in our community was the first black trade union and all, but you know they were the ones that they're the servants on these trains, that's what they were doing. You know they would--they were kowtowing to the white passengers you know who had money and resources. They were getting shoes shined and doing--but that's what they were doing. But just like our folks, you know in the '50s [1950s] and all, they graduated from college and all, well the best they could do was get a job in the post office. So the postmen were something to really look up to, and that's why the Pullman porters (unclear) because you know it was hard to get those jobs. You know they--the pay was well, 'cause they were unionized you know but--and they weren't--they were treated you know--people will say to me, "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones], it's part of the culture of the time." But I have a problem adjusting to how ingrained racism is in society. And it was--it's palpable now, but it was much more in your face there. I mean it's with us now. All you got to do is open your eyes and look around and you see it. But there you--there was no escape. There was no escape and so that--but yet, within that environment you know, we had home and we had family you know. And that sort of protected you from the buffers from without. It gave you something to fight back with. You know I think that's why I ended up going to the Peace Corps [sic.] in Virginia, 'cause I didn't feel there was any situation that I couldn't handle. I just had--it was a false sense I'm sure, I'm sure--but I felt that way. And so that's why I did all of these things 'cause I didn't have fear. I didn't have fear. And that came from my parents. Story_ID: 571417 Speaker 1: Do you remember anything that went wrong on the job that he [Jones' father, George Raymond Jones] was upset about or had, you know wanted to fight against (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes. Oh yes. Speaker 1: Can you--? Speaker 2: I mean there was a time that you know often, there were white females who would accuse my father and I--of being fresh. Now my father, like most men you know, most men who are--who see a woman who is attractive and all, you know they, some way they're going to respond. Maybe to themselves, they won't have an outward response but they're going to respond to it. And--but my father knowing, that the livelihood of his children and his wife [Estelle Campbell Jones] depended upon his decorum, had too much sense to have casual flirtations. He had too much sense for that. So a couple of times he got accused and the union was able to deal with it you know, and it didn't affect him. He was able to move on. But that has always you know made, it made me aware when I first came to legal [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] first as a lawyer, the plight of African American men and what men can endure when a woman makes a false claim. When a woman makes--it's an awful thing to do to a man. And so I come at it from that, you know. And I you know I think about all the death penalty cases I handled with men on death row for allegedly raping white women, throughout the South. When I became a lawyer that's what it was. And that's where I spent the first four years as a lawyer, fighting that, you know. So my father's experience I think shaped me in that 'cause he would come home and the union had to go to bat and blah, blah, blah, blah. So he had the--and then he had a couple of experiences--but they had a pleasant experience. He would come home and somebody gave him a big tip. That was a big deal. You know you could buy a week's groceries for eight dollars, then. I mean money was--you know eight dollars you'd buy a week's groceries and daddy would get a big tip and just be just tickled, you know. Speaker 1: Now do you--you said that A. Philip Randolph you know visited the home. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you remember occasions of what that was about? You know were you aware--? Speaker 2: It was some issue. It was some union issue, something that they were trying to get accomplished in the next contract you know, 'cause you know my father was--folks gravitated around him. You know he had views and opinions and he, I don't think he was an officer of the union, he just, you know--when the train would come back into town, everybody would say, "Come on over," you know. And they'd come over and sit at the table and do whatever they were doing. We--mother would make sure we disappeared, you know. They had whatever conversations they had. Story_ID: 571418 Speaker 1: Do you remember any arguments that your parents had about his work or anything like that? Did that ever come about? Speaker 2: Let me see. I'm trying to think of the things my parents argued about. And they did argue, I mean they argued, trying to think of some of the things. Mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] was not working when we were born, see and she never had enough money. She'd just tell daddy [George Raymond Jones], I don't have enough money. And if she asked him for some more he'd say, "Well, I gave you two dollars last week. I gave you two dollars last week!" And that would just--see 'cause she was very good with money. My mother is not expensive and she could--she knew how to make a dollar stretch 'cause she would often tell us I'm a child of the Depression [Great Depression]. Well she was a young woman when the Depression hit. So they--she knew how to stretch a dollar but she never, she just you know she just needed some pocket money to do the things that a woman has to do. And she never, she just didn't--and so she and daddy would fight about that. She would say you don't, you--and he had it, but he would have a certain amount in his mind that she's supposed to have and he would give her that. And then my mother got so sick of that 'cause see when they married, 'member she was teaching school. She was used to having her own money. She got so sick of that 'cause that was the root of the problem. I know that her mother, my grandmother [Lulu Campbell] told her, "Estelle, you need to go back to start substitute teaching." And grandma told her, "You need to go back and start," so she did. Mamma went back, started subbing you know my sister was about--soon after we moved into the new house mother started subbing. And she had been out you know since the birth of my brother. So she had all those years out. Went back and started subbing, substitute teacher. So finally grandma told her a few years later, "Now you need to get your certificate so you can get on in the system for--." Mother then walked around the corner to Norfolk State College [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] to take the courses. She walked around and walked back 'cause she's smart, made A's and everything, got her certificate and so by 1957 mother was back in the system. I never heard another argument about money. I may have heard daddy saying, you know, "Estelle you know you gonna pay this bill or pay that bill," pay up 'cause now that she's making money--she said, "Now that I'm making a little money you trying to come after it. You were paying the bill before. Why don't you pay it now?" So you know quality, you can--so that's, that was it. Speaker 1: Now can you share any other stories of growing up in the family, things that you remember maybe around (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But they never had any problem about us, money for the kids. They always agreed on us. Tuitions, shoes. "Estelle, Dan [George Daniel Jones]," speaking of my brother, "Dan need some shoes." "I know George, I'm taking him down to so and so." I mean they would--our needs came first. Our needs came first. Now they were not frivolous with us. We did not get what we wanted, we got what we needed and that's a big difference. And they knew the difference. They knew the difference. And I remember my sister, little girl wanted a ukulele for Christmas. A ukulele. I understand my mother went all over town but she had a ukulele under the tree. She wanted--Gwen [Gwendolyn Jones Jackson] would hear something you know, and then want it. So she got that ukulele for her, looking for the ukuleles and black doll babies and erector sets for my brother, you know. Story_ID: 571419 Speaker 1: And around holidays, are there holidays that you remember specifically? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Which one? Speaker 2: I remember. I remember. Speaker 1: Can you--? Speaker 2: I remember in the apartment that first erector set my brother [George Daniel Jones] got, the big Ferris wheel and erector set and my father [George Raymond Jones] was more excited about it than my brother. You know daddy had his--you know but yeah bicycles. I remember my father teaching me how to ride a bicycle, you know and I--my first bicycle, my first two-wheeler, the two-wheeler and we were out you know and he was behind me you know and I went--and so he said you can do this. I said I'm wobbling. I said no I can't daddy. I'm hearing yes you can! Stop saying no you can't get it. And I had been riding for the longest time by myself not realizing he had let it go. He was way back there on the other end of the street 'cause you know--he--so he, he taught us all how to drive. Taught us all how to drive, it was three of us, you know. Speaker 1: So it was really wholesome growing up, really when you think about it? Speaker 2: It really was. Speaker 1: Very wholesome. Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: It was a foundation. It was foundational, that's what it was, you know. It was foundational. I mean, mamma [Estelle Campbell Jones] and daddy had their issues and as I said mostly about money and they could have their arguments you know (unclear). But we knew that they loved us, that they both did, you know and we knew that they'd do what they could for us, you know. Story_ID: 571420 Speaker 1: Now elementary school, where did you go to elementary school? Speaker 2: I went to--when we moved into the new house I went to the elementary school around the--J. Cox--not J. Cox, Liberty Park Elementary School [Norfolk, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay. And you started in school in what, in--? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I told you when we moved into the new house. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is history. Speaker 2: I went into elementary school. Speaker 1: Okay, this is history. Okay. Speaker 2: I went to elementary. I was first grade in elementary school. Speaker 1: Okay so--okay I see. Speaker 2: And when I was in elementary--and that's one of the reasons they moved when they did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you go to kindergarten? Speaker 2: Did I go to kindergarten? I don't think I did. Mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] tried to get me into elementary school a year earlier and she had me in when we were living in the apartment. I was five and she had me in 'cause my birthday is in March and you had to wait a whole year or something so she was eager to get me in. But the lady up the street had a son who was my age and she couldn't get her son in so she told on me. And mamma had to pull me out. Mamma didn't speak to that woman for twenty years. Anyway so she had to pull me out 'cause she had gotten me in, in a year. So then when we moved that's the reason they moved when they did because they wanted me to start in the elementary school. So I, when I entered the first grade then I skipped the second grade. Teacher had skipped me second grade and so then I went on to third. And so I had a chance to skip to fourth, but mother thought the fourth was too important. You know obviously you get some things in there, whatever. So she said, "Skipping one grade is enough, Sister." We had to--called--my nickname was Sister. "You stay," you know, so that's what I did. Speaker 1: Now why was your nickname Sister? Speaker 2: 'Cause my brother [George Daniel Jones] when I was born called me Sister. He didn't--Sister, Sister so I became Sister. Story_ID: 571421 Speaker 1: So were you a precocious child? Speaker 2: My mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] would say I had--daddy [George Raymond Jones] would say I had a whole lot of mouth. "Watch your mouth Sister, you got too much mouth. Your mouth will get you in trouble." And he was right, he'd say, "Watch your mouth. You know, stop sometimes and think. Don't talk all the time." But yes. Yes, I would do things that I thought were imminently reasonable and not understand why they didn't agree. Like I came home one time and I was locked out. I had left my key or misplaced my key and I was a little--there--the windows had six little panes in them on the porch and I figured I could break one of the little panes right over the lock. Just--not break the whole window but just one of the little squares and then reach in and unlock it and pull it which is what I did. And I didn't see what the problem was. All they got to do is replace the little pane. That way I'm not outside. Mamma said, "You wait 'til your daddy gets home. You wait 'til he gets home." I said--daddy came in from Roanoke [Virginia] and: "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] broke the window." "What?" "Elaine broke the window." And I tried to explain to them and they didn't see it my way and I never will forget that. I said, "I don't understand. What is the problem?" My daddy said, "'Cause you don't break things that don't belong to you," you know. "You don't own this house, you live here. You don't have a right to break anything. You sit on that porch and you wait until your brother [George Daniel Jones] or somebody comes here but you don't break anything you know." So I lost all kinds of stuff for about a month. I lost all kinds of privileges. I lost all kinds and I just, the injustice of it all. I (unclear) the injustice of it all. Speaker 1: But now this, you know this is curious 'cause in elementary school [Liberty Park Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia] you tell the story, I think either you were eight or you were ten-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --about the--were you eight or were you ten? Speaker 2: I was about ten. I was about ten. Speaker 1: Okay, ten. And the story about the-- Speaker 2: The dentist. Speaker 1: The dentist. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So I'm just trying to, you know I think it's a funny--you know it's a funny story. But how did you--? Speaker 2: How do you--but see that's part of-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you make these decisions. I would make--I wonder how my parents suffered you know, endured me really 'cause I was. I was, you know I thought I knew everything. And daddy would say to me sometime, he said, "Now, Sister look," he said, "keep in mind one thing, what you don't know will make another world." He said, "Just what you do not know will make another world, even better than this one so you don't know it all." He would try to get me to, you know. I remember one time he bought home a big skillet, a big iron skillet that he had found somewhere. And I was out cleaning up the yard. Mamma told me to go out and clean the--and I saw this big iron skillet. And I said--and it was rusty you know it turned brown with rust but it was heavy, cast iron skillet. And I said, "This is dirty, what we gonna do with this?" And I threw it away. I threw daddy's skillet away. But about two weeks later he asked me, he was looking around, he said, "Sister did you see a skillet?" I said, "Yes." See you don't lie to him 'cause a lie, all a lie does is compound problems. Now that, they taught us you do not lie. It's better not to answer rather than lie 'cause if you lie you don't remember what you said (unclear). So I told him I said, "Yeah, daddy I saw it and I threw it away." And he just looked at me and shook his head. He just shook his head. I'm making--it was his skillet. I'm making a judgment it's dirty. You know cast iron, that thing had some value. All it had to do was be cleaned and it's--and I don't see how they you know suffered with me. Just don't see how they--and then I wonder if, would I had the patience had I had a child like me? I often wonder that, but they did well. Story_ID: 571422 Speaker 1: Now tell the story about the dentist. Now this dentist, the dentist, what was his name? Speaker 2: I, I was-- Speaker 1: Was he on your same block? Speaker 2: No, he was between school and home. Speaker 1: And school was how far away? Speaker 2: School was, oh it was Liberty Park Elementary [Liberty Park Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia]. It was a good little job. It was about a mile walking. It was about a mile and I had this horrendous toothache. Oh, too much candy or something, I had this toothache and was killing me, was killing me. So rather than go home and discuss this with some adult about what to do about this tooth I was passing the dentist office. I'm trying to remember the dentist. I know his name, it will come to me. I passed his office and I said well let me go in here. This is a dentist. Dentists deal with teeth. I walked in and I said, "I have an awful toothache," you know. "My name is so and so and so. I live such and such a place." I got an appointment right then. The dentist put me in the chair, did x-rays, you know saw what the problem was. I don't know what he did. He did something. He did something. He didn't pull the tooth. He packed it or he did something. I think it was a temporary thing or whatever and I got some relief and all and I went on home. He then, I don't know about two weeks later he sends my parents [Estelle Campbell Jones and George Raymond Jones] a bill. And I mean it was not an inexpensive bill. It was--remember you could buy groceries for $8 a week. So that bill was about $20, $25, something like that you know. When mamma got it, she said, "What is this?" I said, "Oh, I went--I dropped by the dentist, blah, blah, blah, blah." "You did what?" Yeah. Yeah. Showed it to my father, they both looked, they said, "Look, we're not paying this. This is not our bill. It's not our--we didn't go to the dentist. You didn't ask us anything about a dentist. We're not paying it." They just put it some, put it aside just ignored it. Pretty soon somebody came on the door from downtown. You know they used to tack the little summons on the door when you haven't paid the bill. So they tacked this summons on the door and the summons came, summonsing my--one of my parents to appear in court over this bill 'cause the doctor had sued over it. Story_ID: 571423 Speaker 1: You were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had a vibrant black press in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] in the United States, especially the South. And so the--one of the leading black newspapers was the Journal--the Norfolk Journal and Guide [New Journal and Guide]. And the Guide came out weekly and it covered what was going on in our community. And in that, you could see what was happening: "This person was killed," you know, saying, "This person lost his job for so and so and so." You could read and we would read the Guide. We would, you know we would get the Guide so we knew what was going on in that you know. And then you, you'd hear your father [George Raymond Jones] talking about what he experienced on the railroad. You know so you weren't isolated from it. You knew there was a world of segregation out there, on the bus. I saw the white and colored fountains, you know. My mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] would go downtown with us. We couldn't try on school clothes in the stores, 'cause we were black. In the shoe store there was a section for black children from other--and our school kids, blacks here, whites there. On the bus, we had to go to the back of bus, going to Sunday school on Sunday morning. So it was reinforced everywhere in my world. I could see the difference and the distinctions made. And you, you would wonder, you'd say, "Well what is this?" I mean it angered me is what it did. I--it got me, it really angered me you know. I saw capriciousness, arbitrariness, all of those things, I didn't know how to put a word to. But I got really angry cause all of these people I knew and loved I knew how worthy they are. And to be treated by the larger society like this and my mother's two brothers in the [U.S.] Army, in the Korean conflict [Korean War] and here they're in uniform and we can't do certain things? Oh no, no I was enrage--I was a little eight, nine year old pile of rage. I was enraged. And even then I mean I knew, I said, "I have to do something about this. I have to do something. I don't know what it is but I have to do something about it." Story_ID: 571424 Speaker 1: Now I want to go back to the dentist though. What did the --? Speaker 2: Yeah. So the dentist--so mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] and daddy [George Raymond Jones] pay the bill. They tacked the notice on the door. When the notice came my father looked at it and said, "I am not--"; had the date on it. "I am not going to lose my trip to California on a--," he had a special trip to take to California on the railroad--, "to go down to this court." And mamma said "I'm going to school. I'm going to school so Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones], you have a problem." Said, "God look at these people, why don't they understand?" You know my brother [George Daniel Jones] and I would often say parents, "Y'all be the parents. Don't make us the parents. I'm a child. I don't know. You--." So daddy said, "What I will do--," there was a person who worked with him, an African American male who worked with daddy on different things. They did flowers or flants- plants. Now he said, "I'll send Mr. Newkirk [ph.] down there with you, but you just have to go down there and explain to the judge that your mother and I are working and tell them whatever it is you did." Speaker 1: Because it was clear that you had done it. You had done-- Speaker 2: Oh I, oh, oh I had gone. I, no, there's no doubt, there is no doubt about that, that I had gone to the dentist without permission. There's no doubt about it. And they weren't paying it. So what I'm gonna do? I didn't have $25 or $20, whatever it was. So Mr. Newkirk and I go down to the courthouse on the day, on the appointed day and here I am scared to death. Scared to death. They called the case. The dentist is not there, the dentist's lawyer is there. The judge is up there. So I had--the judge asked me that, you know what happened. I told him I had gone to the dentist, blah, blah. So he said to me, he said to me, he said--first the lawyer spoke and said what we owed him, that I had come to the dentist and all and the judge looked at me and said, "Did your, did you have your parents' permission to go to the dentist?" And I said to myself--this all went through my mind in a matter of seconds. I said if I tell him yes, I had the--my parents' permission, it makes me look more obedient and more like a child in control of her senses. If I tell him no, you know I didn't have my parents' permission, it makes me look like I'm belligerent and wayward and do what I want to do. I said, "It makes me in a bad light if to tell this man no." But then the voice--I got a few seconds to answer. The voice says to me, "Tell the truth. Got to tell the truth. Can't stay up here and lie." And I said, "No, your honor I didn't." He said, "You didn't have your parents' per-." I said, "No, sir." He turned to the dentist's lawyer and said, "Does your client have the habit of doing full mouth x-rays of eight and ten year old who comes into their office without checking with parents? If that is his practice then he needs to change it. Case dismissed!" Oh, so Elaine's first victory. You know I was amazed. I said, "You know truth will carry you a long way. It will carry you a long way." If I had tried to make myself look good and not told the truth, I would have lost the case on a lie. Would have lost the case on a lie. So I came home and explained it to--they all celebrated, the family--we all, the whole family celebrated. "Elaine won." Told everybody at school, "Elaine won her case." So then I said, "I'm gonna be a lawyer. That's what I'm gonna do." Story_ID: 571425 Speaker 1: Tell me how that, the courtroom felt that day and-- Speaker 2: It was, you know it was a high bench you know it was wooden railings and all and you had to sit over here and it was very intimidating because high ceilings, you know. Antebellum look of a court, high desk, very high desk with judge sitting behind it in full robe, I mean you know. And here me and Mr. Newkirk [ph.] you know scared to death you know. So it was quite intimidating, but I won. I won. That, I mean I--what that did to this ten year old was something. I mean it set me. I said, "I'm gonna be a lawyer. I'm gonna be a lawyer"-- Speaker 1: Now do you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) "'cause I can do this. I'm gonna be a lawyer." Speaker 1: Do you remember the trip home with you (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I couldn't believe it. And Newkirk was just grinning with my father [George Raymond Jones], he was just grin--he, I really explained to him what was happening. I said, "We won Mr. Newkirk, we won. He dismissed the case. He dismissed the case." He said, "What does that mean?" I said, "That means it's over. It's finished, you know." And when I got home and I told my mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] and brother [George Daniel Jones] and everybody was just ecstatic, they were all ecstatic, dismissed. And daddy, "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] don't you do that anymore. Don't you do that anymore." But they taught me a valuable lesson. But--and they had no idea what the outcome was. I think about that today. I said, "Now would I send my ten year old daughter down there by herself?" I don't know, they taught us something. Speaker 1: Now did you--did your parents go to that dentist afterwards, after--do you know if that, if you--? Speaker 2: I don't know who--yes. No, I think they even sent me to him. Yes 'cause I remember him taking out a wisdom tooth when I was sixteen, that same dentist. And it taught him a lesson too. See he saw an opportunity. And I was ten. He shouldn't have taken a full set of x--mouth x-rays, he shouldn't have done that. And one phone call to my house, and get specific instructions as to what to do with me. Or tell me to go home and come back with a note. Do something. But no, we--no, no we continued to use him. I mean it was a fair--you know he hadn't done what he was supposed to do and I did something I wasn't supposed to do. So it was-- Story_ID: 571426 Speaker 1: Now where did you go to junior high school [in Norfolk, Virginia]? Speaker 2: J. Cox Junior High School [ph.], was it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And J. Cox was a school that when my [maternal] grandfather [Daniel Campbell] died the school closed, cause Mr. J. Cox--it's named after, it's called D.G. J. Cox and it was named after the, a quite--an African American businessman in the community, and he and my grandfather were great friends, he and my grandfather. So when grandfather died, the school closed. But D.G.J. Cox Junior High is where I went. Speaker 1: Now were there any teachers--? Speaker 2: Yes. My mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] even taught me for one semester. She taught my brother, too. Speaker 1: Oh so she-- Speaker 2: During her subbing. Speaker 1: So was she teaching--she didn't teach in elementary school, she taught in the junior, in the middle? Speaker 2: Middle school. See, she did both elementary and middle school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So she had a long term, she got on in '57 [1957], '58 [1958] but she had a long term assignment and she had my brother in that long term assignment. And Dan [George Daniel Jones] would come home, he said, "Mamma, why are you so mean?" He asked her, he said, "Mamma why are you so mean to me in school?" Cause she was awful. And she sat him down she said, "Son, let me explain." She said, "Everybody knows you're my son." And she said, "They expect favoritism, anything I do." So she said, "I am overcompensating, letting the other kids know that you're not getting a break." And she said, "That's what I'm doing." He said, "Well explain it to me so I'll know. Explain it to me." So he understood. He understood. So she said, she--but she was a, she had--she was in that class for a while. The lady had--was very ill and was a, you know, long term replacement. I think this was just before she got on regular. Speaker 1: Now junior high was it seventh, eighth and ninth, was that--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was junior high. That was middle school. Middle school now is what, what is middle, seventh, eighth and ninth? Speaker 1: It just depends sometimes (unclear). Speaker 2: Eighth and ninth sometimes, right. But no it was junior, seventh, eighth and ninth. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you--how were you forming as a person though? You know we know this experience with the court but what other things are influencing you as a, you know as a young person? Speaker 2: I think lot of reading. It was a local library, local public library near the black YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association]. And we would be in that, we would go in that library on Saturday morning, we couldn't get there fast enough. We're in there reading every book in that library, 'cause it was not a big room, about this--half of this size maybe, it was small. So you know they had the mysteries and the (unclear) so reading was a very important part of everything. You know I was reading Ayn Rand, 'The Fountainhead,' not even knowing what I was reading. But I was reading it 'cause I thought it was a story. I would get it and I was supposed to sleep and I'm under the cover trying to read, you know 'cause the lights supposed to be out. So I did a lot of reading growing up just for the love of reading. My sister [Gwendolyn Jones Jackson] is a bit of a bibliophile. She loves books today. She loves books. She--you give her a book, she's a happy woman. So my brother in law has it easy. He'll just find a book and give it to her. She's happy. Lot of friends, Girl Scouts, Brownie scouts you know the activities in the community, lot of hard playing outside. Lot of outside activity, bicycle, tree climbing. I fell off and broke my left arm you know and just you know bit of a tomboy running around and really enjoying it. And I--lot of good friendships and association, lot of kids in the neighborhood, lot of kids in the neighborhood, you know. Story_ID: 571427 Speaker 1: And what about church? Where did church you know play a role and you were and were--you were at your [maternal] grandfather's [Daniel Campbell]? Speaker 2: At grandfather's church [New Calvary Baptist Church, Norfolk, Virginia], yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So grandmother [Lulu Campbell] would be sitting up there every Sunday. Grandfather had died and so there was a way I was supposed to act in church you know 'cause you know I usually failed to act that way you know. But once we messed up and mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] knew about it, I remember one time she took my brother [George Daniel Jones] out back to the vestibule of the church you know he came in and he was perfect after that. Mother didn't take a lot of nonsense from us in terms of how we are to behave outside and I think because we were very verbal, active kids, she had to assert herself. She had--in no uncertain terms we had to know that when she said shut up and sit down, that's what she meant. But she asserted that authority you know. Speaker 1: Now do you remember any songs associated with church at all? Any song like when you think of it that takes you back? Speaker 2: Now I cannot sing at all. I can't carry a tune in a bucket. I can't do anything with a tune. But yeah, oh (unclear) 'Jesus, Keep Me Near the Cross', 'Amazing Grace,' all the old hymns, all the old hymns. I can see people now patting their feet and rocking. And I heard a lot of those same hymns when I went up to Lawrenceville [Virginia] up to the country to the farm in the summertime. Speaker 1: Now you--church service would start at what time and end--? Speaker 2: Church service on Sunday morning, Sunday school was around 9:30, church service around quarter to 11, 11:00. Speaker 1: And what time would church service end? Speaker 2: It--oh, at--on Sundays they would have funerals after church and grandmother liked to stay to every funeral 'cause she knew everybody who, you know. So sometimes we didn't get home 'til 3:00 you know but my brother got to the point now he would like to stay the funerals with grandmother. You know I wanted to go home. So mother would--I would get home early. I wouldn't have to stay, that was optional, but I had to get up and go to Sunday school. Speaker 1: Now did you participate in any bible camp or BYO [sic.]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, we had the bible camps. We had the, what was the name for it? Not bible camp, day school, vacation bible school. Vacation bible school yes, so we went to vacation bible school, we did. Story_ID: 571428 Speaker 1: Now in high school, what's the name of the high school now you went to? Speaker 2: Well we all--no segregation then, I mean no desegregation so everybody was at the same high school. Every black student of high school age in the City of Norfolk [Virginia] was at this high school, Booker T. Washington High School [Norfolk, Virginia]. That's synonymous with being African American, Booker T. Washington High School. I don't care where you lived, you went to Booker T. Speaker 1: Do you know how many students (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they were overcrowded. They were overcrowded. School, oh seriously overcrowded. The school is equipped to handle about oh 1,500, 1,800 students you know, equipped and it had twenty-five, twenty-six hundred. It was packed. It was packed. Packed, overcrowded. Speaker 1: Now they had a track system? Did they have a track system then? Speaker 2: They did. They had business and this and that and then they had prep, college prep. They had-- Speaker 1: And that's where you were? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Were all your sisters and brothers in that, I mean-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, sister [Gwendolyn Jones Jackson] and brother [George Daniel Jones]. Speaker 1: --your sister and brother. Speaker 2: Well yes. My mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] had to work on my brother, 'cause my brother, you know in terms of grades, he was--his attention was not on those grades, they were not. My sister and I were a bit more focused and so she would encourage him a lot and make him study. She would have to, I don't know why. And my brother really began to soar when he went to professional school. When he went to seminary, my brother--cause he had found what he wanted to do and it made all the difference in the world. He was a--so, but in junior high and high, mother had to struggle with him. Speaker 1: Now what were some of your favorite subjects? Speaker 2: Oh, English literature, I enjoyed math. I enjoyed math, trig [trigonometry] and geometry. You know I didn't like political science as much, I don't know why but I didn't care for it as much. But I enjoyed the sciences; physics, chemistry, enjoyed chemistry. What else? Oh, the languages, French you know, was the only language I took. I took German in college but I took French in high school. Speaker 1: And do you--were there teachers that you particularly liked? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Which ones did--? Speaker 2: Oh we had some superb teachers, oh we had--I mean they, remember they had the rule in Virginia in the '30s [1930s] that you teach--you couldn't be married and teach. So my mother had dropped out because she got married and had us. But her contemporaries were there teaching. They were my high school teachers and they were uniformly single. They were single. Those women were single, Ms. S.I. James who taught me geometry. Her sister, J.E. James who taught French you know. They--the--my English teacher you know, so it was--they were single women you know who were in there I don't know, mid-fifties or something, forties, late forties, early fifties, but because they were a product of their time. They were a product of their--but they were superb teachers, oh they were good. They were--and they demanded of us you know and they gave it their all. They helped the parents for the standardized tests you know. They just--I look back on those teachers. Those teachers helped shape and mold you, you know. And so I remember Grace Gregory Ward, my homeroom teacher and she was also my English teacher for one year. And I had to read 'Thanatopsis' [William Cullen Bryant], the poem, the Greek view of death and I had learned 'Thanatopsis' at home. Mother had taught it to us. And so when I got to it in English class, literature class, I already knew it and I read it--she just looked at me in amazement. She's looking at--and I said, "Oh Ms. Ward, I didn't do it, my mother taught us at home," you know. But oh no, those teachers, those high school teachers, oh they were good. Story_ID: 571429 Speaker 1: So this is when--at this point it's nineteen-- Speaker 2: It's nineteen--it's sixty--we're in the '60s [1960s], we're in the '60s [1960s], we're in the mid-'60s [1960s] now, late to mid--no, no. No, no, no, no--yeah we're in the early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Right. Right, now you--are you aware at all about any--I mean what--is Norfolk [Virginia], is--are you aware of any turmoil of any sort or is it you know do you like through the--? Speaker 2: Oh no, we're aware because you know, you had the seg- it hadn't started--city hadn't started you see, and I remember go there, going downtown and seeing some of the college students from the--it wasn't Norfolk State then, it was something. It was the division of Virginia State, Norfolk Division of Virginia State [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]. It wasn't its own, but the students were sitting in at Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] 'cause mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] and I, I remember mother and I were in there in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Norfolk, Virginia]. And I said--students were sitting at the counter. They were just as polite, well dressed and polite. And I remember just as clearly they were sitting there waiting to be served, you know. And nobody--but--and then when they, they would sit there for two or three hours and they'd leave and they just had a regular--they made sure that Woolworths wouldn't get any money. Nobody would patronize Woolworths so that's what they were doing. The cops didn't come and beat them in Norfolk they just, they wouldn't serve them. They just had to sit there, which is what they did, and finally Woolworths closed the counter. Speaker 1: Oh they closed the counter? Speaker 2: They closed the counter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They weren't making money. Story_ID: 571430 Speaker 1: Now when you, when it's time for you to go to college-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that was--so how is, what is the discussion about you know school and where? Speaker 2: Well I didn't apply--I only wanted to go to one school. I wanted to go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Now why? Speaker 2: You know I think the real reason is my mother's sister, Aunt Sarah [Sarah Campbell], her parents couldn't afford--they had the two daughters. Mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] always wanted to go to Howard but her sister was at Howard and they could only afford one. So mother went to Miners Teachers College [Miner Teachers College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] which is right there on Howard's campus so mother is a graduate of Miners Teachers College, 1933. And she always wanted Howard and I think I sort of incorporated it. I said, "Well mamma wanted it and couldn't get it and Howard's a great school so I'm going to go to Howard," and I didn't apply anywhere else. Now, Pat King was a couple of years ahead of me, Patricia King who teaches at Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.]. Pat King and I grew up in Norfolk [Virginia], we're home girls you know. And she, when she came through Booker T. [Booker T. Washington High School, Norfolk, Virginia], you know--brilliant, she was. And she had gone off to, up in Massachusetts. She had gone off to Wheaton [Wheaton College, Norton, Massachusetts], she had gone off to Wheaton that's where she had gone but I didn't apply anywhere else. And I remember I applied to Howard and I was the highest girl in the class. What happened was we had four hundred in that class graduated, graduating and I would have been valedictorian. But what happened is there were these two guys, and one of them was a friend of mine today. There was these two guys who were a grade behind me and you know you get some people who are just brilliant. They just, I mean they're just naturally brilliant. These two made perfect scores on the SAT, I mean they were just brilliant, both of them. And come twelfth grade, they skipped them and put them in my class. And I was outdone. I said wait a minute--competitive. In my class but--and so of course that made me third. I'd rather--and I would say in the class to them 'cause they--one, they became dear friends both of them. I said you see you guys are robots, I'm the human being in this situation. I'm the human being here. I'm the one that studies and applies diligence and does my homework. You guys just have it naturally. So, you shouldn't be competing against me. You should go find the other robots and compete against them, you know. So--and so they both went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Both of them went to Harvard. They applied, they went to Andover Newton [Andover Newton Theological School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts] then they went to Harvard. Me, I didn't want to apply anywhere else. I applied to Howard and didn't hear from Howard. Didn't hear. Didn't hear. Weeks went by. Other people got admitted, I didn't hear, didn't hear. Finally mother said, "It's, something wrong." She just knew it wasn't my fault. See, that's the kind of confidence they had. She knew it so she went to the guidance counselor who--woman lived up the street from us, Ms. Swann [ph.]. I never will forget it. And mamma went out to Booker T. Washington High School and said what--, "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] hasn't heard from Howard. What is it that you guys have failed to do?" That's what--come to find out, Ms. Swann had not sent in my papers. Now I don't know why, but mother was--oh, she oh--I mean she told that--oh, I don't--anyway she had not sent in my papers. So Mr. Preston [Albert Preston] the principal, he had now had moved up. He was high school principal, the one around the corner. He told my mother, "Ms. Jones, we'll make it right." We'll make--so the school then sent in my papers with a letter of apology to Howard asking you know--blah, blah, blah. Howard then came back and said it was too late for full scholarship cause they had--but they would grant admission and a partial scholarship if my parents could pay the rest and then they would look at a full scholarship to see what would happen the following semester if I wanted, still wanted to come. But my mother I mean she and daddy [George Raymond Jones], ooh, they waged war on that high school guidance counselor, Ms. Swann. I don't think mamma ever spoke to her again. I don't--but anyway I went on up to Howard and then I got the full scholarship second semester. Story_ID: 571431 Speaker 1: Now, okay so you're going off to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. Your brother [George Daniel Jones] is the, he's the-- Speaker 2: He's at Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay, he's at Virginia Union. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You're at Howard? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How many years apart? You never said that. Speaker 2: No, we're about--all of us are about three and a half years. Same-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's as if mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] tried to calculate but we're about three, not quite four between each one of us. Speaker 1: And so actually cause that could be you know that's quite--it's not like two years apart, you know. Speaker 2: No, that's three and a half. She spaced that because she--I don't know what she was thinking but three and a half is what we have. Speaker 1: Now you-- Speaker 2: Cause it's seven between my brother and my sister [Gwendolyn Jones Jackson]. Speaker 1: How do you find the environment? Is it--? Speaker 2: Howard? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, Howard was a, oh it was just, it was the best choice for me but there was so much going on at Howard. I mean you know Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] was there then, got into Howard and all of the--I mean this is before '65 [1965]. It's '63 [1963], '64 [1964] up in there. I mean, it's just activity you know and it's a center of learning you know. And I said this is the place for me. And I just--the Civil Rights Movement was in full swing. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to Howard and did our charter day speech you know and it was just so many offerings and students from all over the world, a lot of African students as well, you know. And I can tell on myself, the present president of Howard is in my--was in my class, Swygert [HistoryMaker H. Patrick Swygert], we were in the same class. And so I mean we had all of that going on, and it--and I loved it. And I learned some valuable lessons at Howard, valuable lessons. Speaker 1: What were they? Speaker 2: Oh well one of them was this, I--see you don't take people for granted. I ran for president of the senior class, I think it was or the junior class, president of the junior class and I thought I was a shoe-in, 'cause everybody said, "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] we're going to support you." I didn't put up one poster. I didn't ask one person for a vote. I did not campaign. I thought, I didn't have to campaign. I know everybody. Come election day, I lost big time and some guy who nobody ever heard of became president of that class. Nobody ever heard of him, became president. But he had campaigned. He hadn't taken his classmates for granted, you know and that taught me a valuable political lesson early (unclear) you don't take folks for granted or exult--you don't deserve people's vote if you don't have the sense enough to ask for it. You need to respect people by campaigning if you want a position and tell them why you should have the position. So I deserved to lose and I did. But it was a shocker for me. I couldn't say--I said why did I lose it? Other thing was, Stokely and I had a class together. We took philosophy of art. We--he would come back from his-- Speaker 1: Philosophy of art? Speaker 2: Of art. We--you know Stokely had a--his mind was finely tuned in the arts, music, literature, and you know, painting and sculpture. I mean he just, he had an appreciation for art. And so we had this professor--there were five of us in this course, philosophy of art and we learned about Picasso's [Pablo Picasso] cubist period you know, 'cause you had the school of fine arts right there at Howard. I mean this is Howard, so I'm gonna dabble in something I knew nothing about, and there were about six of us maybe in class. And Stokely would come back from his campaigns in Mississippi and elsewhere and regale us. It was a cathartic experience for him 'cause we weren't there. Maybe we should have been there with him but he was there, a leader in SCLC [sic. Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)] and all. He would come by, and tell us what was going on. We would sit--that's when--we would right in class--now we would get our little art in between and we would see a cubist painting of Picasso and Stokely would say, well I see this in that. You know and would--something would grow out of the latest campaign. So it was just a lot going on, on that campus and I made the right choice to go to Howard. Story_ID: 571432 Speaker 1: We ended it when you were talking about Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and I want to pick it up there. Speaker 2: Oh really? So we were in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: You were in college. Speaker 2: All right. We had made progress. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We'd gotten in college. Speaker 1: I thought I had you in law school. That's what--okay. Speaker 2: That's the first twenty, twenty-one, twenty years. Speaker 1: Right. So I'm going to start out by slating it. My name is Julieanna Richardson. I'm the interviewer and Neculai Burghelea is the inter- is the videographer. And I'd like you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us. Speaker 2: My name is Elaine R. Jones [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones], E-L-A-I-N-E, middle initial R. for Ruth, last name Jones, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay. And today's date? Speaker 2: March 6, 2003. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Two thousand seven [2007]. Speaker 1: Two thousand-- Speaker 2: And yes, four days after my birthday. That's right. Speaker 1: Happy birthday, oh! Speaker 2: Why, I thank you everybody (laughter). Speaker 1: The joking and-- Speaker 2: See the significance, which I accord to these proceedings. Speaker 1: What is, what year are we? Speaker 2: We're in the year 2007. (Laughter) You'll have to get that from your archives. It's clear from the documents. Speaker 1: Okay, good. Okay. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And I'd like to also have you state our location? Speaker 2: Oh, we're located in New York City [New York, New York], at 4 Times Square, at the offices of Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP], who were gracious enough to give us the space. Speaker 1: That's right. Now-- Speaker 2: On Tuesday afternoon. Speaker 1: That's right. Story_ID: 571433 Speaker 1: I want to begin by having us, you know go back. We were really in your Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] years. You had talked about your campaign that you had--you know the lesson of the campaign, and being prepared, and you ended really by talking about Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture]. And you both were taking I think-- Speaker 2: Philosophy of art. Speaker 1: --of art class which I found totally fascinating. And I'd like to have you talk more about Stokely Carmichael. Speaker 2: Howard, the years that I was there, 1961 to 1965 were the activist, some of the most activist period in the Civil Rights Movement that there was. I mean if we look back and see they were the years of the Mississippi Freedom Riders and Goodman [Andrew Goodman], Chaney [James Chaney] and Schwerner [Michael Schwerner], and the sit-ins started in '61 [1961]. When I went in--took college, the sit-ins started. Sixty-five [1965] was the Great Society speech which President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] gave to my class, graduation class in 1965. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to our campus. It was a period of real turmoil. Bull Connor and the dogs in Birmingham [Alabama] was in the '60s [1960s]. The Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] was trying to desegregate institutions of higher education throughout the South, [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault trying to get into the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] and Vivian Malone Jones, University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], and Harvey Gantt [Harvey Bernard Gantt] getting into Clemson [Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina]. So all of those cases were going very strongly. Thurgood Marshall had left the LDF in 1961 and he was then on the court of appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit]. But LDF was continuing to litigate and trying to make Brown v. Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] a reality. So Howard University, being known as sort of the mecca of black educational achievement really was--it is the home of many of the sororities or fraternities that got started there. And so when I arrived fresh in 1961 from Norfolk, Virginia and I--and going to college was really, if I remember my first trip away from home alone, showing up on the campus at Howard. And therefore at Howard you had, really our best and our brightest African American students there. And so therefore when the Civil Rights Movement got into full swing you had many of the students in Howard engaged. Stokely Carmichael, you know, many called him a radical. He was--I mean he believed--he was from Trinidad [Trinidad and Tobago], I think Stokely was from. But I mean had a fervent sense you know, of justice. And Stokely was one of the founders of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC], so he was not there, more than he was there. It was not until my junior year you know, that I really bucked--I worked on a desk in the dormitory so in the dormitory, the girls dormitory, it was called the Quadrangle [Harriet Tubman Quadrangle]. There were five dormitories and only one way in. And so on the weekends [HistoryMaker] Elaine Jones was on the desk. All the fellows coming to see their girlfriends had to come through me, you know. And I remember a many instances I was--I would see a face and I would just automatically push a button on the switchboard on the switchboard because I knew who that face was going to ask for. But then I could tell a couple had broken up 'cause when I would go to push the button he would say, "Oh, no, no, no. Not that button, a different button." So it was around 1963 where (unclear) and SNCC and all that activity was in full bloom. And so, the students were involved and they wasn't more than 10 percent of the campus, but they were really an active 10 percent. The (unclear) and the whole--and the boots and the--and when they would come back from their exploits in the South, you know, it--then they would go to class, you know. And Stokely was one of the best known, you know, of that group. And so he and I, I'm thinking it was my senior year, took a class together and it was called Philosophy of Art. It was only six of us in the class. And that's how I got to know him a little better, but as a student. I didn't know Stokely as the activist, 'cause I was not in Mississippi and that. And so we enjoyed the class because philosophy of art, you know learning about Picasso [Pablo Picasso] and the impressionists and modernists and the cubism period and just sitting around--we would read books on what they did, and then discuss it with one another and discussing art. It was a wonderful experience. Story_ID: 571434 Speaker 1: But I think what happened to me, you know while in college, I absorbed all of the--all of the struggles, I absorbed all of the history because, 'cause it was Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. And I think what happened to me is, upon graduation, I really wanted to get away. It was as if I was overwhelmed by it all, you know and seeing it. And I wanted to, I think I wanted to escape it. And the reason I wanted to escape it is because, I wanted some perspective on it. And I knew there was a large world out there, larger than the world that I knew. My world was very small and so Mr. President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] inaugurated the Peace Corps while he was president, I don't know, '62 [1962], '63 [1963] up in there [sic. 1961]. And so when I graduated in '65 [1965], I decided I wanted to go to the Peace Corps This is the--my last year of college I decided that's what I wanted to do. I wanted to get away from it. I wanted to experience another culture, other people, and then I wanted to bring that perspective back, because I knew I wanted to do law; but I didn't know enough even to begin my study of law, in my view. So I signed up and I selected my country. They asked you to select your country, and I selected Turkey. I did not select Africa, or any country in Africa, because I knew one day I would go to Africa on my own and experience Africa and all of the different cultures within Africa. So I asked for Turkey, because it's a country I knew least about and I got--received an assignment. And I graduated and was shipped off in July to study, studied at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] for a while, the language and the culture. Then in August, end of August I was in Istanbul [Turkey], Bebek college [Robert College]. Speaker 2: And this is what year? Speaker 1: Summer of '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965]. Story_ID: 571435 Speaker 1: Let me go back a couple of things. On the class with Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], I just want a couple of things with Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. What was he like then in that class? Because you have, you know you--one thinks of Stokely and the image of Stokely you know in the black, you know with the black power with the glasses, sunglasses. You, it's hard to think that he was in a class that you were studying-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --you know the classics and the-- Speaker 2: That's the side that I saw of him. I saw a side--I knew it was a--it was the size of the student, the young man with a brilliant, engaged mind. Stokely was very, very bright; very bright and articulate. And I think even in that class he relaxed, because he himself escaped. When you're sitting and talking about Picasso [Pablo Picasso] you know, you're not thinking about Bull Connor or you're not thinking about Mississippi, the Freedom Riders. I mean, you're thinking about Picasso. So it was escapism in a sense, escaping into arts. Escaping in the arts. And he was engaging, he was witty. Stokely had a great sense of humor. You know, he had a full laugh, a full laugh, you know. And so, that's the side that I saw. Speaker 1: Now who taught that class, do you remember? Speaker 2: You know I'm trying to remember my professor? Speaker 1: Was it--? Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember my professor. Speaker 1: Okay. I was thinking I might know--I can't remember. Speaker 2: I have to--I can go back and look at my transcript and pick it up years ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you remember (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And needless to say we all did well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) All seven, all six of us did well. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 571436 Speaker 1: Now what, do you remember your graduation, the day of graduation? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: You talk about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 1: I want to know who you know your family, I want to know-- Speaker 2: Our graduation speaker I said was, President Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] it was a big doing, big goings on. And I'm trying to think, who came to my graduation. Did my parents come? I know my brother [George Daniel Jones] came. I don't remember my mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] and father [George Raymond Jones] at my graduation. I think--I don't remember them there. I don't think--I think my sister [Gwendolyn Jones Jackson] graduated from high school. Speaker 1: The same time? Speaker 2: Same time, same date or something because we had the--let me see. I remember one graduation my sister skipped to come to my graduation and I'm trying to think. No, no I must have it wrong 'cause she always reminds me of it. She missed her high school graduation. She did come! They came all up to my graduation. She missed her high school graduation and I've been paying a price for that for the last forty years (laughter). But no they did come. They did come and my brother--it was a big--my mother had always wanted to go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and her family didn't have much money, and so she had a sister who was--Aunt Sarah [Sarah Campbell] was twelve months older and Aunt Sarah went to Howard, and mother went to Miners Teachers College [Miner Teachers College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] which is right there on the Howard's campus almost, the Teachers College. So I think my going to Howard was part of my mother's dream, is also I wanted to go. So my mother went to Howard vicariously through me. So the graduation was a big deal. Story_ID: 571437 Speaker 1: Now you had already decided you were going to Istanbul [Turkey] by the time you graduated (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: And had been accepted? Speaker 2: I knew--I had applied and accepted to the Peace Corps. Speaker 1: What did your parents think of that? Speaker 2: Not much. Not much at all. You know, they liked to keep their children close; and as I said when I went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], that was my first trip alone away from home. You know I went to Howard, I was seventeen. And this was my way of I think, breaking out. I, as I look back you know I'm not the psychologist, but I would think I had to make a big break in order to have some independence. Wasn't running from my folks and my family, 'cause I love them dearly; but I wanted to strike out on my own so to speak, and my mother thought nothing of it. My father [George Raymond Jones] thought even less of that, even less. But they didn't try to stop me, you know they just sort of resigned themselves to it, and mother [Estelle Campbell Jones] said she just had to stay on her knees for two years. My brother [George Daniel Jones] got married [to Geraldine Saunders Jones]. He was scheduled to get married in November of '65 [1965], so I missed his wedding 'cause I was in the Peace Corps and I couldn't come back. And he and his wife are still married you know. So that was a big doing for the--big thing for the family that marriage coming up in November. Speaker 1: Now you said you were trained to--I want to understand a little bit about how the Peace Corps was structured, what kind of training you know how many people were there, who was in your class, were there other--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was called--we were the eighth group to go to Turkey. It was called Turkey 8 and there were two African American women in my Peace Corps group--two African American women in my Peace Corps group. And we--there were ooh, of us I would think there were--there weren't, we weren't big. We were about fifty--fifty. I didn't know, her name was Sandra [ph.], I'm trying to remember her last name--and we went to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and we stayed there for six weeks, and was intense learning on the Turkish culture: what not to do, what to do you know how to, you know--and then there's also language. Now I'm not--usually been very strong in language, but I had to get a certain level of proficiency in order to be able to make it, to go because it was a selection (unclear). Although I had been selected, I had to been selected to train, and if they didn't think you were doing well you didn't get selected to go, you know. So I had to apply myself and I think as part of going up in high school and I took French. I took French throughout high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Norfolk, Virginia], but we didn't have language labs. We didn't have the kind of, where you had to orally use the language. You know we studied the language, and it--and we wrote the language, but we didn't speak the language. And when you don't have that I think that's where it was difficult for me in--at Princeton with the oral part of the language. But they knew I understood it, 'cause I mean I did well on any examination on the Turkish language. And so I think they took a chance on me, and so then they gave me the immersion in Istanbul at Robert College so that was another eight weeks in Robert College. And so you know it was intense, I mean it was intense at Princeton. I mean we went to class you know every day except Sunday and we went four hours in the morning, three hours in the afternoon. So it was, it--we--it was a full immersion. Story_ID: 571438 Speaker 1: Now did you, so really the Peace Corps had a very well structured program? Speaker 2: They did. Speaker 1: It's--okay. Speaker 2: They did. Speaker 1: And it was the--now what were you going over there to do? Speaker 2: It was called TEFL, Teaching English as a Foreign Language. That's what they--they have a new acronym for it now, but then it was TEFL. And in Turkey, the textbooks--I was teaching medical school, and in textbooks--Turkish was relatively a new language, 1935 is when it came into existence, really. The father of Turkey, Ataturk [Mustafa Kemal Ataturk] added new alphabet, new everything. And so the textbooks the Turkish students had to study were written either in German, or English. They didn't have Turkish medical textbooks. So for a student studying medicine, he or she had to have a proficiency, and that's why TEFL became that important. Now the way it was structured, the Turkish educational system, there was no college before medical school. It was sort of akin to our high school, or they called it something else, but the high school. And then after that you got immersed in medicine for six, seven years, I mean just medicine. That's what you did. And so it's at that point that I came into the system, your first or second year of school, you know really teaching English. And my students were fascinated. I mean they were very bright, young, the average age I guess of my students twenty, you know early twenties you know along with me. We're all brought there together. And the way we taught language, and I spent time with my students you know, because my Turkish had to be--I think I was there because my Turkish or--just had to be good enough to understand their need, and what they were saying. I didn't have to be as proficient as someone doing something else, because my job was to teach English, so I needed to know enough Turkish to teach. And I think what the Peace Corps had done was say you know, "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] understands the structure of the Turkish language, how it works and so it's easier for her to take that structure and apply to English language in a way that the Turkish student could understand it." And so it worked well, it worked well. My students, I could see the growth and I taught summer school, as well. I taught year round, 'cause a--and I loved to see, the way we approached the teaching was this: for example, if I said, "I went to the store," I can understand if my students are learning, if I say movie and if they could put the word movie in the right place. "I went to the movie," you know. Or if I say, present tense, they can tell me, "I am going to the movie," you know. If I say you know first person plural, "We, we are going to the movie." That's the way we structured it, and it went back and forth. And they would have to come back to me with it. It was a game. We made a game out of it. And I was very, very impressed with my students. Story_ID: 571439 Speaker 1: Now Turkey was difficult for me in some respects, because the Turks had not seen black Americans. Sandra [ph.], who was the other African American student, had been sent somewhere to northern Turkey. I was in the middle of the plateau in Ankara [Turkey], and so we didn't see each other and we were not big friends, but you know we--it was nice to know there was another African American somewhere in the country. But the Turks were not used to African Americans. They thought all Americans were white, with blue eyes. So when they saw me, and I would indicate I was American they would (makes sound) utter disbelief. That meant (makes sound), "No." "Hai, hai-ah [ph.]," you know. That means, "Unh-uh, you're not American." And I said, "Yes. Siyah." Siyah means black, so, "Siyah American. I'm a black American." And just the whole concept, this is '65 [1965], was just something completely foreign. And then in my little village where I had to live, I remember one day the students, they were afraid of me you know because this color thing was--'cause I looked so different. And the students picked up stone, they started stoning me. Actually started--I said now, "Isn't this a trip? Isn't this a trip Jones [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones]?" They actually started stoning me. So one of the dolmus drivers, it's a shared taxi called the dolmus, got out and he stopped them, and shoo-shooed them away you know. But then I learned, it was not only the race, the color that was strange, they thought I was Arabic. That is the only dark skin that they understood, really dark was Arab, and there was no love lost between the Turks and the Arabs. So, the rest of the volunteers were having a difficult time, many of them because of Cyprus and Turkey, the big fight going on then and they were understood to be Americans and Americans had taken the--according to the Turks, had taken a wrong position on that Cyprus/Turkish dispute. And so they were not liked for those reasons. I was not liked, because they thought I was Arabic; you know so we all had our problems. But in time, that--and I said to myself, it was part of my stubbornness, I said, "I'm not going home" 'cause you know after that little stoning thing had got to me, I said, "But I'm not going home. I didn't come here to fail." And I think of leaving it as failure. "I signed up for two years. I think this can work and I'm going to stick it out." And to make a long story short, it was one of the best experiences I have had, because when you get through the rough parts, my students, the other professors, my neighbors, my neighborhood, I got so comfortable in Turkey, I could go anywhere and do everything. I became familiar. I became familiar, and liked--I was called hojum [ph.]. That means teacher, professor. Story_ID: 571440 Speaker 1: What neighborhood were you in? You were-- Speaker 2: It was called (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were in Istanbul [Turkey]? Speaker 2: Yeah but it was a section called Ulus, U-L-U-S, Istanbul. Speaker 1: Okay, and what--where was the section? Was it--? Speaker 2: Well it was, you know it was by Turkish standards, I mean it was housing. I wasn't living in a little hut. I had a house and you know, but it still--and guys would sit out smoking their water pipes. I never could understand why these volunteers were trying to get these water pipes back home. I was so confused. That's naivete (laughter). And they--the Turkish men--and they were out on these water pipes, three or four men and they were smoking, and I would walk by and say, "What is these things?" Turkish volunteers getting water pipes back to the United States, and I'm in a state of oblivion. But you know, and so walking through my neighborhood and the little corner stores, I mean everything was unpaved of course, and rocks you know and you climbing up dusty hills and things. But--and I began, I think I began to look more Turkish, the rag around my head you know, the long sandals, you know, Turkish clothes. You know, I would--the stuff you would buy the fabric and somebody would make you a dress, you know. And so, and I you know and I became more comfortable in the language, I could go in the store to order. I could joke with people you know, and people always wanted to make sure I was comfortable. See, but after you got through the first six months, you have to make the--and that's a metaphor for life. You've got to get through the tough times, because it will get better if you work at it, and so that was my experience there. Story_ID: 571441 Speaker 1: Oh, now I said I worked round, year round, but even teaching summer school I had a couple of months free, and I traveled extensively in those two months. Speaker 2: Where did you travel? Speaker 1: Oh I went--there were three other volunteers and I, tall Nordic looking Americans with long hair, and me. And me! We took a Black Sea cruise, cruise up the Black Sea and the captain couldn't do more for us. I mean he gave us, upgraded our quarters and all of that. I went to--I saw 'My Fair Lady' in Beirut [Lebanon]. Beirut was a beautiful city, you know. It was the Paris of Asia or whatever, I mean it was just beautiful. And the sidewalks were so clean, you could eat off the street. This is Beirut in 1966, '65 [1965] and that's how I saw 'My Fair Lady' in Beirut. I went to Israel and I went to Egypt, partied under the pyramids with the son of W.E.B. Du Bois. We had--'cause there was a whole expatriate American community in Egypt and I went over there and I hooked up with them, had a wonderful time. I spent oh, I spent several weeks there, two or three weeks, had a great time. And went--they took me to the pyramids and they were, I mean just saw--went to Syria. Syria was absolutely awful at--I mean 'cause Syria had a real sanitation problem in Syria. I mean they couldn't get the hygiene and the, they couldn't get it straight, you know. Syria needed--and I'm sure things have much improved, but Syria in 1966 was a sad place to be, '66 [1966], '67 [1967]. I remember when I left Beirut, tried to get into Syria, they pulled me--the car I was riding in, the guard stopped me at the border, and pulled me out because although I had been to Israel--see the rule was if you had gone to Israel, you couldn't go back into an Arab country. They just wouldn't let you in. I had been to Israel, but--and a lot of volunteers had two passports, one so you can go to Israel in and out, and the other one that didn't show Israel. I had one passport, but when I--what did I do? I was in Jordan and I--to get to Israel I had walked across through the--going through the Mandelbaum Gate, to get into Israel. And when I left Jordan, they stamped in my passport Mandelbaum Gate. Now there was no Israel visa or anything in the passport, but when I'm on the border of Syria and they see Mandelbaum Gate, they know the other side, the only other thing on the other side of Mandelbaum Gate is Israel. And the way the Jordanians did it, if you left by way of the Jordan airport, they wrote Jordanian airport so they know you hadn't been to Israel, but if you--they put in your passport Mandelbaum Gate, then they knew you--so here I am in Syria. This Syrian guard seems Mandelbaum Gate on my passport and he pulls me out of the car, 'cause I can't go into Syria. Story_ID: 571442 Speaker 1: So you actually had thought about doing another tour. Speaker 2: I had. How did you know? Did I say that? Speaker 1: It's okay, you did (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did? Speaker 1: Yeah. No, you didn't but-- Speaker 2: Micronesia [Federated States of Micronesia] I think, or something. Speaker 1: Now, why Micronesia? You--? Speaker 2: Because they were opening it up right. See, I--, "You give Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] a new experience and she's going to weigh it just because it's different and it's new." I like trying something new, something. Don't take me back to where I've been. Let me go a different place. And so Micronesia, they were just opening Micronesia to the Peace Corps as I was leaving, and so we were looking for volunteers and they liked the idea of experienced volunteers going into Micronesia, 'cause we wouldn't make some of the mistakes maybe that newer volunteers would make. And by that time I was seasoned. And so I had enjoyed my Turkey experience. I had thoroughly--I mean I did ups and the downs, but the sum total of the whole thing was enjoyment and growth. Speaker 1: Now what were the--what were some of the downs, besides the stoning? Speaker 2: Well, you miss your people, you miss your family. I missed my brother's [George Daniel Jones] wedding, I missed you know--you miss other African Americans to sit down and talk, I mean you know, whatever. You have to forge new friendships. Things that were familiar to you, you don't have--and you're not going to get for a while, you know. So you know that is a distance away. But I didn't have many down moments, because there was so much to see and to do. There was a great deal to do. So they were--the down moments were few, and it's just being in an unfamiliar surroundings. But not so much in being in unfamiliar surroundings, not being around those that you love and care about and are used to seeing and interacting with, and other African Americans. You know what we do. You know at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] I mean we played bid whist all night on Saturday night. I didn't have--talked stuff and playing bid whist. You know none of that was there. So-- Story_ID: 571443 Speaker 1: What did you learn about yourself though in the process, because remember how you said I, you know, "I wanted to get as far away"-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --"I think even subconsciously you know, I was trying to you know experience something new," you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --"expand my wings." So what was the person who emerged, you know out of these two years? Speaker 2: The person who emerged was--the person who came back had been to something like eight or ten countries, when she got back. And she valued other cultures and other people and she knew that the way that she does things, or her culture was not the only one, the only acceptable culture in the world. And that it's important to take time to understand people, you know, and that when you do that, when you reach out and then they in turn reach back, you're wiser for it. You're wiser for it. And so also, it validated my view that we need to step out of our comfort zones. It's so easy to stay within your comfort zone, and just stay there you know. But it's important to make opportunities, to travel and to grow and to interact with people who are unlike you. And you know that's why I'm such a huge believer in diversity, and why I fought so hard my professional career for affirmative action and all, because too often we get in our comfort zone, those whom we know, our families, our friends, our neighborhoods and we can't make it as a society like that. And so the Peace Corps reinforced that I was on the right track. Story_ID: 571444 Speaker 1: You said you know you had thought about law school before, so are you in Istanbul [Turkey] doing your law school app, like I mean--? Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's very interesting. I was-- Speaker 1: This is before, you know it's hard to think of time before email, but it was not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --right. So-- Speaker 2: Well what happened was the Peace Corps provided--many volunteers decided to go to professional school when they left the Peace Corps, and so the Peace Corps facilitated that, and there was a day in which the law school aptitude test was being offered at the Peace Corps office, see. The government can do a lot for you when they want, so I didn't have to do this on my own. I could just let the Peace Corps know that I was interested. So I took the--now my--I had a Peace Corps roommate my first year, but my Peace Corps roommate married another Peace Corps fellow, my--the end of first year. So my roommate moved out with him, you know, and so then I got another roommate and moved. I moved to a different section of town my second year in the Peace Corps, you know a little up on the hill. A little--I had a little better apartment. Little better apartment, lived a little larger, now. You know Peace Corps, we got forty dollars a month. Got forty dollars a month, which was big money then. And so you know I knew my way around, and could negotiate a better deal and even got a nicer apartment, and it was very nice. And so then I took the--my roommate, my first year's husband also wanted to go to law school, David [ph.]. And so David and I and about four or five other volunteers took the LSAT at one time, at the same time. And then I applied to only two law schools. I applied to University of Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia], and I applied to Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. University of Virginia because I'm a Virginian. I knew that they had not had--they had had very few blacks, if any. I wasn't sure of how many, but I knew it had been very few. And I thought, I said, "Well Virginia may not accept me but I know I ought to be accepted. My grades are good," you know, "I'm doing things that I should be doing. And if they don't accept me, well then I'll be a test case for somebody." You know I didn't know anything about the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], but I said, "I'll be a test case," because Virginia, I knew Virginia had a rule whereby if you qualify to enter the state university, the public university, rather than admit you, Virginia will pay your tuition, out of state. And so Patricia King at Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.], matter of fact who ought to be interviewed for HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers], who's married to [HistoryMaker] Roger Wilkins now, Patricia was my home girl from Norfolk, Virginia. And I re- if I thought, I said Virginia--'cause Pat went to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and the State of Virginia paid some of that tuition. She was--'cause they wouldn't admit her, you know. So I said, "Well I'm on my way to Harvard." So I applied to Virginia. Then, I also applied to Howard, because I knew of the reputation of Howard law school and I had been to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] undergraduate. So to my surprise I was admitted to Virginia and Howard, admitted to both, and I had to make a decision where I was to go. So I didn't have to make that decision though until I returned from the Peace Corps, and I returned in June of '67 [1967]--in June of '67 [1967]. Law school started in late August, and I hadn't decided where I was going to go and they had extended my time, both schools. I went to visit Howard law school, and Howard indicated that I would have a completely, a free ride. They would pay my--there was no on-campus housing for graduate students, so they would pay everything. They would pay my rent in my apartment off campus, wherever I choose to live and they would--all tuition, free ride. They wanted me to come to Howard. It was tempting. Virginia on the other hand offered nothing, but a national defense loan. You know, they had national defense. And so they offered nothing but admission. And so I thought about it. I had--I struggled really. I didn't, couldn't, you know I thought about it and I decided, going back to my rule that never fails me, I had been to Howard. I had four good years at Howard. Go to Virginia, just because once more, it's the unknown. You don't know whether--spread your wings, get the experience and so I went. And was it an experience. Story_ID: 571445 Speaker 1: So let's talk about that, because you were really the first--so you were the first-- Speaker 2: Black woman. Speaker 1: --black woman admitted. Speaker 2: They had never had a black woman on a--and see women, there were only six white women in the class, and me. I mean women weren't particularly welcome. Speaker 1: And this is 1967. Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1967, okay. Speaker 2: This is '67 [1967]. Women--and the undergraduate school at university [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] was all white male. Speaker 1: All white male (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All white men. No women were admitted, allowed to be admitted, to undergraduate school. It was a sick segregated institution, as well. It was amazing. It was sick--it was where the governor's kids went, where the businessmen kids went, state school, you know University of Virginia (unclear), that's just the way it was. I don't think women were admitted to Virginia 'til 1970-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --undergraduate. So you imagine the law school [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia]. I, when I got to Virginia that late August or early September, whenever it was-it was just, it was an amazing eye-opening experience. Everything that I had learned in the Peace Corps, I had to apply. Had I not gone to Turkey, I would not have made it in Virginia. Speaker 1: You wouldn't have been mentally--? Speaker 2: I wouldn't have been mentally ready. I couldn't handle it. There were two blacks admitted in my class, me and someone I had been in school with, in junior high school who is now in the court of appeals in Virginia, Jimmy [James W. Benton, Jr.] and I were in the class together, Jimmy Benton and I were in that entering class together, the two of us. That's the first year class. The second year class had two blacks in it. Speaker 1: Black men. Speaker 2: Black men. Black men, who are friends today and the third year class had one black. So that's us. Each class had about 120, 120--25 students. It was not a welcoming environment for women, and the whole idea, I think that--and the whole idea of a black woman was just so far off the charts. Story_ID: 571446 Speaker 1: Now these--this is Virginia, so you're not going to get overtness. You're not going to get a whole lot of overt activity, but I remember when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died, you know I heard some students say to one another, "He deserved it," round in there. That was the environment I was in. And I remember 'cause he was assassinated April of '68 [1968]. I was in my first year coming toward the end of my first year, but I was in it, and nobody said a word about the assassination. Cities are burning, and people are carrying on. Nobody at Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] said a word as if it hadn't happened. So I asked Jimmy [James W. Benton, Jr.], I pulled him aside one day. I said, "Jimmy?" He said, "Yes." I said--he said--I said, "Do they know?" (Laughter) I said-I couldn't believe it. I said, "Do they know?" This--it just, it tickles me so. I said I--is--, "It's the subject that everybody's discussing." No professor, no student, no administrator, no one had said a word to us. And I said, "Do they know?" Anyway, so we laughed about it and we just went on. But that shows you, that's that gentlemanly, just ignoring you're there, you know, and really in some way denying your existence by not giving credence or giving voice to anything you say. Story_ID: 571447 Speaker 1: Well, in the class you had a lot of the gender stuff. You know you're taking up a place you know. The white females got that a lot, "You're taking up a place a man could be in." They wouldn't say to the individually-individual, but they would say it in front of the class. And then whenever a woman got a question it had something to do with you know somebody being raped or some domestic crime, or something. You know always--so what I remember was it was only one place for us to congregate as women, in the law school [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] it was in the ladies room downstairs. It was a two room lady room situation--ladies room situation. You had the--you had in the one room you had a sitting area, and then you had the bathroom in a separate area and then there was a little kitchen area. And it used--I think it was primarily for the secretaries in the law school, had been. But it was where the law students, now that there were seven women in there, where we congregated. Seven women in my class. And we would congregate there, 'cause we would bump in and out. And we would sit around sometimes talking about your day and your day, and I would listen, you know. Now I would listen to their using each other as a focus group to talk through their issues, and they were open to me. I liked several of those women, I really liked. And they would, they--and I would listen to their experiences, and whatever was left over from them I assumed was race. See, I was trying to decide what was gender and what was race, in terms of what I was experiencing, you know. And it was complex, but I figured out which of my experiences were gender based and which were race because I, then I had Jimmy [James W. Benton, Jr.] who was in--Jimmy Benton and he and I could talk about it. But we both had our study groups in which we were of course the only--everywhere we went we were the only African Americans. Jimmy was in a separate study group from me. And there were some students at Virginia who embraced us. It was the radical left--I guess the whole school's considered radical. But there were students who were--went out of their way to reach out, you know, to me--and I will never forget that. And when we--'cause the first year was the most difficult. And I remember the stoning in the Peace Corps; I will not be deterred, I didn't come here to be a statistic. I am going to graduate you know, and so just getting, just getting through that first year. Story_ID: 571448 Speaker 1: The professors, when I came to law school [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] after I had been to law school two weeks, all of the problems on the campus came to me. The African American employees who were the janitors, were having problems. The folks in--the cook, undergraduate, the cooks in the kitchen were having union problems, and they heard there was a black woman in law school and were all coming to me, I was supposed to be able to solve these problems? I had been in law school three weeks. Speaker 2: They were coming to you and not to Jimmy [James W. Benton, Jr.], or they were coming to both of you? Speaker 1: They were coming--no, primarily to me. I don't know why me. Women, 'cause these were women employees and they just felt comfortable, I think. So they were--and I'm trying to respond, look, doing the research. One of my professors pulled me aside, and I'm grateful to him to this day. He said, "You've been here three weeks." He said, "Now you can help these people and everybody else in the world, once you get your law degree." He said, "But if you flunk out trying to help them, you can't help anybody." He pulled me aside to tell me that. Speaker 2: That was smart. Speaker 1: And he was--and he did me a huge favor. He did, 'cause he was so right. But I had to tell them, "No, I'm not equipped, I'm just a law student. I can't help." Then, also, every time I had a negative experience that first year in law school, I had to think to myself, there are people who want you here. There are professors who want you here. There's an admissions committee who voted you in. There are people here, you don't know who they are, but these people reached out to you. And so just as there are those who don't want you here, there are those who do, and that--so you have to talk to yourself, talk yourself through these things. And my roommate--we had campus housing, and so my roommate was an Asian student who was getting her masters in law from, she was from Taiwan. And interesting who my roommate was (unclear) (laughter). Speaker 2: So they, that's how they (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They had to play--that's how they found a way, what to do with me, housing, so she and I became friends, how we became roommates. That was the first year. Second and third year I had housing (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So can we, can we talk-- Story_ID: 571449 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can we talk about the first year in terms of the professors and the study and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and how you took to legal studies? Was it-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Was it a difficult stretch or was it--? Speaker 2: It was. It was a very difficult stretch, because I had come from two years in the Peace Corps I hadn't been studying. I hadn't come from one academic environment, to the next. I had been off--under the--partying under the pyramids in Egypt, you know, and here I am at Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia], and Virginia didn't play. And I remember the first week there buying the books, and I was sitting in the ladies room downstairs on that sofa. I was the only one in there and I had the books. I couldn't get over the size of those law books. (Laughter) I--Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], the size of those law books was a very sobering experience indeed. And I was sitting there in a state of shock, state of shock. And this white lady comes through the ladies room, and she just polite to me as she can be, middle-aged woman. And she looked at me sitting there. She said to me, "I know you're taking your rest break now but when you finish, would you clean the refrigerator?" She saw color only. She didn't see the books. She didn't anything. She saw color. She assumed I was the cleaning lady. She assumed I was the cleaning lady. She said--she was, and she was just as nice as she could be. She said, "I know you're taking your rest break now but when you finish would you clean the refrigerator?" And walked on out. People have said to me subsequently, "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] you are so fiery. What did you say to her?" She was gone by the time it dawned on me that this lady had just insulted me, in a sense. But I didn't say anything to her, later learned that she was the Dean's [Hardy Cross Dillard] secretary. She never apologized, but I tell people she never--there was nothing I ever needed from the dean's office that I didn't get. Nothing. I mean she was just as accommodating to me. She reached out of her way and that was her apology (unclear) 'cause I mean, they hadn't had a black woman student. So she just, you know but I'm not making excuses for her, 'cause she should have stopped to think. And she just saw color, she didn't see circumstance. Story_ID: 571450 Speaker 1: Now your classes-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Contracts-- Speaker 2: Contracts, I had-- Speaker 1: --and torts? Speaker 2: The dean taught me contracts, Dean Hardy Dillard [Hardy Cross Dillard]. My second year he went up on the world court [International Court of Justice], taught me contracts [at University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia]. I had torts, I had procedure, I had all of the first year requirements. Speaker 1: Contracts? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: A year of contracts, torts-- Speaker 2: I had-- Speaker 1: Property? Speaker 2: I had property a year, and then I had a procedure course and then there was another one, there was a fifth course, administrative law, administrative law. And the reading every night I mean, it was two hundred pages a night. It was quite something. Speaker 1: So did you--tell me though, so this was, it was you know a sort of experience that hit you in your face-- Speaker 2: It did, it hit me in my face. Speaker 1: --a lot coming at once. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you ever say, "Why am I here?" or did you--did you one, ask that question? If not, did you take to it and what classes were more intriguing than others and what professors? Speaker 2: I really took to it my second and third year, they were breezes for me. Academic, they were not difficult, second and third year at all. First year was the most difficult, because I was trying to adjust to everything, you know. And--but certain classes I really enjoyed. We had a small section, my torts, small section. I enjoyed that. I enjoyed contracts. You know, certain courses I enjoyed. I took the time to understand. Pro (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Civil procedure? Speaker 2: And civil-- Speaker 1: I can't imagine (unclear). Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. I won't say enjoyed civil procedure. Civil procedure was a survival course. The idea of civil was to survive it. And I didn't like administrative procedure, the APA, administrative procedure [Administrative Procedure Act] 'cause I never understood it. I never fully understood it, and I guess my professor knew and he teaches at American University Law [American University Washington College of Law, Washington, D.C.] now, gave me the lowest grade I ever got in law school, 'cause I just didn't--I got the Hornbook thinking I could get through it with the Horn--that didn't work either. But I was, I managed to get through them all. You know how you get the first, the grades at the end of the first semester, just as a test to see how you're doing. But what really bothered me was administrative procedure, civil procedure, those two at the end of my first year trying to get through them, and I managed you know I managed to survive it. Second and third year I took to those courses like I took criminal procedure. I mean I enjoyed all of my courses, I really did and I enjoyed my third year courses. And when you enjoy a course, you do well in it. And so I--you know my grades were pretty good second and third year. Story_ID: 571451 Speaker 1: Now, so what are you thinking because this is before BALSA [Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)] really, right? There's no-- Speaker 2: Yes, there's no BLSA, 'cause we were it (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: BLSA-- Speaker 1: You were ahead of BLSA. Speaker 2: We were BLSA. When Jimmy [James W. Benton, Jr.] and I met it was BLSA meeting. But it was--BLSA was getting started elsewhere, and what was big then was the Reginald Heber Smith Fellows [Reginald Heber Smith Community Lawyer Fellowship Program]. There was a fellowship that they would take students, no matter what your race and put you in an environment; whether you were in a law firm, or whether public interest or public advocacy, and you get a summer placement. And so I became a Reginald Heber Smith Fellow the end of my first year, so I never worked in a law firm 'cause I always wanted to do something, what I considered interesting. So I got assigned to work with a senator in California. He was in the California state senate and I said, "Well, why are they sending me from Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] out to this California State Senate?" I would say. And I was a little apprehensive, but I went. And went out there to Sacramento [California] and walked in my senator's office, I saw him come in there and we just fell into one another's arms, 'cause he was the only black senator in the California Senate, Mervyn Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally]. He--Merv was the only black and here I am--and he had thought I was going to be a little southern rosebud, you know so it was a joke on both of us, which is why we fell into each other's arms, 'cause you know we're coming out of the same experience. And so I had a great summer working with Merv, oh it was absolutely-- Speaker 1: So that was after your first year? Speaker 2: My first year that summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's where I spent working with him in the Californian--I had to set up a bus system (simultaneous). Speaker 1: So he was in Los--in L.A., he was in Los Angeles [California]? Speaker 2: No he was in Sacramento. Yeah, he was L.A. Speaker 1: He was in Sacramento. Speaker 2: He was--L.A. was his district. Speaker 1: His district, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right and Sacramento was the--but in his district I had to set up a bus system to get--there were jobs in Compton, California, at a factory, to get his constituents out to Compton and back, and so I had to devise and set up a bus system. I loved it. Loved it. My second summer in law school, which was the summer after my second year, I went to Atlanta [Georgia] and Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] was running for mayor, for [U.S.] Congress, his first time. He lost that first election. But I was down there working with, oh, this brother, what's this brother--David--the brother-- Speaker 1: David Franklin? No, the lawyer-- Speaker 2: David, no not a lawyer. He had really been big in the Civil Rights Movement, very fair, out of Louisiana. He (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Frank--no (unclear) David Franklin? Speaker 2: I can't remember David's [ph.] last name. But David-- Speaker 1: Was he on the Ford Foundation [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: No, no. He was, he's been an activist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's been down there to Mississippi the Freedom Summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He knew Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] and all those guys well and he was very--he was African American, but he was very, very fair and I worked with Zeke [ph.]--not--I can't think of the-anyway, I worked with him in Atlanta that summer, and my job was to visit all the civil rights attorneys throughout the South; to meet them, and to get their stories. That was my job is to meet every--and so I went, that's where I--summer of '69 [1969]. Summer I met [HistoryMaker] Julius Chambers, I went down to Charlotte [North Carolina], I went out to Houston [Texas] met Gabrielle McDonald [HistoryMaker Gabrielle Kirk McDonald]. I went cross the South and met every one of them and it was great for me. Speaker 1: It was extreme learning experience. Speaker 2: It was. It was. I got to interview them and talk to them and meet them. Speaker 1: So were you to--oh okay. Okay, sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was. Some sort of (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --somebody was going to buy these stories and I was one of the researchers (Simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wow-- Story_ID: 571452 Speaker 1: So right, it wasn't--activism was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Couldn't exist I mean in the-- Speaker 1: No, not in that way. Activism was trying to graduate. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: That was activism. Speaker 2: See you know now that's interesting 'cause I--'cause you know, what's interesting about--oh okay. What's interesting about this is that, you know, really when you were on Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] campus people don't realize that you know the HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] community was very conservative. Speaker 1: It was. Speaker 2: So remember how you said about 10 percent-- Speaker 1: That's right, about 10 percent of what was going on down there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's right and that's about to (unclear). That's right (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. And then you're really in the time you know the time period after that, when you're breaking barriers. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so it's not enough numbers really. You know-- Speaker 1: It's not enough but I did know within myself, that I was preparing myself for something. I didn't know what it was, but I knew that I had to make the best of every situation I was in and to get what that situation offered me. Now, you say what you want about Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] and all and that social environment--first class legal education. I mean, when I left Virginia, I could write and reason my way with the best of them. You know I mean analytical and I mean you--that's what they do. They train you how to think and how to reason. They don't, you don't ever get the answers to any questions. You--all--you learn how to approach the questions. You know, the analysis. And Virginia was very good at that, very good at that. So it was a time for academics, is what it was. It was a time of preparation. It was--I didn't go--I went home more the second and third year, 'cause I wasn't far from home. I was still in Virginia. I--the--my third year, BALSA [Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)] came into existence, somewhere else. Columbia [sic. New York University School of Law, New York, New York] I think, BALSA was founded, campus of Columbia, and I went to one or two BALSA meetings 'cause I knew there were other and I met first blacks from all over, different law schools all over, ones at--in Tennessee. I just met a lot of people who were the first, and so you know, the network was developing. And then, that summer, end of my second year when I met all those civil rights--not all those but the handful that there were, and got to see what they were doing--[HistoryMaker] Julius Chambers was first, from University of North Carolina [University of North Carolina School of Law, Chapel Hill, North Carolina]. And he was also my predecessor's director counsel. All that's the way those things overlap. Story_ID: 571453 Speaker 1: Now, when you did the interviews, what did you find? Did you hear anything or learn anything you were surprised by (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I found that I was on the right track, 'cause these people had prepared themselves. They were the best that we had to offer. Gabrielle McDonald [HistoryMaker Gabrielle Kirk McDonald] coming out of Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], and she came out of Howard in '66 [1966], Gabrielle was at the top of her class, and she later went on to the world court. She was head of the world court. You know Hardy Dillard [Hardy Cross Dillard] went to the world court [International Court of Justice] my, end of my first year. Gabby in the '90s [1990s] was chief judge of the world court, you know. And nickname was Gabby, but Gabrielle McDonald, and brilliant. Brilliant, you know. She was one of the pioneers for the employment discrimination law. [U.S.] Congress had passed the statute in 1965, and she was busy in the courts bringing the statute to life, the employment rights, 'cause she understood economic rights of African Americans to get access you know to money and to salaries. We weren't talking about entrepreneurship at that time. You know we're talking about just getting jobs, so you could support your families, you know. And you know, we used to have to hire other people to take the job that we should have been getting. You know we had to train others to get the job that we should have been promoted to. That was the way it was. But she built--she spent years of struggling with that employment statute, making it work, major class actions in Corporate America, making it work for us. Julius [HistoryMaker Julius Chambers], down there in Charlotte [North Carolina], with all the--Julius Chambers, office burned to the ground, burned to the ground, established the first interracial law school, law firm, down there in Charlotte. You know, thoughtful, reflective, smart--you know, personable, didn't lose sense of self, but a mission, a mission, you know, believed in serving the community with his tool, the law. And you got that from his interviews, you know. And these people weren't boring academics, all of them, you know what's viewed as boring just looking at books, all that. No, they believed in life you know; they had laughter you know; they had sense of humor, and all of that. But went down to Georgia, Augusta and I got to--where C.B. King [Chevene Bowers King] was--C.B. ran for governor in 1970. We all laughed about it. C.B., you know C.B. was in your face with all that racism he was facing down there, but brilliant. You know went out--I went to Alabama, Oscar Adams. You know Oscar came out of Howard around ooh, '51 [1951], '52 [1952], one of the first blacks to take the Alabama bar, had put out his shingle, you know. And Oscar was about eighteen, nineteen years into his practice you know, well respected, became the first black on the Alabama supreme court [Supreme Court of Alabama], you know. These are the people that I got to see and interact with. And as a movement--and I said to myself, I said, "Now this is what I have been thinking about all along, what they are doing," you know. And not only was I getting their stories, I was trying to figure out how I could fit in somehow, what I would do. But it was fascinating. And now you read all the history. You go down to South Carolina, and there's Matthew Perry [Matthew J. Perry] down there with his office open. Matthew Perry was the first black on the federal court down there. Strom Thurmond put him on the court. He was so good, Strom Thurmond had to put him on the federal district court. So Matthew, you know these guys are in their eighties now, those who are living you know. You know Gabby is in her late sixties, early--she's in her mid to late sixties. No, her mid-sixties, yes she's in her mid-sixties. So, she's one--she was the youngest of the group, you know. But it was an extraordinary group of people and these were all--most of them had been cooperating attorneys with Thurgood Marshall and Jack [Jack Greenberg]--they were LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] cooperating attorneys, but I didn't know that connection, Legal Defense Fund, how it functioned, and what it was. I didn't fully understand that at the time. Speaker 1: Now were they advising you on what you should do? Did they give you--? Speaker 2: No, they weren't advising me because I was there to get their stories, not there to seek mentorship (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Their advice. Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 571454 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now when you go back your third year-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --what are you--and have you cultivated a mentor at the law school [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia]? Not really? Speaker 2: Let me see, there were one or two people who, professors that I thought the world of. And so don't ask me names, but one of them and I see him periodically. He was--he's the one who had pulled me aside to tell me, "Get your degree." He's still there. He's senior, still there. And the new dean was very helpful to me. The dean after Hardy Dillard [Hardy Cross Dillard] left to go on a--to go on the world court [International Court of Justice], the new dean, Monrad Paulsen [Monrad G. Paulsen] had come down from Columbia [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] and he was the new dean of University of Virginia law school and that's how I got to the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], 'cause the new dean and Jack Greenberg were friends. There, so--and he had been helpful. He was new himself to the law school environment. But--and then, I--my professor, I had a professor I'm trying to think of what he taught me, but he left the law school and became a partner in Mudge Rose [Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander and Ferdon] and that's how I got the invitation 'cause--and I had done well in his course, my second year. So that's how I got the invitation to come to Mudge Rose and got the interview to go to an interview with them for a position. Story_ID: 571455 Speaker 1: Now this Mudge Rose [Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander and Ferdon] was Nixon's [President Richard Milhous Nixon] law firm? Speaker 2: Nixon's law firm. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Nixon, Mudge, Rose, Guthrie--and Nixon was president, and it was also the law firm of the attorney general [John Mitchell]. What was his name? Nixon's attorney general (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is what we call a silk stocking law firm. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh silk stock--that's what it was. But see I didn't--Nixon's law firm. I'm invited. I didn't even apply, they invited me to come up, because my professor was up there and he knew I was at Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia]. And I accepted the invitation and went up for the interview and got the job offer. But I remembered I--first time I ever broken out in hives, I was scared to death. I went up there, now I came up to New York [New York] in that environ--I had never been inside this and I'm--the senior partner interviewed me, you know. He was about seventy-five, you know and there I was. And I never--I broke out in hives, but I, now I could see what was going on, but I answered the questions and talked. And when I got the job offer around November, I accepted, you know. They were going to pay big dollars, $18,000 a year, 1970, it's big dollars, big dollars. And so then around Christmas I was not happy with my selection. I would go by the mirror and not be able to look at myself in the mirror. I was not happy with telling people I was going to Mudge, Rose, Guthrie and Alexander, because that's not what I had gone to law school to do. And I was uncomfortable with the decision. I was--and so I, you know going back to one of my rules. If you're really uncomfortable with something you need to really look at it closely and figure out what the problem is. And I realized, the reason I was going to Mudge Rose was for the money, only for the money--and so that's another rule I have: if you're doing something solely for the money, unh-uh. Now money can be an important part of it which is all right, but if the only reason you're doing something is for the dollars, then you better look at it pretty closely, 'cause there needs to be some other redeeming feature to the thing. So finally I decided in December that I just wasn't going. I just, it's just not what I wanted to do. So I went to the dean and I told him, I said, "Dean Paulsen [Monrad G. Paulsen], I can't go to Mudge, Rose. I thought about it. I thought about it through the holidays. I said I can't go." Speaker 1: So was he disappointed? Speaker 2: No. No, he didn't care one way or the other. He understood perfectly. He understood perfectly. I said, "Now, here I am though, I'm going to turn this down and I don't have a job. I don't have a job, it's late, it's January. Everybody's placed." And that's another lesson I learned. I should have negotiated, 'cause there was some white male behind me who got that position at Mudge, Rose--was going to get it. Speaker 1: And was happy as a pig in a-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Happy as a pig and he's worth gazillions of dollars now. I should have negotiated the deal. You know I should have negotiated, 'cause: "You make a charitable contribution to a charity of my selection for the next ten years, and you have to give me at least, you know, $40,000 a year." Something I should have come up with. Story_ID: 571456 Speaker 1: So you tell him, but now does he [Monrad G. Paulsen] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I tell him-- Speaker 1: Does he then tell you about--how does that--? Speaker 2: Yes. He says to me, "I know." He says, "All right." I said, "I don't have a job, dean. What am I going to do?" He said "I'm gonna call my friend Jack Greenberg." That's what he told me. "I'm gonna call my friend Jack Greenberg," and I--and ask--you know. And so he came back to me and said, "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones], you have an interview next week in New York [New York] with Jack." Just like that. "You got an interview next week with Jack." And I, you know so I go up to New York and I go to Legal Defense Fund's [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] office and then it's at Columbus Circle, and I go in and it's three o'clock in the afternoon and I walk up stairs, and the offices are empty. They're own three stories, three floors, you know, and the offices are empty. It's not a soul in sight and I'm walking through. I said, "Well, where is everybody? Did I get the date wrong or something?" So I left and I went to the restaurant, sat down and had a cup of coffee and waited. Then I went in and about forty-five minutes later everything was filled. And I got in Mr. Greenberg's office, I said, "Well, Mr. Greenberg, where was everybody?" He said, "We had a bomb scare," (laughter). I'm walking throughout the offices, just walking, empty. Something happened to the security, I don't know where it was. But Jack hired me on the spot. Hired me on the spot and said, "All right, what's your salary requirement?" See, a lot I have to learn. So Wall Street was paying $18,000, so I said $11,000, 'cause I figured public interest lawyers are making nine, ten, eleven [thousand dollars]. I was at the high-end of public interest. He said, "Hired." Now I should have said twelve, 'cause I would have still gotten hired. I asked Jack later, "What should I have said?" He said, "You were right in it." He said, "You would have gotten twelve, had you said it. But you said eleven," you know. So he said, "You always go a little higher and let them cut you back, rather than--," but anyway, it was fine and I was just tickled. I was just tickled I got that position. Speaker 1: So let me ask this, a couple of things. What is Jimmy Benton [James W. Benton, Jr.] doing at this point? Speaker 2: He's on the court--intermediate appellate court of Virginia (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no but what was he doing the same year you guys were--what was--what decisions did he make about--? Speaker 2: Oh. He went to Hill, Tucker and Marsh in Richmond, Virginia-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Oliver Hill's [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill] law firm and Henry Marsh's [HistoryMaker Henry L. Marsh, III] law firm in Richmond. They were cooperating attorneys with Jack, and so that's where he went, and that's where he spent his career before he went on the bench. Speaker 1: And so when you came back and told the dean--well the dean probably knew-- Speaker 2: Probably Jack told-- Speaker 1: Okay, probably-- Speaker 2: --he knew before I even went up there, 'cause the dean obviously had given me a recommendation and had told Jack the whole story, 'cause Jack hired me right there. He--we hadn't interviewed fifteen minutes before he made the job offer. Story_ID: 571457 Speaker 1: So, now what are your parents thinking? Speaker 2: My mamma [Estelle Campbell Jones] and dad [George Raymond Jones], you know, they really gave us a great deal of independence in making our decisions about our lives. After college, they just--I mean we could ask them what they thought about something, but they just left it up to us assuming we wouldn't be ridiculous. Now for example, my sister told me that my mother, when I was in the Peace Corps, every time there was an earthquake in Turkey, there was a chair in our living room, she would sit in that chair, and my sister said the wake would begin. All the neighbors would come, mother would just be pros- just completely prostrate. She would say, "Oh my child," (laughter). She knew each earthquake that I was no longer among the living. And my sister said the neighbors would come, it was very solemn time, very solemn funeral of Sister Jones. (Laughter) "Oh, Sister Jones, it will be all right." And then she--Gwen [Gwendolyn Jones Jackson] said that went on for two years (laughter). And so I remember when I was thinking about going to Micronesia [Federated States of Micronesia], my sister said--wrote me a letter. She said, "All right, now I've gone along with this. You left me here. You went you know for two years. I've been in college. I've been holding mamma and daddy and this whole thing together." She said, "Now it's time for you to come back." She said, "Enough of this." She--I never will forget that letter. She said, "This is quite enough. It's time for you to return." That letter had a lot to do with my realizing that I need to get on back. Story_ID: 571458 Speaker 1: Now your sister [Gwendolyn Jones Jackson] ended up going to law school right? Speaker 2: She came to Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Right and-- Speaker 2: She was the second black woman. Speaker 1: And so that was right after (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After--my third year was her first year. Speaker 1: That is amaze--so what did the school think of it and--? Speaker 2: Well, they had done that. The school had went--had gone out to interview, to find you know and I guess they felt safe, same family and all. "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] didn't come in here and burn down the university," you know, and so they--I know what happened. What happened is, there was a professor there who taught criminal procedure, Charlie Whitebread [Charles H. Whitebread] and he's out in California somewhere now I think, Stanford [sic. University of Southern California Gould School of Law, Los Angeles, California]. I think he's at Stanford. But he had just begun his teaching career. And so Mr. Whitebread said to me, "Elaine I'm going--," 'cause there was affirmative effort to recruit students and African American students, to do something. So he said, "I'm going down to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] to--on a recruiting trip. Will you--you want to go with me?" 'Cause he knew, you know. I said, "Well sure I'll go." So he and I went to Hampton and we interviewed lots of students. Interviewed at least twelve students that day. And at the end, as we're leaving we're having dinner with my sister, who happens to be in her third year at Hampton. But--fourth year, her last year at Hampton. But I knew my sister wanted to get this Ph.D. in English. I mean she's a bibliophile, English, she loves literature. She loves literature. And so, you know, that was--so when we are having dinner, Mr. Whitebread and I are getting ready to drive back to Charlottesville [Virginia] from Hampton, we said, "We interviewed these folks and blah, blah," we've talked about our day. And so she said, "Well interview me!" I said, "Interview you?" She said, "Yes, interview me." I said, "Gwen, you're going to get your Ph.D. in English. You want to be a professor. You want to teach." She said, "No I'll think about law school. I will think about law school." She said, "I'm intrigued about the whole notion of studying law." It's the first time I had ever heard that. First time I had ever--and Professor Whitebread just jumped on it. He said, "Oh, fine. Let's inter- ," so we interview and the next thing I know, the next class, entering class there was thirteen students who came in through the--no, twelve students who came in through the CLEO [Council on Legal Education Opportunity] program, the legal education, come in that summer and studied. The only one who did not come in through CLEO, was my sister. They just admitted her outright and she just came on in. And so she was--so there were thirteen students my third year, there were thirteen students in the first year class. Speaker 1: Which is amazing. Speaker 2: Oh it was big. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 571459 Speaker 1: It was you and Jimmy [James W. Benton, Jr.] in that-- Speaker 2: And Dick [ph.] in that class. Speaker 1: Right, 'cause-- Speaker 2: And there were two blacks in the class behind us. Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Second year class. Speaker 1: Okay. And so did CLEO [Council on Legal Education Opportunity], the CLEO program get started with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Started, got started the third year. Speaker 1: The third year, okay. Speaker 2: Got started. Speaker 1: Okay. And how did those students end up doing, do you know? Speaker 2: Yes! They became very close. One or two of them should not have been admitted, but I wasn't of the frame of mind to say that. I didn't want to pass judgment, 'cause Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] had passed judgment on us so long and unfairly, and so a couple of--got admitted who shouldn't have got admitted. And so when they were admitted they weren't doing well. Most of them did fine, did fine, but the two who weren't doing well I remember the students, the African American students, went to the dean [Monrad G. Paulsen] after he had flunked out, one of them had flunked out and said, "You know give him another chance, blah, blah." So they did, so he graduated but he never you know, never did well. So, I mean never became a member of the bar, because some people have an aptitude, others don't. I mean he was, he you know was very good in the things that he was good in, but it didn't lend him, lend itself to the study of law. But I wasn't mature enough at that time to speak up, 'cause I didn't want to be the one to end his dream, you know, and so that's what happened. But most of them did well. Speaker 1: Now so when your sister [Gwendolyn Jones Jackson] and you were there together was that news? That was newsworthy, wasn't--? Speaker 2: That was interesting, but we had--oh we, by that time you know, Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] had been around, you know. We were--we had a house off campus where there were four African American women. One was getting her Ph.D. in English, one was getting her Ph.D. in physics, and there was me in law, and my sister in law. So four of us, and all the parties were there, you know. All the--we had a big apple tree in the backyard, and my sister was just, she was quite a cook. She was making fresh apple pies, I mean just screamers--it was a club house, you know, off from the campus, off campus. Speaker 1: So but how--who--had the campus, the black population overall had grown? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was growing. It was growing because you had other schools. You had graduate school students coming in. Speaker 1: Undergrad? Speaker 2: Well, yes 'cause by that time John Charles Thomas was in the undergraduate school. He's now on the--he was the first black on the Supreme Court of Virginia. He's now practicing, well respected lawyer in Richmond [Virginia], in one of the large firms. So outstanding black doctor down in Virginia, who is well known and respected came in, undergraduate. So all those undergraduate students came to us. And so we were one big network, whatever school you happened to be in and we could hook up, you know, there was enough to hook up. And we were--we would have our parties. Now we didn't have a frat house or anything like that, but we didn't need one. We had Anderson Street, which is where we were, the four story house on Anderson Street, big house on the corner. Oh, we--I mean fresh cooked stuff and we had music and--we just you know--and then we needed jobs, 'cause we didn't have any money so all of us, that whole household, would substitute teach. We were on the Charlottesville [Virginia] public school list. When they needed substitute teachers, they called us and we--I arranged my schedule so I had third year, I could do that. See I had the most of my classes were three days a week, and so I could keep those two days in there for substitute teaching if called, and that was the spending money. So were all you know--I found myself in the Charlottesville public schools teaching gym, English, whatever (laughter). Story_ID: 571460 Speaker 1: So when it's time to graduate do you--what do you do that summer? Do you go and get settled in New York [New York], or what are you doing the summer after graduation [from University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia]? Speaker 2: That summer after-- Speaker 1: Because you have to--you have the bar exam too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's it. That's it, thank you. Bar exam. Bar exam is serious. This is Virginia (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And in New York it's--oh it's-- Speaker 2: No, no I'm taking the Virginia bar. Speaker 1: You're taking Virginia? Speaker 2: I was taking the Virginia bar. I wanted to take that Virginia bar, because I thought if I--eventually I could see myself in Virginia, and also I knew how the rules were. You could waive in other places, but I wanted to get the bar-- Speaker 1: You could waive into New York? Speaker 2: No, I didn't do New York. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did Virginia and I did D.C [Washington, D.C.]. And after that, in New York, I'm in federal courts. So once you're a member of a state bar it doesn't matter. I'm not litigating in state courts of New York. You know, and if I have to litigate in state courts in New York, I've got lawyers to do that you know. It's rare, you know. So once you're in and in the federal system, no matter what bar you're in, you're in--and that's the way it works. That's why most people just have one bar, but you can get a second or third if you're going to have a state practice in that jurisdiction. So I took Virginia and it's a challenge. Challenge, I took it summer of '70 [1970] and you know, I knew again, I had to--I had a big afro on my first and second year, but I straightened that hair that summer. (Laughter) Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] found a hot comb and got rid of the Nehru jacket and all, and got very serious and put on the little business suit. We called it a uniform, the little two piece and had the hair straight and showed up for the bar exam. And Ms. Jones was a member of the bar in September (laughter). So, but you know it's--you got to do your--see you know I'm going to stand out, because I'm African American. I don't need to show up there with a Nehru jacket and an afro. Story_ID: 571461 Speaker 1: Then you go to work in New York [New York]? You move to New York. Speaker 2: I go to work in New York, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, now you know, this--because LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] had only had at that point--wasn't Jack Greenberg the third? Speaker 2: Second. Speaker 1: Second. So it was Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall] and then Jack (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jack. Speaker 1: --and then you. Speaker 2: Julius [HistoryMaker Julius Chambers]. Speaker 1: Oh Julius, okay. Speaker 2: And then me. Speaker 1: And then you, okay. Now in that whole, you know the process--so you go there. What are you finding? What kind of organization are you finding in LDF? Speaker 2: Oh it's-- Speaker 1: How large is the (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At first it's--it's sort, it's like Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], in some sense. At LDF, oh the quality of the minds; I mean the lawyers who are on that staff--not only very bright and very smart, but very committed to issues that I'd always wanted to work on. I mean, just being in LDF was a--Conrad Harper [Conrad K. Harper], who just stepped down from Simpson That- [Simpson Thacher and Bartlett, LLP]--was on the staff, on the staff. Jim Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, III], the son of Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] who had been president of Howard, you know, they're on the staff. The cooperating attorneys all around, I mean it was just--it's, it was the place to be. Lynn Huntley came in a year after I was there, and Lynn Walker Huntley [sic. HistoryMaker Lynn Jones Huntley] used to be with the Ford Foundation [New York, New York]. She had clerked for Connie Motley [Constance Baker Motley], Law Review at Columbia Law School [New York, New York], African American woman. I mean it was just, it was the place to be and then to get the responsibility. You had clients who really needed you to litigate these cases. You weren't just sitting writing briefs, you were interviewing your clients, as well. You were--you had mentors. You could go to court next to people who were litigating and see how it's done, you know. You learn which side of the court to sit on early. You learn who the bailiff was, you know. You had responsibility. You had motions to argue. You know here I am fresh out of law school [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] and actively engaged in a practice. It was a heady, heady time and I was so grateful to be able to have that job. Speaker 1: Let's talk about just the history of LDF a little bit. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know because, how--and I'm interested in how the LDF that you came to, you know you found under Jack Greenberg how did it come to be and why was it able to-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --you know attract such minds and things like that. So if you could just talk a little bit about the org, how the organization came--its relationship with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Story_ID: 571462 Speaker 1: I want you to tell the history of LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] you know, and-- Speaker 2: Well briefly put, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was founded in 1909. The--Charlie Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston] who, one of the most brilliant lawyers of our time, started litigating cases in the '30s [1930s]. He went to Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] in 1929 to upgrade the law school, 'cause the law school I think had been a night school or something, and just wasn't really very highly--and Mordecai Johnson, who was president of Howard at the time, tapped Charlie Houston who had come from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and who everybody knew was brilliant, got him to--as he was practicing law in Washington [D.C.] with his folks, got him to come and to build up. His job was to make the law school competitive and which he took very, I mean, took very seriously. And you can tell by his classes that he admitted, Oliver Hill [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill] and Thurgood Marshall, you know, were some of his early pupils--okay, couple of years after he got that law school going, a year or two. Well, then Charlie Houston in the mid-'30s [1930s] started bringing different cases as part of the--he became special counsel to the NAACP, and these were the cases trying to desegregate institutions of higher education. You know, he filed a suit against the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], different schools. And Charlie Houston came up to New York [New York] and was working--all this was NAACP, you know, and finally he decided he wanted to go back to Washington and he got his pupil, his former pupil who--Thurgood Marshall--to take on and do this at the NAACP. So Thurgood came on, I'm thinking, '38 [1938], '39 [1939], up in there at the NAACP, LDF-NAACP, it was. And so the idea came around '39 [1939] that the lawyers needed money to function. NAACP was considered a, an advocacy group, and couldn't get public dollars. They just couldn't get non-profit dollars. Whereas, the lawyers thought if they had a separate organization and the board, NAACP board, if they had a separate organization they could raise money, non-profit money, under this separate organization. So they were going to set up this new (c)(3) [501 (c)(3)] and name it the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. And they--lawyers in the major firms in New York, one or two of them, stepped up to the plate and was able to persuade the New York courts that they should give a charter to this new legal entity, because it was unheard of that you could have lawyers working for no money, non-profit lawyer was a new concept. And they really sold it to the courts of New York, who understood it, bought into it; and so thus LDF was born in 1940. And so when LDF was born in 1940 they still had interlocking boards. They had to set up this new board and all, but they had interlocking boards with the NAACP. It was really in name only, you know, just so you can get this money coming in the door. Same offices, everything was the same. And so the legal campaigns, they started this whole legal campaign, and stayed from 1940 until Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] was decided. The second Brown came out in '55 [1955]. The southern senators were so upset with this decision, they started looking into the organizational structure of the NAACP. And in it they saw this organization which was non-profit, the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, that was there, and they said, "This violated the rules. You can't have--if you're a separate organization you got to be separate in fact as well." So the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] then sent a letter making it clear that this is what would have to happen. So that's what happened in 1957, the NAA- they had to end the interlocking boards. People decided which board they were going to be on, and you had to sever--they were already separate in law, but you had to separate them in fact, as well. And so in 1957 is when the actual factual separation began, although LDF existed from 1940 forward. Story_ID: 571463 Speaker 1: So really this is a time when Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall] is viewed in a positive way-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, very positively because of Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. He's god almost then, right? Speaker 2: Oh, in the '40s [1940s]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --throughout the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s]-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --Thurgood's at the top of his game. Speaker 1: That's right. So it's really--and Charlie Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston] really-- Speaker 2: And he died in '51 [sic. 1950]. Speaker 1: He died in-- Speaker 2: Heart attack. Speaker 1: Okay. So, but this was his appointed person, his heir-- Speaker 2: This is his appointed--and it was his vision. Brown was Charlie Houston's vision. And I think Charlie Houston's death inspired Thurgood and the LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] staff so, because the year that he died they filed these five cases that made Brown--they were all filed that year, Kansas, Virginia, Delaware, let me see, Kansas, Virginia, Delaware, we got two more states, D.C., District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], and we got a fifth jurisdiction which was, what was it? I said Virginia? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: It will come to me. It will come to me. Speaker 1: So here--so LDF in 1950--so they separate in 1957. Speaker 2: South Carolina. Speaker 1: Oh South Carolina, okay good. So LDF separates and it has its own location. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And at this point it's Thurgood and Robert Carter [HistoryMaker Robert L. Carter]? Speaker 2: Thurgood, Robert Carter, Jack Greenberg, Connie Motley [Constance Baker Motley], and Frank Williams [Franklin Hall Williams]. There was a couple, you know, they had about eight of them. Speaker 1: And they had been working with Thurgood for how many? Connie Motley-- Speaker 2: Oh Connie Motley was--came in, in '46 [1946] as a law student. Jack came in, in '48 [1948], Bob Carter came in '44 [1944]. Speaker 1: And so he had this whole team? This is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had his team. Speaker 1: Okay, oh-- Story_ID: 571464 Speaker 1: How were they processing, you know, all these requests, you know (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know-- Speaker 1: I mean I often-- Speaker 2: --there are some great books on this thing, but you know 'cause Connie Motley [Constance Baker Motley] in her book ['Equal Justice Under Law: An Autobiography'], great autobiography, explains how she got the James Meredith case, 'cause Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall] got this letter from this young man who said he wanted to desegregate the University of Mississippi's school, the college, University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi]. And Thurgood said, "This is somebody who's lost his mind," (laughter) when he read the letter, "Somebody who's lost his mind." Told Connie Motley, "See what you can do with this." And so that's what ended Connie Motley with twenty-two trips to Mississippi in eighteen months. She became very close to Medgar Evers. He met her at the airport in Jackson [Mississippi] every time. Got to Motley. She took her son there once and he played with the kids and she pointed out to Medgar, "Medgar those bushes on your house, you need to cut those bushes down." So she knew Medgar well, and she was stunned that he was assassinated, which they got this admission right during this period, '63 [1963]. So it was, it was, you know--but that's how she got the case, 'cause Thurgood said, "This is somebody that lost their mind so see what you can do." They were inundated with cases. I mean, I just look at Judge Motley from '61 [1961] until she left the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] in '65 [1965], four years. She had ten [U.S.] Supreme Court arguments. She had twenty-two trips to Mississippi, she had University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida]. She had the Florida higher education cases, elementary, secondary and higher education cases. She had University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], she had the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina]; she had all that litigation. I mean that's just one--that's her schedule, you know. You had Bob Carter [HistoryMaker Robert L. Carter], and there were all of the issues trying to take the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] out of existence: in Virginia, in Alabama, they were trying to you know say that the NAACP couldn't exist as an organization 'cause it wasn't an advocacy organization, it was a political entity. You know, they want the membership lists and all of this kind of stuff. I mean those people, I look and I think about their litigation schedules and I just don't see how they did it, as I sit here now. Now I'm used to being busy and LDF in my day, you know, we--those lawyers, you know, we put some time in. But those lawyers in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], 'cause I just, I just marvel at it. Story_ID: 571465 Speaker 1: Now when you--so tell me about Jack Greenberg, because he's the only non-black that you mention, you know, part of the core. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And he became out of LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.]. Tell me how he came, you know-- Speaker 2: He had worked with Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall]. Thurgood handpicked Jack as his successor, that's what happened. And that you know, he--Thurgood left in '61 [1961] and Thurgood is gone now, so you know you can't ask Thurgood. But Thurgood decided that Jack would be the one to lead LDF and the LD- and it was no con- dissension about it at all. You know, the LDF bought it. The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], you know everybody agreed, because he let Roy Wilkins in, it wasn't Roy it was one that preceded Roy, Walter White. They all--everybody acquiesced and that you know, that's what happened. Speaker 1: So the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Jack led LDF for twenty-three years. He's the longest serving director counsel we've ever had, from '61 [1961] until '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: So now when--because he developed a reputation as real stalwart, you know committed person to the 'cause. Speaker 2: Well yeah, but Jack, from what I remember, Jack didn't do a lot of traveling in the Deep South. He knew how to use his lawyers. He knew how to use his lawyers. He saw himself as getting the resources. His job was to get the resources and help develop the legal strategy, help develop the concept so you can get the money from the foundations, help develop the programs and the plans so the LDF could grow. He set up the scholarship program and a program whereby they funded lawyers to get started in the South. So LDF had a program where a lawyer graduated, if they were selected in this program, would get money the first two years for himself, his secretary, and would get his law library and his rent paid, so he could set up an office. And you know Jack came up with that program and it was funny, it was very successful. It seeded the South with lawyers, you know. And that's how Julius [HistoryMaker Julius Chambers] got started. That's a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that was Jack's brainchild? Speaker 2: That's right. Story_ID: 571466 Speaker 1: So now the LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] that you came into, because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I came in the '70s [1970s]. Jack [Jack Greenberg] had been there nine years. Speaker 1: Seventy [1970] which is--right and Connie Motley [Constance Baker Motley] had been gone for five years. Speaker 2: Five years, that's right. Speaker 1: But Rob (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Robert Carter [HistoryMaker Robert L. Carter] was at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause he--when the split came he left a year or so then you need to read his autobiography ['A Matter of Law: A Memoir of Struggle in the Cause of Equal Rights,' Robert L. Carter]. He explains why he left, 'cause things had broken down between he and Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall], you know. I think you know Bob is an extraordinary lawyer. His birthday matter of fact, I'm going to a party for him next week. And I have immense respect for him, immense respect for--and Bob is called a lawyer's lawyer. They don't come better. But I think he and Thurgood must have had at some point some disagreement about something. I don't know how it came about, or why it came about. I'm not privy to that, you know. You know Bob, whatever Bob is going to say about it, he put it in his book and his book is pretty thorough. I read it from cover to cover. But things had broken down between them, around '58 [1958], '59 [1959] so he left LDF and went to the NAACP and became general counsel of the NAACP. And three years after he left, Thurgood left and went on the federal bench. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then Jack took over. Story_ID: 571467 Speaker 1: Tell me the Jack Greenberg that you got to know and the--and what immediately you were given, 'cause you immediately--I mean the thing about LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] is you could be thrown into things, right? Speaker 2: Yes. But Jack hired me--see he, when he hired you he had to have a slot for you. I--now that I've been director counsel, I understand how you have to do that. And so he had a--he knew where the slot in his budget was. It was in capital punishment. And so he hired me as a member of the capital punishment team of lawyers. And so that's where I spent, you know, I'm immersed in those cases my first three, four years out of law school [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia]. And they was--again and I'm trying death penalty cases in Alabama. I'm getting folks off death row. Most black men in the South on death--were on death row for rape, allegedly raping white women. And they were convicted, you know, before you--and not only that, rape was a capital offense. A capital offense was any offense the state determined, any felony the state determined to be a capital offense. Nighttime burglary was a capital offense. Anything the state wanted to make a capital offense, was. And so that's the vibe we were functioning in. I mean, and prison teeming with black men, you know, for robbery and you know these--and rape was what they loved to throw at a black man. And I jumped into the middle of this. I had jumped into the middle of this and I mean it took some of everything, but I mean trying cases in southern courts. Ku Klux Klan [KKK] wrapping themselves around the courthouse, full regalia, you know. I'm coming out of the courthouse with my cooperating attorney, my lawyer, local lawyer and we're looking under the--opening the hood looking for the bomb before we start the car, you know. That's what it was. But you know--and it's all in the South, Deep South. Speaker 1: Okay. So give me, talk about two of your cases. I know--wasn't there Furman v. Georgia [Furman v. Georgia, 1972]? Speaker 2: Yeah well Furman was the [U.S.] Supreme Court case. Speaker 1: Okay, let's talk about-- Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: --the other, the cases that you were handling 'cause-- Speaker 2: Most of the cases I had--I had the cases when they got up on appeal, didn't try the cases, but here I was--a transcript, trial transcript would be dumped in my lap, and we had to--and I had to do an appellate court brief to make some argument to get a retrial, or to get something done, or to get it you know get a decision, get it in the Supreme Court, do something with it. And so, and there were a team of three of us on the staff. And Tony Amsterdam [Anthony G. Amsterdam] who is now teaching at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] out--that time was at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], he was really the head, our leader. Although he was at Stanford, he was the one we looked--see that's how he volunteered his time with LDF. And so we really reported to Tony. Jack Himmelstein was the staff, the senior guy on staff, white attorney, that Lynn Huntley [HistoryMaker Lynn Jones Huntley] and I reported to, but back went with Tony. Jack sort of reported to Tony and so that--it was the four of us and we were the capital punishment, criminal justice staff for the Legal Defense Fund and we were good. We were good. We had it coming at us, you know. We had it coming at us. And so finally-- Speaker 1: Now how many cases would you be handling in any one time? Speaker 2: Oh, we had a docket, the four of us we had a docket, we had a hundred cases. We had, easily we had a hundred cases. Story_ID: 571468 Speaker 1: And when you're dealing with appellate courts, what is the, what's the whole process with appellate--because that's a much different, than if you're, you know on the trial court (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Trial court. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But what these--some of these cases--one case I remember kept coming back to us. Kept coming back to us, every time we would get it reversed, it would come back. So I decided, on this one occasion I said, I told Jack [Jack Greenberg], I said I'm going down to Alabama and I'm gonna try this case. I'm gonna try this case, get this behind us. And so cooperating attorney and I, who's chief judge of the court down there now, he and I tried this case back in the early '70s [1970s] and we--he was convicted. He was convicted, but with no death penalty, got a term of years, 'cause we kept--he kept getting the death penalty, kept coming back. And the--he shouldn't have been getting the death penalty for this, you know and they were egregious, the violations of law, the rules, the procedural rules. So when we tried it and got it over with, then it didn't come back to us anymore, you know. And Johnny Beecher just went off to prison, you know, for whatever period of time. But we never got a death penalty, 'cause--all the trials we had. We had a lot of trials, we didn't get a death penalty during a trial. And then on--we got several people off of death row when we proved that they shouldn't have been convicted in the first place, and they--it was bogus. And this is '71 [1971], '72 [1972] before all the--now you hear about it (unclear) but this is Alabama-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in '72 [1972] and '73 [1973], major victories. And these guys would walk and they would call us up. And they would--I would go down to see him and they're so ecstatic, so we had some victories. Speaker 1: But how--what was the strategy behind a lot of these? What--who were you bringing you know to the--? Speaker 2: What we were trying to do was to show--we were trying to get established through the courts, that people who had doubts about the death penalty should be allowed to sit on juries. In other words, we call it death qualifying a jury. Anybody who had a doubt about a death penalty, if they say, "Do you believe in death penalty?" and you say, "Oh well maybe, I'm ambivalent," you would be stricken for calls. So in other words, your death, your jury was death qualified, before you even went to trial. Anybody who had a doubt period, was not there! And so we were saying that was a violation of your right to trial by jury you know trying to establish the principles. Also, we took a position that in looking at these cases, that a jury, the same jury should not decide your guilt and innocence that decided what punishment you got. Or, if the same jury decided, they should decide it at different times. As part of your guilt or innocence determination, they should not determine life or death, 'cause it mixes things and so just separate that out. So all of that was wrapped up in Furman [Furman v. Georgia, 1972] and (unclear). And also in Furman we--a series of case--Furman came up through Georgia, the arbitrariness in the system, you know the likelihood you're getting the death penalty really increased exponentially if you were African American. Increased--yet you had whites charged with similar crimes. The prosecutor didn't ask for the death penalty. That prosecutorial discretion issue, you know, was a big issue, so the whole series of issues around in there. We showed that in most of the states, the statutory scheme set up, whereby a defendant got the death penalty was fallacious. The statutory scheme itself needed to be changed, and it was on that theory that we were able to get it wiped out in thirty-seven states 'cause they had similar statutes. Story_ID: 571469 Speaker 1: And you handled, you--that was--? Speaker 2: Yeah I--what happened was, Furman [Furman v. Georgia, 1972]--it was so interesting. Speaker 1: How did you end up getting Furman? Furman was the--you were--because it was a capital punishment, right? Speaker 2: It was a capital punishment case. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Tony--and see Tony Amsterdam [Anthony G. Amsterdam] argued Furman, and what happened was I spent the first two years--'cause he was leading up to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, and I remember when I first came--I never-now, I see how important it was working on the briefs, working on the issues. But he came and he said, "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones], this case cannot be heard in the Supreme Court because the secretary of the State of Georgia will not certify the case to the Supreme Court." You're supposed to--the clerk and the secretary are supposed to sign a document to certify the case to the Supreme Court. It comes from the Supreme Court of Georgia and the secretary refused to do it, clerk refused to do it. She absolutely refused. And there was nothing in law that could make her do it. And they'd been trying for months and they knew if they Supreme Court didn't hear this case it, you know--so I, they dispatched me later to Georgia, and my job was to come back there with a signature on that document to get that case certified. And I, and so that's--I went, it was a con, really. Not really a con, I met with her several times. We had lunch one time. I went by the court and I got--she got to know me. And so after I had been there to Georgia about three or four days I told her, whatever her name was, she's a white female. She said, "All these carpetbaggers coming in there trying to tell her what to do, you know and blah, blah, blah, blah." So I told her, I said, "You know, I understand, right." I said and, "You know I'm Virginian, so I'm southern." "Oh you're from?" "You know, oh yeah." So I said, "I do understand." I said, "But you know, I'm gonna lose my job if you don't sign this thing." I said, "I, I really--I'm here--I've got this job. I just got my law school, I'm just starting. And a lot rides on this you see." I said, "No one ever knows what the Supreme Court's going to do on any subject." I said, "You know, I don't know." But I said you know, "Most likely the court may be affirmed. Your Supreme Court may be affirmed." And I said but I--, "It would just help me immensely in starting this career if you would just let that case go." She looked at--she said, "Elaine, I'm doing this for you." (Laughter) She said, "I'm doing this for you." I said, "I really, really appreciate it." Speaker 1: So that was major? Speaker 2: Oh! So I mean, I--that was a big deal (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was amazing. Speaker 2: So we got it in--so the case, Supreme Court could hear the case then I could start working on the briefs and you know, the moot courts and all that kind--but it was a fascinating experience to be able to help pull the record together, you know, get the, all the exhibits and the document, really learning. And I was two years out of law school [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] and I'm a central, I'm counselor of record in this case, you know. So--but that was major. Without it, we couldn't have been in the Supreme Court. Story_ID: 571470 Speaker 1: What was the work that you had to do after that? Speaker 2: Well it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, it was because then it's-- Speaker 2: --it was. And after that when Furman [Furman v. Georgia, 1972] was decided, it was a major victory. Speaker 1: Now did--you said Tony [Anthony G. Amsterdam], he argued the--? Speaker 2: Tony Amsterdam--I was there. Speaker 1: So were you there? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Oh yeah. Speaker 1: So that was your first time in the--? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Oh yes. Oh yes. So--but after that Tony says-- Speaker 1: Was Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall] on the court then? No, he was on the court of appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit]? Speaker 2: Thurgood wasn't--no, Thurgood was on the [U.S.] Supreme Court. Speaker 1: He was. So he was there? Speaker 2: He was there. Speaker 1: Oh that must have been totally (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was in the Supreme-- Speaker 1: --exciting. Speaker 2: It was. It was. It was. Thurgood was on the Supreme Court so--'cause he got there in '67 [1967] I'm thinking, '67 [1967]. Anyway, you know, so--but the point was when Furman v. Georgia was decided they sent us--Tony told me, "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones], you and Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Jones Huntley]," 'cause we're the two, have to go to Georgia and tell the inmates what is hap- what had happened, 'cause it's Furman v. Georgia. So Lynn and I go to Georgia to the prison (unclear) and the guards there, they're angry about this decision 'cause it entered out the death row. They have all of the death row inmates in there in a room sitting in a semi-circle, ushers leading me into the room and they leave and close the door, lock the door. That's what they did to us. That's what they did. Lock the door. Every death row inmate in Georgia; it was about forty of them (laughter). Speaker 1: Are you serious? Speaker 2: I'm serious. Speaker 1: So what did you do? Speaker 2: All we could do. There were two seats there, we took them! And I looked at Lynn and I knew that was unusual, that wasn't supposed to happen. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Unclear) you know, we're, look we were saying these people shouldn't get the death penalty. We were not saying they were innocent. Just a minute, there is a distinction (laughter). Speaker 1: So what happened? Speaker 2: So we're sitting--so I looked at Lynn, and she looked at me. We laugh about it today. I looked at her, she looked at me. I said I tell you what. I tell you what, I said, "I'm glad we're bringing good news, good news 'cause we won the case," (laughter). I'm glad we're bringing--so we were in there about an hour and I had, I mean there were two or three jailhouse lawyers in there, of the forty on death row. And we were going--we were into it right, 'cause they wanted to know--it was fun. We enjoyed it, 'cause I--we knew what we were talking about, and he knew we knew, he could tell we knew. And they weren't gonna hurt us, we were the lawyers, we were their key. Story_ID: 571471 Speaker 1: The Peace Corps experience affected my practice, some things that I got out of it in terms of other cultures and other people. One of the first cases in the United States Supreme Court, the first case on the issue of employment discrimination, the court heard it in 1971. I had been at the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] for one year. It was a very important issue, this whole question of economic rights and being able to be hired and get promoted. A white female in Georgia had three preschool age kids and she applied for a job at Martin Marietta [Martin Marietta Corporation] and they told her, "No, you cannot be hired 'cause you have three preschool aged kids and you should be home with your children." Well, under the law--you know, I mean that may be true, she should be home with her children but the law is that if she's got the qualifications for the job, then you need to hire her for the job. It's her decision as to where she should be. And so we won that case in the Supreme Court of the United States, okay with Thurgood Marshall writing on that. Afterwards, we're having a dinner in New York [New York] to celebrate the victory of the case and the white female plaintiff is there, and she's middle, she's you know forties, forty-five. And she had to be younger than that, she had these three preschool aged kids, unless they were adopted--but she looked to be in her early forties. Anyway, she said--I asked her, "Ms. Phillips," her name was Ida Mae Phillips [Ida Phillips], Phillips v. Martin Marietta [Phillips v. Martin Marietta Corporation, 1971] is the name of the case. I said, "Ms. Phillips, how did you come to the Legal Defense Fund?" See, I was selected, I was a new lawyer on the staff, selected to meet actually the client. And she looked at me, she said "Oh," she said, "this was civil rights issues and I knew Negroes understood civil rights and so--and I knew this was a Negra organization." We're all at dinner, some restaurant in New York. All at--and, "I knew this is a Negra organization and I came here." Now she said Negra twice, and I sat back and everybody else, and I sat back and I said to myself, "See that's why you have to think." I said, "We're here celebrating a victory for Ms. Phillips. Ms. Phillips is tickled, she's happy, she's pleased." I said, "The last thing she wants to do is insult us. She doesn't want to insult us." So when people say things, you don't just take it at face value, you have to think about it in context. I said, "So now why is she saying this?" She's saying this because where she's from in Georgia, they use the lazy a, it slurs off their tongues, Negra. It's not Negro 'cause then it was Neg- wasn't black, wasn't African American, it was Negro, so Negra, you see. So I--when that--it didn't take long for that to drop and then I leaned forward. And I said, "Now Ms. Phillips," I said "Negra is an insult to black people." She said "Oh." I said, "Yes." I said--I played that southern card again. I said, "I'm from the South like you, and I've heard--now practice with me, watch it, 'Negro, Negro.'" I said, "Take your time and say, Negro." So she leaned forward. She said, "Negro." So we were practicing Negro. And so Negro is what--I said, "Think of knee and think of grow," and I said, "just say the two words, Negro," and she practiced. But you see you could--I could--we all could have gotten insulted, dinner, blow up in a huff 'cause she insulted, blah, blah, blah, blah you know, but that's where the Peace Corps experience taught me different cultures, different backgrounds, take time to think where a person is coming from, and to try to listen to their meaning, 'cause many times they do not mean to insult. They do not mean to insult. That's why again, diversity is so important you know. Joe Biden talking about clean. Clean! I mean he didn't mean to insult, you know. So that's an important lesson. Story_ID: 571472 Speaker 1: So really within two years, Furman v. Georgia [Furman v. Georgia, 1972] happens, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: And then what--and you're doing still these capital cases? Speaker 2: Yeah, and then after that I got several [U.S.] Supreme Court victories on the papers. The court didn't even have to hear arguments. I had several cases that we'd written the briefs and you know and waiting on argument and Supreme Court ruled for me on the papers. Speaker 1: So how often does that happen? Speaker 2: It doesn't, but it had happened. I had it at least three times. Speaker 1: How? Why? I mean I don't-- Speaker 2: 'Cause it argued--I just the--you know this is the, this is '70s [1970s] and the arguments were powerful. The arguments were power--there had been in abuse. Here I had one case, it was they shot the man's leg, he was running and they shot him in a field and they, standing over him with the rifle. Meanwhile they shot him in the leg, he's bleeding and holding the rifle to his head and said, "You will confess or die." Now what's to be heard about that? That's a coerced confession, if ever there was one. And all I'm saying is the man--I'm not saying that the man should go free I'm staying he should stand a new trial. Court agreed with that, said (unclear). I mean the facts aren't disputed. That kind of thing was going on. Speaker 1: So let me ask you, at this point how many--how large is the staff at the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.]? I mean how large is it? Speaker 2: Staff now is about-- Speaker 1: No, no, no, then, then. Speaker 2: Oh. Oh, fifty. Speaker 1: Fifty. Speaker 2: Everybody. Speaker 1: Okay, and it's--are you--that's not including--? Speaker 2: That's secretaries, fundraising, development. Speaker 1: Oh it is, it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's everybody. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 2: That's everybody. Speaker 1: Okay. And were you getting (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maybe not fifty, maybe forty-five. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. That's even law interns, 'cause you always had legal interns, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You would get-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you would get real good talent that way, right? Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now what lessons are you sort of learning in this process? I mean obviously you knew you were on the fast track? Speaker 1: I'm on the--yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm moving, I'm traveling, I, you know, this is--I've got major employment case in Pensacola, Florida. I'm traveling back and forth. I'm exhausted. I'm exhausted. Speaker 2: No this is you're saying this is 1973-- Speaker 1: This is '73 [1973], '4 [1974]. Speaker 2: Okay. Now when did you transition into employment from capital--or did--was there-- Speaker 1: After--around '73 [1973]. Speaker 2: Now why is that? Speaker 1: You get burned out. Speaker 2: You do. Okay. Speaker 1: I mean you try not to get burned out, but you do. I mean you, when you have a steady job of four years in trial, in litigation, all these sordid facts and the--I mean you can just--you got to do something else for a while, even if you come back, see. So I have--a criminal lawyer has always--I've always enjoyed criminal law, but four years, you know, nonstop--you got to go, you got to do something else. Speaker 2: So that's where employment came in at that point? Speaker 1: That's where employment came in. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I shifted over to do employment cases. Speaker 2: Okay. Now who took your place on the criminal, you know, the capital punishment side then? Speaker 1: You know who came in eventually? Was David Kendall [David E. Kendall]. David is--well, did David come then? I think he came then. I think he came then. David was--he's Williams & Connolly [Williams and Connolly LLP, Washington, D.C.], a partner in Williams & Connolly. He was Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] lawyer. He was Bill Clinton's lawyer during the impeachment, David Kendall. David Kendall was my--came in after me as--in death penalty. Speaker 2: Now when people would come to LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] would they come for a period of time? Like would it be--? Speaker 1: Um-hm, you'd just come. You were hired on the staff. You know LDF, the lawyers that were--I think about the lawyers who'd come through there, Deval Patrick [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick], just elected governor, was on the staff of the Legal Defense Fund. He was one of the younger lawyers on the staff when I went down to Washington [D.C.]. I mean just, you just look across at--Bill Lann Lee, you know, was civil rights chief under Clinton, on the staff of the Legal Defense Fund. So there's a gentleman in New York, Peter Sherwood [O. Peter Sherwood] on the staff of the Legal Defense Fund. I mean just the quality--[HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier on the staff, Legal Defense--all staff lawyers. I mean we're so fortunate in the quality that we attract. And that's been consistent. That's been consistent. Speaker 2: Which says a lot you know about maintaining that type of quality, you know, under a lot of different turbulent times and things like that. Speaker 1: That's a real fact. Speaker 2: That's why-- Speaker 1: Because we know our--what we have to sell, what we bring to the table with LDF at the table is the quality. Without the quality, you don't have anything. But we've got some of the toughest, most attractable legal issues out there and so the quality is our currency. Story_ID: 571473 Speaker 1: How were cases decided to take on [at the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.]? That's what I'm sort of wondering and so-- Speaker 2: Well what you did each area had a chief, a lawyer in charge of that area. So Jack Himmelstein was head of capital punishment. I'm trying to remember who was head of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who was employment? Speaker 2: --who was head of-- Speaker 1: Employment? Speaker 2: Employment yeah, there was a lawyer head of employment at the time. I know there were several of us on the staff. I'm trying--oh, Bill Robinson [William L. Robinson], who later went down to the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] was head of employment. You had head of education (unclear) the different areas, you know. Then we got head of voting, you know voting section and you have different sections. Speaker 1: So let me ask this like, so when you went and you started doing employment-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and you, there are several cases. You had I think Patterson v. American Tobacco [American Tobacco Company v. Patterson, 1982]. Speaker 2: Right. Right, that was the first. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, I mean was that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it Stallworth [Stallworth v. Monsanto Company, 1977]? Speaker 2: Monsanto and Stallworth was the first. Speaker 1: Okay, Stallworth first. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Stallworth was first but then Patterson--so we won Stallworth, matter of fact, we won them all. Speaker 1: Now was Stallworth the one in Florida? Speaker 2: In Florida, it was. Speaker 1: Okay. And can you talk about the circumstances? Speaker 2: I remember Judge Arnow [Winston E. Arnow], the district court judge, he's deceased now. It was, so you had African American employees, it's the glass ceiling sort of thing, cement ceiling. You can get to a certain point, and then after--you--certain jobs you just couldn't get, the upper tier jobs. I don't care how long you've been at the plant or how knowledgeable you were, you had to train your superiors and that. And so it was a major--Kent Spriggs, you later became the mayor of Tallahassee [Florida], was our cooperating attorney, and white lawyer in Tallahassee, and that case had been brought and was getting ready for trial. And so they said "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones], we need another lawyer to try this case." It was Spriggs. And so Spriggs and I then we became co-counsel and then we worked on the case for two or three years and brought it in and we got a huge settlement. But I remember in court one day, it was not a jury trial--we tried it to the judge. And Judge Arnow was an older white male judge, you know and just didn't like this case. They don't like racial discrimination cases against one of the biggest employers in the county, right. And so, but he came up with some--I sat--I was sitting at counsel table and he ruled on something and his ruling was just palpably erroneous. It was just wrong, factually wrong. And I sat--I was just sitting, I didn't say a word. Kent had argued the motion or something, and my face must have--my face is expressive and it must have reflected what I thought of the ruling. The judge looked over the bench, looked at me and said, "Ms. Jones, you may not like my ruling but it's my ruling nevertheless." I had not said a word. "Ms. Jones, you may not like my ruling but it's my ruling nevertheless." So, but that's the kind of thing. But anyway, so Stallworth we settled Stallworth and then the next big case was in Richmond, Virginia which was my hometown, Richmond. My hometown was Norfolk [Virginia], but home state of Virginia. Story_ID: 571474 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's Patterson? Speaker 2: Patterson v. American Tobacco [American Tobacco Company v. Patterson, 1982], and this was a major--'cause you had the tobacco industry and you had again, the race segregated jobs. Blacks couldn't just get in those upper tier jobs where you could wear a white shirt to work and pull down a bigger paycheck. We couldn't get those jobs, and so this was again about those issues. And I remember it was the first young--he just, I think he died recently, Albert Bryant was the judge. He had just been appointed a federal district court judge. His daddy had been a judge on the court of appeals. This is about '74 [1974], '74 [1974], '75 [1975]. And I remember when we tried that case and then the caucus, the lawyers talking, three of us, "We said you know we're going to make this case an education of Albert Bryant." In other words, "We're going to use this case to educate the judge about racial discrimination in America." It's going to be his tutorial, and that we did. We took him--we--the witnesses and we took them through slowly and that so he could see the story. We had a slam dunk win. It was unheard of in Virginia, in Patterson. It was a slam dunk win but we had to prove every aspect of our case, put the folks on the stand, opposing plant managers and all and not--we were not unpleasant, we were civil and you know the--and just talked them through it. And these plant managers had this attitude--they weren't being malevolent, but it's the tradition, the way things function. And so you could see the look on Bryant's face when I would say, "Well now, you know Mr. So and So, what if I told you that there was a law that said that that was unlawful," (laughter). You didn't--you just got them talking on the stand. We weren't antagonistic or any of that, just let them explain the story 'cause ours will be--the facts of the facts. The--ain't nothing more powerful than a fact, you know properly you know demonstrated to the court. And it was fair. Speaker 1: So now in that--what were the facts under that case though with Patterson? What--? Speaker 2: Oh this was a plant, tobacco plant made cigarettes, American brand, made cigarettes and you got this sweaty part of the plant with the tobacco fumes and the tobacco leaves and churning and the heat and the--you know, and that's where the black people were. And in the other part of the plant, clean, folk had white shirts where the cigarettes are already processed and the cigarettes in the wrapper. You handling the machines and the women are working on the machines and the men are walking around with clipboards and you know, and the air, it had air conditioning, you know. And so you could just see, one plant it was separated from each other by four or five miles. Go in one plant and see sweaty, dust, heat, you know; and as a young girl on a farm I had to work with tobacco, so I know what tobacco can do for you in your hair, eyes, nose, everywhere and there it was, you know. And then you go in the other plant and you know not a black person in sight. It's there to see. Story_ID: 571475 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. When you were doing you know these cases, what are the other strategies? Were--like were you identifying or did you have--? Speaker 2: Industries, we identified industries. Speaker 1: You identified industries. Did you identify, you had your co-counsels in place. The local-- Speaker 2: And they were local lawyers. Speaker 1: So, which is important, right? Speaker 2: Right, very important-- Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause-- Speaker 2: --the local lawyer. So, and see some of them I had met, remember? When I was on my tour-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --earlier. But Henry Marsh [HistoryMaker Henry L. Marsh, III] and Oliver Hill [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill], that's how I got to know them very well, that firm down there. They were also a firm in Brown v. Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], David's case in the Brown cases. So I--and Jimmy [James W. Benton, Jr.] was at that firm, my friend Jimmy Benton. Yeah, but I was assigned from LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] to work with the firm lawyer on this particular case [American Tobacco Company v. Patterson, 1982]. So I spent a lot of time in the firm. Speaker 1: So then they're getting paid--let me just understand. They are getting paid by LDF. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No, LDF doesn't have that kind of money. Speaker 1: Okay, so how-- Speaker 2: But what we would do is, at that point LDF would pay a little stipend to the lawyers. Speaker 1: So you would-- Speaker 2: To the firm for their time. Didn't pay much but just a little something, so they could keep the lights on and the secretary going. And then there was a counsel fee provision of these cases. So at the end of the case when we got the counsel fees, the firm would get its fees and the firm, if the firm could they would reimburse the Legal Defense Fund. That's why you know, if a lawyer deserves his fee you have to give it to him or her. The LDF would be--and LDF would have paid for my time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But my time would be in LDF, they would be reimbursed 'cause it's a portion of that fee. So, but you have to give the firm enough so they can--the cases take a while so the firm could hold body and soul together while they're litigating the case. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's the way it worked. Story_ID: 571476 Speaker 1: Now are there other things in these employ- because capital punishment, I'm not saying trial strategy is--has to be different, but different types of the community you were interacting with. So like employment cases versus capital punishment-- Speaker 2: Yeah, employment cases were working people. See, you know usually when you're dealing with a capital punishment case you're dealing with the down and out. People who have no counsel, no representation, they're just on the fringes of society and they picked them up and thrown them in on death row, you know. They're the worst problems in society. The employment cases were people who had jobs and had worked on those jobs many years, 'cause they were seniority cases. You know these are the people in your community who you know are trying to, you know, trying to do for their families, trying to play by these rules that we've set up, and who are being messed up in their work place. They can't advance. They can't do what they have to do to go to the next level, because they're being stifled because of these employment practices. So it was a different kind of client, you know. And also we were educating the court. The courts were seeing these people for the first time. Court, I mean, courts are used to criminal defendants, but they're not used to hardworking men sitting there with their gnarled fingers holding their little hats with their boots on sitting in court, four or five rows of them been working thirty years at the plant. See--and we had to teach them, talk to them and explain to them how to testify. Scared to death of the court, scared to death of a court. But they found solace in numbers. And also as their lawyer, you got to have their trust and their confidence. Story_ID: 571477 Speaker 1: So these were all class action? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're certifying classes at this point. Speaker 2: I'm certifying classes. Speaker 1: So you learned how to cert- 'cause there's a whole thing to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A whole thing now, I know, 'cause it was so effective, so they're trying to block it. You know the Corporate America wants to get rid of the class action. You know, 'cause class action is a tool where you can show those systemic policies and practices how it's affecting a range of people. Speaker 1: Now how was the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] playing into this (unclear)? Speaker 2: The EEOC at this point, were not as comfortable trying cases. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And Corporate America knew it. Speaker 1: Ok, I see. Speaker 2: So the EEOC came into the Patterson [American Tobacco Company v. Patterson, 1982] case, but they didn't do any trial work. They didn't do any trial--they were there, you know, 'cause they had to do--but they were-- Speaker 1: They had the--they were more legislative? Speaker 2: They were better at investigating the stuff, coming up with the facts, doing the investigation. It was called pretrial work. You know they could give you a memo to tell you how that company worked, you know, that read like a novel. They could give it to you, and that's what they were good at. So they had to develop trial lawyers, you know, but we didn't need them to try a case. Speaker 1: Okay. And then what about organizations, like in the South was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] playing a role at all, or were there--was the Urban League [National Urban League] playing a role? I mean in terms of in, helping with investigation or proof or--? Speaker 2: Well no, it's different. At that time the Urban League was trying to help people become employed. Speaker 1: Get jobs, okay. Speaker 2: See, I'm dealing now with employees. The--our cooperating attorneys also had worked with the local NAACP chapters on whatever, you know, and I'm sure a lot of people that we represented were NAACP members. But there was no institutional relationship, you know, between these cases and the NAACP at that point. It's just that whenever you benefited the black community, you helped all of us. So you know that's how that worked. Story_ID: 571478 Speaker 1: What about Swint v. Pullman-Standard? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Swint was another big one. Swint was another big one. It was a-- Speaker 1: Give me the facts, first. Speaker 2: It was--this is a Swint v. Pullman that made the rail, they made the railway cars for the Pullman Company. And I-- Speaker 1: Where was this based out of? Speaker 2: That's from Bessemer, Alabama, in Alabama, one of the biggest employers down there in Bessemer. You had the union, the steelworkers union, was supposed to be representing the interests of the black people, black--'cause everybody had to pay union dues. You had a closed shop. And the union wasn't doing the job it should have done. What the union was doing was representing the white employees and also representing the black employees. But when you had a conflict, 'cause you had the segregated unions. So when you had a conflict between the two, the union, you know, always benefited the white employees. So they weren't being fairly represented as one thing. Also, we're back to old fashioned discrimination in assignments, in seniority practices, you know. And you needed to have merged those seniority lists, the black and white seniority lists needed to be merged. And--but the unions fought that. The white unions fought it 'cause it meant more whites would be at the bottom, 'cause the blacks when they come in and the blacks usually had greater seniority. So you had all of those issues and back to the railway cars, who's doing the dirty work? You know, who's got the paint fumes? You know, who's got the soldering and all that; I mean who's got that, you know? And who is stenciling the thing on the car you know? And who is, you know, doing a--who is putting the windows in, you know, whatever. I mean who's doing that (unclear)? So, you know, who is inside doing the carpentry work that you do for the road and beds in the Pullman car? You know, that's white. Black folks are out there with the heat and the soldering and the--all over again, but just depends on which industry you're in. And so Swint was a huge case. I had three thousand class members. Speaker 1: Three thousand (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had three thousand. Speaker 1: You had to certify the class? Speaker 2: I had three--that was already certified when I came in, because when I came into Swint the judge had brought the case, who's now the chief judge of that (unclear) the district of Alabama--U.W. [U.W. Clemon] had brought that case. And he had tried that case, major trial, weeks and weeks on end, and they had lost that trial and they shouldn't have lost that case. But again you have a district court judge didn't want to alienate the biggest employer. See it's the business side, you know. So when I got the case, the case had been lost below, U.W. was going up on the federal bench, first black in the state. Speaker 1: U.W. Clemon. Speaker 2: Clemon. Speaker 1: Clemons. Oh (unclear) okay. Speaker 2: He was (unclear), he was going up on the federal bench and he needed a lawyer. The lawyer who had tried the case with him was leaving the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and so here is Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones]. Here's Elaine. So Elaine took on Swint and Oscar Adams who was the first black who became--remember the Alabama bar in 1951, had died, so his son is practicing law now and so his son is now local counsel and we've got Swint. And we had Swint, we had six or seven years of Swint. The court kept--you know when you got a district court judge-- Speaker 1: Now you mean six or seven, not sixty-seven. Speaker 2: No, six or seven. Speaker 1: Six or seven years. Speaker 2: Six to seven years of this case litigating back--and you got a tough time. You've got a district court judge who makes your findings of fact, you know, who's not trying to do what ought to be done here. So it took everything we had, but we finally--we went up to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, came back down. Went to the court of appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit], four or five times. It's twelve different opinions in Swint, twelve different opinions I've got in that case. Story_ID: 571479 Speaker 1: So, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so we finally settled it [Swint v. Pullman-Standard]. Speaker 1: You settled it? So that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eight million dollars. Eight million dollars. Speaker 1: Eight million dollars? Speaker 2: It was big money then and this is back in the, what? This is back in the '80s [1980s], early '80s [1980s] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did each of the class members get good money? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yep, we did because-- Speaker 2: How much (unclear)? Speaker 1: --a lot of them had died, lot of them, when I say filtered out, you know, the three thousand class. But a lot of them when you compared their salaries to the others, we couldn't see an economic difference. You know the job difference, the job was dirty but there was no premium, because you had a dirty job and somebody else had a clean job and everybody is deceased. They don't give you a premium for having a dirty job if you didn't have economic harm from it. So they washed out. So what stayed in the case were those that I could prove should have been in jobs that were more economically rewarding. Speaker 2: And how many did that--how many was that? Speaker 1: Oh, I had about eight or nine hundred. Speaker 2: Wow, from the three thousand. So how much did they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the $8 million--I don't--I can't--I'm trying--you can do the math. Speaker 2: Okay. So, but a third you get, a third doesn't-- Speaker 1: No, we didn't get a third. Speaker 2: You didn't-- Speaker 1: We didn't take a third of this, up and down, up and down, um-hm. We did counsel fees separately-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and that $8 million went to the class. Speaker 2: Oh that's great. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: But was that strategic about the (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, the judge finally realized I think that I wasn't going away. I was not going away. He couldn't get rid of this case. This was the oldest case on his docket. Speaker 2: So this--so it got decided that was 1973--? Speaker 1: Nineteen--no, no, no. Speaker 2: Long time before-- Speaker 1: No, late '80 [1980]-- Speaker 2: Eighty [1980]? Speaker 1: Eighty [1980], '83 [1983]-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983], '84 [1984] up in there somewhere. Speaker 2: But wait a minute, but you, did you leave and come back? Speaker 1: I did. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I did. Speaker 2: Oh I--oh, my God (laughter)! Speaker 1: I did. Speaker 2: You left (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] for two years. And then when I came back-- Speaker 2: You were still doing-- Speaker 1: That case was there. Speaker 2: That's amazing. Speaker 1: That case was there. Speaker 2: That's a--that's-- Speaker 1: They hung in there, those guys. But see they were still working. Speaker 2: But can I ask, another question I have, is how did the legislate--legislator, legislature, impact you know what you were doing? 'Cause sometimes you can, you know you can get cases decided, but then, you know, you just-- Speaker 1: But, so-- Speaker 2: --it doesn't have-- Speaker 1: You can do less and less of that, 'cause the expo- I mean you have to be careful how--what you get the legislature to do. And you're talking about--the legislature in the area of employment then all they were going to do for us when we got Title VII passed as part of the Civil Rights Act of 1965 [sic. Civil Rights Act of 1964]. Story_ID: 571480 Speaker 1: And that case [Swint v. Pullman-Standard] is going, and you're going back and forth, and back and forth. You win and appeal and it's remanded back, you know, you go back and forth. Speaker 2: Documents, records up the ying-yaw, you know, no computer, all of this paper. Speaker 1: How many people were working on this (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Boxes and boxes. I had--I would have to make it with interns, so I would have about three a summer. And then during the year I would have one other intern working year round. Speaker 1: Now at this time are you still within employment? Are you primarily doing employment still (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, what happened is I leave. Speaker 1: Now you leave to go-- Speaker 2: To-- Speaker 1: --with Bill Coleman [HistoryMaker Mr. William T. Coleman, Jr.]. Speaker 2: Bill Coleman. Speaker 1: Now how did that come about? Speaker 2: What happened was, Bill Coleman--let me see. When did Nixon--Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] stepped down. Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] I think became president around '73 [1973], some time in '73 [1973]. Bill Coleman became secretary in '74 [1974], early '74 [1974]. Bill Coleman called me up in seventy, in late '74 [1974]. He'd been secretary nine, ten months. And then he called me up and said "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones]," cause he had been chairman of our board, "I'm calling you directly because I've asked Jack for ten months to say something to you," Jack Greenberg my supervisor. Jack hadn't said a word. "I've talked to Jack several times to tell him I wanted to offer you a job, ask you to come here to Washington [D.C.] and help me out, be one of my special, one of my two special assistants." And I said, "Well Bill, this is November," or whatever it was. I said, "Jack hasn't said a word." He said, "I know he hadn't." (Laughter) Ten months, Bill finally woke up (unclear). Speaker 1: He's been waiting this whole time? Speaker 2: Had been waiting this whole time and Jack--so I said, "Well Bill you know," I said, "well this is quite something," I said. "But you know I don't know anything about transportation." He said, "Well neither do I and I'm the secretary." He said, "I'm the secretary," he said, "but come on down, we'll have fun." I said, "Bill send me something. Send me some information." So he sends me the budget and he sends me all about the departments and this pack of materials. And I see Jack. I said, "Jack, Bill called me." I said, "You didn't say anything about becoming secretary." He said, "Oh no, I didn't," you know. He didn't intend to say anything. So finally I thought it through and I said you know it's an opportunity, another venue. I've been at LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] almost five years, time to go see. So in '75 [1975] sometime in seventy--spring or something I don't know, I went on to Washington. And it was two years, and it was--I mean I learned so much about government. And I said, if we ever have to go into government, go in near the top 'cause I was special assistant to the secretary. I had the secretary's eyes and ears. I told you how he had to teach me how to deal with the people in the department. Did I tell you about it? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: He was really a mentor. Bill Coleman is, he still is, really an important mentor to me. We admitted women to the [U.S.] Coast Guard. We gave landing rights to the Concorde. We cleaned out his civil rights department and they were picketing us within the department 'cause you had a bunch of people who were in jobs pulling down paychecks, but weren't looking at the civil rights interests in these contracts and these grants. And we were billing--giving them money to build all these airports, Atlanta airport [William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia], all these new airports and nothing in it about minority contracts or nothing, you know. So it's time for the civil rights, those people had to go. So I, what I remembered was Bill--I was going to rent an apartment, and cause I'm southern calling everybody Mr. This and Mr. That, the secretaries, Mr. This, Mr. (unclear), Mr. This. And so Bill called me to my office, he said Elaine come in here--one day, toward the end of the day around seven o'clock, 'cause we worked late. And I sat down, I said, "Oh what have I done?" He said, "I know you're southern and all of that." He said, "But you are my special assistant, that means you're my eyes and ears in this department. You can't go around calling these people Mr. This and Mr. That and they're calling you by your first name." He said, "You learn these first names and you use them." You learn these first names and--see that's the--you learn them and you use them. I said, "Oh my," and so I had to learn them and I remember when Bill decided he was going to admit women to the Coast Guard, he said, "Elaine I want you to tell the commandant." And I went up to the commandant, who was beribboned and bejeweled all up on his uniform, and I said (clears throat), "Phil [ph.]?" Come first name, you know secretary's made a decision. So I mean I--all these guys I learned their first--now he was a (unclear) for high, federal highway, the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] administrator, head of the Coast Guard, head of the St. Lawrence Seaway, head of the mass transit, urban--all of them, first names, and Bill was right. Story_ID: 571481 Speaker 1: Now tell me because this was like 180 degree turn. Speaker 2: This is-- Speaker 1: I mean it was--it's like, here you are at LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and then-- Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. Speaker 1: --this is major. Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975] to '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Right, in a Republican administration [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr. administration], no less. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. And can you just talk a little bit about Bill Coleman [HistoryMaker Mr. William T. Coleman, Jr.] and his-- Speaker 2: Oh, Bill is an extraordinary person. I mean he's one who--I mean Bill is really--he understands, I mean economics and business, you know. He's, at heart he's a--he's from, he's of the world of business. He's served on so many boards. He knows how business functions, how it's supposed to function. He understands systems, you know. A superb lawyer in terms of his client base at his firm and--but--and Republican, always Repub- he said he calls it the party of Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] and said well you know a lot of people have gotten a long way from Lincoln that's still in your party. Party of Lincoln, but understands these social justice issues as clearly, you know. He and Charlie--Charlie Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston] has nothing on Bill Coleman in terms of his commitment to us. In the W.E.B. Du Bois, Charlie Houston, I put Bill in that category. But Bill believes first in preparation, you know Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], Harvard Law Review, first black clerk on the Supreme Court of United States, clerked for Felix Frankfurter, 1948. I mean excellence, see. And when you do your homework and when you prepare yourself, then you can do all of these other things that you know, that you're called upon to do. But people confuse economic--understanding economics, and the role of business with having--being anti-social justice and social advancement. You know, Bill could see how both lived side by side. They lived side by--I mean when you like when you open up markets and open up opportunity, you open up--the same applies to people. When you give people the opportunity to be contributing members of society, well then society is strengthened. He understands that. And so he's had a lifetime in that. So therefore he has his conservative Republican friends, and then he has his friends you know in the middle and to the left on a lot of these issues. And Bill is busy trying to educate that it's in our economic interests to view our people as an asset, and you--to invest in people; and he's lived that. And so he was you know, there for Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] as a young lawyer reading those briefs and writing and debating and arguing and want to you know contributing his time with Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall], working at his law firm all day and coming to the Legal Defense Fund at night, spending another six or seven hours there in the evening. That's Bill Coleman. He's an extraordinary man. Speaker 1: You know and it seems you, the two of you seem an odd combination in many ways. Speaker 2: Yeah, I bet. Speaker 1: But he saw a lot in you. Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He did. I-- Speaker 1: And it transferred over politics, immensely. Speaker 2: It, oh we--I mean I think Bill--we became friends. I mean I have immense respect and I think Bill saw me because I would make presentations to the board about my work, and he saw that spark, I think. It's what we look for. You know, when you care about what you do, it shows--and he saw that in me. And so when he got to transportation [U.S. Department of Transportation], he remembered me. And he--and it also was a test. Was I going to come do it or not? And I--we had a great two years. Bill and I had a great two years. I mean he, he's demanding, he's exacting, he has high expectations. But I like his goals and I liked his processes, you know, and he engaged you and involved you and I grew. I learned a lot from Bill Coleman. Story_ID: 571482 Speaker 1: Did you ever think--was there any decision that you were glad you were coming back here, I mean to the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.]? Was there any decision that--? Speaker 2: Yeah, well there was a pit there--I remember when David Rockefeller came by the office, 'cause he would come up to New York [New York]. And he--at one point I thought about--cause he invited me to come to something and it was an opportunity there to move out from LDF and to do something else, cause I had been at LDF seven or eight years. But you know what was so interesting? Another shrewd cookie is Jack Greenberg. Jack Greenberg shows up at the [U.S.] Department of Transportation two months shy of my getting ready to leave and said, "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones], we got another position for you." And I said, "What?" He said, "There's a tax reform act that [U.S.] Congress has passed, 1976, where public interest organizations can be involved in lobbying and legislative activity up to a certain amount of their budget. And so we're going to--we have a small office in Washington, but we're going to expand it and I want you in there and I want you to be our legislative person, in addition to whatever litigation you intend to continue." Wasn't that smart? Wasn't that--Jack showed up and that was his proposition, and I couldn't--too good to be true, so I said yes. And so I left transportation and went into the Washington office of LDF. I got there in '77 [1977] and stayed there until '92 [1992]. And I mean everything, I was all over that hill, the Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]. I got to meet every and know everybody, cause these issues we worked on we got four civil rights acts passed, I got to know my way around judicial appointments, you know, and how--work with the senate judiciary committee [U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary], you know, very closely, work with judicial nominees, worked on--the [U.S.] Supreme Court had undercut Title VII, the employment statute throughout the '80s [1980s] and we over--we got congress to overrule some twelve Supreme Court opinions in the Civil Rights Act of 1992 [sic. Civil Rights Act of 1991] and got it signed by President Bush I [President George Herbert Walker Bush]. He vetoed the first, and it was back on his desk a year later. I mean that--we--it was a vibrant--Clarence Mitchell [Clarence M. Mitchell, Jr.], who was head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], known as the 101st Senator, took me under his wing for a couple of years, cause when I first got back he was still with the NAACP and my office was across the hall from his. And so he took me under his wing and we would go to the Hill together and I mean I learned the ways of Washington. I learned the ways of Washington. Speaker 1: Now-- Story_ID: 571483 Speaker 1: You were essentially a lobbyist for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we didn't have--'cause we only had limited percent that we could lobby on, a limited-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] wasn't going to spend a lot of money on lobbying. So I had to do a lot of public education, lot of public speaking, lot of--but I also had to do my litigation, as well. I still had some cases. Speaker 1: So you were still working on Swint [Swint v. Pullman-Standard]? Speaker 2: I still had Swint, I still had--what else did I have? I had--did I have an education--I'm trying to think what else I had. Speaker 1: But didn't things like--now let me ask you like were you involved in the Bakke [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978] case at all--I mean or no it was his appointment. Speaker 2: No, no we had the Bakke decision. I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: --very much involved in that, cause when Bakke came back, LDF was filing an amicus brief. See all--this is all strategy, what do we do and how do we approach, all of that. And because at one point I became head of the Washington, D.C. office and then when Jack [Jack Greenberg] would have meetings, you know, about our--and you know, how to make sure we hold onto affirmative action do--cause they were trying, the right wing was trying to get rid of it through the [U.S.] Congress, you know. And remember Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], mend it but don't end it? That was a major effort there to get that to happen. So all of those issues, anything of any moment in civil rights between 1977 and 1992, I was there. Speaker 1: But that's like, that's a fifteen years period (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what it was. Story_ID: 571484 Speaker 1: Now did you--now I'm just wondering in that instance, how are you setting priorities? Like this was--because, look at this. When you left LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], you know priorities were still sort of being, you know, you were being handed cases. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Then you go and you're, you know, the deputy to, you know trans- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Secretary, right. I'm doing whatever his [HistoryMaker Mr. William T. Coleman, Jr.] agenda is. Speaker 1: Right, so you're doing policy and legislate-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: You're doing his-- Speaker 2: His agenda. Speaker 1: But then you know Jack Greenberg comes and says do this. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do this. And so we decide, what I--we decided several things. Decided the courts would be a focus, cause of what happened in terms of the courts in this country, because several things were happening. Number one, no black people were getting on the bench. If you're a civil rights lawyer, you couldn't get to the front door 'cause they didn't consider civil rights lawyers serious lawyers. It wasn't tax, and so we had to take on the American Bar Association [ABA] on that issue. We had to fight (Simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So how did you do that? Speaker 2: Oh, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], I mean it's just, it's just ingratiating yourself on the committees, you know, within the ABA. It's finding allies within the ABA. It's being on panel discussions, going on television. I went on 'MacNeil/Lehrer' ['The MacNeil/Lehrer Report'; 'PBS NewsHour'] I don't know how many times; different things, just talking about it as a policy matter. Why is it one, that we have an all-white federal bench? We used to talk about equal justice in the law. And two, in having this federal bench, why is it that everybody is coming from the same background, out of the silk stocking law firms? You know, why is it that lawyers out here in smaller firms, in mid-sized firms, you know, in private practice handling some of the most difficult issues we have, why can't they get to the courts, get appointed to the bench? What is this? And so then, you talk about it but then you have to put in place when nominees come up, some of these nominees we took on because it was more of the same. We said it ain't nothing wrong with the nominee. But this can go on forever. We only have X number of federal judges. Where is it--so we show up and testify, although the person is going to pick a firm and he start making a record on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.]. You just build up to it. And so then, you get a president like Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], who understood the importance of what I call desegregating the federal bench. And so I spent four years of Jimmy Carter's presidency working with his justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] identifying candidates across the country who could sit on the federal bench, who I thought could sit on the federal bench-- Story_ID: 571485 Speaker 1: So who were you working with at the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice]? Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember his name. He was wonderful. It will come to me. He was wonderful. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was the person assigned to the judiciary. I saw his name in the paper the other day. Speaker 1: Okay. I can't remember-- Speaker 2: But he was superb and it was all above board, because they sent it out to everybody asking the--our views were and we stayed with it. And that's, it's no accident, Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] put more African Americans on the federal bench than any president before or since him. Speaker 1: How many? Do you remember? Speaker 2: And we had--oh it was about 45, 50, it was huge. It was huge. And most of those black people now are senior and older, see. One of the youngest he put on was, I keep mentioning Judge Clemon [U.W. Clemon] in Alabama, he's a senior judge now. Some of his--lot of his appointees, some are deceased, but they're your seniors on the bench. I just saw in the Jet, Terry Hatter [Terry J. Hatter, Jr.] in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. All--these are all Carter appointees. He took Higginbotham, Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.], elevated him from the district court, to the Court of Appeals, Third Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit]. I mean he did all of that. He did it--a phenomenal job. Speaker 1: So you're saying, 'cause it's interesting to hear you say that, because in the interviews I've had on the legislative side, you know, with the congressmen, they were disappointed. But you're saying on the legal side (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On the judicial-- Speaker 1: Oh, judicial side-- Speaker 2: On the judicial appointments. Speaker 1: --that he was extremely significant (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was extraordinary. He was extraordinary. Story_ID: 571486 Speaker 1: Now, essentially what it seems that you're doing, is you're taking your sort of litigation skills and applying them in an advocacy. I mean-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: In an advocacy (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Advocacy way. See, for example, when you get the civil rights decisions and you get a bench you have conservatives and right wingers in [U.S.] Congress wanted to keep the courts from including all of us in the [U.S.] Constitution. They really did, there's this whole thing about judicial restraint. You know, "Let's read the Constitution the way we've always read it, the way the founding fathers read it." And when you talk about you know private property, you're talking about slavery. In other words, so it's a euphemism, strict constructionist is a euphemism for keeping it the way it is, that's all it is. So we ought not be fooled by that. So here we have the most active court that made a difference in the quality of life for all Americans, especially African Americans in this country, because the rules apply to all of us. It was the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit]. And the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals was the Deep South circuit: Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Texas and Mississippi, the Deep South circuit. All the cases post-Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] cases, all those cases came through there. They were some brave judges on that court, brave in their time. Here you have Senator Eastland [James O. Eastland] from Mississippi in the late '70s [1970s], I'm just back in the LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] office in Washington [D.C.], he's decided he's going to split up the Fifth Circuit. "It's too big, too many judges on it." It was about 22, 23 judges on that circuit. Meanwhile, California had the same number of judges, but nobody talking about splitting it. We're going to split it. So Eastland was chair of the City Judiciary Committee [sic. U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary], he's a powerful person. He wanted to create a circuit of Alabama, Florida, Georgia and he wanted to create a two state circuit of Louisiana and Texas. No, no, no. No, no, no. A two state circuit of, not--Louisiana and Mississippi 'cause, 'cause--Louisiana and Mississippi. We have no two state circuit in the country. Why have a circuit court of two states? It's too provincial. But that's what he wanted to do, because his friend would then have been chief judge of a circuit, so he was going to just split it. Meanwhile, he had the circuit itself divided over whether or not they should be split. So to make a long story short, it was a part of, the split was part of a judgeship bill, bill to add over, you know, seventy-five new judges to the bench. Big important bill. Eastland pulled out all of the new judges that would be added to Mississippi, 'cause he didn't want to have to fight over the question of judges. All he wanted was the split of the circuit. So he took out all those judges. So House/Senate conference, big problem. That bill would have killed us, you know, 4-2 split, four states on one side, two on the other. It was Louisiana and Texas. We're going to call the oil and gas state, Louisiana and Texas. I went to Barbara Jordan in the House [U.S. House of Representatives], that's how I became close to her. I said Ms. Jordan--she was in a House conference. I said this is what they're getting ready to do to the Fifth Circuit. And she was a Fifth Circuit House member from Texas. She understood it. She understood it. I went to Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] on the [U.S.] Senate side. Ted Kennedy understood it. He was my point person on the Senate. She was my point person on the House. They held up that bill for a year. They held--they would not let that bill go. They were fighting Eastland. Finally caught up with the first black on the Fifth Circuit bench who I saw the other day, I haven't seen him in a long time, Judge Hatchett [Joseph W. Hatchett], put him up there. and so Judge Hatchett understood what the problem was and they went--the other members of the court went to Hatchett and they worked out the deal, got--and so when they came back to me and said what about a 3-3 split, he said we can live with a 3-3 split 'cause then you're not gerrymandering. You got, rather than 4 and 2, you got 3-3 and you know Mississippi moves. And so that's what the final bill was. We beat Senator Eastland at his own game and that's what the circuit is split today, 3-3. We beat Senator--and that's a--those kinds of things are going on but the first time the civil rights community have really started to look at the courts and how the courts function cause that's when the right wing was beginning to--they were waking up trying to undercut all that we had gained. And so that was LDF you know working with the Congress, you know. And so Barbara Jordan was honored in Washington. I remember we bought her back and she was honored at something and I introduced her and I talked about this Fifth Circuit fight and what she had done. And she was just overwhelmed because she said she didn't think anybody would remember. This is just before she died. She said she didn't think anybody would remember how--I said Ms. Jordan, I'll never forget it. I was there. I said I will never forget it what you did. And that meant so much to her 'cause she said--so things like that and those kind of battles we fought day in and day out. Story_ID: 571487 Speaker 1: So are you saying that you started with the judiciary battle then was it next the voting rights amendment battle? Speaker 2: Yeah, but you couldn't do them seriatim. They had to do when they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When they were-- Speaker 2: --coming up. Sometimes you had to do several at once. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: 'Cause I worked on the courts and judges throughout, you know, because they were trying to load the courts with right wingers and all that kind of stuff. So and then we had the voting rights stuff, you know big voting rights battle. And-- Speaker 1: Now explain the significance of the voting rights. Speaker 2: The voting rights act-- Speaker 1: Because people think okay, voting rights got passed in 1963, right, '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: In '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Five [1965], okay. Speaker 2: Voting rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], but the act expires. Just cause it's passed doesn't mean you-- Speaker 1: So what you don't want to, so what you don't want to understand--understood, right. Speaker 2: It expires. When it expires, it means it's gone. It's gone. So the '65 [1965] act, you know, what, ten years and then it will expire in '75 [1975]. The '75 [1975] act was for seven more years to expire in '82 [1982]. Once you lose the Voting Rights Act, you lose all the protections under the act. They're still messing around with the black vote. You saw it happening with the last election at the college in, where, it was Ohio, one voting machine for all those college students somewhere in Akron [Ohio]. It's absurd. They still try to mess with the African American vote. So, civil rights and social justice issues don't ever go away. You can't rest on your laurels, "Oh we won that, that's done." If you're in the legislative arena and the statute is going to have a sunset provision if it's a--I don't know of a [U.S.] Congress that's going to give us a civil rights statute in perpetuity, forever. If would be nice if they did but I--not one in my lifetime or before has ever done it. And what the congress can give you the Congress can also take back, so we have to be vigilant about--so here we come up for '82 [1982]. So we had to start on that two years, at least two years ahead, two years around the clock, [HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier and I are working in the same office. She on the one side with her desk and on her phone, me on the other side. Two years, side by side, on that voting rights act [1982 Amendments, Voting Rights Act of 1965]. She's down in the Washington [D.C.] office. Speaker 1: So she had joined you. She had-- Speaker 2: In D.C. Speaker 1: --had come from New York [New York] and then joined you there? Speaker 2: She was in D.C. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 571488 Speaker 1: Who are the key players in the voting rights act [1982 Amendments, Voting Rights Act of 1965]? Speaker 2: Oh, we had a coalition. We had a coalition of people. I mean you had the groups, had the NAA, played a key role-- Speaker 1: NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], you love calling it (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) NAA, I love--NAACP, I call it NAA, NAACP and the League of Women Voters and, you know, and the unions weighing in with us and helped us out. You had a coalition of--called the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights [Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights] and, you know, we all were part of the coalition. So it was amazing--the lawyers came up from the South. The voting rights experts came up and camped out with us, for several months at a time. The Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights [Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law] worked on it, People for the American Way, a whole group of us. You know Bill Taylor [William L. Taylor], the Leadership Conference Education Fund. I mean it was as coalition, 'cause it was a strategy. You had to have meetings and conference calls. It was a two year strategy. Story_ID: 571489 Speaker 1: How was the funding? How was the funding coming in for this? Was--you know when you were an advocate, is the risk of funding being pulled, or were there always funding--cause he said he had a salary for you to be able to do this. Speaker 2: Yes. But what he would do is Jack [Jack Greenberg] would raise money. At this time, voting rights act, Julius [HistoryMaker Julius Chambers] was head of LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] but Julius became head in '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: That's right, okay. That's right, ok. Speaker 2: Jack was head during all the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] years, Jack was there and fully supported what we were trying to accomplish. Julius came on, continued the support, but here we--at this period when he came on in '84 [1984] we had the second term of Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] and they're trying to undercut everything in the South, all the courts, getting all the consent decrees for desegregation reversed, Brad Reynolds is in the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice], wreaking havoc. I mean it's, it's, it's, you know it's a mess. They're trying to put a head of the Civil Rights Division in there who didn't know--couldn't even spell civil rights law, much less understood what one did, and they tried to make him head of the thing. And I mean all of that, we had to fight it and take it on and we did. We did, but Julius had to raise the money. Story_ID: 571490 Speaker 1: Tell me of those fifteen years-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --what was your biggest disappointment? Speaker 2: My biggest disappointment? What was my biggest disappoint--my biggest disappointment is not being able to make permanent change. No matter how important the battle and how hard it's fought, it has to be fought again another day. That's what, you know, that's the frustrating part. It's ongoing. Everything we won is, you know--it has it's, it has a time period in which it's going to exist. Each judge I fought for, all the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] years, the desegregated the bench, got all those judges up there. What's happening over time? It's eroded, it's gone because I mean the Bush record, Bush II [President George Walker Bush] has been awful, you know. President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] did not appoint as many African American judges as I would liked to have seen appointed, you know. You know Bush I [President George Herbert Walker Bush], you know gave, told us what he thought an African American judge ought to be like, you know. And so it's just--it has to continue. It has to continue. Now we've got to start by--you look across the South, you got a place like Alabama and no black judge been appointed in eight years. Alabama with all--I mean so that, that's the frustration. But it's the nature of the game. I mean we, we're fighting battles, this most recent battle to get the voting rights act--in which we just got done last year [Voting Rights Act Reauthorization and Amendments Act of 2006], that was an extension of the battle in '65 [1965]. Story_ID: 571491 Speaker 1: Now when it got extended, how far did it get extended this next time? Speaker 2: Each, like last--we got it extended in '82 [1982], we got it for twenty-five years. So in '82 [1982], it's due to expire this year in '07 [2007]. That's why last year we had to fight, and so we fought. So this time when '07 [2007] expires, the last year meant we got it extended for twenty-five more years. Speaker 1: Why is-- Speaker 2: So it goes into thirty, thirty-- Speaker 1: Can you explain to me why it can't be longer? Speaker 2: Or why it can't be permanent? Speaker 1: Um-hm. I mean-- Speaker 2: Because the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] singles out specific states who have a poor history of messing over--that's a part of it. That's a part of it. Now some parts of it are permanent, but the parts--there are some parts of it that are critically important that are not permanent. For example, I think the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] oversight is permanent. But one of the things--there are several states that have a history of excuse the expression, messing over the right of blacks to vote. They have just a history of that. And now we've got a provision that when those states try to make a change in these voting laws, it's got to clear it with the justice department and justice has to look at the impact of those changes. But it's a good system, except it can break down when justice just looks the other way and lets the states do whatever it wants to do, such as what has been happening under Bush II [President George Walker Bush]. Speaker 1: Well isn't that the whole thing, the concept of states rights, you know, over federal rights? Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's why the Voting Rights Act trumps. The Voting Rights Act says in this area of voting rights, [U.S.] Congress has made the decision that this area is so important, so fundamental to democracy, that this federal law trumps states' practices--state practices. See, and that's one of the reasons they don't want to make it permanent. They want to revisit that every once in a while, because it really is an exception to the rule. Story_ID: 571492 Speaker 1: But this is the whole thing. You don't--are you saying that forty--based on the work that you did, forty years later that those states still have those same tendencies? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: 'Cause was Florida-- Speaker 2: --sometimes it shifts around. Yeah, Florida is there. Certain states, sometimes it shifts. States come in and out. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] allows for that. States come in and out. But yeah, you know especially when you have a heavy concentration of black folk, it's the South. Look at the South. The South isn't voting Republican, you know, since you've got increased numbers of African American voters, you notice? I mean really, I mean but now it will be good when we can become less racial and less partisan, it will benefit us all. When I say less racial, I mean in terms of the South, whites start voting Republican, you know, it's no accident because what happened was, you got the southern strategy of Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] and all of that, making racial claims. And so black folks started voting democratic and so whites--and it's a racial thing, you see. And so it would be helpful if we could see the issues and not blinded by racial appeals. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're saying less racial and less-- Speaker 2: When I say less racial, I mean if racial appeals don't play to us as much. I mean they use racial--politicians have used racial appeal to divide the South, along racial lines. And I'm saying, somehow we've got to affect that, because it's--as a society it hurts us, and by having us focus on racial appeals, they're over here not doing things like they should be doing such as provide healthcare for all of us, you see. The purpose of a racial appeal is to get our eye off the ball, as a society. Speaker 1: That's an interesting, that's interesting. Speaker 2: It is. I mean I'm talking about these people who are paid to run these campaigns. And who was the one who died? The guy who died who was an architect of the Nixon campaign and he had died of cancer, brain cancer. He apologized, 'cause he's the one--Lee Atwater [Harvey LeRoy Atwater]. Lee Atwater apologized on his death bed about that southern strategy, 'cause he was the architect of it. Speaker 1: Of separation? Speaker 2: Use the racial appeals to separate. You got Nixon elected doing it. Story_ID: 571493 Speaker 1: Now in 1992 then-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you have another opportunity. How does that come about? Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because-- Speaker 2: --Julius [HistoryMaker Julius Chambers] announced that he was stepping down in the summer of '92 [1992]. You had Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] very happy in Washington [D.C.]. Very happy, head of the office. I didn't have to worry about budget, I didn't have to raise $12 million a year. Speaker 1: So you didn't have to do any of that? Speaker 2: But I did some, to help Julius (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, right, right. But you-- Speaker 2: But I didn't have to do it. It wasn't my responsibility. Speaker 1: A lot of times I even think of you as head of the Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] longer than you know the time period you served because you were like your own (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, always, right. I had my own in Washington and I was there for, since '77 [1977] so I've been always a fixture. If they get an LDF in D.C., I'm going to be there. So--but now, become a head of the whole thing, it's a different set of responsibilities. I mean you can always help somebody, but when the buck stops with you that's different. Speaker 1: But was it, was there a succession planning and all of that or he--I'm just trying to understand how the opportunity came? Speaker 2: Well no, Julius, that's why he did it when he did it, told the board as early as he told the board, to give the board an opportunity, okay. And the board, an excellent board, it did its little, you know, search and started--you know the board, 'cause between the board members and all, you know who's doing what across the country. I mean there are no really new names in that sense, because you have to have somebody who understands the issues. They got to start off understanding. Can't have somebody who's learning the issues for the first time. And then somebody who also knows how to work with other organizations so you can maximize your strength. But I was quite content at--I did not put my hat in the ring to go anywhere. Had my house in Washington, doing these issues. I loved my job, loved what I was doing. So the board came calling after, about a couple of months and told me they wanted me to consider this, you know they wanted me to consider this. And I'm--I had such a--they told me around, when was it, around September, October, 'cause they even had a committee of the staff to give input about me and my name was on the staff list. Now that's quite a compliment, when your colleagues think that highly of you, you know. I've always been floored by that. And I just--I was dragging because I didn't know--I didn't think I wanted the responsibility of trying to raise that money and those salaries and all that management stuff. I didn't think--and as I thought through it though, I thought about it, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], you shouldn't be in a job or be in an organization if you aren't willing to run it when they ask you 'cause I said if I don't do this, how can I stay here and say, "Well I want to be where I am doing what I'm doing and not go to the next level if everybody thinks I should go to the next level?" You can't always do what makes you comfortable. Sometimes you got to do what you're needed to do. And so this was one of those cases. I said, "I owe it to Legal Defense Fund. Maybe it's my time you know." Story_ID: 571494 Speaker 1: And then I had a talk with, I never will forget, he was a judge, Nate Jones [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Jones] who used to be general counsel of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], judge on the Sixth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit]. And Nate said, "Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones], it's not a job. He said it's a calling. It's a calling." [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height told me the same thing: "You have nothing to decide young lady. You have--," she calling me young lady--, "you have nothing to decide. Decision's been made for you." So then, the idea was to embrace it, really to think through it, pray over it and go into it with a, with energy and enthusiasm and so that's what I decided to do, to embrace it. Speaker 2: So who was your successor at--in Washington [D.C.] then? Speaker 1: Who became head of the Washington office? I don't think, they didn't do it the same way. The head of--they didn't have a head, so to speak. You had you know three excellent lawyers we brought in and they were all working in different areas, but all learned the legislative process and so that's the way we did that. Speaker 2: And so you come here, you're the first female head [of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: There are only--was it four? Speaker 1: I'm the fourth head, and the first female (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're the fourth head. Speaker 1: --in sixty-five years, that's pretty-- Speaker 2: Which is pretty amazing, um-hm. Speaker 1: It is. Speaker 2: And so what are you--like it's different being part of an organization and running it. Speaker 1: And running--it is. It's night and day. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now Bill Coleman [HistoryMaker Mr. William T. Coleman, Jr.], he was still on, he's still on the board. Speaker 2: He was still co-chair. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so that helped you had worked with him, you know, you had a good working relationship with him. Speaker 2: I worked with him and Bob Preiskel [Robert H. Preiskel]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who we'll memorialize in a couple of weeks, Bob Preiskel was his other co-chair. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We always wore our diversity on our sleeve, you know. We had blacks and whites, visible in the organization. We also had Asian lawyers, Latino lawyers. Speaker 1: So it all was working together? Speaker 2: It was all working together. Speaker 1: That's right. Story_ID: 571495 Speaker 1: So tell me what was the--what did you set, sort of as your stamp, because you know I--[HistoryMaker] Julius Chambers, he didn't seem to have as much--okay prominent, I mean in name. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know he may have been a good technician but I mean his name wasn't out. Speaker 2: Right, he--right. North Carolina, Julius' name is synonymous with civil rights. Speaker 1: Right, but I'm talking about nationally. Speaker 2: And his area. Nationally right-- Speaker 1: I'm talking about (unclear). Speaker 2: --well because I had been at LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] so much longer I think, that's the reason. Speaker 1: So that's what people identify, also-- Speaker 2: And also Julius didn't do a lot of media. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause Julius is quiet, low key. He--you don't see Julius on camera. I did a lot of media and that's the difference. That, I think therein lies the difference. And then we, of course we realized in 1990, LDF has to get out there. You've got to be out there with marketing issues, you got to be on tele- I mean 'cause also it helps the bottom line. It keeps people informed, it keeps organizations out there and it helps in terms of contributions when people understand what you're doing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And it was very important to show also that African Americans could contribute, were contributing to the Legal Defense Fund. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That's very important. And so Jet and Ebony and the whole thing, whatever, Essence, whatever it took you know, all of that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were doing. So how did you do that--I mean that was typical of the work you were doing in Washington [D.C.]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --so that was not a stretch right? Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. Story_ID: 571496 Speaker 1: But how did you have the infrastructure support, because it's an added responsibility running an organization? Speaker 2: Well what I had to do, I had to look at those infrastructure needs. That's one of the first things I did. First, we had to reorganize the staff, the management of LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], as well as the boards. And I couldn't come in and reorganize the board, 'cause that's not my responsibility. It's not mine to come in and tell the board, you have to reorganize. That doesn't work. What you have to do is show the board that the institution across everything needs reorganizing, not only the board but the management, LDF as well. LDF in other words needs a makeover. And the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] was very helpful, gave me a little report saying that's what they thought about LDF. They thought that we had a board of sixty-five, seventy people, was too big. Was a huge board. And people on the board who have been on the board with Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall] and they were very proud of that. This is 1993, people who loved the organization. And so we really did need this. And so Ford sent me this letter saying that they wanted to continue to support the Legal Defense Fund but it just seemed a bit un-wielded to them when they reviewed our, not only our organization's chart and all, but reviewed our board members. It just, it's too many they thought just to be, you know--and that they appreciated our work and all of that and they, this is something they want us to consider. That--we don't know how I came to receive that letter, but that letter I received and the board understood. To their great credit, the board voted Julius [HistoryMaker Julius Chambers] and--oh, no, no, no, the board voted two new--no, the board didn't vote anything. It was a reorganization of the board and a reorganization of management. We brought in a firm who does this from Washington, D.C., who understands organizing non-profits and she spent months with us, 'cause we had to do an organization chart, what we do with the board and then the co-chairs of the board, Preiskel [Robert H. Prieskel], primarily--'cause (unclear) is down there in Washington. But Preiskel and a couple of other board members worked with me. We met a couple of times a week for four months--how to do this, you know, we looked at the whole thing. And she wrote a report that she shared with the board. She shared with the board the report about the board and the report about management. And the board decided we were going to implement this report and they had this committee. So we worked--the bottom line is, it took us three years but it was worth it, because we had to do it in a way we didn't alienate board members. We had a lot of goodwill built in that board and the idea was to come down to thirty and of that thirty to have at least half of them new people. So it was a major development but we did it over time. It wasn't a wholesale anything. And as people got on-then, what we did with a lot of our senior board members, we created something called our senior board, but it's not putting people out to pasture. We had a senior board of twenty people and to stay on the senior board you had to be elected every year, but you had to do something to merit reelection. And senior board, you're just called a senior director. Not senior board, you're called a senior director and the senior directors sat with the regular board. You couldn't tell any difference just that they didn't vote on things when we had a vote, but they could come to the meetings, they did everything. And they had to show up at least a meeting a year, to stay on the senior board so they felt a part of things. And it worked like a charm, because you know you start off with thirty of your previous board, plus new senior board members, that's fifty. And then you had some people wanted to be emeritus. You had fifteen, twenty want to be emeritus and so it enabled you to move into it. And so that's--and then we got new co-chairs where Marty Payson [Martin D. Payson] and Julius Chambers became my co-chair, 'cause he had been director counsel and it just worked beautifully. Then internally we had to organize ourselves. I had to get a communications department. I went down to J.P. Morgan [JPMorgan Chase and Co.], got them to fund the communications dept. They gave me the seed money. I never will forget it, 'cause I needed an in-house communications department. I needed to get my development department up to snuff. I needed to find a seasoned development person. I found a woman who was excellent; it took me a while, but I found her. Then I had to get my finance office straight. I had to fire my--get--not fire. I had to--my chief financial officer decided he wanted to go elsewhere (laughter), and so then I got another chief financial officer. And board, set up into board committees. Every board member served on at least one committee, functioning committees, you know. Staff assigned to board committees, a key staff to board committees. I mean just--board meetings how many a year, three board meetings a year, one of which can be by conference call. You know good--keep your attendance up, keep your interests high and so that's the way it was when I left. Speaker 1: So that accountability, that all worked? Speaker 2: It did. It worked very well. Story_ID: 571497 Speaker 1: Where was Ted Shaw [HistoryMaker Theodore Shaw] in the mix? Speaker 2: He was my deputy. I--Ted was teaching at Michigan [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan], quite happy. He had--LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] had started under Julius [HistoryMaker Julius Chambers] in an office in Los Angeles [California]. Ted and Bill Lann Lee were in that office as lawyers for LDF, litigating cases all over L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. They're both superb lawyers. And Ted left LDF in late '80s [1980s], around '89 [1989] or so, escaping to the academy. He's always been a teacher at heart, and was at University of Michigan at the law school, happy as a clam. And then when I was asked to be head of LDF, sending me notes about how I should do it. And I--was sending me notes from his perch in the academy, telling me how I should do it (laughter). So finally I--when I decided to do it, I went to see Ted. I told him I said, "You know it's time for you to come to--put your money where your mouth is. I should come to LDF, you ought to come as my deputy." He (unclear)--I said, "No, all right, do you mean it?" You know, so. He said no for about six months and I kept--I wore him down finally. And then when he said he would take a leave of absence for a year, I said to myself, "Gotcha. Gotcha." And so I did have him. When he came the first year and was thinking about going back, I said, "Oh Ted we're in the middle of something. You can't go back now." And so that's how it worked. So he--eleven and a half, eleven years he was my deputy. Story_ID: 571498 Speaker 1: So talk about the things that you're proud of that you did, you know during your, you know during the time here [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh we had some good, good wins. I, you know I like to win. I like the victories, you know. We also have to suffer the defeats, but I like the victories. For example, the whole idea to hold up affirmative action, the Supreme Court of United States was a campaign that was started. It was about an eight year campaign, because it had to be the right case in the Supreme Court, it had to be the right fact situation. It had to have been tried. And so the right wing was filing cases left and right, and we had to make sure the right one in the Supreme Court. So there are others you had to move out of the way. And so a whole series of cases we had to just use our strategies and our tactics. Speaker 1: Can you give some names for the cases, some of them? Speaker 2: Well several of them we just moved out of the way. But--and several cases had been filed. There was one in University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], one in University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], one in--one over here in New Jersey, (unclear). There were several cases we were trying to get in the Supreme Court on this issue and it was very important that it be Michigan [Gratz v. Bollinger, 2003]. Story_ID: 571499 Speaker 1: Don't you think though, an important thing though that's sort of helping along the way in that the right had become very organized? Speaker 2: You mean helped or harmed? Speaker 1: Well harm--I mean, I didn't mean helped. But something had changed, they had become extremely organized. Speaker 2: They had, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay, and a long-- Speaker 2: It was a lot different from the '70s [1970s], they--'cause they studied our playbook, that's what they did. They studied our playbook. And-- Speaker 1: But they seemed to have even made it better. Speaker 2: Well, they had more money. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They had more money right, because they you know they have--you know they are very aggressive and when you've got the resources, it's a lot you can do. You've got, you have people, right wingers who put serious money into those, you know, those organizations. So--but yeah they copied our playbook and they copied Thurgood's [Thurgood Marshall] playbook for setting up their civil rights organizations, you know. Then they copied our litigation playbook and then the way they played not quite fair was by controlling the presidency to the extent that they did, impacting on the political, you know they made--they tried to dismantle the whole thing of strict constructionism and all that. That's, it's just cold. And all of that to make sure they won the right wing bench. And they spent a lot of resources and we had to fight them on that, lot of resources on that trying to control the [U.S.] Supreme Court and all of that. Story_ID: 571500 Speaker 1: In some respects you sort of merged you know the Washington, D.C. office maybe became an extension of this office. I mean not that it wasn't but were you--I'm just trying to understand, how did you structure departments? Was it still capital punishment? Speaker 2: No, what it was, there was one office. One headquarters, which was LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.]. And I didn't view each office as having a different program, the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] office or D.C. [Washington, D.C.] office. We had one program and the offices are slotted, office is slotted into the program. For example we had voting rights, a big voting rights component in LDF. And within voting rights you had the litigation and the legislative advocacy, where you had lawyers in Washington doing litigation, lawyers in New York [New York] doing litigation, and lawyers both places doing the legislative advocacy 'cause a lot of times the New York lawyers need to support the D.C. lawyers in terms of the writing and the testimony and all that kind of stuff. So it was one entity, one unit, one organization, one LDF, you know, and with a--with our strategic goals, you know that applied LDF-wide. And so everybody had to be on the same page and know where we were trying to go. So example, we needed to win the affirmative action case in the [U.S.] Supreme Court, that's all there was to it. So the question is, how do we do that? And so you start eight years earlier and making, trying to make sure it's the right case. We--Tulia, Texas, a whole, you know all these black people in town, arrested, sixty-eight year old hog farmer, black man being put up as a drug smuggler, it's ridiculous, you know. And we had to do all of that. The idea is to win, you know to go in and represent these folks and to prevail. The whole question of you know education it's still with us, making sure that quality education is very important. But desegregation is still a value, because when you get Asian, black, white and Latino kids in the same room, the money will follow. If you let them be separated, then the money doesn't follow in the same way. Money usually follows, historically, the white students. Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall] understood that. That's why he talked about desegregation as a value. Get those kids in the class together, not only because of what it does to the psyche of African American students when you tell them that they aren't, you know, they aren't worthy of being with white kids, but it also has an economic component. We need all our kids--we need classrooms that are diverse. That's what we need. And we need quality students in those classrooms. And it just so happened the kids who need most have least because the way we fund our schools through property taxes. And so the neighborhoods that have lower property values and people living in apartments and what have you, their schools aren't up to what it ought to be because the resources aren't there. So we have to figure our way through this. Story_ID: 571501 Speaker 1: Now University of Michigan case [Gratz v. Bollinger, 2003], were--is that one of your proudest achievements though the affirmative action? Speaker 2: It was. And Ted [HistoryMaker Theodore Shaw] played a major role in that because remember he taught at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan]. See, I got him from Michigan and he was there when the plan was adopted in the law school [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan] so had to recuse himself from the law school case [Grutter v. Bollinger, 2003]. But he was, you know, not part of the plan for the undergraduate school, so we could be in that. So we had to--you know but we had an overarching strategy we had to employ that only LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] could employ. Speaker 1: Now this strategy was a little different than strategies used in the past, right or not? Speaker 2: That's right. Right, because you had to--we had to organize right wing, bringing as many cases as they could. They were throwing them up against the wall to see what would stick. And we had to unglue all of that you know 'cause we had an opponent that was well financed, you know. And if we had lost those cases, it would have affected us across the board, although in law the cases would have just applied to education. But you know how people do in practice, we would have had it seeping over into the business community and into employment. People would have been afraid of the whole notion. Right now we're still struggling for diversity but that would have really been a hit, 'cause people do take bad news and expand it beyond where it ought to go. That's why it was import--it was an important win, it also was an important psychological win and to let the country know you're going in the right direction. Story_ID: 571502 Speaker 1: Kemba, let's talk about Kemba Smith. Speaker 2: See, Kemba was part of my effort, the LDF's [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] effort, when I say my, I mean the LDF's effort to put a spotlight on the plight of women of--women in prison and this drug war and what we were doing. And as a country what we were doing is sending these women off to prison with these long terms who had boyfriends who were into drugs. And either the women didn't know it, or they didn't turn them in or what have you, and the boyfriends were killed or what have you, or the boyfriend could cut a deal because he could talk about who was in the food chain above him. He had somebody to turn in. She didn't have anybody but Johnny and they already had Johnny. She had nothing to cut a deal with. So she's getting fifteen, twenty, twenty-five year sentence, prison sentences. And prosecutors, putting a notch in their guns to say, oh well we ate the war on crime--I mean the war on drugs. The war on drugs, we're really doing a good job, 'cause all they're doing is counting convictions. But then you've got these women piling up in prison, average one with two kids. That's the kind of predicament. These women haven't sold drugs or used drugs or done anything--got the wrong man in their lives. Now, as a society it's something wrong with us, with this. So we say--and then women of color disproportionate. Black women, Hispanic women, disproportionate, going into these women's prisons. So I said no, you know it's time to look at this. And Kemba was where we started. Kemba, two parent family, college student, Girl Scout, ballet, music lessons, only child, every advantage, protected by her family you know. Didn't have a date 'til she went to the prom, which was a mistake, and goes off to Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton Institute, Hampton, Virginia]. Free, away from home, although her parents are in Virginia. Falls in l-u-v, love with the first person she sees. Driving--'cause he's got the fancy clothes and the fancy car. He's the biggest drug dealer on the East Coast, you know. Ends up two years later in an unhappy situation. He's dead in a shootout in Washington, Seattle. And she is arrested. She was not with him at the shootout. She had already left. She was scared to death of him 'cause he knew where her parents lived. She had taken him home for Thanksgiving dinner one year, so he knew where her parents--he told her, I know where your parents live. Scared to death. Caught up in something she knew nothing about. So ended up with a charge with all these counts in a conspiracy. Everything they would have charged him with, they charge her with as a co-conspirator. And the judge gave her a year for every year of her life, 24.5 years without possibility of parole, 24.5 years. She's twenty-four years old standing before the court, never had a traffic ticket. Gotten pregnant, little baby had been born. It was just, it's just a classic mess. So I'm sitting in my office in New York [New York] and we'd been for some time, had been looking at this question of women in prison and I see this come across my desk. She's already convicted. I said this is ridiculous. We got to get in this and we did. Four years later, Kemba walks out. Got Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson Clinton] to pardon her. I was up and down the courts in Virginia. We were up and down the courts. I knew the courts of Virginia wasn't gonna let Kemba out, but I had to go through that judicial process to prove to the executive branch that I had exhausted my remedies. See, I had to really stay in the courts. You have to do that. You just can't jump over and try to get a pardon, 'cause pardons are hard to get. So, and I knew Kemba had one shot and if I missed it, she'd be there 'til she was forty-eight years old. She had one shot to get out, that was that pardon from Clinton and I couldn't miss it. So Clinton left office in 2000 and we had been working at it for about a year and a half. I had to put all the ducks in order. Every duck I could find I put in order. It had to be very subtle about it. Couldn't be--had, it had to get--justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] had to make the recommendation. Couldn't have the justice department against you 'cause you're dead in the water if they said no. So one of the last set of pardons he made, Kemba. Speaker 1: That's (unclear). Speaker 2: She walks out, she walks out two days before Christmas. Speaker 1: That's pretty amazing. Story_ID: 571503 Speaker 1: That's right. That you know that's important. And then, so then that year, now you got a spokesperson across the country, somebody who's credible. I got The Links [The Links, Incorporated] and the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] involved. They were very important to us in terms of the resources and the tie--I went to the prison to see Kemba [Kemba Smith], understood the issue. You know The Links could understand how this could be their daughter, you know, somebody they could relate to you know. And so it's a massive educate--in terms of our community cause we have written these women off. We weren't paying attention to these women. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: But now we know the issue. We know the issue. And so that kind of campaign to educate us and to inform us and to get some action you know. So it's a whole series of things like that. Speaker 2: How did that case come to you? Speaker 1: I was sitting--oh. Speaker 2: Was it from--? Speaker 1: No, that--a brother at Emerge, a brother who was the editor of Emerge. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] George Curry? Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, wrote a--one article and he wrote an article on Kemba that went away. He wrote a couple of articles on Kemba in that magazine and that's where I saw it. That's where I saw it, George Curry bought it to my attention. It, just in his writing, cause you know he--that was a powerful magazine he had there. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And he did some good work. Speaker 2: He did. So that's very--see, that shows a confluence of you know of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Our issues. That's right. Speaker 2: --of events there, you know, because-- Speaker 1: That's right. And also our black press is so important to me. I mean I need--because the larger press watches the black press, what's in the black press. And so I get the black press to go over the story or understand something, or some insight. The right press had heard about it, they'll follow up on it later, you know. But you know, so media is very important. I mean new media, the blogs and all that, that's good. But the traditional media is very important, especially serious reporters who understand what they're doing and take the time to understand issues, very important to the whole process. Story_ID: 571504 Speaker 1: So this is what you really learned over these years-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --was that it was a whole network-- Speaker 2: Whole network. Speaker 1: --of things that were important? That legal issues could, they might be the center you know or--but you had to rely on these other--? Speaker 2: And then sometimes they aren't the center. Speaker 1: Center, okay. Speaker 2: They are an important part of moving the ball but they center is the issue. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: What's at center is the issue. Now the core piece of it has to be taken care of to move the rest of it case they all want to know have you done this, have you done that? You know you got to jump through your hoops and legal is a part, important part of jumping through the hoops. And so somebody's got to take care of that piece. That's LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.]. So as a community we shouldn't have to worry about the legal piece except when LDF asks us to do something we'll do it. But we depend on them to do that. We have our PR [public relations] and community whole, that's very important, media and public relations and PR and all that. Then you got your legislative thing, you got to advocate and you know, you got to write and dah, dah, dah. Then you got your money over here, you have to get that, blah, blah. And you have to--people, got to get your grassroots folks to do the--it's all, all of us are needed. And we've got to see--and I see it's a seamless web, that's what it is. And what I talk about often Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] is we're in a position now we've never been in. We got more education, more resources, you know. We've got more awareness, more access than we've ever had. Now the trick is to get the same agenda. To get the same agenda, to get on the same page in terms of the agenda. And then use our different strengths to get accomplished what we need to get accomplished. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Before now what happened, historically our folks knew the agenda, but they didn't have all this other stuff. Now we got all the other stuff but we don't know the agenda. Speaker 1: That's true. That's true because even just listening to you here you know 'cause you hear the questions of you know is civil rights dead? You know is the era dead? And I don't think people understand it in the context. I mean like you've-- Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: --sort of laid out here, you know. And-- Speaker 2: It's cyclical. I mean you--what was fought-- Speaker 1: That's right. And it's (unclear). Speaker 2: --and what we have gained we can lose tomorrow. Speaker 1: That's right. That's right. Speaker 2: If we aren't vigilant. Everything that we have is a member of legal construction, the court's interpreting something or congress passing something. The courts can change their mind tonight, not tomorrow, tonight. And congress passing something, congress can change its mind or whatever it is come sunset. What we have is ephemeral. Story_ID: 571505 Speaker 1: You know, that--now I want to go back, just not go back, but I want to ask you because, you know, you have left you know LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] now. Speaker 2: Well I'm still consulting, helping out. Speaker 1: You're consulting, okay, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But you transferred the reigns, let's put-- Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Oka, you transferred the reigns. And really after about eleven, was it--? Speaker 2: Eleven and a half years. Speaker 1: Eleven and a half years-- Speaker 2: As head of it. Speaker 1: As head. Speaker 2: But I've been at LDF thirty-two years. Speaker 1: Right, I know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So what, why did you make that decision and did--you know in the reports, you know there was a report of the judicial appointment letter, okay. Speaker 2: Appointment, of the judicial appointment letter. Speaker 1: Letter, something about a letter you had, you know trying to stop a judicial appointment? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] doesn't write letters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it had to be a report. Elaine does not write letters. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. But what made you decide to--? Speaker 2: No, the reason I stepped down was I believe in orderly transition. I believe in change and I believe the way we control change, what kind of change we're going to have, is to embrace it. Don't fear it, don't run from it, embrace it. Make it part of your agenda. After thirty-two years, that's a pretty good little piece of time. Also, we had just come off the victory of the case. Speaker 1: Of the--right, Kemba's [Kemba Smith] (unclear). Speaker 2: So Kemba and the affirmative action thing-- Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: --we come off of victory, we had pieces in place at that organization I thought should be in place and it was a good time. Also, we were coming up on a celebration of Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], the fiftieth anniversary. What better time for my successor to be show-cased than in the celebration of Brown? That would give him or her, their jump start in terms of a public identification. They knew--they know who I am. But rather than my staying, soaking up all of that attention and then leaving, why not use that attention to let the world know who the new leader of the LDF is? Why not have him or her up there on that stage with Urban League [National Urban League] and Cosby [Bill Cosby] and all and let the cameras focus on them. It helps give LDF a head start and that was my thinking. Speaker 1: But that says a lot about you. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: 'Cause change is not that easy. Speaker 2: Yeah, but you know I've always--you know I believed in it and that's one thing that's, you know, that's the constant we had, the constant we have. The constant we have is change. And so that's why I set it for May 1st, which was law day and the celebration of Brown was on the 15th, two weeks later, you know which had been in planning for a year. And up there on the stage or wherever we were it was my successor. Speaker 1: Had you identified--how far in advance had you identified Ted [HistoryMaker Theodore Shaw]? Had you identified him not when he first came on? Speaker 2: No, I--well you know it was the board's decision and all I could do was make a recommendation which is all I did. And I only made a recommendation when they asked. When they asked. I didn't volunteer it 'cause I--you know board won't--has to do it. That's the one, that's the role of the board to determine who leads and heads an organization. And so I think I decided that around January, stepped down in May, around January you know. But you can't ever know these things, you know. But I just knew what had--Ted had done with me for eleven years you know. And how one does as a manager is a whole--you never know 'til you get in there. This is what I thought when I became director counsel. And it's not an easy transition especially for a lawyer. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: It's not. Speaker 1: Because you want to lawyer, you don't want to manage. Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: We don't get one course in law school on management. Story_ID: 571506 Speaker 1: So where are you now? I want to ask just some philosophical questions now and some-- Speaker 2: Well I, you know it's interesting. My relationship with the University of Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] has been an interesting one because when I graduated I stayed away for about fifteen years. Then I went back and interestingly they gave me an alumni award one year. But then they brought me back in the mid, no in late '98 [1998], '99 [1999] and gave me the highest award that the university gives, the Jefferson Medal in Law [Thomas Jefferson Medal in Law]. Big dinner at Monticello [Charlottesville, Virginia], Jefferson's home. I said oh Mr. Jefferson [President Thomas Jefferson], I hope you're not doing flip flops. Big dinner and you know and this is just coming home. And I'm going back to Virginia the end of March and I'm gonna speak to the students and to the minority students who are there and they're having a conference. I decided--they've been asking me for a while, go back and talk to them and give them some encouragement, you know and to let them know that they're not there by accident. They're not there by accident. Somebody wanted them there. They have to understand you know. So I'm gonna go back and do that. People have been very kind to me over the years and I have crossed the paths of so many who have helped me, who have helped me. I mean you know you got to raise what $12, $13 million a year, that's a lot of money. And people have stepped up to the plate you know. Muhammad--Sidney Poitier, you know let me honor him out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], Quincy Jones and [HistoryMaker] Clarence Avant, I mean they stepped up and helped. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: You know, the folks across the country have to send in their twenty dollars and thirty dollars, a hundred dollars, two hundred dollars. And it's important for you to have an efficient system where you can thank people when they send you money, and thank them quickly. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: That's very important, 'cause when you thank them for the hundred dollars, then you'll look up and it's a year, you'll have a thousand from that same person. So I've, I have been very, very fortunate. I have worked with some quality people, you know. The board members, old and new, the ones who've been on for a long time and the new ones all committed, you know. And then when I see some smart aleck tell me well the civil rights era is over, you know and I just look at them and I--sometimes I may respond. I think it's important to respond but sometimes it's so arrogant it's not worth my time, you know. And it's important for people who do study and research to understand how the world works around me. You can't get it all theoretically. You got to know what is going on, what's the real deal, what's going on in the world. You have to have that happy mix. So you know I keep getting honorary doctorates which is wonderful. I, you know I--this is--Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] is giving me one this year, I'm very pleased. I want to ask all my friends out there and I'm very grateful for any acknowledgments, but Ms. Jones [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] has lots of plaques, (laughter) lots of plaques and so you know you don't have to give me a plaque the next time I see you. You know, you save that fifty or hundred dollars, you know. Or give me a check and let me give it to my favorite charity. Story_ID: 571507 Speaker 1: Where are you right now? What are you wanting, you know, Ms. Don Quixote, what windmills do you want to slay or tackle now? Are you, you know there's also the thing of nonprofit head you know find, losing themselves in the mission. You know so where do you--what are you wanting to--? Speaker 2: No, I'm outside of that now. I think what--I'm still helping where I can and talking to students and you know I'll go somewhere and teach for a week or two weeks or something you know. But now I think I'm, I am deciding what the next phase is you know and I'm not in any rush to decide it 'cause I'm quite content. You know I like not having to catch a 6:00 a.m. flight, I love that, you know being in the shower at 4:00 in the morning. I love not having to do any of that. But yet I--as I'm called upon I can, I'll show up to meetings and I'll still talk about issues and I still zero in on issues as asked and I'm often asked. My phone rings quite a bit. But I'm just thinking about what the next stage is you know. I got a house in Washington [D.C.] I need to renovate and move into. You know I need to get my living surroundings more comfortable and enjoyable. I don't like my living environment as presently. Do something about that and you know interact with family. My nieces and nephews. Have a niece whose you know a lawyer. She just finished clerking and one who's teaching and my nephews--and one thing about my nieces of nephews, two of each, I've always stayed close to them when they were young. Aunt Elaine [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] took each one on a trip and got my own time with them and as they've grown up I've developed my relationship with them. And so it's strong with all four of them and I value that. I value that. Aunt Elaine gets valentine cards and you know, so I--when I get one from my nephews I said ooh, Aunt Elaine has noticed, you know. Aunt Elaine has noticed so it's just--it's a good place to be in. Story_ID: 571508 Speaker 1: Now your thoughts about, where we are as a black community-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and a society, what are your thoughts and you, you know you talked about now getting on the same agenda. So what are your thoughts about even that being possible? Is--we're really you know in an important precipice I think right now. Speaker 2: We are. We are. We could either gather our reserves, pull them all together and you know go off in a positive direction. Or we can drift each person for themselves and not thinking that we have some responsibility for one another. I'm hoping for the former, that we will get back to basics to understand that when we become strengthened, we also strengthen our nation, you know. One thing about our community, historically we've always had a very tight--I mean back in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], we were known for our tight family networks, you know. The way the extended family would function. And we've got to get pieces of that. We have got to care about what happens to poor children in inner city neighborhood and in rural areas. We've got to care about poor children and poor families and poor people. And if we start, at least start trying to address some of these issues in our own community, it affects the larger community cause we are part of the larger community. And we've got to fight a tendency to become self-focused, a tendency to--I need to get mine and you know you've got yours to get. And you have to take care of yourself 'cause I'm taking care of mine. Um-hm, to whom much is given much is required. And we've got to get back to basics. For the nation to be competitive, you know we've got to find a way not to waste the minds of our children you know. We've got to focus on the little boys, little African American boys and what's happening to them, you know how they become hardened. The trip between boyhood and hardened criminal you know. And so you have many segments of our society doing that, really working hard at it. But too many of us are not engaged. Too many of us are not engaged. And so it's not the responsibility of some, it's the responsibility of all. And all of us don't have to care about the same issues. But we got to have the same center. I mean we don't have to approach--when I say don't have to care about the same issue, we don't have to approach it the same way. Some in education, some in economics, some in family care, some in you know whatever. But all of it is to-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --lift people up, that bottom, that's what it's about. It's about lifting people up. And that's the challenge, it's still the challenge. Story_ID: 571509 Speaker 1: Now what do you, what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: She cared about the issues of her time you know as she saw them. You know not only did she care about them but she tried to do something about them, make a difference, you know. Sometimes as with succeeding generations, the issues can shift and take different dimensions you know. But we are born of our time and that we not just talk and gossip and moan about things but that we do things. I believe in activism, action. And that she cared and she acted. Speaker 1: Now I want you to think about your family-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and your mentors, your parents [Estelle Campbell Jones and George Raymond Jones], your family, your mentors-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and I want you to think about the collective legacy of what that represents if you can think about that. Speaker 2: If I understand the question you mean what about-- Speaker 1: In the collective sense. Speaker 2: --about what I have experienced and what has motivated me, how--what that means to us--? Speaker 1: In the collective sense. 'Cause we've got, you know I keep thinking about the dinner table conversations, the storytelling. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: I keep thinking about you know the Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] years. I mean I-- Speaker 2: Well I come back to how fortunate I am. I think I represent the best that our society has to offer its young. It's not as we used to say flowery beds of eaves and all the money in the world but it's opportunity and self-esteem, you know. My folks gave me self-esteem. They--now it could have been misplaced but they gave me a belief that whatever I felt I wanted to accomplish that I could, that you know, that I could. And that's the best of our society. And when we can do that to our children, self-esteem. And then couple self-esteem with opportunity. Opportunity, kids need opportunity. And they need to know that somebody believes in them. With that they can soar, they can absolutely soar, you know. And while they're soaring then they'll look around and decide which direction they want to go. And you know we say education is key. Education is key but for a child to be educated a child has to believe in himself. These little boys and little girls have to belief that they have value and that we see that value in them 'cause they respond to that. But it can't happen when they're eight, it has to happen when they're first coming in the world or before like the mothers singing to the, you know babies before they're born. But you know--and I, when I see a child, I saw a little child the other day. Oh, she was talking up a storm and she was about three. I told her mother, somebody has been reading to that child. She laughed. She said I certainly have. I said you've been reading 'cause she was just, oh she was verbal. When she saw something she was about three, not more than three, had an opinion and (makes sound). Somebody cared. And too many of the kids you see they're neglected. They are emotionally neglected. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: You know, and so if you--one adult can make a huge difference in a child's life, I mean and a huge difference just with the attention. I mean everything is not dollars and cents, although money is important, but everything is not dollars and cents. Sometimes it's finding a connection and just simple encouragement, see. The--these kids, a lot of them don't think anybody cares. They're out to prove that they are somebody by harming themselves and others..