 Story_ID: 344565 Speaker 1: My name is Loretta Henry and I'm doing the interview and Scott Stearns is doing the camerawork. Could you please tell us your full name and, including your middle name, and spell it for us? Speaker 2: I'm Brenda Joyce Payton Jones [HistoryMaker Brenda Payton Jones], B-R-E-N-D-A, J-O-Y-C-E, P-A-Y-T-O-N, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth and the location of your birth? Speaker 2: August 24th, 1952, Omaha, Nebraska. Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date is-- Speaker 2: Oh, April 3rd, 2006. Speaker 1: Okay, and the location of the inter- this interview? Your address? Speaker 2: 7843 Outlook Avenue, Oakland, California. Speaker 1: Okay, and your occupation is? Speaker 2: I'm a journalist. Speaker 1: Okay, for-- Speaker 2: The Oakland Tribune. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you. Story_ID: 344566 Speaker 1: Just to kind of help us all relax, I'm going to ask you five kind of People magazine-ish questions so, just bear with me. Could you please tell us what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Favorite food. Well, I like strawberries. I'm not sure they're my favorite but I like straw- I really like strawberries. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I'm a spring, summer person, not this rain. Speaker 1: And your favorite color? Speaker 2: I guess turquoise, maybe. Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Warm, Jamaica, or Hawaii, I guess. Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite phrase or saying? Do you have one, if you have one? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do I have one? Speaker 1: That's all right. Speaker 2: It's probably someone who knows me might know (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 344567 Speaker 1: Now we're going to start, we're going to talk a little bit about your family background, okay. So, could you please tell me something about your mother? What was her name? Could you spell her name for us? Where was she born? Where did she grow up? Speaker 2: Her name is Willeen Brown Williams. It's W-I-L-L-E-E-N, Brown is her maiden name, Williams is her married name and she was born in New Albany, Mississippi, was in, which is in northern Mississippi, was in Mississippi to, I think they moved when she was nine to Omaha [Nebraska]. And so she, her family was in Omaha and she finished, I guess, growing up there and met my dad [HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams], he was in medical school at Creighton University [Creighton University School of Medicine] in Omaha and they got married there. Speaker 1: Okay, good. Do you have any idea why the family moved to Nebraska? Speaker 2: I think it was work-related. My grandfather [Preston Brown] went first and he had a sister who had moved there from northern Mississippi. So, you know, kind of typically, he followed her and then my grandmother [Christine Strickland Brown] and their three daughters came within that next year. Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother? Speaker 2: Well, she's a very elegant lady, very beautiful and classy and very outgoing, kind of a, kind of, I guess, a social butterfly kind of, I don't know, very social and, you know, she talks a lot and makes people feel very, you know, at ease and-- Speaker 1: Okay, did she share any stories with you about when she was growing up? Speaker 2: She did. She, I guess more so, more recently, or, I actually, I kind of became more, they basically, because my grandmother had also left Mississippi, we didn't, like a lot of families, go back south during the summer and I was more curious, I think, about, you know, where the family had come from and took a trip back after I was grown, as a journalist, and then eventually my mom and my grandmother went back and her--and my mom's sister went back. So, I think, more over that time she talked more about, you know, as, as they went back and discovered and actually we had a really nice visit where we were going around, you know, where they had been kids and, had skated and then, you know, remembered crashing on the street and, you know, little, their little hijinks as, as kids. So, it, one thing that was surprising to me and something that I guess whenever you start looking into history, it's always, there're always surprises there that even in Mississippi, at the time that they were growing up, there were white families that lived in their neighborhood. In fact, I think one of their neighbors, and it was a black neighborhood, but one of their neighbors was white. So, it's like, yeah, that's a surprise. Speaker 1: Did she, when, after they moved to Nebraska, did she tell you anything about what it was like growing up in a, being a black person in Nebraska? Speaker 2: In Omaha? Speaker 1: In Omaha. Speaker 2: Let's see, what did she, yeah, she, she had a couple of stories. I think she couldn't, things that kind of had stayed with her; slights, that had stayed with her. I think it was the swimming. It was a swimming pool, I think it might have been a Jewish community center and the cla- and they wouldn't let the class come because, well they wouldn't let her come and then her teacher, though, said, well none of us are going to come if we, if you're not going to let, you know, the black students come or Negro students, at that time. What else did she talk about? Mostly, I think more so she talked just about kind of the social aspect of them growing up. The three sisters were, you know, they sang and they were kind of, you know, well-known, I guess, and they were all really pretty in different ways and so they made quite a splash there. So she (laughter) talked about that more, I guess. Story_ID: 344568 Speaker 1: Okay, could you tell us about your father? What was his name and could you spell it? Speaker 2: His name is James Buchanan Williams [HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams], J-A-M-E-S, B-U-C-H-A-N, it's Buchanan like the president [President James Buchanan, Jr.]. Is that two Ns, I'm not sure, A-N, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S, and he's a retired general surgeon, still living, and he grew up in Las Cruces, New Mexico. Speaker 1: Okay--which I find absolutely interesting, this--we've been talking before. How did his family get to Mex- New Mexico? Do you have any idea? Speaker 2: Yeah, actually I've been doing some research on that. His parents [Clara Drisdale Williams and Jasper Williams] were school teachers in Texas and there, it's related to the fact there was a, I guess ongoing boll weevil infestation in the South and so southern fam- southern farmers were moving farther west to try and get away from it and moved into New Mexico and brought their black workers with them and insisted on segregated school before, this was like 1924, I think, before that, the schools in New Mexico were not segregated and some of the people that I interviewed, the older people, had gone to school before segregation and also were fluent in Spanish 'cause they'd gone to school with the Mexican kids and the white kids. And then with this migration, they, the new farmers insisted on segregated schools so suddenly they needed black teachers and that's how my, my grandmother and grandfather were recruited to come teach in the newly segregated schools in New Mexico. At first they were in a town called Vado [New Mexico], V-A-D-O, which was a black town in New Mexico. The guy who founded that walked from Georgia to New Mexico and had started a couple of other black towns, that didn't quite take. One was Blackdom [New Mexico], I think, near Ros--Rose--what was it, Roswell, oh yeah, New Mexico, and then this one, Vado. At first my grandparents taught there and that didn't quite work out and then they taught in Las Cruces and my grandmother ended up teaching in Las Cruces for, I think, almost thirty years. Speaker 1: Amazing. Could you tell us, well, you told us about, how would you describe your father? Speaker 2: My-- Speaker 1: Your father. Speaker 2: Oh, father. Well, he's kind of typically a science-minded very literal. He's reading all the time, constantly reading newspapers and anything around him. He doesn't talk that, he's not, you know, that verbal. I guess that's the perfect combination with my mom [Willeen Brown Williams] and very, both of them though are very politically aware and kind of, kind of radical, actually, considering, you know, and sometimes they're more radical than I am and, when they, you know, assess like our current administration in Washington [D.C.] and, also, they're very race conscious I think in a way that generation was, I, the way people would call, I guess, race man and women, you know, so they'll decide who they're going to, which team they're going to root for in a game based on, you know, if the quarterback is black or the coach is black, so, you know, there are two black quarterbacks, they, they're suddenly in a, you know, dilemma, but-- Speaker 1: Did he tell you anything about growing up, his years when he was growing up? Speaker 2: I'm sorry? Speaker 1: Did he tell you any stories about his growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he does, he tells a lot of stories about growing up. They had a, it sounded like really, you know, kind of frontier, because my grandfather, who's also quite a character and really quite militant and the more research I've done in considering the whole, you know, background of lynchings at the time, I, we grew up with the stories about him being, you know, militant and always taking a stand but I'm kind of newly appreciated what that meant, you know, what the context was. So, he ended up, because he insisted on having a holiday from school for [President] Abraham Lincoln's birthday, he got fired from teaching there and blackballed, so-called, in the State of New Mexico. So after that, he then homesteaded and they, and, in an area that we call the mesa and homesteaded 640 acres, actually a whole group of families, I think it was twenty-two African American families homesteaded there. Our family still owns the land. Most of the families have sold. Story_ID: 344569 Speaker 1: Actually now the city is growing up around that land, it's almost, I think it's partia- partially incorporated now but anyway, my [paternal] grandfather [Jasper Williams] was out there homesteading so my, my father [HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams] and two brothers [Jasper Williams and Charles Williams] spent time out there, you know, shooting rattlesnakes and rabbits and living that kind of life but then also going to school in the city, well the city was Las Cruces [New Mexico] but compared to the homestead. So he has a lot of stories about that and the people trying to, there were cattlemen who didn't want the homesteaders out there so there were these kind of conflicts between the, not exactly violence but they would cut the barbed wire fence to let their cattle come in and graze on the homesteaders land and my grandfather had a dog that would, you know, attack the cattle. So (laughter) there was all this stuff going on but I think it was, it was a pretty unusual and it was kind of like what a boy's dream, I guess, growing up like that, you know. Speaker 2: My heavens. That's an amazing story. And then when your father grew up and he joined, there was World War II [WWII] and he joined the [U.S.] military, could you tell us about his-- Speaker 1: Yes, he and, all three brothers joined and my dad was a Tuskegee Airman and my oldest uncle, his oldest brother, was actually going to be shipped overseas and their father was so disturbed by the thought that one of his children could die defending a country that, you know, he was very conscious of lynching because he had actually left the town that he grew up in because of a lynching and he, the idea that this country that had never passed an anti-lynching bill and one of his sons could possibly die, he literally had a stroke in the street when he heard about it and never recovered. He spent two and a half years bedridden after that but then my dad was in the service and they, they were on a base, Freeman Field [Freeman Army Airfield, Jackson County, Indiana] and the black, or the African American, Negro officers, refused to abide by an order that, with keeping the white officers club, white. So they were arrested and court martialed and they actually snuck them kind of off of that base to another base and there was a camera person, a cameraman for a black newspaper who took a picture of them being transferred in a, with a camera hidden in a brown paper bag, as I understand, and so it was, then on the front pages of black newspapers and the community was able to, you know, protest. They continued, I think, only two or three, there were 101 of those guys, my dad was one of them. Two or three of them were eventually charged with something like pushing an officer or something but in their files there was some letter of reprimand that stayed there and I think it wasn't until 1995 that finally was expunged, so-- Speaker 2: That's an amazing story. Did, were, did your father go overseas? Speaker 1: He didn't. Speaker 2: He didn't go. Speaker 1: He didn't end up going, yeah. Speaker 2: He was a pilot, though? Speaker 1: He wasn't a pilot, he was the grounds crew, like head of the grounds crew, you know, for serving, maintenance crew for the planes. Story_ID: 344570 Speaker 1: And then your father [HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams] had a first when he was in college. He was a first-- Speaker 2: He was the first African--Negro, it's interesting all this, surgeon or res- resident, in a residential surgery program that, in an integrated program. So obviously there had been some surgical training programs at black colleges [HBCUs] but he was the first black person trained in an integrated program as a surgeon. Speaker 1: Did he tell you any stories about that experience? Speaker 2: One that really sticks out, I don't know why this sticks out. He was, yeah, it was at Creighton [Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, Nebraska] which was a Catholic school and he had gotten a call, you know, to come and it was, you know, an emergency call that came in the middle of the night and he had, we, had a stocking cap on and hadn't taken it off, he just put his hat on. So he's in the elevator and a nun came in the elevator so he took his hat off, you know, and then he was, you know, because of a lady being in the elevator, and then he was embarrassed about that he had forgotten to take his stocking cap and she was looking at him but, you know. But, another one, though, he, I think it was a dental school [Creighton University School of Dentistry, Omaha, Nebraska] there. I mean, this story to me really shows some of the absurdities of segregation. They would not fill a black student's tooth, they would only pull the tooth. So he had gone in, I don't know if he actually needed a tooth filled or he had just heard about it and he went in and the woman who was running the, you know, I guess it was probably dental training, was quite, even when he talks about it now, you know, it was so rude and so abrasive and, you know, it's like you people don't belong here and you can't get, you know, this done here. And he mentioned that, he protested that and talked to, I think, it was one of the fathers at the school, and then it led to not only did they change that policy but they pushed to get a black student trained at that program, so-- Speaker 1: Good for him. And both of your parents are still alive, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, they're both still alive. Speaker 1: How long have they been married? Speaker 2: Let's see, fifty-four years. Story_ID: 344571 Speaker 1: We talked a little bit about your grandparents. Could you tell us a bit more about your grandparents on your mother's [Willeen Brown Williams] side? What were their names and tell me about them? Speaker 2: Preston Brown, P-R-E-S-T-O-N, Brown and Christine, her maiden name was Strickland, Brown [Christine Strickland Brown], C-H-R-I-S-T-I-N-E, Christine, S-T-R-I-C-K-L-A-N-D, Brown, and they were, that's kind of a really sweet love story. They were just fourteen when they got married (laughter) and then stayed together for, until my grandfather's death because it was maybe about two years after their fiftieth anniversary and they raised three daughters and were both from northern Mississippi, met there and then left and went to Omaha [Nebraska] and they, you know, worked, and he was working in a meat packing plant and I remember there was a strike and I'm forgetting now, I used to remember the name of the company, because it was like, we hated them because there was a strike-- Speaker 1: It wasn't Hormel [Geo. A. Hormel and Co.; Hormel Foods Corporation], was it? Speaker 2: --and they, it wasn't Hormel, and they just fired all the workers. That was, you know, that was the response. I used to remember that and I can't, maybe it'll come to me. And, and they just did various, they weren't educated and they did various work and some domestic work. My grandmother's favorite work though was--my father [HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams] and his two brothers [Jasper Williams and Charles Williams] all became medical doctors and had a clinic in Chicago [Illinois], the Williams Clinic [Williams Medical Clinic], and my grandmother, on the other side, her favorite job was working as switchboard operator for the clinic and she was really good at it, (laughter) so-- Story_ID: 344572 Speaker 1: Your paternal grandparents, what were their names? Speaker 2: That's Clara Belle, her maiden name was Drisdale, D-R-I-S-D-A-L-E, Williams [Clara Drisdale Williams], and then Jasper B. Williams [Jasper Williams], was my, was the grandfather who raised so much Cain, and they were both school teachers. Speaker 1: Okay, did your, have you been able to research any more of your family history? Do you know anything else about your, your, either side of the family background? Speaker 2: The, my father's [HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams] side I've been, been researching 'cause I started with my [paternal] grandmother [Clara Drisdale Williams] who she lived to be 108 and we were working on her memoirs and so that's why I kind of started with that and learned about my [paternal] grandfather [Jasper Williams], you know, the reason that he left town, that he grew up in Cameron [Texas], and I was actually able to find the, the lynching that, you know, had him leave and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], their history of, I think it's called, I forget how many years of lynching, and found the name of the guy that they lynched there and he and another friend, who's a doctor, Nixon [Lawrence Aaron Nixon], who was actually, Dr. Nixon brought a lawsuit [Smith v. Allwright, 1944], against what was called the white primaries in Texas that was disenfranchising black voters that eventually overturned this practice but they both left Cameron and went to El Paso [Texas] at that time and was believed to be, I guess it was a little more, less hostile for black people, and my grandmother grew u- was born in La Grange, Texas. There are so many tiny little towns (laughter) in Texas. There must be more towns there and she was, I think, valedictorian of her class and won a scholarship to go to, was educated and went to, it was, at first a normal school [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College] and then, and it was Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] and then, you know, started teaching and, I was just thinking of something, and I've forgotten (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wasn't one of your grandmothers or, someone was the first graduate in New Mexico? Speaker 2: Right, then she, what she did, she actually was a grown woman at this time. I think she was in her fifties when she ended up getting her, her four-year degree from New Mexico State University [Las Cruces, New Mexico] and she was the first African American who graduated there and she talked about it, they had a, when she was ninety-five, they gave her an honorary doctorate and it's kind of typical of her, she had, she was very much a positive person and really chose only, as my brother [James Williams II] says, to keep her backpack of life light and only take the things with her that were useful. So, she didn't dwel- which was a little bit difficult in terms of dealing with her memoirs because she tended to really not talk about some of the things that she had to overcome but when she went back for her honorary doctorate, she talked about, for the first time, that they had cancelled the graduation because, as she put it, nobody wanted to walk in front of or behind a Negro so they just got their diplomas like out of the, you know, window or something of an office. And that, but that was the first time she'd ever said that to us. Story_ID: 344573 Speaker 1: You have this wonderful, wonderful background, this wonderful family. Could you tell us a little bit, what was your first memory of growing up? Speaker 2: Hum. I, actually my really first, I have a memory, I don't know exactly why, of reading the paper, my dad [HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams] reading the paper, it must have been like a Sunday morning and, because I remember, you know, the smell of pancakes or bacon or something like that in my, in a house in Omaha [Nebraska] and I, for some reason that really, it's probably my earliest memory and I must have been maybe three or four. Story_ID: 344574 Speaker 1: It was just a very close family. I grew up, we, we moved to Chicago [Illinois] and I think maybe I was three and it, in Chicago with my brother, with my-- Speaker 2: Should we take-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm going to pause-- Speaker 2: Okay, all right, I'm sorry, okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You know, I didn't want to make noise. Speaker 2: No, that's-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's okay, all right, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Oh, just growing up, we were really close with my father. My father and his two brothers [Jasper Williams and Charles Williams] were all there and so growing up with my cousins, you know, we were all living near each other or, at different times, lived with each other and so it was very close in that way and my grandmother [Clara Drisdale Williams] was very much my, this is on the paternal side, my paternal grandfather [Jasper Williams] had passed, I think, the oldest of us, the cousins, was just a few months old when he passed, but she was very much the matriarch. It was kind of very obvious before we knew what that word was that, you know, she was, at the center of the family and her sons and their families. And then on the maternal side, we would go to Omaha [Nebraska] on the, in the summers and also was very close with the, with the cousins. So I had that really nice closeness with, you know, extended family. Speaker 2: Your immediate family, you have a brother? Speaker 1: Yes, I have one brother. Speaker 2: Could you tell us something about your brother? What's his name and-- Speaker 1: His name is James B. Williams II [James Williams II], and he's a colorectal surgeon in Albuquerque [New Mexico] and he has three children who are young. Speaker 2: Did you, have any little stories about when you were growing up with him? Speaker 1: He has some (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Well, I'm six years older than he is so it was, I guess kind of a slightly different, I was always the big sister but he claims that I used to, you know, harass him but I, of course, think he was harassing me but, we grew up in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] in Chicago and, you know, I guess we went through some periods of where we were squabbling but we've been pretty close since, I guess, as adults because he, recently he was saying, you know, you were always kind of gone because I would, when I, I went off to college and then was out on my own and, but then as adults I guess we've become, you know, friends. Story_ID: 344575 Speaker 1: So the family moved from Nebraska to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes, when, when I was three, and that, that was I guess must have been related to my dad's [HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams] medical practice, and so we grew up in Chicago. Speaker 1: Could you describe, oh, we're-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's your warning. Speaker 1: Okay, could you describe quickly your neighborhood [Hyde Park] in Chicago, where you lived? Speaker 2: Actually it was one of the few integrated neighborhoods in Chicago at the time and Chicago's still more segregated than here in Oakland [California] but, so it was, you know, kind of a, connected to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] so, and where we both went to school, and so it was an interesting neighborhood, liberal, integrated and I can remember a classmate, her mother saying, well, you can't buy, I don't know whatever it was, some product, you know, because it wasn't correct in some way and this was, you know, before, I knew of anybody else doing things like that, thinking along those lines. So, it was very progressive and-- Speaker 1: Were you in a house or an apartment? Speaker 2: In a, in a house, a town--well first we were living in a, in an apartment and then we moved to a townhouse, so, and you know, we walked to school and could play out on, in the alley, (laughter) have a normal childhood. Story_ID: 344576 Speaker 1: So you told us the family had moved to Chicago [Illinois] and you were telling us a little bit about your neighborhood and your community. What was it like growing up in Chicago? Speaker 2: It, I think it was, just, I felt, I guess, thinking about it very supported and I did, I, initially I was going to a Catholic school, St. Thomas [St. Thomas the Apostle School, Chicago, Illinois], which is in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. At that time we were not living in Hyde Park and I do remember after church one day, my parents [Willeen Brown Williams and HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams] were talking to father and my dad being very upset when they came out and I guess at that time the school was becoming, in their view, too black so they were, they, all of the kids, the black kids who were not living in the parish couldn't go to the school anymore and that might be my first memory. I mean, I didn't understand it and my parents didn't explain the full nature of it. I knew something was wrong and I knew I couldn't go to the school anymore but that's probably my first experience with, you know, that kind of prejudice and then I started going to the lab school, University of Chicago Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] and then we moved to Hyde Park and I guess there were, you know, some incidents. I remember when I went to the lab school there was a girl and there were two black kids in the class and they, I think they had a policy 'cause, so that, you know, we wouldn't be lonely or something. And so this one white girl said to me, well two things I remember, one, you know, you remind me of my maid and I think, I don't know if it was the same girl said, you, when are you going to take a bath? When are you going to, you know, wash your skin? And I, you know, I don't know, I guess my family was so supportive. Those things, I just thought, how strange, what is wrong with her? What is she talking about? It didn't, I mean I guess it must have hit me in a way because I remember it but it didn't seem to, I don't remember it being, feeling, you know, hurt by it at the time. So I pretty much felt like I eventually fit into that school. I guess I was used to being a minority there, although, I mean it was interesting, outside of school, in family, and my dad's, you know, medical practice [Williams Clinic; Williams Medical Clinic, Chicago, Illinois] and in, cousins where they lived, it was all black so it was, it was kind of living in two worlds but I'm not sure I was so conscious of it until later. I think at adolescence it became much more of a choice and I remember feeling socially that suddenly my friends who were white, I'd hear about parties that, you know, where I wasn't invited and that, you know, that I would have been invited to. So, I guess I reacted and then I became super, and then I just started hanging out only with the black kids and, and then as politically became, as things were going on in the '60s [1960s], and of course this was, you know, just a very volatile time with the Civil Rights Movement and then the Black Power movement and I became quite political and I guess I would be considered a black nationalist or, you know, black militant, I guess, more (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 344577 Speaker 1: Could you tell me are there any sights, anything, or sounds or smells that when you come into contact with them, it immediately takes you back to your childhood? Speaker 2: Hm. Speaker 1: Some food frying on the stove and it goes, oh yes, grandma. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that's interesting you say that. There is, I remember, we would, the cousins would all go to my [paternal] grandmother's [Clara Drisdale Williams] house after school at, you know, various times and she lived next door to the clinic, her son's clinic [Williams Clinic; Williams Medical Clinic, Chicago, Illinois] and there is a smell of fried fish that will really get me right there as, you know, a fourth grader or something, doing my homework in her house. So, yeah, that's one (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, good. Story_ID: 344578 Speaker 1: You told us a lot about, you know, your growing up and you had mentioned that you had gone to Catholic school. Could you tell us a little bit about elementary school? Were there any teachers that influenced you when you were in elementary school? Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, there's one in, I guess I left that school, Catholic school, well I started the other school in third grade-- Speaker 1: And what was the name of that school? Speaker 2: The first school was St. Thomas the Apostle [St. Thomas the Apostle School, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and then it was, the other school was the lab school, University of Chicago Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there was a nun at St. Thomas, Sister Christina [ph.] which, I just remember as being sweet, and she, and when I think about it, she was probably, you know, twenty-two or something because she was little and probably young, you know. But then at the lab school I had a teacher, her name was Ms. Pliss, Louise Pliss, who wrote children's books and she very much influenced me and I remember she always said, there's nothing frightening, most frightening thing in the world is a blank page and then all you have to do to overcome it is put a word on it. And so she would, had us write a lot as a class and I think that probably started my whole, I guess I was already a reader but that, introduced that other side of it and just the fact that she had us writing so much. So she was a big influence. Story_ID: 344579 Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you? Were you always in the principal's office? Speaker 2: No, never. Not with my mom [Willeen Brown Williams] (laughter). It's funny, my mom is very--a sweet and now we're good friends, but she was, she's a serious disciplinarian, so we didn't mess around at all and it was clear that they had their jobs and our job was to go to school and be a good student. And my brother [James Williams II], in fact, recently I was saying something, he said, one semester he brought home, you know, Cs or something and he said it was just so much trouble, he was like, this is just too much trouble, I'm not going to do that again. So, we, you know, we were expected to get A's and Bs and we did and they, you know, completely gave us the quiet and space and the support to do that, so. Speaker 1: When you went to, when you, what were your, you learned to be a writer, well you're starting to write, but when you're in elementary school, what did you, what were your dreams? What did you think you were going to do, become? What did you want to be when you were in elementary school? Speaker 2: In elementary school? I don't know that I thought about being a writer. I didn't, even though with my teacher, I didn't really think of it as a job. I think at one point I flirted with wanting to be a doctor because there's so many doctors in the family but that was kind of short-lived. I think maybe I wanted to, I thought of myself as a teacher and then in high school [University of Chicago High School; University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] I became very serious, I wanted, I was very serious about the theatre and wanted to go into theatre and, my mother, I think, was, I would call a frustrated actress and so I thought, oh, I'll be the one who, you know, who does it. And so I went to college with that as my major and that's what I really wanted to do but, again, I guess at the time it was so limiting for black students or black people trying to get into it. There was one other black woman in the theatre department and my college, which was Pomona College [Claremont, California] and she had never, she was--yeah, and she had never been in a production, she was only, you know, on the crew and behind the scenes so I just, it was too, you know daunting for me. Story_ID: 344580 Speaker 1: At the University of Chicago [University of Chicago High School; University of Chicago Laboratory Schools Chicago, Illinois], you were still in high school there. Were there teachers that influenced you at the, you were there? Speaker 2: In high school, I don't think so much. Speaker 1: What were your friends, could you tell us something about your friends in high school? What did you guys do? Speaker 2: Well, we were, well initially, let's see, first I had kind of a mixed group, then at kind of at adolescence it seemed to, you know, racially separate and at first I was, you know, just trying to fit in and it was a group of African Am- you know, black students, and then actually there was kind of an incident where I became ostracized from the students. There was, I mean it's kind of complicated but it actually turned out, I think, to be good for me because--it was pretty dramatic, though everybody stopped talking to me and if I sat down at the lunch table, people would get up and leave and what had I done? Speaker 1: What did you do? Speaker 2: And it was, you know, of course related to a boy. My, I think, the official story was that my good friend, there were three of us who were good friends and my friends, she and her boyfriend had split up and he asked me for my phone number and I gave it to him and then, but obviously, that's not, in my view, what was really at issue. You know, there was, I guess, working out different kinds of, anyway, I ended up then becoming, I think, more of a maverick or, because I was pushed out of the social group, I became more of a maverick and, you know, then my friends, then I, that's when I started hanging out in the theatre department and hanging around more political people and people who were also kind of, for whatever reason, not in the social, main social groups. So, it, I think it worked out (laughter). It was supposed to happen, I guess. Speaker 1: Were you in, did you take part in sports or any extracurricular activities? Speaker 2: I was a cheerleader for, let's see, two or three years in high school, three years I guess, and yeah, that was something. There was a friend whose sister was a cheerleader and we just wouldn't, until we could, until we were old enough to do it, we were just practicing cheers and, you know, and both tried out and made it and so, I was a cheerleader I think, three years. And then, you know, that became much too square and corny at that time, you know, so then, that was when I started doing theatre and, oh, one interesting thing. They did a, my, it was a pretty progressive school and pretty progressive theatre department. One of the teachers was a member, had been a member of what was called, the Living Theatre which was very experimental at the time. This would have been like 1968, I guess, and, or maybe it was '69 [1969], and they did a production of 'Antigone' by Henry [Henry Bauchau] and did cross, or non-traditional, what we call now a non-traditional casting. So I was Antigone and Creon was black but Creon's wife was white and my sister was white and, they even wrote about it in the Hyde Park newspaper because it was like, oh, imagine that, you know, you have this, where race didn't matter at all, race wasn't the issue, which is pretty amazing. It's still now being, it's more common now in the theatre, particularly in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], but still, it's still being worked out, so-- Speaker 1: All right, it certainly is. Story_ID: 344581 Speaker 1: You had mentioned you grew up in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], which is very, very liberal, in the '60s [1960s] and Chicago [Illinois] during that time was a very, very interesting place. Could you tell us some of your experiences? Were you, Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was there and other things were going on. Were you involved in that whole-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I did, it's, yeah, I've kind of forgotten about that. I remember when PUSH [Operation Breadbasket; Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] was formed and I think I was even in some of the early, you know, big meetings of that. I did, I remember going to a rally with Fred Hampton and, and it always struck me, he was, there was actually some kind of a confrontation at that rally because there were also some gang stuff going on at the time between the Disciples [Devil's Disciples] and the Blackstone Rangers and, and I remember kind of at a rally, it was like one of the Rangers or somebody interpreted the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] as a rival gang and there was almost like a shootout at this rally. It was, I think it was even held at some place on the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] campus and Fred Hampton completely talked that situation, talked everyone out of that situation. He completely defused that situation and not, because I always remembered what a true leader he was and the fact that he was murdered. I think of the Panther leaders that I, but of course, that's, he was the one I had the closest contact with but, in terms of what happened later, he, he might have been the strongest of the leaders, certainly just to see what he did in that situation. And now I see that his son [Fred Hampton, Jr.] is around and continuing the cause so that's interesting. But, yeah, we were, you know very much pulled into what was happening in Chicago. There, and during that, the riots after Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination, I didn't exactly participate but, you know, you're kind of on the periphery and there was a lot of, it was a really exciting time. There was a lot of community activism. The DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois], [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs, I think is her name, was organizing that and I think I remember going when it was like in her basement and there was poetry and just, it was very vibrant and, to be, you know, coming of age at that time I think it was just, you know, remarkable and just, you know, just a gift really (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 344582 Speaker 1: Was your family active in the church? (Background noise) Did it influence you? Speaker 2: Actually, we were raised Catholic, which was, oh, that's kind of an interesting story. My father [HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams] always said that he, that Creighton [Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, Nebraska] accepted him, and the tradeoff was that your children will be Catholic and I guess, I guess they did stuff like that (laughter). So you promise your, you know, your progeny but, so they were, not, I wouldn't say so active. I mean, we went to church every Sunday but they weren't, it wasn't in terms of like the black church, activism. They were, my folks were active in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and kind of interestingly, I guess because of their background, they didn't, even though they were, I would say right in the middle of social, of Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] middle class, they weren't so much socially in that. Well, I don't know exactly how to explain it. They did attend things that were very, you know, social and bourgeois but, for example, I didn't come out and we weren't members of Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]. I think they were slightly, not completely comfortable themselves in that because of, you know, they, because of their own backgrounds of not really coming out of, I guess, I don't know. I should ask them about that. So we, it was kind of, it wasn't typical, you know, it wasn't exactly the typical upper middle class black and I guess also the family was, it was more family connected than some of the social, but they were, you know, active in the, I remember us marching against something at the school. Mom [Willeen Brown Williams] taking us to, you know, some demonstration about something with the schools, I guess segregated schools in Chicago. But then when I got, you know, kind of super militant, there, what, that did cause some friction with my parents and it was interesting. What my dad could never understand was when we kind of segregated ourselves when, you know, and actually in college [Pomona College, Claremont, California] I remember somebody, I can't remember who, some famous black scholar coming and all the black students were sitting on one side and he just, whatever he was going to talk about, he just said, why are you doing this? We just, we were just undoing this. Why are you doing this? And so they didn't so much, I don't think they understood, ever understood. Even now, don't understand what that was about. I, you know, being so, for so long, a minority, understand, you know, why at some point you need to just say, you know-- Story_ID: 344583 Speaker 1: 'Cause oh, yeah, at, in high school [University of Chicago High School; University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] too, we did have, I guess my junior year, we started organizing and we were organizing for, we had no black teachers, wanted black teachers, more black students and black curriculum there, because there was none, and that was an important organizing lesson for me. I was a junior and so it was mostly juniors and seniors doing this and we took the principal, this is, I always laugh when I think about it, took the principal to a black Muslim restaurant for our meeting and I don't know if we really truly understood how intimidating that was but, so he agreed to everything, right, but what the truth of it, which I found so many times with other institutions that, you know, also, I don't, you know, the seniors graduated, so when we came back and what we had was, you know, like a no actual class, black studies class, we had a, like a voluntary, how do we get along session or something, no black teachers, you know, nothing that he officially agreed to, but what were we going to do about it because most of the organizers were graduated, so, that was kind of a lesson I always remembered later and I was also very active in college in, you know, student organizing. Story_ID: 344584 Speaker 1: How did you spend your, your free time? What were some of the things you liked to do when you were not in school and not organizing the world? Speaker 2: (Laughter) In high school [University of Chicago High School; University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: Yeah, in high school. What did you-- Speaker 2: Oh, you know, trying to have a boyfriend, going to parties, you know, in that regard, and I was only sixteen when I graduated from high school. And so my father's [HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams] view of when I should start dating and all that was out of, in my view, out of whack in terms of where, you know, I would have been in college by his, by his calculation. So, you know, I was trying to sneak out to parties and (laughter) getting caught, smoked cigarettes and, if I was always good in school, there was definitely another, another side of me. We used to go out, there was a place in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] called the Point [Promontory Point], that was the big hangout place and I don't know if kids still go out there. It was kind of just right on the, on the water and, you know, grass and you'd have picnics and just hang out there. That was a big favorite and what else. That's all I can remember. Speaker 1: You didn't play a musical instrument or anything? Speaker 2: I play--I took piano for a long time and then I did play the French horn for one year but I wasn't terribly, I probably should have stayed with the piano, you know, but I don't think I was terribly talented in that. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 344585 Speaker 1: You decided to become an actress-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and so you went to Pomo- to California. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Why California? Speaker 2: (Laughter) As far away from Chicago [Illinois] as I can. Well, it also, almost everybody went east and, you know, my group, the kids who were graduating, and, or else stayed around in the Midwest, and, I really wanted to go to Antioch [Antioch College, Yellow Springs, Ohio] and my folks [Willeen Brown Williams and HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams] were just like, no, absolutely not. I was just seventeen, you know, I graduated [from University of Chicago High School; University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] at sixteen, turned seventeen and, before college, and-- Speaker 1: I, I understand when you say, Antioch, why they were upset, but there might be some people who don't quite understand what Antioch, why your parents were getting upset about Antioch. Speaker 2: And what I, yeah, I was attracted because it had, it was, I was so, oh gosh, I was so idealistic and, of course, knew everything in the world and, you know, challenging all the traditional, everything about education and so Antioch's program of balancing academic study with, you know, doing community service or working in cities or wherever, really appealed to me. They were, I probably mostly, they had heard of the reputation about a lot of drugs on the campus which, that I don't remember being focused on that but, and just felt that I was too young to handle what the-- Speaker 1: Right, Antioch's in Yellow Springs [Ohio] and it was very open-- Speaker 2: Everything open and, yeah. Speaker 1: You made your own decisions about what classes you took-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and you took all these (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No structure, right. Speaker 1: No structure, right. Speaker 2: And also you, you know, you could be in New York City [New York, New York] your second or wherever, you know, your second semester. Story_ID: 344586 Speaker 1: So, I think after that, I was a National Merit Scholar [National Merit Scholarship]--finalist, semi-finalist. So I was getting information, you know, schools were sending me stuff and I think Pomona [Pomona College, Claremont, California] was after they said you can't go to Antioch [Antioch College, Yellow Springs, Ohio]. Pomona was the next school that sent me something but also a classmate from the year before had gone so I looked into it and I went. I had never even visited the campus and it was kind of crazy but it turned out to be good. I think it was, there was a lot, there had been a lot of activism. The black students had organized the year before, kind of similar to what we had done in high school [University of Chicago High School; University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], demanding, well everybody was doing it, demanding more students in, more black students and black faculty and a black studies department. And so that was in place when I went, in my freshman year, and actually that year, and it's a cluster, there's five schools, I think, and of all, on all those campuses, that year was the first 10 percent black class and maybe for another two or three years and then it's gone back to, you know, now it's, I don't know, and probably not even 3 percent but, so it was again kind of a critical time. There was enough black students to have a social base and also political base and you know I was very active. We had a, what we called a Freedom School and Saturdays in the, I think it was in Pomona [California], in the town, and we did, you know, we were selling the Black Panther newspaper [The Black Panther Black Community News Service] and organizing it and every year, this is some of where that previous lesson taught me, every year the schools would try to take back what they had, black students had won so there'd be like in the spring, some new need to organize to, you know, to protect black studies or, you know, black faculty. So, and there still is a black studies department. I went back for my twenty-fifth, I think, reunion and saw that they still had a black studies, although that's kind of gone more, I guess the thinking in a lot of campuses is kind of, is its strength, and it's the same issue in terms of the issue of Black History Month. Is it stronger to integrate it into the body of the order, you know, so, it's that same kind of issue. Speaker 2: How did you find California? I mean from, coming from Chicago [Illinois] which was, first of all, very cold? And it was very segregated and very kind of structured to Southern California? My heavens, that must have been cultural shock (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well I do, I, I remember in which almost anybody from the East or farther east remembers thinking, you know, seeing Watts [Los Angeles, California] and saying, what, there're fruit trees. People have fruit trees. How, this is the ghetto. How could this be the ghetto, you know? And not that I lived in the ghetto in Chicago but certainly you were aware of it and, you know, knew what it looked like and it didn't look like, you know, single homes with fruit trees. So that was surprising to me. I, I guess, obviously, I liked California. I ended up staying here pretty much since I, you know, since I, and I found it, well and some of it I guess is too, is just the time in my life. It was where I was really beginning to feel that I was defining myself and, you know, searching for different things and finding, finding them, so, it was very exciting and felt nurturing in that way. Story_ID: 360370 Speaker 1: So you've come to California and you've entered college and you're a theatre arts major, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I came as a theatre major. Speaker 1: And did you remain a theatre major or-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, I, this is even crazier. I, when I realized that, you know, there wasn't the kind of opportunity that I wanted, I guess, then I changed my major to chemistry (laughter), which was crazy and this was out of the idea, I mean--I probably had been to some, you know, lecture or something and that, you know, black people don't need artists, they need chemists, you know, so okay, I'm going to be a chemist which I had never been, you know, scientifically minded or talented and then also Pomona [Pomona College, Claremont, California] was a pretty rigorous school and, in fact, I think they used chemistry to weed out their pre-med because so many people came in pre-med. So I had no chemistry background and I can remember my advisor, this old white guy and he was like, okay, really, you know and that was the most difficult semester. I mean, and I don't know, I have a lot of, co- you know, what, confidence in my intelligence but it's like, even now, chemistry is just something that cannot get into my brain. I just couldn't understand it and I worked harder and got a D in that class and was, again, too stupid to take it pass, fail because at least I would have, you know, just gotten a pass, so, but I worked harder for that D than any A I ever got. And then, changed my major quickly to history which, that's what I ended up getting my degree in and it's interesting. I could have, I can see I could have gone into history and my professors really wanted me to. I think probably I was feeling a little more, still that I wanted to be more engaged and not, you know, in an academic, more engaged in society. So I ended up with journalism which is very related and now it's funny, now with the work that I'm doing with the family memoir, you know, returning kind of to the history and getting re-enthused, I guess, about history and wondering, well, I wonder what it would have been like if I had gone down that other path but, so at least that was the academic path. Speaker 1: Okay, so you really, did you really enjoy journalism? Did you feel like you'd found-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. Speaker 1: --or where you should be? Speaker 2: And it's funny, I chose that, again. It was kind of a confluence of different things because I had always written and liked to write but didn't think of it as a career. And then there was a writer, Louie Robinson who wrote for Ebony magazine and he was, it wasn't even a skills class, it was like a blacks in the media class, and then it just kind of clicked. I was like, oh, I could do that, just seeing him, you know, as a, as a black journalist. And-- Speaker 1: That was at Pomona, you have that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a blacks in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause they had-- Speaker 1: --really, in the media class? Speaker 2: Oh yeah-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --they, because of the, of the organizing that the students had done before, we had very good black studies department and, and in various, you know, history, sociology, we had a really strong black studies faculty and department and he was teaching, I think that was, you know, he was like a lecturer, that was what he was teaching. And that wasn't until my senior year and it was like, and I had been thinking I would be a teacher but I was also discouraged. I had done some practice teaching and just discouraged by, you know, the public school system that I saw and I think, I think it was Jonathan Kozol's 'Death At An Early Age' was also very, and it just seemed like it was a kind of catch-22. So anyway, then when I saw Louie Robinson and I always, whenever somebody asked me to come speak to a class, I do because I think, you know, maybe there's a student there that will be like me just seeing a person that you can identify with in a job. But I didn't really know anything about the field but, you know, it turned out to be very suited to me. I then went and got a master's [degree] in journalism [from Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] which was basically me catching up because I, most people, most people tend to have been involved in high school journalism, so I was, you know, playing catchup and so it was well suited. I'm, I guess having a few second thoughts, not second thoughts now, but wondering but I don't know if that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. A path less taken. Story_ID: 360371 Speaker 1: California, back to the East Coast which is another cultural difference. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so you're in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Oh, gosh. Yeah. Speaker 1: And you learned to speak Boston, I suppose. Speaker 2: And that was, well actually in between, I was in Ghana for a year-- Speaker 1: Oh really. Speaker 2: --on a Watson Fellowship [Thomas J. Watson Fellowship], my first husband [John Payton] and I, and that was an incredible, and I had gotten very interested in African, West African literature. And so we were studying West African literature in Ghana and that was a fantastic experience and I still, I, I cannot believe I haven't been back because I really loved Ghana in a way that just, I can't even hardly describe it. I talk about it all the time and I guess some of it too, again, was the time in my life and coming as a true adult and, but I made, you know, some really close friends and just great experiences and the culture is so rich and so layered and then I, I suppose we do connect to it in a, some ancestral way. And then Ghanaians are so hospitable and welcoming and I just had dinner with a couple that was there at the time who had been back and said, ah, you won't even recognize it now, it's just, you know, all the spaces, the places, the, between towns are all grown together. And so, but I think we're talking about going next year is there fiftieth independence so, and I'm also intrigued by Ghana and I think Kenya are offering dual citizenships to African Americans and I think I'm going to do that if nothing but symbolic-- Speaker 1: What do you have to do to become a--do you know? You don't know. Speaker 2: I don't think you have to do anything but sign up but they're, they are on a campaign. The New York Times had a piece on it right around, a couple of months ago, 'cause they're trying to attract African Americans to come back, in retirement or send your kids here or come back and, you know, people who, you know, for the resources. So, I, I don't, I don't know if I would go back and live there but I'm really pretty sure I'm going to do the dual citizenship. Speaker 1: Oh, you'll have to tell me what's, what's involved (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, what's in, what's involved, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, my. Story_ID: 360372 Speaker 1: So you're in Ghana and you had this wonderful experience and then you went to Boston [Massachusetts] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Boston, oh yeah, and that's, that was, the timing of that was very strange, I guess, or, 'cause we, the, we got there in Boston like in the summer I guess and we'd been out of the country so really, you know, removed, and also it's amazing how you get acculturated and you're really having culture shock. For example, you know, you don't do anything with your left hand there, and in a lot of places, and it took me years before I broke that habit, you know of, I mean, even awkwardly to pass something so that you would not use your left hand. So, anyway, it was culture shock coming back to just, you know, the wealth and waste of America, and also, Boston was desegregating, was going through desegregation, starting that September. Speaker 1: And this year was-- Speaker 2: So that would have been 1974, '74 [1974], or was it '75 [1975]? But, so going from this kind of really rich, and I won't say so much that I felt like, because I was conscious of being American when I was there, and I was conscious that, you know, the Ghanaians didn't really look at us as our long lost brothers and sisters but going from, you know, such a rich black African experience into Boston, which was at this time, you know, the whole, so racially polarized and, of course, the politicians were completely exploiting everybody's, you know, ignorance (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fears. Speaker 2: --and fear and prejudice and some really hideous, and then I was also work, in school in journalism [at Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] and then working as a journalist so I was covering stuff and some, and I don't, I don't know that the rest of the country ever really knew what was going on there and how-- Speaker 1: Oh really? Speaker 2: --close. I mean there were a couple of times that they had to decoy the angry, screaming white mobs to get the black kids out of the school and if that hadn't happened, who knows what would have happened. You know, it could have been as ugly as, or uglier than things that had happened in the South (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the South. Speaker 2: And it was, it was the South, it was that, you know, recurrence and I hadn't lived through that, you know. I had seen that and it was removed but being in the middle of it was quite shocking and I don't, because of that, I don't think I would ever live in Boston even though, and I have to say too, later, they desegregated the public housing and it went very smoothly and that's another part of the story I don't think the rest of the country was, you know, just didn't get out, and I, I look at that as the example that a town and people can grow, you know, can evolve. Story_ID: 360373 Speaker 1: But I know one of the things that really struck me, oh yeah, I can--experiences there. There was an attorney, Ted Landsmark [HistoryMaker Theodore C. Landsmark], or something, I can't remember his name, who was an African American attorney going on the steps of City Hall [Boston City Hall, Boston, Massachusetts] and it might have even been, I know it was the year of the bicentennial, and a group of white kids took an American flag, no doubt, less, and smashed him in the face and broke his nose. And, I mean this is stuff that, you know, if you wrote it, people would say, oh, this is over the top, you know, and there was a pic- I think that picture might have been, I don't know if it won a Pulitzer [Pulitzer Prize] but I remember it and remember covering a press conference with him and his face bandaged and one time I famously get lost. I have really very poor sense of direction and I was driving some place and got, ended up lost going because it was southeast, South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] was the most upset, I guess, because they were bringing black kids into South Boston. And I was, I got lost and pulled in some place, it was like a postal, you know, some kind of a post office area and the guy's like, this is federal property but I'm going to let you go through here because I'm not sending you back the way you came because he was afraid that I'd get attacked. I mean, people were getting attacked and pulled out of their cars and all of this crazy stuff. So, it was very, you know, disturbing time. Oh, the thing I was thinking. It also struck me, there was a place called Columbia Point [Boston, Massachusetts] that was black, right across from the little inlet, from South Boston, and if you looked at those demographics of, of, you know, welfare dependents, high school dropout, they were both poor, you know, abandoned communities, and it was so, I think I understood in a way class, the class issue better there--because those people, if you looked at them on paper, other than race, they were identical and they were just, you know, the people in South Boston would have killed the, and they had more in common than, you know, of course the politicians who were-- Speaker 2: Using-- Speaker 1: --exploiting the fear of the poor white people. So, I did learn that lesson, you know, pretty, it was real stark there. Everything was very stark in Boston [Massachusetts] (laughter). Story_ID: 360374 Speaker 1: I was there, and my first husband was in Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Okay, and your, what was his name, please? Speaker 1: John Payton. Speaker 2: Okay. So he went to Harvard Law School and you were in Boston? Speaker 1: I went to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and got a master's [degree] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In journalism. Speaker 1: --and then started working. My first newspaper was in New Bedford [Massachusetts], the New Bedford Standard-Times [The Standard-Times], which is where 'Moby Dick' [Herman Melville] starts, in New Bedford. I read 'Moby Dick' (laughter) when I was working for that paper. It was an old whaling town and then became garment, you know, part of the garment, you know, manufacturing, and then was just, by that time, was pretty depressed because the, the economy was pretty depressed because the garment industry had moved south and now, of course, moved out of the country. And that was kind of interesting because there, the black people were Cape Verdean, the majority, you know community, and they didn't really identify as, with African Americans. In fact, there was a funny thing on the census. They had to redo the census. They had just done a census when I got there because even though their community was quite poor, they didn't qualify for some federal monies that were going into minority communities because all the Cape Verdeans had marked that they were white (laughter), you know, and then I had, there, my first paper, there was a first black--I was the first black reporter, and this was, this is what I would call true affirmative action. The editor said, you know, it's time that we have a black reporter. I came knocking on the door. I mean, I had just, you know, I sent my stuff out everywhere and so he made a, you know, decision, okay, we're going to do this. I'm going to hire this woman, she's, you know, give her a chance. And I was only there about four or five months before I went to another newspaper [The Boston Phoenix] in Boston [Massachusetts], but during that time, I had been doing, I think I had done my graduate thesis on the efforts to integrate the construction industry. There was something called the, the Boston Plan and the Philadelphia Plan to try and get, you know, work in the construction and trades. So I was still looking into that and talking to the black, you know, la- workers, construction tradesmen there who were complaining about the union not representing them. So I called the shop steward, I think it was the shop steward, and I said, you know, the black workers, and he said, you know, "Well those niggers can go back to the cotton fields for all I care." So I wrote it down and they printed it on the front page which was, when I look back on it, I mean, for that, they were so, that was so bold of them to support me in that way. I mean, here I'm a total rookie, straight out of school and the guy didn't deny that he said it, he said I tricked him into saying it or something but I'm sure, in large part, he, he, it never occurred to him that I was black because there had never been a black, you know, reporter there. So, it became, it just blew up. It turns out that he, the mayor had appointed him, this guy who said this, to some committee, you know, some city committee and, because the mayor was running for re-election, the guy had to resign, it just, the town just went, you know, because of course all this stuff is, as usual, underneath the surface and nobody--the other ironic part of it was the Cape Verdeans were angry because, you know, that he basically had called them black so they were upset about that part, you know, like they didn't come from the cotton fields. So, there was a lot of irony in that whole thing. And then I was just so, I don't know, naive. I remember, I went after that, and there's all, you know, a lot of underworld, I guess, connections in, you know, New England and the labor movement and I went to, by myself, to a union meeting after that and went in and I, and I can just remember the look on those guys faces like, what is, who is this woman? You know, and then went to the meeting and left and drove my car. I wasn't afraid of a bomb being under the, you know, so, but I would not do that now (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't think you should. Story_ID: 360375 Speaker 1: You had mentioned the Cape Verdeans. Could you tell us a little bit about their culture because you said they, they didn't consider themselves black. Speaker 2: Yeah, well they're, actually, well they come from an area off of the West, West Africa, it was not inhabited and became just kind of a, I guess, a stopping point during the whole European and slave trade and so it got populated. And so they are Portuguese speaking and I think identified--in fact I'd heard Cape Verdeans say that the island, that the island is off of Portugal, not West Africa and so their orientation was much more Portuguese. But they're, and it turns out too there's a pretty large community here, outside of New England. I think this might be the largest, or maybe L.A. [Los Angeles, California] but I was surprised to find that. And I, I don't think I got to know them that well. They would initially, oh, the question is, are you from here which meant are you Cape Verdean. And then when I'd say, no, then it, you know, then that was like, okay, well you're not really one of us and I didn't, the African Americans who were there, there was a woman, I think, married to a Cape Verdean activist, had kind of there, they were like a minority within a minority. So there were a lot of interesting, I guess, or maybe strange cultural dynamics. I know the Cape Verdean, there's a Cape Verdean singer who's, their music is getting more popular and it's, it certainly sounds, you know, kind of more African derived. So, and then I don't know too if, what, you know what, on the island it might be different from the, you know-- Story_ID: 360376 Speaker 1: So you've, you worked there [The Standard-Times] for a few months and then you moved on (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then I, I went to The Boston Phoenix which was anoth- is, an alternative newspaper. They recruited me to come. Also, I was commuting sixty-five miles so that was killing me. And, and The Phoenix is a weekly newspaper and it was out of that, and came out of that anti-war, you know, the whole journalism, anti-war journalism, but it was also a good place for me because it was much, it was a writer's paper and you really, you know, got a lot of guidance and development. They put, you know, much more development into--daily newspapers they don't really spend that much time, it's kind of just go as you, you know, but this took much more time. So I think I really was able to develop my writing there and much longer articles, and that was kind of an interesting, again, I was the first black reporter there and may still be the only, I'm not sure if they, what they've done. They, the alternative press is not much better than the mainstream press or, worse actually, and that's been kind of a disappointment to me and, you know, that we haven't made more progress. But there, oh, and on, kind of on the personal side there, it's again, an interesting thing. I, when I first went there, I would come home sometimes crying and really felt very, at the time, felt very much that, and again, I'd been, I've been a minority in school situations most of my life but there I was really very conscious of feeling unaccepted or that they didn't think I could do the work and in hindsight though, I thought about that, and the editor was British and said to me later, I think as, I don't know if the issue of affirmative action was talking to me like, well, yeah, I hired you because we needed a black reporter but if you couldn't have done the work, I would have fired you. I mean, that was his attitude. It wasn't any of this, you know. But later, and I ended up feeling very much a part of that staff and then later it kind of dawned on me that what I took for racial resistance or something, some of it could have, really might have been because I was so young and that some of their feelings that, that were patronizing, were more because of my age but I took it as racial and I think that's been a lesson to me to one of the issues that we struggle with is we don't know what's going on, you know, and you can, sometimes you can mistake something for racial but we're constantly in that, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Territory. Speaker 2: --and the kind of stress and insecurity but there, I think, it also made me tough so that when I came through that and I was determined, then I felt like, well, I'll never be soft or vulnerable in that way again. Story_ID: 360377 Speaker 1: How long did you stay with them [The Boston Phoenix]? Speaker 2: I stayed there two and a half years and, and did, I think did very well and then came out here [California] because my first husband [John Payton] had a, what do you call it, internship with a judge? That's not what they call it but-- Speaker 1: Clerkship? Speaker 2: Clerkship, yeah. You know I wasn't saying the right word, Judge Cecil Poole [Cecil F. Poole] out here, so we moved out here. And then I started, and I didn't have a job and I, and it's funny. I remember some interview, oh, I just sent all my, you know, sent resumes to everybody and then kind of similarly, I think, an editor at the old, what was the San Francisco Examiner hired me and kind of the same. Well, they did have three black reporters and one guy left so there was kind of a joke that I was filling the third black reporter's slot, you know, but I think, too, this guy was the idea of, you know, we need more of a presence and here's a person I'm going to give her a chance, so. And I stayed at the Examiner and, covering the East Bay [San Francisco Bay Area, California]. And, again-- Speaker 1: What kind of stories did you cover? You were a reporter, what kind of things-- Speaker 2: General, general assignments, so, I did a lot of, I was supposed to cover more kind of cops and stuff than I did. I would kind of try and get around that and I was really interested more in politics then. I came to Oakland [California], Lionel Wilson had just been elected the first African American mayor of Oakland, so that was a real interesting time of, you know, what was happening and seeing and, again, this is one of those lessons, you know, people had a lot of hopes and seeing that for a large degree, it didn't, wasn't really going to matter that he was African American. That was pretty much, he was still going to, it would be, you know, his buddies and cronies. I mean, they were African American-- Speaker 1: They were taken care of, yeah, and they were taking care of each other. Speaker 2: --but in terms of what it really meant to the African American community, other than symbolically, and I think that's a question that a lot of communities can ask after having, you know, political leadership. And I think I've thought that maybe we focused too much in terms of our strategic plan as a people, focused too much on electoral, you know, getting elected officials, just put too many eggs in that basket just because that's a limited return, I think, generally because politicians, I don't have a terribly high regard for politicians. So (laughter)-- Speaker 1: I understand, I understand. So you're at the Examiner and you're-- Speaker 2: I was at the Examiner and, you know, doing work that got noticed and then Robert Maynard [Robert C. Maynard] came as the first, and this is amazing. In what, 1980, he was the first black editor of a mainstream, so-called mainstream newspaper [Oakland Tribune] and then he was publisher about, within two years, I guess. Story_ID: 344595 Speaker 1: All right, so you, you, we were talking about your work experience and you've come to the Oakland Tribune and you have something that you've never had before which your, the owner of the paper is African American. Speaker 2: Right, right. Well, and, and Bob [Robert C. Maynard] recruited me to come and that was really an exciting time that people came from all over the country to be part of that, that Oakland Tribune which was, you know, the first time an African American was the editor and then publisher of a mainstream newspaper. And what Maynard really understood, and I've been thinking about more recently, was yes, racial diversity, because we have a diverse community, but what that totally connects to is the, the re-, to coverage, to accurate coverage, that that's what good journalism should be, or has to be and, of course, it hadn't been in the past and unfortunately it's still to a large degree isn't. You know, newsrooms, the newspaper industry, in particular, is one of the worst in terms of achieving diversity and, you know, had a, had a goal. I can't remember what the publishers association goal was, and then they're like, oh, well we're not going to make that so we'll push it forward and still now, and what I've been thinking recently is how that's kind of a fundamental distortion of, you know, and that's why you have the distortion of, of the images of people of color in, in the media. What's, another interesting aspect of that, though, is that as, and then now newspapers are really struggling and circulation is going down and they, you know, are really unclear about the future but the ethnic press has really blossomed in recent years so that, it's like anything, the vacuum is not going to stay, it's going to, something's going to fill the vacuum. So, and it's kind of curious that, and I don't know exactly why newspapers are so resistant but they have been and, in fact, I took a leave to work on the family book for seven months and when I came back into the newsroom, it almost felt like the third, you know, the first time I walked into a newsroom, thirty years earlier. I was that conscious of how few people of color, and this is at the Oakland Tribune which, of course, is, you know, was sold and is owned by somebody else but, kind of skipping back, back with, during the time that Maynard was the editor and recruited people, and as somebody said, you know, before the editors would always say, well, you know, we'll hire them but we just can't, we don't know where they are. We can't find them but he managed to find us, you know. And so, it was very exciting those first years because it was like we were doing something that, you know, hadn't been done and showing that there were black journalists and Latino journalists and Asian journalists and, you know, doing good work and, you know, unfortunately, his health, it was a combination of his health failing and then the econ- economics, I guess, of the newspaper and just this area and the fact that Oakland [California] doesn't have a strong retail base. So he ended up having to sell the newspaper. Story_ID: 344596 Speaker 1: Could you tell us a little bit about him [Robert C. Maynard]? Some memories that you might have of him. Speaker 2: Well it's funny, he had a, he kind of had a way of speaking that was very formal and, I don't know what the word would be, I guess formal, but he was a ver- himself, an interesting guy. He never, I don't think he ever finished high school, but was just so, loved journalism, loved newspapers and understood that--what they should be, what they, what they needed to be, I guess. And he developed something called the fault lines that he had kind of observed that people are divided along gender, race, age, geography, class. I think there's six or seven of them and it's kind of an interesting paradigm, I guess, to look at things and, as some of what I was talking about before, things that you can think of as race, or really class, things that can be age are really, or race or whatever, you know, and that his idea was that if you understand, if you better understand what the dynamic is rather than just this kind of muddled, it's a better way to bridge the gap. Story_ID: 344597 Speaker 1: And for me, he [Robert C. Maynard] gave me a column [in the Oakland Tribune], I think I was just thirty, and I was again so, you know, I knew everything and so, a radical and hotheaded. So I knew that there were times that it had caused him trouble and he just really gave me the space to develop a voice which I think that is, again, really rare to have had so much time to really, to really be able, and freedom, you know, and space to develop a voice that doesn't happen that often and particularly to African, you know, with African American journalists. So I probably, I might have one to be, one of the longest, you know, have written a column the longest-- Speaker 2: How many years? Speaker 1: Well, I guess twenty-five years, twenty-five years again 'cause that would have been I think '81 [1981] and this is '06 [2006]. Now I did have a break in there. I went, I went to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] on a Knight Fellowship [John S. Knight Journalism Fellowship] and that was a nine month break and then I recently took a seven month sabbatical but other than that, so that, it might be now one of the longest, one of the anyway, you know, longest ongoing columns by an African American in the country, so-- Speaker 2: How do you see your column? What do you, what's its perspective? Speaker 1: Well I have a couple of different kinds, I guess, of columns. I do a lot of local politics and social issues but I also do what I think of as kind of either slice of life, either just, you know, a day at the lake at Oakland [California]. One of the things that, even after all this time, I'm still, I still remark on the diversity of the city and the way that people basically get along. I mean, they're demographically, you can find other places that have the same diversity but I don't think that there's usually, you also find more racial tension say in Los Angeles [California] or New York [New York]. And here people really, it's like they kind of don't even notice, I don't think, and I think sometimes readers are like, why is she, keep writing about this. Of course, we're all here and, but I think if you have grown up some place else, it's still amazing. You know, I mean I, went out just the other day, I was walking at the lake and it was like there were four women, there was one white woman, one Asian woman, one Latino and me and it's like, you know, it almost seems false but that's just the way it is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the way it is here, yeah. Speaker 1: And generally, I mean, there isn't that much racial tension. There, you'll find some of it with political--again, you know, usually it's around politics and people kind of trying to exploit their own agenda but, and occasionally something will happen and, you know, in the high schools, but I think comparatively, in fact, I've always said that this was something that Oakland could hold up as a model to, you know, of how we've done it but-- Speaker 2: It's a very integrated city. You don't-- Speaker 1: Very integrated. Speaker 2: --you don't really find a Latino neighborhood and a black neighborhood. Speaker 1: Right. At one time, I don't know if they still have done this, at one time they did a study of how--I forgot how they asked--how many people, there were fewer people in Oakland who lived on a block with only people of their race than any other place, if that makes sense (laughter). Story_ID: 344598 Speaker 1: Besides this column, you've done some other things. You, you, oh dear, I'm sorry. You did something for PBS [Public Broadcasting Service], 'Frontline.' Speaker 2: Oh, right. Yeah, I have done some other reporting projects. I worked on a documentary on lending discrimination ["Your Loan is Denied"] that aired on 'Frontline' in '98 [1998] or something. Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992]. Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992], (laughter) thanks. Speaker 1: You're welcome. Speaker 2: That was an interesting, and we went, we went back to Chicago [Illinois], or we went to Chicago to tell the story. Basically you can tell the story in any city but it was, there was some aspects that were very stark in Chicago because of the old black community and an old black middle class but you would still have this, the effect of, and you know and found, what you can find again probably in any, you can find it here in Oakland [California] where places that had been strong working class black neighborhoods, you know, had been, basically, divestment from those neighborhoods. People weren't able to get loans to, you know, to keep up their property and so you have the deterioration of the neighborhood and, and then, what they call a secondary loan market where the main institutions won't lend in those neighborhoods or to those people but then institutions with worse terms will come in and lend and people end up losing their houses. So that was, that was, and there was an interesting project because it kind of shows, well, while certainly a lot has changed in terms of overt racial segregation or discrimination that there's still very strong institutional things that, an analogy is like car insurance. And people just assumed, well, yeah, if you live in a black neighborhood, you're going to pay more car insurance, you know, until you start questioning, but why. You know, why is that? Isn't that just discrimination? Story_ID: 344599 Speaker 1: I also worked on a long-term newspaper project [for the Oakland Tribune], well a couple of things that kind of stick in my mind. One, I went, there was a group from here, a multi-denominational religious group that went down to Alabama to, when the church burnings, not these recent ones but the previous ones, to build a, rebuild one of the churches and I went down there and just wrote about it and it's interesting, everyone in that group, I reconnected with some of those people because of the recent church burnings and everyone says that that has been kind of a singular experience in their lives and these are people who were pretty, are social activists or, through their churches but, you know, are involved in a lot of things. In watching the group here who were from Allen Temple Baptist Church [Oakland, California] and from a Presbyterian church in Lafayette [California], so primarily a black and white church and watching them become a group was really an interesting, journalistically and sociologically, an interesting, because they just bonded and I think some of it was, well of course, there was the historical weight of what they were doing and what the role of church burnings in our, you know, in civil rights history, and I don't know, maybe it was the humidity too (laughter), I don't know, but, and then conversely or not conversely, on the other side of that, that area of Alabama, it's, it's western Alabama, was still so segregated. They still had segregated swimming pools and the black people there almost literally had never seen, I mean the people there had never seen like-- Speaker 2: This is like the '90s [1990s], right? Speaker 1: Yeah, this was like, that was like ninety--like '98 [1998], I think. Speaker 2: And they're still segregated? Speaker 1: Still, they had a black swimming pool and a white swimming pool. And I said, and what was striking to me, and I said, well what would happen if the black kids went to the white swimming pool because there was no law against it? And the woman looked at me like I'd said, what would happen if you jumped off the Empire State Building [New York, New York]? So that was, it was really stunning to see that that, there was a pocket where that was, had not really changed since the mid-'60s [1960s] and, and that it was kind of an acceptance, it was accepted. And they were, and I, actually would be interesting to know what affect this group had because it was just subversive or revolutionary just who they were, just walking down the street to see that kind of integration. They had, it was unknown there. Speaker 2: Gosh, that's unbelievable. Speaker 1: So that was, you know, I guess because of that contrast, it was a very interesting story to tell, you know. Speaker 2: That's, that's totally amazing (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, it was. Story_ID: 344600 Speaker 1: And you do other things beside print. You were on the radio? Speaker 2: Oh, right, I do once a month, in fact. In fact I'll do one this week on the public level, public radio station, they have a commentary and I do that and I enjoy that. I, whereas befor- with the documentary ['Your Loan is Denied'], I discovered that television was not my medium. It's, 'cause it is about the picture whereas radio is still about the word. I mean, you're hearing it as opposed to reading it but it's still word-based which is my, my whole thing and so I enjoy that. Sometimes I'll use the same column, you know, rewrite a column that's been in the paper and do it on the radio but a lot of people hear those, people who don't necessarily read the Tribune [Oakland Tribune] so, and I've been doing that for (laughter), I don't think twenty-five years but more than ten years (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My heavens. Story_ID: 344601 Speaker 1: You're members of many professional organizations and you've done, you've been honored so much. We were just talking about the honor that you had with Dennis Richmond-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of our local television station and you just were named one of the ten most influential black journalists (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) African Americans, yeah. Speaker 1: --American, it's like, whoa, excuse me, lady. Speaker 2: That was, but I, I don't know if I feel so influential but that's a nice group to the, it's a young African American guy started doing, this was the seventh year and they honor people in different fields and--in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], and you know, it's just a way again to have, you can suddenly recognize each other, you know, that the accomplishments that people have made that we don't always get a, that aren't reflected in the media and you get, you do get kind of overwhelmed by the negative that's, you know, constantly there that comes out in terms of police and you just don't see. So it's a kick to see all these, you know, really accomplished in all the areas that people, and the achievements that they've made and the work people are doing. Speaker 1: One of the things that always struck me when I moved to Oakland [California] was the prominent people in the black press, [HistoryMaker] Belva Davis and Dennis Richmond and it was just, that kind of overwhelmed me. How do you feel about, do you think this is a special area or is this-- Speaker 2: I guess, you know I'm not sure I've even thought about that. It's--'cause Belva Davis, I think, was the first African American on television and there were like Ben Williams and there were some others. Speaker 1: Many, yes. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Not just doing sports and-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --really doing other things. Speaker 2: Doing news and anchors and now we have, what, two or three women, and women, too. So it is, I guess it is-- Speaker 1: It seems like a very nurturing-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there is a strong presence and maybe it was Belva being that kind of--I think sometimes it, you know, if somebody makes a breakthrough and it does help other people, you know, get established and you get kind of a critical mass. In terms of print, though, we've kind of gone backwards, we've slid backwards after Maynard [Robert C. Maynard] sold the paper [Oakland Tribune] and his death. And after a while, African Americans often just like feel, I guess feel kind of beaten down by that continual battle and you don't feel so much that the newspaper or the institution is responding and so a lot of people end up leaving the business. So we don't have, I don't think we've made very good progress in terms of newspapers. Story_ID: 344602 Speaker 1: We were talking about you'd like to go and talk to school groups and do some mentoring. You're part of a group that nurtures young black journalists? Is that true? Your Bay Area (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Bay Area Black Journalists Association [BABJA]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I, actually it's funny, I'm not, I'm not really a good organizational person, I guess. I was a founding member of that group and then they, and they recently honored me. I haven't been consistently active with them. Probably the most consistent I have been in terms of that is I have a side passion for dance and I was on a board of a dance school for, it was about fifteen years, I think. So, and that was City Center Dance Theater in Oakland [California], but I, I don't know. I'm not real, I'm not a big organizational person, I guess. Speaker 1: Wonderful. Tell us about, I found this photograph in your house absolutely amazing, in your little costume, once (laughter), the carnaval, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So you really do enjoy dancing and you really-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I kind of discovered it and maybe it was the replacement for theatre, it was an opportunity to perform because I did, I was a very serious student, although coming to, considered late for dance, in my mid-twenties, but for, I would say about, really for about fifteen years, a very serious student and did some amateur performing and have a whole love of that form. Now I still take dance class but I don't, I'm not performing now except in carnaval, that's my last hurrah, (laughter) I guess. Speaker 1: Her cute little, all her feathers (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 344603 Speaker 1: You've had this long, illustrious career, twenty-five years. Have you no-, what have you noticed about Oakland [California], per se? And has, has it changed, how has it changed? Or has it not changed in the community? Speaker 2: Well in some ways it's funny. It's like there's some things it seems like we can't, you know, ever seem to get a department store (laughter). That hasn't changed and I'm not exactly sure why. I do think the city's at a turning point now. I think, when Jerry Brown came as mayor and kind of did attract, or you know, people call it gentrification, I'm not sure, you know, younger families who had been not coming to Oakland and part of it too is that they were priced out of every place else. And, but also in the, not just during the time that Jerry Brown, but a trend also has been the black population, or African American population, is going down. We're only now about 31 percent when we had been, I think at one point, I'm not sure if we were over 50 percent, but the dynamic there is people can't afford to live here and if people live here, you know, middle class, working class, then feel that they'd have to put their, either put them in private school because the schools are poor. So, you know, they have to choose. And so I think the city is changing. I don't think it's going, it has, obviously, a strong African American history in terms of size--a sizable community since World War II [WWII] but it has an older community than that but I think it's not going to be as African American. I think it probably will, it's becoming more Latino and probably will be more, you know, culturally and politically, that's probably the next phase, I guess. We also, I think, in this mayor's race, there's an interesting choice because there, the Latino candidate or, not Latino candidate but he is Latino, he would be the first Latino mayor, Ignacio De La Fuente is pretty much talking about taking, keeping the city going as it, in the direction it has which is attracting more people from outside and maybe not, not consciously but not focusing so much on keeping people here versus, and then Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums], the former congressman who's responded to the call to come back and he's talking about more of taking care of the people who are here. So it is an interesting choice. I think probably a lot of cities face that and I'm not exactly sure which way the voters are going. I don't think Dellums is a slam dunk. I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay, this is a very, as you said, it's a very interesting city. Is there anything else you'd like to add that we haven't asked? Speaker 2: God, let's see. Well, no I guess not. I can't think of anything (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 344604 Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you've lived your life and what's important to you? Have you done the things you wanted to do? Is there something you'd like to do that you haven't? Speaker 2: Well, I, it's, that's an interesting question 'cause I think I have, I'm feeling I'm kind of at a turning point. I really wanted, probably preferred, would have envisioned myself, I guess, as a fiction writer and I went into newspapers because, basically, I was too chicken to try and do that, you know, and that was a way to write and make a living and I've always dabbled kind of on the side with that. And in doing this family history, 'cause it's a, the form that I'm doing it in it's all factual but there is, you know, created dialog and scenes so it's kind of merging those things and I've really enjoyed working like that and it's funny when I came back to the newspaper [Oakland Tribune], I kept saying, it's taking me so long to adjust and I'm realizing a year later, maybe I'm not really going to adjust and something kind of shifted for me about newspapers and it is related to that, the lack of diversity and kind of, in a fundamental way, questioning the, that maybe it's kind of fundamentally fraudulent and there's some other things about that. I mean, the superficiality of it and things that before I tolerated, in a way it feels like I kind of outgrew it. Things that I tolerated because I liked the immediacy or being in the mix, now those things seem kind of, in a way, almost childish and the flaws are, are bigger. And then I have been thinking recently for a variety of reasons, I won't go into all of them, about our own, and I guess there is some thought of historical trauma, and the need for healing for African Americans and that, you know, so much of, we just survived and got through it and a lot of times our families didn't talk about it, didn't talk about what happened because they didn't want that burden. Like I was talking about, it seems like two days ago, my [paternal] grandmother [Clara Drisdale Williams] didn't tell us about, you know, how they wouldn't have the graduation, but that, but that, you know, the more and more people understand that didn't go away, it's passed on, you know, those fears, that anxiety, that sense of inadequacy or insecurity is passed on. So I've been thinking just in the past couple of weeks that maybe I would want to do more creative writing but also maybe address my more kind of, I don't know, journalistic skills more directly to people who were doing some healing work. So I'm going to investigate more, you know, what, and I think of reparations as part of that so I need to find, you know, who's doing that work and, you know, can use someone who can interview and analyze and write and inter- what did I say? There are four things-- Speaker 1: Interview, analyze, write-- Speaker 2: There was something else, and I guess just research. Speaker 1: Oh, okay (laughter). Speaker 2: Those skills (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any regrets? Speaker 2: Sometimes I wondered, I didn't have my own children, I have two stepsons but then I get to be a grandma with their, but sometimes I wondered, that might, I wouldn't call it a regret, it's a question. Should I have, you know, had my own biological children? But I also really believe that you make choices in your life and you're not--I was just talking to somebody about this, you can't have everything in your life-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --and there were certain, you know, times I made choices and that's, this is the way my life has gone. Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered, I- in twenty-five words or less (laughter)? Speaker 2: Easy, as a writer. In fact, I already said I want on my headstone what, even though I won't have one because I'll be cremated but, to say, "That's all she wrote" (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's wonderful. In fact, that's a wonderful place for us to stop. I want to thank you, again, for being so gracious (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, thank you. Speaker 1: --with us. It's, you have this wonderful, wonderful interesting life and thank you for sharing it. Story_ID: 343814 Speaker 1: That's my paternal grandmother, Clara B. Williams [Clara Drisdale Williams] on the left, me on the right and that was, I think that was her 107th birthday party in Chicago [Illinois], so that would have been '92 [1992], 1992, no, yes. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's my mother, Willeen Williams [Willeen Brown Williams] on the left, my father, James Williams [HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams], me and my brother, James Williams II, and that was at Creighton University in Omaha, Nebraska honoring my father as an alumnus. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good, next. Go ahead. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me that went along with the series that I wrote back for Gannett News Service about racial attitudes and that must have been in 1980. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: And that's my mom and dad. My dad, Dr. James Williams on the left, my mom, Willeen Williams. That must have been about 1995. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: That's, on the left, is my great-grandmother, Mrs. Alice Strickland [ph.], we called her Mama Strickland, her daughter, my maternal grandmother, Christine Brown [Christine Strickland Brown] and my, and her three daughters, my aunt, Lois Brown [ph.], Eleanor Brown [ph.] and my mother Willeen Brown, and that was probably, either in Omaha or in northern Mississippi. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. You know there's so much border around that, Loretta [Loretta Henry], you could just stand behind the stand and reach over with your-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --fingers and just hold it and then I'll stabilize it, I'll (unclear) this one. Speaker 1: Those are, on the left, is my cousins, cousin. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Wow, cat-like reflexes. Speaker 1: What do you want? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead, sorry. Speaker 1: Uh, oh, I forgot her name. Okay, on the middle, I'll come back to these, Ray Metoyer, my first cousin, and that's me on the right and that was at a National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] convention in, where was it? Houston [Texas]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great. Do you know [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I was just with him in Los Angeles [California]. He's doing some of our interviews. Speaker 1: Yeah, he had actually first called me about this. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me that went with a column, one of the column pictures and that must be around, I would say, 1992. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: What is that cousin's name? Speaker 2: That's my paternal grandmother, Clara B. Williams and she was 106 in that picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: That's-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): There's some glare on that, Loretta. Why don't you slide it over? Taking the stand and rotating it a little bit this direction, just a little, that's good; that should probably do it. Let's take a look. No, can you flatten the photo? Speaker 2: Here, do this one. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead with that one. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me. That was my first column picture when I first started writing in 1981, writing a column for the Oakland Tribune. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, lots of reflection on that one. Do this. Take the top edge of the photograph-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --and begin to incline it so the top edge leans outward. There was a hinge at the bottom. Just tilt it forward, keep going, hold it, hold it right there and go ahead with the description. Speaker 1: That's my paternal grandmother, Clara B. Williams on the left, that must have been in the '50s [1950s] and on the right, that's her as a young woman, probably in nineteen--I would say '10 [1910]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, good, next. Thank you, Loretta. Remember that trick that's this photo in a lot of those instances. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, but this one will need the same treatment, what you did with the other. Keep going, right there, good, okay. Speaker 1: That's Nelson Mandela, shaking, on the left and he's shaking my father's hand and my mother's to the right of my father and that's Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] looking on and that was at a fundraiser for, I guess, it was the new South African government under Mandela in Chicago. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: And [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett in the background. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Tilt it forward, please. Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: That's my mother on the left, my paternal grandmother, oh, I'm sorry, my mother Willeen Williams, my grandmother Clara B. Williams, my dad, Dr. James Williams shaking the hand of Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and that was in Chicago at the Sheraton Hotel. That must have been around 1967 or '66 [1966]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's my mom on the left, Willeen Williams, her father, Preston Brown and her mother, Christine Brown in the middle. Behind them is her sister, Eleanor Brown and to the right is Lois Brown and that was in Omaha, Nebraska. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Go ahead. Speaker 1: That's me, I was, I think about eight months old, so, it must have been about, probably 1953. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: All right, this is the last large one. Speaker 2: That was a promotional poster when we worked, I worked at the San Francisco Examiner and that must have been about 1979 and it's, those were the people covering the East Bay [San Francisco Bay Area, California]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, next. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We've hit our, we're about seventeen photos here so (unclear) it around. Speaker 2: (Unclear) here, this one? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, turn that 90 degrees, that's very good. Go ahead with the description, the one she's pointed to. Speaker 2: That's my grandmother, Clara Belle Williams and that's her graduating from her normal school [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] which should have been in 1904. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold it please. Okay, next. Speaker 2: And that's my-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Which one is that? Okay. Speaker 2: --paternal grandfather, Jasper B. Williams [Jasper Williams] and, I'm not sure of the date. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next. Speaker 2: Okay, this is the last one. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Bottom, on the right-hand page. Okay, go ahead with the description. Speaker 2: Those are the varsity cheerleaders at the University of Chicago High School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. I'm the second from the right and that would have been 1968 or 1969..