 Story_ID: 36069 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is Stephanie Jackman. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Michele Seretta Jones, M-I-C-H-E-L-E, middle name, S-E-R-E-T-T-A, Jones. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind your name? Speaker 2: One, the Michele part, being just one "L". My mother [Doris Herndon Jones] was adamant that it's not two, very sensitive to that. She actually wanted to name me Roxanne, but my dad [Leon Jones] was like, my daughter is not gonna be named Roxanne. So it was Michele, and then Seretta actually, my mother's sister had said, Serrita, but my mother didn't like that. And they liked the sound of Coretta, like Coretta Scott King, but with an "S", and so Seretta was, and then Jones is my dad's name. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And Jones being a Welsh name actually that derived from the, from John--Christianity actually, but it's Welsh. And that's the origins of Jones. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter), a little something. Speaker 1: What is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 24, November, 1963, and I was born in Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm currently retired from the [U.S.] Army after twenty-five years, Command Sergeant Major, retired. My last title there was Ninth Command Sergeant Major of the Army Reserve. I am now the, I've just left the Obama [President Barack Obama] administration after serving three and a half years. My last, I had three different positions there. I was the, first one was Special Assistant to the [U.S.] Secretary of Defense, White House liaison. The second position, I was the Senior Advisor to the Undersecretary of Defense, Personnel and Readiness. And then my last title and position was Director of External Veteran--Veterans, Military Affairs and Community Outreach. And now, I am the president of the Bones Theory Group. Speaker 1: Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is the 14th of January, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Arlington, Virginia-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at my house (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, okay. Story_ID: 36070 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up. And they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: Crabmeat. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Blue crab (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, black. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, winter. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes, Dominican Republic. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I have many (laughter). The one that I probably use on a regular basis is, "People say God is good, I say chicken is good, God is amazing." (Laughter) Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36071 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately so we can keep them straight. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Doris Herndon Jones, Doris, D-O-R-I-S, Herndon, H-E-R-N-D-O-N, Jones. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I will tell you the date--the year, she may not like. It's, she was actually born on the 22nd of January. However, we celebrate it on the 22nd of February because that's actually what was on her baptism record. And for some reason, that is the date that our family has always celebrated that, which is interesting. I think they had a fire in New York. She was actually born in New York. Speaker 1: New York City? Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: As far as, I have a very small memory of my great grandmother. I was probably about three or four when she passed away, and it was in Chester, South Carolina. And we called her--actually, I'm sorry, in Baltimore [Maryland]. And I remember her in the backyard, in the garden at my grandmother's house. But it's a very, very vague memory. Her name is Mama, well, we called her "Mama." And she was, she had very prominent cheekbones. I remember that, very sharp facial features. And she was a matriarch. When everyone said her name, it was said with, you know, such reverence, Mama, you know, and to this day. But that's my only recollection of my great grandmother. Speaker 1: What was her given name? Do you know? Speaker 2: I don't know. I really don't. Speaker 1: Now, was she a Herndon or-- Speaker 2: No, Herndon, well, yes, I'm sorry, yes, she was. Yes, she was, I'm sorry, 'cause that is my mother's maiden name, but I don't, I don't recall. I really don't. That's interesting. It was always Mama. Speaker 1: She was your great grandmother. Speaker 2: She was my great grandmother. Speaker 1: And so she died, was it, you said, 1967 or eight [1968]? Speaker 2: She probably, she probably passed away in 1966, 1967, somewhere around in there 'cause I was a young, young, very young. There's one picture of her I recall too. Speaker 1: Now, she would have been born, what? Speaker 2: She would have been born in the 1800s, definitely. Speaker 1: Is that as far back as you can go on your mother's side? Speaker 2: On my mother's side, yeah, nothing beyond that. No. Speaker 1: There are no stories about Mama's parents or where she came from? Speaker 2: No, no, what I do know--the only thing that I do know is that one of her parents, don't know if it was her mother or father, was Native American. That I do know because of the family stories. That's the only thing that I know. I may have to ask. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, now, so what did she do for a living? Speaker 2: I'm pretty sure she was a homemaker, pretty sure that she was. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did she come from any place other than Baltimore? Speaker 2: South Carolina, Chester, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Any stories about her? She was the matriarch, and you said-- Speaker 2: And it's because, and the reason I think that I don't know as much is because my grandmother--I think it was about 12 or 13 of my grandmother's siblings. And my grandmother was the youngest of all of those siblings. So by the time I came along as the granddaughter, my great grandmother was, she was in her nineties when I was born or very close to it. But, you know what? Her name was Sarah. I'm sorry, her name was Sarah because my mother's sister was named after her. Her name was Sarah. That is correct. Speaker 1: Okay, so Mama's name was Sarah? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Sarah Herndon? Speaker 2: Yes, and then my great grandfather--now, it's starting to come back. My great grandfather actually was a reverend. He was a minister. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was Rev. Herndon, we know, but what-- Speaker 2: I cannot remember his first name. I actually have a paper, and my grandmother and I were sitting down--this is before my grandmother passed away. We were actually going--she named all of her siblings. She wrote 'em down on a piece of paper, and her parents' name as well. And she had a, remember, she had a trachea, trache in, and she was trying to say Reverend. And I kept asking her, what was her father's name? And, and I could not understand her. And I kept saying, "Ravan?" You know, and it was just the funniest thing, and finally, she was saying reverend, and I--and finally we, "Oh, he was a reverend." And she was like, yes. So then we started laughing and that was that. But 12 or 13 of them and her mother's name, my great grandmother was Sarah. And my grandfather was a minister. That, I do remember now, 'cause I didn't know, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so they moved to Baltimore from-- Speaker 2: They actually moved from Chester, South Carolina to New York, actually to New York. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hum, 'cause that's where my mother was born. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right. Okay, so do you know what denomination he was, your great grandfather-- Speaker 2: Baptist. Speaker 1: Baptist, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Southern Baptist. Story_ID: 36072 Speaker 1: So, now, what about your [maternal] grandmother and grandfather? Speaker 2: My grandmother was Fedora Brooks. It was her second marriage. My biological grandfather died before I was born, so I never knew him, but my grandfather, as far as I know, and always will be is Purnell, P-U-R-N-E-L-L, Brooks. And which was my mother's [Doris Herndon Jones] stepfather, but he's the only grandfather I ever knew. And so there were two siblings of my grandmother's first marriage. And that was my mother and her brother, and then two children of my grandmother's second marriage, my mother's two youngest sisters. So it's four of them. So my grandfather, Purnell Brooks, he passed away in 1978. He and my grandmother started a business together. I remember they had a restaurant in Baltimore [Maryland] and very successful, corner-like, not full-scale restaurant, but sandwiches and things of that nature, light fare. And then they sold that, and my grandfather and his brother started Brooks Construction Company. And they were, if not the first, one of the very first African American construction companies in Baltimore. And his specialty was cement. So driveways, sidewalks, etc., high demand, extraordinarily successful. The thing I'm most proud of, my grandfather did not have a formal education. And he built a extremely profitable business. He was in an area that African Americans weren't doing, laying concrete, as my dad used to say. Both he and his brothers, and at that point, my grandmother pretty much stayed at home. It was that successful where she didn't have to work at all. She became very traditional, grandmother baking pies and always feeding her grandchildren. So, and he also was born in the late 1800s. I wanna say 1892 or so. And I think my grandmother was born somewhere in 1910, 1920s, something like that. But very quiet man, however, very loving, very loving, very proud of his grandchildren. And taught us how to make peach brandy, so, yeah. Story_ID: 36073 Speaker 1: All right, so did your mother [Doris Herndon Jones] grow up in Baltimore [Maryland] or-- Speaker 2: She grew up in New York, and they moved from New York in, somewhere in my mother's high school year because she actually graduated from [Frederick] Douglass High School in Baltimore. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so, and henceforth, me being born in Baltimore. But she graduated from Douglass. Speaker 1: Now, what did you mother say about growing up? Now, she grew up like most of her, I mean, almost through high school in New York, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Now, where did they live in New York? Speaker 2: In the Bronx. Speaker 1: In the Bronx? Speaker 2: In the Bronx, um-hum. And Bronx, as a matter of fact, when I was growing up, when I was younger we would go to New York in the Bronx to visit my grandmother's other two sisters who resided there, my Aunt Inez and my Aunt Rose. Both of them stayed in New York. And so we'd go every summer to visit. So. Speaker 1: So, does your mother have any stories about growing up in the Bronx? Speaker 2: Not really. Most of my mom's stories that we talked about were in high school, when she was in high school in Baltimore because if you remember, if you think about it, in the '50s [1950s], you know, she's coming from the Northern area or from up North, literally to Baltimore, Maryland, which, you know, most people don't really realize that Baltimore, Maryland is below the Mason Dixon Line, so it was a Southern state. And so schools were segregated when she came to Baltimore. Douglass High School was one of the few, one of the few premier public high schools in the area at the time. And so, the level of dress, the level of academics, the expectation of the students that attended Douglass High School was very, very high. A lot of the prominent families, their children went there as well. So we talked more about the segregation and what it was like to grow up in that environment in Baltimore, especially coming from New York. It wasn't like she came from the South to the Northern area, but she came from the North down to a Southern state, if you will. Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right, now, did your mother go to college after-- Speaker 2: She did-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She did. She graduated from Morgan State [University, Baltimore], which was then Morgan State College. And she also has her MBA [Masters in Business Administration]. And the interesting thing about when my mother went to college, my mother went back to school after she was married to my dad. So I actually attended my mother's college graduation. So she went back to school as a wife and as a parent and as a full-time employee as well. Speaker 1: So, I take it that she started at Morgan State, got married, then went back to school, is that it? Speaker 2: I don't think she started straight away. I think-- Speaker 1: So she got married first, and then-- Speaker 2: She got married first. She was working at CSX, and then subsequently, later she went to college. I say back to school, just going back to school, period, but no. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Your mother eventually got her MBA, you said? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: From-- Speaker 2: I'm not sure. I didn't even know she had a MBA until she retired from CSX in 1998 or something like that, in 2001, I think is when she retired. I didn't know it, that she even had her MBA, but she does. Speaker 1: Now, CSX, that's-- Speaker 2: That's railroad. Speaker 1: Railroad, okay. Speaker 2: It used to be the old B and O [Baltimore and Ohio railroad]. When she started, it was B and O and C and O [Chesapeake and Ohio] railroad. And they went to Chessie System, and then somewhere, they changed and became CSX. Story_ID: 36074 Speaker 1: I'm gonna go to your father's side. Then we'll get 'em together, I guess-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and do it like that. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Leon, L-E-O-N, Jones, no middle name. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: One, January, 19--let's see, '40 [1940]. Speaker 1: '40 [1940]? Speaker 2: I think, yeah, 1940. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And he was born in Durham, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Now, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace 'em, and-- Speaker 2: They, as far as my great grandfather. My great grandfather was Native American as well. I believe he passed away at 102 [years; age]. He used to lead--there was a Native American parade every year in Durham, North Carolina. And he used to lead that parade and my first time, first and only time that I ever saw him, he was in full attire and I remember his hair was past his waist. And I thought it was my great grandmother, actually, but he had the head dress on and everything. And I don't know how old I was. But that's my only time ever seeing him. As with my mother [Doris Herndon Jones], my biological grandfather passed away, my father's biological father passed away before I was born. And my grandmother remarried. She never had any more children to my grandfather, Earl Harris. And we haven't got to my grandparents name yet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he grew up in Durham, North Carolina until high school or somewhere a little before-- Speaker 1: Now, this is your great grandfather? Speaker 2: Oh, I've passed my great grandfather. That's all I remember of him. I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Okay, but you don't know what he did for a living or what he-- Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Do you know what Native American group he was a part of? Speaker 2: No, I wanna say Lumbee, but that's the, that can't be right because Lumbee is closer to Fayetteville than it is to North Carolina. But--I mean to Durham, North Carolina. I'm not sure. My father always jokes around and says, Blackfoot, but I don't know. I have to see if that's the blueprint. Speaker 1: That's often said. People-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --say that, and, you know, the Blackfoot, so-called Blackfoot Indians are out in the Northwest. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: But, there is a tradition, another tradition that in, children who have Indian offspring and black offspring--and black heritage, they call 'em Blackfeet. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah, an Indian told me that. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, I don't, you know, so it's a-- Speaker 2: I don't know. That's what I say, I don't know. That's, that's--unfortunately, you know, as I--I think every child at some point, African American child, at some point and time, when 'Roots' came out, everybody wanted to go back. But just like Alex Haley, when, you know, as he was tracing his roots, and then they were looking in places to find his ancestors, and you're looking under "property" versus "people." And, you know, in my mother's case, for example, with her--and we're just talking about the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], there was a huge fire, and, you know, a lot of things were lost. And we're thinking her birthday is February 22nd, but it's actually January 22nd when those things were found. But the point I'm trying to make is that because the documentation was not there for us in a multitude of ways, be it African American, be it Native American, and all the things that went on in the 1800s and early 1900s, and the in ability to read and write and to chronicle certain things, I mean there are so many pieces that are missing. I think the only thing at this point, you know, which is even, it's scary to a degree, but I think it's the best that we have, is to find out relationships and pieces of you through DNA testing, quite frankly, to determine, you know, your genetic makeup. But that's the unfortunate piece of, you know, just being an African American in today's time with multiple heritage--ethnicities I should say, not heritages, but ethnicities that you don't really know, you know. You look at a person, and you see different features, you know. People say, oh, Michele, you've got high cheekbones. Well, I know, and I know why, you know, but I don't know why I've got, you know, my eyebrows arched this or, you know, my lips are shaped this way or whatever. But it's a conglomeration of multiple ethnicities, and that's the unfortunate thing. And so, that's why we're here today. So maybe, you know, a hundred years from now, someone in my family knows, you know, that's my great, great something, you know, when they look at something like this. So. Speaker 1: Okay, well, we get the story, that's where we start. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: We're not the only people in that fix (laughter). Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Story_ID: 36075 Speaker 1: But, so, okay, so your great--we went past your [paternal] great, great grandfather, and did you know anything about your great, great grandmother. Speaker 2: No, not really. She died when my grandmother was 12, 12 or 13 [years old]. Speaker 1: So we can assume, I suppose, that she was black, if your great, great grandfather was an Indian. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's a good assumption. My grandmother was very, very fair, but very African American, with Native American roots. Speaker 1: That's your grandmother you say? Speaker 2: My grandmother, um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandmother. She, her mother passed away when she was, like I said, about twelve or thirteen because she raised most of her siblings, my grandmother did. She was more of a mother figure than a sister. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was a young-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now, what about your grandfather? Speaker 2: Again, like I was saying, he, the grandfather that I knew was not my father's biological. But his name was Earl Harris, and he's the only grandfather I knew. And that's his picture up there, Grandpa Harris. He was originally from Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] and he worked as a Red Cap for the railroad all his life. And the only time he ever got on a plane was he flew to North Carolina for my graduation from college, but very, dry wit. He had several brothers. The one that I knew the most, Uncle Cleve, who still resides in Washington, D.C., and he was just grandpa, you know, hard worker, very strong work ethic, instilled that in all of us. And he would gauge people, their character, by whether or not the dog liked them (laughter). He would say, "If the dog likes you, then I like you. Dog doesn't like you, and I don't like you." (Laughter) So, and any male that I brought home had to pass the puppy test. So-- Speaker 1: I wonder what the dog was thinking. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I have no idea, but, but he sided up-- Speaker 1: If likes 'em, so I like 'em (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, if he sided up to somebody, then that means the guy was okay or anybody was okay with my grandfather. But if Fritz, that was the name, that was his dog's name, did not like 'em, then my grandfather didn't take to that person too much either (laughter). Speaker 1: It may be something to it. We'll find out one day. Speaker 2: Yeah, he loved the Baltimore Orioles. That I know. He used to sit out on the porch and, with his transistor radio and listen to the games. He always, always--he never left the house without wearing a hat. He always had a hat on. And he loved his Stacy Adams shoes. He always had on Stacy Adams shoes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did your grandfather do for a living? I didn't ask you that yet, oh,-- Speaker 2: Red cap. Speaker 1: --he was a Red Cap. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And your grandmother? Speaker 2: My grandmother was a, she was a nurse, worked as a nurse. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she work in a local hospital in the Baltimore area? Speaker 2: In a clinic and actually at Mondawmin Mall. She worked at several different, she worked private and, privates practices, but then they had a, actually had a clinic in Mondawmin Mall in Baltimore, Maryland, Mondawmin, M-O-N-D-A-W-M-I-N, Mondawmin Mall. Story_ID: 36076 Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did your father [Leon Jones] say about growing up? Speaker 2: I'm sorry? Speaker 1: What did your father say about growing up? Now, he grew up in-- Speaker 2: He grew up, he grew up some in North Carolina, but he grew up, actually went to high school in--and that seems like where I always have the conversations with my parents [father, and mother, Doris Herndon Jones] about their youth, if you will. He grew up in, went to high school in Baltimore [Maryland], Calvert--is it Calvert? Oh, gosh. Oh, I just lost it. I wanna say it's Calvert [Hall College] High School, but that doesn't sound. It's with a "C." I'll have to think about it. It'll come back to me. But he was a jokester, and he was also in the drama club. And I say it like that because when I went to, went off to college, I said I wanted to major in drama and theater. And my father told me, you know, you sure you wanna do that because that's not really a career field that you can find stable employment. And so I changed my major, and I found out after I was looking through his yearbook that my father was in the drama club. So (laughter) anyway, but, he played sports in high school and, football. He was a good student, but he, everybody just liked my dad. As a matter of fact, my high--my high school--his high school recognized him years later, about forty years later just for his achievements in the community and things that he had accomplished, so pretty proud about that. Story_ID: 36077 Speaker 1: All right, so your father [Leon Jones] went to high school in Baltimore [Maryland]. He was in the drama club. He had a great personality, as you say, (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Yeah, and he still, because there's still, you know, we may attend something, an event or something, and, you know, some will come out of the blue, you know, "Hey, Leon, how you doing?" And "Gosh, I haven't seen you since high school," and it's just amazing, again, that Carver--there you go, Carver (laughter). I knew it was coming, Carver Vocational Tech. I'm not sure it was a Vo-tech when he attended, but it is now. Carver High School. Those were the two schools in Baltimore. I couldn't believe it. But people do--my father has, I've got my personality like both my parents. My mother's [Doris Herndon Jones] conservative, reserved, but she's very silly around her family, whereas my father is very gregarious. He is the life of the party. He is the one that, you know, kind of jumps out there and does anything. Everybody loves LJ, that's what they call him. And he DJs, you know. He's football commissioner. He was executive with Bristol-Meyers Squid. That's what his actual profession was, and he retired but continued to work in areas that made, that he loved, football. He was a football commissioner for Maryland, assigning all the officials for high school games, both Baltimore County, Baltimore City. He also, like I said, DJ'd, LJ the DJ, started out as a hobby and I think thirty years later, still going strong. And so he, in terms of my outward, very comfortable in the public environment, that comes straight from my dad. And my mother who also belonged to certain civic organizations and things like that, but is very conservative, very, very refined, very elegant woman. When I choose to show that side, I get that from my mom. Of course, growing up, I rebelled as always. But two very different personalities, but worked very well together, you know, so I look like 'em both Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I always ask that question, but you answered it before I asked it (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Which is good, it's good, yeah. Story_ID: 36078 Speaker 1: Now, you've got one sibling? Speaker 2: I have one, I have one older brother, Michael Leon Jones. Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were growing up, the family consisted of you and your parents [Doris Herndon Jones and Leon Jones] and your brother? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is that it? Did your grandparents live with you or-- Speaker 2: No, they didn't, but my grandparents, every day--both sets of grandparents--I was very blessed to have both sets of grandparents the majority of my life, especially growing up until I lost my grandfather. But one set, my maternal set of grandparents lived less than five blocks from us in Baltimore County [Maryland]. And then my maternal grandparents lived--I mean my paternal grandparents lived in Baltimore City, less than fifteen minutes away. But we would, you know, holidays, birthdays, we would always come together, weekends, every day after school, we went over my grandmother's house. You know, there were no babysitters back then, went over my grandmother's house, my mom's mom. And then, weekends, you'd go down to grandma's, you know, Grandma Harris and Grandpa Harris, and, you know, two totally different types of grandparents. And my, like I said, both of my grandfathers, one grandfather was an entrepreneur, Grandpa Harris, I mean Grandpa Brooks, and then my other grandfather was traditional. And when I say "traditional," you know, for a African American male, limited employment so to speak, but he worked as a Red Cap. That's what he did. But he retired from the railroad, which is something that a lot can't say, a lot of strong family values in both of them. And then, you know, my grandmothers, one grandmother, my mother's mother, very traditional, very Southern, you know, in everything from the pies and the peach cobbler and the corn pudding and everything else. And the other one also in the cooking, but this one over here, loved life. She was the traveler. She was the one that was always in the Islands somewhere. She was the one that was dancing, you know. She was the one that always had the, you know, the preverbal twinkle. She taught me the art of flirtation, and it is an art form. You know, I'm not talking, you know, the hoochie, skeazey (ph.) kind of thing, but the actual art of flirtation like women did in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] and things like that. So, but I had both sets to balance me out in terms of different things and pulling and picking different things from them. So, and my parents were able to bring that together. And a lot of times, both sides would come together for the big holidays, you know. They weren't so much separate. You know, let's go over to the, you know, the dad's parents' house for a little of the time and then go over--sometimes we did, but then a lot of times, we would all come together at, like our house or something like that so. My grandmothers were involved. My grandparents were involved in virtually every aspect of my life growing up, very, very close to both sets. They're all gone now, but--. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 36079 Speaker 1: Now--and I forgot to ask this earlier, but is there a story about how your parents [Doris Herndon Jones and Leon Jones] met? Speaker 2: (Laughter) They met in high school at a dance actually. They went to two totally different high schools, and actually, my mother's brother, my Uncle Sonny, and Mr. Coleman, two different, you know, one of my dad's best friends, they were best buds. And long story short, there was a dance, and my father was at this dance. And so he saw my mom, and whether it was love at first sight or, you know, the fact that, because all these ladies are following behind my dad that my mom was like the cool cucumber, if you will, that he just, he was attracted to my mom. And she said that she knew that she was gonna marry my dad. She didn't let him know that (laughter). So they met in 1958, and they got married in 1960 and lived my, with his parents until they got their first place together. And they lived in my grandmother's place, grandfather's place on Chauncey Avenue in Baltimore, Maryland. Why I remember that, I don't know. But I do remember they lived on Chauncey Avenue in Baltimore. Story_ID: 36080 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Ooh, in what--I have, I know I do, but I guess, travel, moving, scary, I mean, significant moments? Speaker 1: Well, an earliest one, the first thing you remember? Is there anything-- Speaker 2: Oh, boy, first thing I remember? Let me think real quick. I don't know why this one sticks with me the most, and maybe it's because it was a catalyst for us moving from Baltimore City to Baltimore County [Maryland]. And I was four, and my dad [Leon Jones] at that time was working for the postal service, working and going to college during the day. So he worked at night. And we were home. And we had gone out to, then it was called Reed's Drugstore, which is now Rite-Aid. And they used to have the soda foundation counters, and where you could get ice cream floats and things like that. So, and milk shakes, and so my mother [Dolores Herndon Jones] and I, my brother and neighbors, we went to go get milk shakes. And when we came back, the door was open, and we lived in an apartment complex. And the front door was open. And I remember my mother saying, you know, taking my brother [Michael Leon Jones] and I, and I don't even remember my brother really in my mind, but I know he was there. And we went across the hall to the Longfoot's. That was their last name, and they took us in, and, and said, you know, someone has broken into our place. So we get in, and I remember Mr. Longfoot go, standing in their hallway and going across, leaving out of his apartment to check it out. And I remember him having a gun in his hand, and the brief time that I did see into our apartment before we were taken over, and I go back, they had taken my tricycle. That's how young I was. I didn't have a bike. I had a tricycle and smashed the glass sliding door, and there was blood everywhere where the person had just, was looking for stuff. And I had a milkshake in my hand. And I just kept squeezing it, and so needless to say, all the milkshake was all over my hand and then they shephearded us over across the hall. But I remember that, and I remember the gun in the hand, and I remember the milk shake, and I remember, you know, the bloody fingerprints all over the house. And four, if I was four. That's the earliest memory, unfortunately, that I have, that I can put an age to it, quite frankly, because it's, obviously, it stuck with me forever. A number of things, security very early, handguns, you know, and on another level, how close we were as neighbors to be able to go over to our neighbor, you know, take your kids and they're gonna come and make sure your place is okay. It was another time back then, you know. And so, anyway, next thing I know, we were in a house (laughter). You know, I know it had to be some time, you know, in between then, but not much longer, not that much longer after that incident. So that's one memory that I have. Another memory I have, happy times. We traveled a lot, you know. My parents always wanted to expose us to, you know, a lot of good things, things outside of the neighborhood and, although, you know, we were one of the very first African Americans in our neighborhood, it was a great neighborhood. But my mother really felt like, and my dad agreed that we needed to travel. Kids need to travel. They need to see other things. They need to see other cultures, other cities, other countries, the whole nine yards. So we had some great times traveling, sometimes on the road, sometimes on a plane, you know. I remember that, my cousins, very, very close, very, very close with my first cousins. We saw each other every day. So, I had a really good childhood. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Very (unclear), I had a very good childhood, very secure, very secure, a lot of fun, a lot of love, a lot of support. You can be whoever you wanna be, do whatever you wanna do. Story_ID: 36081 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Peach cobbler, macaroni and cheese, steamed crabs, a lot of laughter, a lot of joking, a lot of talking, you know, reminiscing, I should probably say, music. We always had music. Sights, everybody just together, just piled all around the house doing different things, kids over here playing games, adults over here telling us we can't, go back over there. You can't listen to what we're saying, you know, not in a way that made you feel like you weren't wanted, just, you know, they're having grown folks, you know, talking. Holidays, Mother's Day was a big, big deal in our family, you know. My grandmother on my mom's [Dolores Herndon Jones] side was the matriarch. You know, even when my grandfather was living, you know, Mother's Day was a big deal. Mothers, all mothers got something, all mothers. I don't care if it was a card or gifts or just mothers, Mother's Day was a big deal. We always got together on Mother's Day, Easter. When we were very young in elementary school, all the first cousins, we all went to my grandmother's church, Mount Hebron Baptist Church in Baltimore [Maryland]. And then we all kind of found our own different churches along, you know, as we got older. Story_ID: 36082 Speaker 1: Was church very important growing up in terms of-- Speaker 2: Going to church as a whole entity, not really. There were certain things that you went to church for, you know, as the whole family. And I say, you know, the grandparents, parents [Dolores Herndon Jones and Leon Jones], cousins, everybody went. There was always fish fries and different things, and, you know, very much the foundation. However, the fact that you believe in God and God is good in all those things and everything's possible, and thankfulness and knowing your blessings and reading the bible, all of that was imbedded in everything that we did. I mean there is, there was no mandate. We must go to church every Sunday. But it was very much imbedded in everything. And hymns were song. You know, when there was a baby born in our family, you can best my grandmother's holding that child singing, you know, some hymn from way back when, but very much so on both sides of the family, just not--it was, that is your relationship with God. You decide what denomination. We're gonna expose you from everything from Baptist, Methodist, Catholicism, Judaism, everything, Muslim, the whole nine yards. We're gonna expose you to everything. And when you become of age, whatever that age is, then you decide, you know, you decide what denomination you choose to be. And that's how we were. And so we've all chosen. Some of us have stayed Baptist. Some of us have changed. I didn't become baptized until I was an adult, you know, by choice. I think we were all baptized as infants. But, you know, the actual decision was left to us as adults, which I think is probably why we're all very, we all have very strong belief because we were exposed, taught and then given the freedom to build our own relationship, you know. So, yeah. Story_ID: 36083 Speaker 1: Okay, now, well, tell us about school now. Where did you start school? Speaker 2: Woodmoor Elementary School in Baltimore [Maryland]. Speaker 1: Woodier? Speaker 2: Woodmoor. Speaker 1: Okay, W-O-O-D-W- Speaker 2: Yeah, W-O-O-D-M-O-O-R. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Elementary school. Speaker 1: Now, I take it you liked school, but I don't, I'm not sure. Speaker 2: (Laughter) For the most part, I did. It was a great social place. But, no, I actually loved learning, actually loved learning. What I didn't like is teachers that taught, you know, expected you just to absorb the information, you know. I couldn't put my hands on what it was exactly because it, you know, wasn't that developed yet. But to tell me, okay, read Chapters 5 through 10, and then I'm gonna test you on it. Okay, but when I come back and I read Chapters 5 through 10, and I have questions on it, well, why is this? You know, so I'll take something very simple. America, okay. And they say Christopher Columbus discovered America. Well, why, okay, and then they talked about this guy named Amerigo Vespucci. And I'm like, okay, well, it's called America, and why is it Christopher Columbus, you know, and I--so when I'd go back and ask those type of questions, which I thought were very insightful questions--and I just use that as an example, "Oh, you're being smart" or you're, you know, you got an attitude. No, I don't have an attitude. I'm asking you a question. The last time I checked, this was school. I was a very independent thinker, very early, and so needless to say, that wasn't consistent with a lot of teaching. So I would find myself in the principal's office because of the fact that I was, dare I say, confrontational when I asked a question. So my parents [Dolores Herndon Jones and Leon Jones] said, well, did she disrespect you? No. What did she do exactly? You know, and so you have a young--and again, remember, this is the first wave of college educated, you know, of children, product of college-educated African Americans in this community. And most of the teachers, all of the teachers with the exception of one or two, so they're not used to this child, you know, they're not used to anyone challenging them. It had nothing to do with the fact that I was African American. It had everything to do with the fact that I was very, very curious. And you just couldn't tell me something. I wanted to know more. I wanted to know--I didn't just wanna know surface. I wanted to know depth. But I found out also, and it was a common practice, because I came from the inner-city, which I spent one year in kindergarten. Then I was automatically put into a class for students that had learning disabilities or slow learners. Speaker 1: Or tracked on the non-college track or the non-- Speaker 2: I was put in that class just because I came from the inner-city. I was a first grader. There was no, there was no basis. There were no tests, no anything to determine that was the class that I should have been in. Speaker 1: So Westmoor, is that in the inner-city? Speaker 2: Woodmoor. Speaker 1: Woodmoor, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: No, it's Baltimore County. It's a suburban school. Speaker 1: Suburban school. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Story_ID: 36084 Speaker 1: And were most of the students [at Woodmoor Elementary School in Baltimore, Maryland] white students? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. So there may have been two of us in my class, if that. So it was very, there were a lot of stereotypes at that time. Fortunately, a teacher told my father what was going on. And my father immediately went to the school and said, you will take my daughter out of that class, and you will put her where she's supposed to be, very, very bright, highly intelligent and, but I was put into a class just because I was an African American kid coming from the inner-city. I remember that well. I remember the challenges of challenging what was in a book, which didn't make sense to me. So, but, very close group, friends from high--from elementary school, I'm still friends with them today. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Ooh, boy, history was one. Archeology was two, any reading, English, love English, reading particularly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's my favorites. Math was my worst. Speaker 1: So you didn't do very well in Math? Speaker 2: I got As and Bs, but I had to work really, really hard. I just didn't like it. I didn't like it. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a favorite teacher? Speaker 2: Oh, boy, yeah, I did, Mr. Mack. Speaker 1: Now, this is in grade school. Speaker 2: This is high, oh, well, if we go back to grade school, that was Ms. Johnson. Ms. Johnson, of course, Ms. Johnson was the only African American teacher there, but I also liked Ms. Hemelstein (ph.). Ms. Hemelstein was 6'2" [height], thin as a rail, and she jumped out of airplanes. I thought that was the coolest thing. This was in the, you know, '60s [1960s]. And she was kind of like a hippy kind of persona, but she was really, she really liked students. And she encouraged learning, not just books. So Ms. Johnson, she was like a, she understood. I would call her a informal counselor, advisor. She was never my teacher, but she was like a counselor and advisor on how to maneuver there. But I really liked Ms. Hemelstein. She was just a cool teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36085 Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in activities in grade school, like the Girl Scouts or anything like, Campfire Girls? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm laughing because, no, I was a tom boy, but my, I was, I played basketball, I played softball, even in elementary school. And we had a very large--recreation and parks back then, everything centered around elementary school. And so, and we had our own independent leagues too, Woodmoor [Elementary School], you know, that was elementary school. Woodmoor versus Campfield versus Headville and all of that. So I played, I was a basketballer and I was a softball player. I was a tom boy, but my mom [Dolores Herndon Jones] sent me to charm school where I (laughter), refined (laughter) all those rough edges that I didn't want to. It was hilarious, but I graduated so she was happy. I was happy she was happy. Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated from charm school? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: What kind of things would they teach you in charm school? Speaker 2: You know, how to use fifeen different types of utensils, you know, glass, wine, how to order food, alcoholic beverages also--we didn't drink them, but the different types of wines and liquors and, you know, things like that. We, upon graduation, our graduation dinner, we had Shirley Temples, of course, and how to sit and walk and talk like a lady. Speaker 1: And did you take dance or anything? Speaker 2: Oh, goodness, how could I forget. Yes. Modern Dance was my favorite 'cause it was very expressive, outside of boundaries, Jazz Dance as well. I did ballet, but I didn't get to the point with the toe shoes. So I did that also, and even though I was a tom boy, actually, and I loved to dance. So that was kind of like a dichotomy between the two personalities. Speaker 1: What kind of music was played in the home? You said, there was always music. Speaker 2: There was always music, R and B, you know, for I think the first song I think about, and probably because it was on a eight-track tape, was the Staple Singers, "Mr. Big--The Staple Singers and "Mr. Big Stuff," that, those two songs. And then Santa--it was a song by Santana. I can't remember exactly what it was. But it was a song by Santana. It was another song by Jose Feliciano, and I was impressed because he was blind, you know. Caribbean music, Latin music was played. That was my grandmother, everything Island, you know, everything Caribbean and Latin and all that. That was hers. But dad [Leon Jones] and mom, R and B, Temptations, you know, Diana Ross, Manhattans, Four Tops, all that, those songs were, you know, dancing--Marvin Gaye, and, oh, and then my dad because he was part of Alpha Phi Omega, which is they say fraternity, but it's really a service organization, several presidents have been a part. But, and he pledged in college, and so there was always something involved with the organi--with Alpha Phi Omega. There was always Family Day and picnics and this and that. So there was always music and sports and all the kids coming together, all those things, all the time. So--. Story_ID: 36086 Speaker 1: Now, where'd you go to high school? Speaker 2: High school, at Baltimore [Maryland]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which is now, it's Milford Mill Academy, but it was Milford Mill High School when I was there. And I did go to junior high, but I was only there two years, the lost years. Speaker 1: Now, you were in grade school during the closing days of the Vietnam War, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Did you pay any attention to the military, I mean as a, I mean did you pay any special attention to what was going on in those days? Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not at all. There, you know, looking back 'cause I've thought about that a lot, especially being in the military, you know, what did I ever hear about the Vietnam War? Nothing, nothing. Speaker 1: You just didn't pay attention to it at all? Speaker 2: It was not, no. Speaker 1: Now, your father [Leon Jones] served in the [U.S.] Army, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum, he did. Speaker 1: And he, did he get married first before he joined the Army or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was married, he was married when he was in. I do know that because there are pictures of him in uniform with my mom [Doris Herndon Jones] after they had gotten married. And so--what was the question again? (Laughter) I'm sorry. Speaker 1: No, just, I was asking about your father's military career (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was in. I don't remember. He got out before, before I even knew he was. I don't know if he got out before-- Speaker 1: You said, I think you told us in the, when we came in, he was in it for six years-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --which is a little bit longer than your normal--is that two terms or-- Speaker 2: It, well, actually, it was a normal enlistment. Even when I went in, what they called the mandatory-statutory obligation was six years. Now, you could do a three-by-three, three years, you know, active, three years, you know, inactive, two years active. So, it's always been a mandatory--I shouldn't say "always."--as far back as I can recall, it's always been at least six years. It's changed to eight. But how you do that is different. That's different. It could be three years and five, two and something. But it's still always a pair at a time, so six. You he had one enlistment, but you can, you can do a break at three years, and go straight into the reserves or something like that or National Guard, so. Speaker 1: Now, what rank did your father obtain? Speaker 2: Sergeant, I think it was a staff sergeant, actually, Staff Sergeant Jones, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36087 Speaker 1: So we were talking about Vietnam, and you really, your family didn't pay that much attention to it. Speaker 2: No, I can't say that my family didn't. I would say that I didn't. It was not anywhere on my radar at all, at all, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, now, high school. We were at Milford Mill High School, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Milford Mill High School, and what, did you have a favorite subject at Milford Mill? Speaker 2: All of the ones I mentioned, the archeology-- Speaker 1: That's probably where archeology starts, really, in high school, right? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: You didn't have it-- Speaker 2: No, we didn't have it in junior high school, but archeology is actually where that--and that was outside of the norm in terms of (unclear)--you know, it's not something that most high schools offer. I loved archeology, I loved oceanography. Again, it was outside of the normal realm of traditional classes, if you will. And so I enjoyed them both, one peering into, you know, the past, and learning about different cultures and findings and things like that. And then the oceanography piece got me out of school, out of the confines of a schoolhouse, I should say, and out on the beach and the water. Speaker 1: And so they had some oceanography in high school? Speaker 2: We did. Speaker 1: Oh, that's interesting. Speaker 2: And in fact, my oceanography teacher was at our thirty-year high school reunion. So, but, yeah, those were some of my favorite--I loved reading and English, English, that was a area that I really enjoyed too because there was a lot of reading in that. Speaker 1: Now, Milford Mill, was that primarily a suburban high school-- Speaker 2: It was, yeah. Speaker 1: --with a wealthy white populous, school populous. Speaker 2: Um-hum, it was, it was. That whole area, Baltimore County, in the, in the--definitely in the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s] was predominantly white. The parallel area and parallel to what we call the Liberty Road Corridor, the parallel area was the Pikesville Corridor. And that was predominantly Jewish. And so there was, and the rival high school, so to speak, even though a different class because of size, was predominantly Jewish, but there was some mixing and merging, if you will, of activities around the area because we're talking about, you know, just a small radius. And so those communities actually--and we did, of course, have, you know, I had classmates that were Jewish. So growing up in that environment not only being African American, but learning really a lot about the Jewish culture as well. That's just part of my, my, you know, my growing up. I had a friend of mine when I was in the [U.S.] Army, older officer used to ask me all the time, when you imitate an old woman, why do you always sound like an older white Jew--well, older Jewish woman? And I never thought about it, but, again, that's based on my background. Those are the ones that I heard. Honey, you know, when we go into the store, that's what we saw, you know. So he would always laugh, and I never really realized that, you know, I was having my lox and bagels and, you know, my kosher hot dogs and everything else. But it was really funny. So it was a part of me, it was part of growing up, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, it's Eddie Murphy's version of the Jewish (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Exactly, and it was true. I mean, but that's the environment, you know, that, that I knew, that I grew up in, so, and knew, you know. You didn't think about it then. It just, it was what it was. That's the nat-you know, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36088 Speaker 1: Now, did you play any sports in high school [Milford Mill High School, Baltimore County, Maryland]? Speaker 2: I did, I did. I alternated between softball and being a cheerleader (laughter). One year I was a cheerleader, one year I played softball. Speaker 1: Now, cheerleading can really be athletic. Did, or it could be just, you know, it could be very simple, depending on what kind of school you go to, and what the expectations are. Speaker 2: Um-hum, back then, to me, cheerleading back then was very simple. It was very simple. It wasn't, I'm sure they had cheerleading competitions and things like that. But, but not at the level that we see it now, you know, 2012 or 2013. You know, you got, you became a cheerleader, you know, the cool girls so forth in school. You know, you wore your little cheerleading outfit the day of the game to announce to everyone, you know, that there's a game. You had your little black and white saddle shoes with the pom-poms on it, you know, and that was just part of being in high school. I, you had to, you know, try out. And did I think I was gonna make it? I never really thought about it. I'm like, I'm going out for it, and I think I am, but I never thought that I wouldn't. But I didn't assume that I would either. Softball, something I had played all my life when I was, you know, I think that, I picked up a bat when I was about seven or eight, maybe. Speaker 1: What position did you play in softball? Speaker 2: Short center or outfield. I had a long throw, sharp, tight, low, intense throw, a heck of a arm, still do. Speaker 1: Think you covered some territory too. Speaker 2: Very fast, very fast on my feet, especially--and I didn't really, 'cause playing it as a youngster, we just, I played center. And then, but going into high school, that's when I found short center. They said, well, you're gonna play short center. Okay, what's short center, you know, and found out. You know, it's that area right beyond the infield, but you've gotta be fast 'cause you're really, you're covering left, right and center. There is no short, you know, left or right. So, you gotta be fast, you gotta be quick, you gotta be limber and, you gotta have a heck of a throw because a lot of times, if it's comin' right there, and if it's a line drive, you're, you know, you're leaping for it. If it's on the ground and it's gotten past, let's say, second base or something or in between second and third, you've gotta be able to swoop it. Nine times out of ten, you've gotta drive that ball right to home plate, you now, or maybe even to the first plate. You know, you don't know. But it was an exciting spot. It wasn't boring, you know. It was far enough away not to get bee-lined by the ball, like a pitcher (laughter). I didn't wanna be a pitcher ever, you know. So I like short center. That was a good, good fit. Speaker 1: Okay, now, was it--did the school have a competitive team? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. You know, played all the various high schools, you know, JV [junior varsity] and varsity. You know, we had two squads just like, you know, male football, JV and varsity. And I played varsity my whole time. Speaker 1: Okay, now, being a cheerleader, did that make you one of the cooler girls in high school or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they were the popular girls, you know. And note I say "they," and I don't include myself in it to the degree because I was involved in so many other different things. You know, I was an athlete, but I also, like I said, you know, I was a cheerleader, but I also was a softball player. And I also was president of Black Awareness Organization. And I also was in a theater. So I had a range of friends, different things that I was doing, different groups of people. So cheerleading wasn't my be all, end all, everything. If I went out for it, and I didn't make it, yes, I'd be disappointed, but, you know, I also had the theater to do and come springtime, I had softball to do. And so, you know, I didn't consider myself, even when I was a cheerleader--and my friends may differ, but I didn't consider myself like prissy girlie-girlie kind of like. You know, I was a cheerleader. That's the outfit we wore, and, you know, but I wasn't super girlie. I didn't wear makeup. You know, a lot of girls did. I didn't wear lipstick or lip gloss. I hated it. I still do to this day. And, sure, I got my nails done every now and again, but if I broke a nail, so what? It would grow back kind of thing (laughter). So I, you know, I consider myself a little bit different in that, in those, especially in that time period. Nowadays, a lot of young ladies, they do a lot of different things, but in the '70s [1970s], you didn't have, you know, the dichotomy of, you know, a female that was a, you know, athletic, you know, girlie-girlie, thespian, you know, etc., all those different things. That wasn't a norm, you know. As my friends, Michele, you're different. I'm like, I know. You know, yeah. Story_ID: 36089 Speaker 1: Alright so, now, did you have a favorite teacher in high school [Milford Mill High School, Baltimore County, Maryland]? Speaker 2: Yes, I had a couple. Mr. Mac was one, Mr. McPherson--no, McLaughlin (ph.), I'm sorry, Mr. McLaughlin. He just was a really nice guy. And he was a choir director, and I also had him for home room, I think too, one year. But he was just a really, very nice guy. And Ms. Smith, who was my typing teacher who was in the [U.S.] Army Reserves. And I thought that was a cool thing. It was the first woman I met that had actually, was actually in the military. And but I only had her for typing, which I failed miserably because I didn't wanna learn how to type. It was too girlie for me, and, you know, A-F-J-M, space, something, something, you know, and I was all over the map. But anyway, she was a great teacher. And there were several other ones, and then there's other ones that may not be my favorite teacher, but something that they did stood out, you know, that was memorable about their personality that stayed with me today for some reason. They may not have been my teacher, may have been just another teacher in the school. Story_ID: 36090 Speaker 1: I know we were looking at the pictures. You went to the prom as a freshman, right? Speaker 2: I did (laughter), I did, I did. Part of that was because I could go because my brother [Michael Leon Jones] was a senior. And so my parents [Doris Herndon Jones and Leon Jones] knew that he was gonna be there with his date as well, and very strict guidelines about when, what time I had to be back. There was an allocation for dinner, but other than that, I was home, you know. So I mean he was a nice guy, but I was a freshman, was a sophomore and then a junior. And then I almost didn't go to my own, which was really funny. Speaker 1: So what happened? Speaker 2: Why didn't I go to my own? Speaker 1: Why did you almost not go? Speaker 2: I, one, at that point--now, we're talking about 1981, and it was such a big, you know, girls were stressing over, you know, and I guess they always have. But I mean I didn't realize the level of stress about who you're gonna take, who you're gonna ask, what are you gonna wear, and, you know, all these things. And then the guy that, the only guy that I really wanted to go with, he lived in another state. And he was in, matter of fact, he was in the [U.S.] Navy. And if I couldn't go with him, I didn't wanna go with anybody. But then my parents said, you'll always regret not going to your prom. And so it was a couple friends of mine that didn't, they rebelled. They were like, you know, I'm not dating anybody. I'm not gonna go with a guy to the prom just to say I'm going with him. And then there's that expectation after the prom, you know, what's gonna happen, kind of thing. And we decided to band together and all of us dateless females, and we all went. You know, we went out to dinner, and we went to the prom. We had a great time, and then some of the ones that had dates, were like, man, we should a thought about that (laughter), you know. We, we just, we went because it was our prom, but we didn't feel that we had to take a date or if we wanted to take one, and the person that we wanted to go with, like in my case, wasn't available to go, then we went anyway, you know. And it was the first time that there was interracial couples-- Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: --which was cool. Speaker 1: So there were some interracial couples at the prom? Speaker 2: It evolved into that. And it wasn't, you know, it was just, I like him, I like her. And we're going because we like each other, you know, which I thought was just an evolution within my school [Milford Mill High School, Baltimore County, Maryland] from the time I got there in 1977 and 1981, and which really was the foundation, what I took with me when I left, you know, to go to college and the subsequently in the [U.S.] Army, that people can work through their ethnic, cultural differences if they really want to and, you know, celebrate the differences, and welcome those, those differences. Story_ID: 36091 Speaker 1: Now, how were your grades in school [Milford Mill High School, Baltimore County, Maryland]? Speaker 2: I was definitely an A-B student. I could have been an A student if I really wanted to. Quite frankly, the only subject I ever struggled with was Math. I didn't like it. I didn't see use for some of it, you know, and once I got my mind set, what I'll ever use this for? Algebra, I hated with a passion. It was very difficult for me to do Algebra. So I always had a tutor, you know. The other areas, my grades would dip depending on my relationship with the teacher, quite frankly. If I got a C, it was because I didn't like the teacher, I didn't want to interact, and I didn't wanna do anything in that class. And I would take a test, you know, not put any effort into it whatsoever. If I liked the teacher, and when I say "like", that is not just I like them as a person. But if they welcome learning and real learning, where you could ask questions, you can go into more than just memorizing a book, and there was a good give and take of discussing what I was learning, I got an "A" every time. And I, when I say an "A", I went for the 100, and it was easy because I was learning. And I was retaining. Even if it was an area that wasn't my, you know, that fascinated about, but I was learning. So I would do very well in those classes. But I would allow how I felt about a teacher affect how much I would participate. But I was a pretty much A-B student. Story_ID: 36092 Speaker 1: Okay, now, what kind of, out of the all the things--you were doing a lot of different things, and you had a lot of varied interests and a lot of, you were a very inquisitive student apparently, what--did you have a goal in mind for, you know, what you would pursue after graduation as a career or-- Speaker 2: Well, I knew that I wanted to go into the [U.S.] Army, but I knew that wasn't an option because I was sixteen [years old] and in high school, in my senior year. And I knew that my parents [Doris Herndon Jones and Leon Jones] were not going to sign for me to go into the Army. I was gonna go to college. So I think I applied for, to one, maybe two schools, and I picked, chose Howard University in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] because a couple of my friends had applied, and it was in Washington, D.C., and it was a historical black university. And I wanted to go to a historical black university because I, that was not an environment in which I grew up in. So I'm like, ooh, I wanna experience this, you know. So I applied and was accepted. Speaker 1: Okay, so, but you said you knew you wanted to go into the Army in high school-- Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Now, how did that--I mean was it because of your teacher, I mean your typing teacher or-- Speaker 2: No, she never pushed it. I just thought that was interesting that she was. It was something outside the scope of what most women did. The, there still was a mindset of, you know, you only went to the Army if you had to. But I saw a commercial. Quite frankly, it was "Be all you can be." And it was a, they were out in the field, (unclear) you're in a forest area. And this guy comes parachuting in, you know. And he lands, and there's this First Sergeant sitting down, and the guy that gets--take his chute off and everything. And he goes, "Good morning, First Sergeant." And I was like, he is so fine (laughter). And I'm like, I wanna meet him (laughter). I'm like, but I also wanna jump out of planes and "be all that you can be," you know, and I'm like, oh, yeah, that's what I wanna do, you know, kind of thing. So the ad grabbed me, the cute guy grabbed me, the parachuting in grabbed me, and the fact that women were not doing it. If you said to me I couldn't do something 'cause I was a female, that was the, it was waving a red flag in front of a bull. I was gonna do it just because. You know, my family didn't put limitation on gender, except for my mom, you know. She was very much, oh, you're a girl and all--why can't I do that? Because you're a girl. Really? Okay, are you serious (laughter)? I'm like, all right, so why do I have to come in at midnight, when Michael [Jones' brother] was this age, and the same age, he could come in at two in the--two o'clock in the morning? 'Cause you're a girl. Well, you know, it was, and so, that was like a red flag to me. So no, no females that I knew personally were going into the Army. It appealed to me, travel the world, "Be all you can be," all those things were screaming for me to come. So I told my parents, I said, I know I have to go to college first, you know. I said, but as soon as I turn eighteen, I'm leaving. And I will put myself through college, but I'm going in the Army. So, you know, I applied myself very well, the summer before the first semester started at Howard [University], I was a, I had a 4.0 [grade point average]. The first semester rolled around, the fall. Everybody was on campus. I was having a ball. I had a, I think, .8 grade-point average (laughter) that semester. My father, the grades were known, and my dad said, every student deserves a bad semester. And you've had yours (laughter). So, and, of course, I turned that around and, but I didn't wanna be there, you know, I didn't wanna be there. So after a year and a half, I finally went down to the recruiter and said, I wanna go in. I wanna, I wanna be a lawyer, so I wanna go in the legal field, and, you know, henceforth, I went in. I stayed home that summer and then left the first of September, 1990--1982. Story_ID: 36093 Speaker 1: Now, what did your parents [Doris Herndon Jones and Leon Jones] think? Speaker 2: My mom really thought I had lost my mind. She was so upset. She really was. She was so upset. You know, again, even though I didn't know anything about the Vietnam War, I'm sure she did. You know, women didn't go into the [U.S.] Army, especially African American women didn't go in the Army. There was still a lot of stigma associated with that too. My dad, you know, although he had been in, he was very honest. He said, you know, I'd rather my daughter, rather say that my daughter's in college than is in the Army. He said, but it's your life. It's an honorable profession, you know, but no, it's not easy. And he did throw in there, he says, if you can get through basic training with that mouth, I'll be surprised (laughter). So, but when I--once my mind was made up, and, you know, the day that my recruiter, Sergeant First-Class Parker, I remember his name, picked me up, and my mom just was, she was just devastated. But she's very reserved so, she wasn't boo hoo crying, but she was, she was devastated. My dad was there, and even though they didn't agree with my decision, they supported my decision. The whole time through basic training, my mom wrote letters. I still have those letters t this day. My dad sent cards, funny cards. I still have those cards to this day. They never wavered in their support. And that's a very valuable lesson to me as a parent. You may not agree with what your child wants to do as long as its legal, moral and ethical, you know, support them in what they do. And I really, I feel that strongly. You can guide them, you can give them advice, but if they have their mind made up, you know, support 'em, 'cause you never know where it might lead to. And that one decision has led me to where I am right now today. So, but they were, like I say, very, very supportive. When I graduated from basic training, there was a caravan of cars from Baltimore [Maryland]. And I remember being on a field between a barracks, and it was Family Day, and walking across the field with a plate of food in my hand like this, and I remember looking, and I see this 19--whatever, '78 [1978], I don't know, I think that's the year, Lincoln Continental, four-door, one of the last years they made the big, heavy metal ones, and about--I said, that's my mom's car. And about eight car, five or eight cars or whatever, behind. It was my entire family. They had driven down from Baltimore, and they were there en masse for my graduation, you know. That's support, you know, that's support. So. They didn't like it. Story_ID: 36094 Speaker 1: Now, from the--now, we've seen the glory part. Now, and what was the basic training like? I mean what was it-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --you know. Is it what you expected it to be or-- Speaker 2: Yes and no. A couple friends of my brother's [Micheal Leon Jones] had gone in and kind of, you know, one of the biggest things, they said, they're gonna yell at you, you know. And they can't do anything, they can't, they can't beat you up, you know, just, you know, don't worry about it. So that was one thing that I kind of went in there, the mindset. I was a little bit older. Even though it may not, a year and a half may not seem that much, but when you've already gone away to college, and you're on your own, and you have a structure, and you've started doing things on your own, that's one thing. The second thing, when you come from the type of family that is encouraging, you know, for you to be confident person, then I was in the [U.S.] Army because I wanted to be, not because I had to be. So I went in with some very, very strong, you know, values and experiences from the very beginning. And I had a personality of, you know, bring it on, you know, kind of thing, bring me your worst. So, the one thing that I had to learn, the biggest lesson I learned in basic training was, you know, you can be very good, you know, very, very good. You can be the strongest soldier, but you're only as strong as your weakest person. And in basic--what I mean by that, in basic training, they pair you up with a buddy. And I'm strong, and I'm, you know, I'm doing everything. I'm Jonesy (ph.), you know, I'm running. I'm doing everything. You can yell at me all day long, and I'm like, [spish sound] whatever, you know, drill sergeant. But they paired me up, and I--she had the coolest name. Her name was Star Baracko, Star Baracko was her name. I'll never forget it. And she was, she was married, okay. And she was such a crybaby, she just, oh, my, you--the drill sergeants would, get over here Baracko, [crying sound]. She'd start crying. And I'm like, she is such a wusp, you know, and I was like hating life every time for her. She was sweet as she could be, but she was just so, to me, weak, oh, my gosh. And so, the drill sergeant called me in and said, we're giving you a buddy, a new buddy. I'm okay, and I'm thinking of people that I don't mind, you know, 'cause I'm like, we can do this, you know. Star Baracko. I'm like, you have got to be kidding me. And then he was like, no, Star Baracko is your buddy. I'm like she cries at everything. Her helmet doesn't even fit right. She looks like a weeble, (ph.) you know, the head and it goes like that. It was just--I'm like, I was hating life. Well, she was the weakest link; she was crying, she was sniveling. But you know what, it taught me how to help somebody that was not confident and help them, bring them up. And it taught me how to be patient with someone that isn't as strong as you are, you know. So it taught me a valuable lesson about being a leader and being, helping somebody that needs some assistance, you know, and, and developing, you know, as an individual myself. So, it was a bit--I'm not sorry. My drill sergeant, he was a wise man obviously, because he paired me with Star Baracko. So, I don't know where Star Baracko is to this day, but I sure hope she's doing well. I never forgot her. Speaker 1: But she got out of basic training. Speaker 2: And went back--I think she's from [New] Jersey. I think she was from Jersey, actually, now, yeah, but I remember, remember her. Story_ID: 36095 Speaker 1: So what happens now? So you go to basic training. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: You get out of basic training, and you're-- Speaker 2: Then you go to your individual, what they call AIT, individual--Advanced Individual Training. That's when you go into your career field. And I went to Fort Benjamin Harrison, which was in Indiana, and as a legal specialist or training to be a legal specialist, responsibilities are, you know, as a, like a paralegal. We weren't actually called paralegals back then. Speaker 1: Okay, so this would, now, at this juncture, were you seeing yourself as a career military person-- Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: -- by pursuing a career or just doing it for a couple of years and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, three year. Speaker 1: Three years? Speaker 2: I was like three years, I'm a get out, go back to school, go to law school, etc. Speaker 1: Okay, so what was Fort Benjamin Harrison like? Speaker 2: It was really fun because, you know, you're out of basic, you're out of that getting up at 4:30, four o'clock in the morning. You know, you're out of the regimen of people yelling at you. You still have kind of like drill sergeants, but not to that same degree. You're getting a little bit more freedom. You get to wear your civilian clothes. You get to go out, you know, with your friends. You still have a curfew, pretty much during the week, but on the weekends, it's a little bit more flexible. You start, you know, really seeing, you start using the tools that you learned in basic training, knowing the ranks, and knowing, you know, the protocols and all the, you know, things that you do in the military. You start kind of coming into your own as a soldier. You find out where you, where you kind of lie in terms of your peers 'cause keep in mind, the people you went to basic training with, you're with for eight weeks, okay. And you know the good, the bad, and you're all in the same exact environment for eight weeks, whereas when you go to AIT, you've got people coming from basic training from all different areas, from around the country. And so you're learning different things about, you know, how they did basic training maybe at Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri or this place or wherever, you know, wherever they could have come from. And so you start learning more on a personal level as well, you know. You start eating junk food again too, you know. You get to do that (laughter). You get to go to restaurants. You know, the first thing everybody wants to do when they graduate from basic back then, go to McDonald's, you know, go, you know--of course, everyone said they wanna go have a drink, you know, 'cause you can't drink when you're in basic. And for those that smoke, you know, I'm gonna smoke, my head off, you know, all those things that you couldn't do, you know, now you can do. So, it was really good. Also, you learned about what it means to pull together when you don't have to. And what I mean by that, in basic training, somebody goes down, you know, they teach--you know, you're there for your buddy. You, you know, you better be there, you'd better help 'em. If they're messing up, you're messing up. It was like mass punishment. They don't like to say that, but it's sort of like that, okay. So, it's a forced thing. It's imbedded in basic. That's the reality. Story_ID: 36096 Speaker 1: AIT [Advanced Individual Training], if somebody goes down, it's--and someone wants to help pick you up, it's because they want to. And I'll give you a quick story. I was, we were almost finished, completely finished through the course. The last major test was called this Article 32B. It's like a grand jury hearing. And it's a all-day test. It's an actual court trial going on and your summarizing the testimony, etc., etc., etc. You, you have so many, so much training leading up to when you take this final test. Well, the day, the week prior to us learning all this stuff for, to actually do this major test, final test, and you could only make four mistakes out of 12 hours of testimony, I got sick as a dog. And I was in the hospital. I had 104.2 fever, something crazy like that. And when you're in training, if your fever goes over 101, 102, you're automatically admitted to the hospital. There's no, we're gonna give you medication. You stay in the hospital. So, I'm in the hospital for a whole week, and my classmates, by the second day, they're coming to, you know, they're coming to see me. People are trying to teach me what I'm missing. They're trying to share with me--this is while I'm, you know, probably half out of my brain. But they're like, you've been with us, "J", you have been with us. We're not, we're gonna make sure you pass this test. This is what we learned today, blah, blah, blah, blah. So they're teaching me, I'm literally in my hospital bed. The day we took the exam--the day that the test was being, I was--it was my first day back. And my instructor, Specialist Molash (ph.), that was his last name Spec. 6, Molash--I know (laughter). It's funny, these names come up. Anyway, so he, he asked me, he says, says, Jones you sure you wanna take the test. I said, well, what are the options? He said, well, you know, you could be recycled. In other words, you start with another class. I said that, so that means I'm gonna have to wait until this class behind us catches up to this point, stay here at Fort Benjamin Harrison and then graduate with another class? He said, yes. I said, that's not an option. So he said, but if you take the test and you fail, you're gonna be recycled. I said, okay, it's like either I take the test and I fail and I'm recycled or I don't take the test, and I'm still recycled. I said, but you never gave me that other option to take the test and I pass. And he says, no one's ever taken the test and passed after missing a week of instruction. And I said, Specialist Molash, I'm not like everybody else. And so I took the test. I took all twelve hours. I took every last minute till the last piece of it, remember everything that all my classmates had given me, had taught me and shared with me when I was laying in the hospital. They didn't have to do that. No one made them come to the hospital. And so, after I took the test, the next day, you know, whatever, all the test were graded. It takes a long time to grade. Like I said, you can only make four mistakes. And so they called us out one by one, to give us our grades, and Specialist Molash said, sat me down, and I'm like, oh, man, you know, I'm like, so what is it? And he's like, he looks down at my paper--I can't see my, my paper. And I'm like, he says, I don't know how you did it. He said, but you only missed one. I ran, jumped up screaming and hollering, ran down the hall, you know, and, and everything. And it taught me, you know, that in this thing called the Army, it's not about you, it is about pulling together as a team, not wanting your, you know, your comrade to fail. Story_ID: 36097 Speaker 1: Okay, well, so you passed the test [Advanced Individual Training]. And what happens next now? What happened next? Speaker 2: So, then I get my first assignment. So now we waiting for, you know, where we're gonna go. And I, I think, you know, you have a wish list and a dream sheet. You put your top three places you wanna go. I think I put California, Hawaii, and I can't remember the third--and Maryland, and Maryland, wanna come back home. And I didn't get any of 'em. I got Colorado [Fort Carson]. I was pissed. I'm like, Colorado? That's in the middle of the United States. I'm like where's the ocean. Most importantly, where is the seafood? Where is the fresh seafood? I'm like, I don't wanna go to Colorado (laughter). And I couldn't get anybody to change with me, you know, (laughter) so off to Colorado I go. Speaker 1: This is still 1982? Speaker 2: No, now, it's 1983. Speaker 1: '83 [1983], okay, alright. Story_ID: 36098 Speaker 1: 1983, and the other significant thing that happened in Indianapolis [Indiana] when I was there was the Baltimore Colts were stolen in the middle of the night in a Mayflower van (laughter). Speaker 2: Now, wait a second here. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Somehow this got past us, but the Baltimore Colts cheerleading, we didn't talk about. Speaker 1: No, (laughter) we didn't. So we gotta go back. We want-- Speaker 2: We'll (unclear) (laughter)-- Speaker 1: --what year and you tell us what happened? I mean how you became a Baltimore Colts cheerleader? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm sorry. Ooh, I was in high school. And at that time-- Speaker 1: This was '81 [1981]? Speaker 2: This was in 1978. Speaker 1: '78 [1978], okay, all right. Speaker 2: 1978, and I was in a play. It was 'South Pacific' actually, and at the time, the art or the band director for the Baltimore Colts marching band was also a teacher at my high school. His name was Art Schmerzel (ph.). And Art came up to several of us--we were cheerleaders in high school. And he said, the Baltimore Colts cheerleaders are having auditions, and you girls, you know, you girls are cheerleaders. Would you like to audition? And we're like, are you serious? NFL [National Football League] cheerleader, you know? And I'm thinking to myself, how old do you have to be because I'm younger than everyone else, although I don't look it. And so at that time, you had to be sixteen [years old]. Well, I wasn't quite sixteen, but no one asked me for my birth certificate (laughter) quite frankly. So, fast forward, the first rehearsals were going on. Unfortunately, they were during the time that I was in the play. We were holding rehearsals for 'South Pacific', and I had a lead character. And so I was very disappointed because all my, my good friends were auditioning and I couldn't. So one evening, we had a dress, full dress rehearsal without an audience. And it was the first cut for the cheerleaders that had come out, with wanting to be cheerleaders, cheerleader wanna-bes. And so I was asked if I was gonna audition, and I'm like, no, I, you know, I haven't been to any rehearsals. I didn't learn any of the cheers or anything like that. And so Art Schmerzel said, hang on a second. Let me, let me check something. So apparently, he went in and asked, and said, you know, I've got one person. She hasn't been able to be, you know, attend the rehearsals. Can she audition? You know, will you allow her to audition? And this was just the first cut. And so he comes back out, and he says, do you have a, you know, a one-minute dance routine? No, do you have, do you have a leotard, 'cause that's the (unclear). I was like, no. He said, do you have shorts and a halter top or tee-shirt? I said, yeah, I've got one of those. Well, I was in high school. I had it in my locker. And he says, well, do you have a one--do you know a cheer? And, of course, I knew a cheer. They had learned certain cheers, but I, I, you know, I knew cheers from school. And then he said, do you have a one-minute dance routine prepared? And I'm like, oh, sure, got this, sure, sure, sure. So, go in the locker room, Sheila Jones had Michael Jackson's "Don't Stop Till You Get Enough". That was her song. She had a one-minute tape, and it was cassette. And so as I'm changing, and I'm like, Sheila, just play the beginning, play the end, play the beginning, 'cause I'm like I have to, you know, begin big and I have to end big. Anything in between, they're not gonna remember, you know, this was my thought. So I throw on the little outfit--keep in mind, I just had dress rehearsal from, for a play. I don't know if you've ever seen anybody with stage makeup on (laughter). I had on stage makeup. If you've ever seen the movie, the play 'South Pacific', it is set in the Polynesian Islands. I had a long black wig on that came to here. This is what I wore into the audition (laughter). Story_ID: 36099 Speaker 1: So I go in. They ask me to do a cheer. I throw the most simple, ridiculous cheer, but did one. Then they asked me to do my routine. And so they started the player, the record player, I'm sorry, the cassette. And I remember starting off with some big move, doing a couple of turns, a couple of leaps in the air, a couple of head throws, praying the wig wouldn't fall off, turned around, and it was like ta-dah! And that was it. I was given my number, 105. I leave out. All of us are in the cafeteria. I was the 105th girl to audition. And they came out after a while, and said, we wanna thank everyone, as they always do. Everyone was great. We can't choose everyone. This is the first cut. So I'll never forget. You know, they said, Number 2, 5, 15, whatever. Then they say, 96, 97, 105. I was like, I cannot believe I have made the first cut, with stage makeup on, a wig on, a routine that I made up on the spot, and so I made first cut and the second, second rounds, and final cut. That was nothing compared to the first one. That was most normal. So at that time, there were only two African American cheerleaders on the squad, Saloma (ph.) and Jackie. When I made the squad, it was seven, myself, Michele Jones, Sheila Jones, Shelly Jones, Alisha Plumber and Leatrice (ph.). I can never remember Leatrice's last name. Five, all of us were in high school. So there were seven of us at that time. First time out on that field at Memorial Stadium [Baltimore, Maryland], it was like unreal coming out of the, you know, tunnel, with our little, you know, Go-Go girl boots on, our little horseshoe on the back, and our little pom-poms. I was like, oh, my goodness. This is real (laughter). So anyway, loved it, did it for three years. And, and like I say, I went to college, went, ended up in the [U.S.] Army, went there and was in Indianapolis when the Colts were taken from Baltimore. Speaker 2: So you were there in Indianapolis-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --at the terminus of the Colts-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --of the Robert Irsay-- Speaker 1: Yes, and I wanted to stand in the middle of the highway and say, "go back, go back to Baltimore" (laughter). It really was, I was devastated. Now, needless to say, everybody knew I was from Baltimore, and everyone the next day could not stop harassing me about the fact that I had no more team. So it was just a sad, sad day (laughter), it was. Speaker 2: Okay, we had to go back and record that story. Speaker 1: Okay, so we got that, yeah, okay. Story_ID: 36100 Speaker 1: Now you get your first assignment as a court-- Speaker 2: Fort Carson, Colorado, living life and loving it. Here I am, you know, I'm--college was different. You know my parents were paying for it, you know. I wasn't working when I was a student. So I had allowance and all those things, and I lived in a dormitory, but now I am in the [U.S.] Army. I am working, 7:30 [a.m.] to 4:30 [p.m.]. I'm still in a barracks at that point, got a 5-speed, red Toyota Celica. It is a coed barracks (laughter), which, you know, coming from basic, everything was all females, AIT [Advanced Individual Training], the boys--the males were on one floor and the females--well, they were in whole another building. I can't remember, but we were definitely separated. There were no men anywhere around in the barracks, except on the ground-level floor. But you've got, you know, a coed barracks, and they--the guys helped us bring our stuff up to our room. And I'm like, well, you can't come here, you know, all kind of--yeah, yeah, we can help you. I was like really? You know, this was cool stuff, you know. So now I'm starting to feel like an adult. I'm making my own money, and I got my little car, you know, got expenses and I'm working in the legal field. I'm like this is, this is all right, you know. I'm in the Army, for real now. This is what it's like. So a lot of good times in Colorado, didn't wanna be there at first, glad I did. I do ski, I've been skiing since I was a little girl. But living in that part of the country, you know, the majestic mountains and the snow and beef. You know, I ate a lot of beef when I was there. There was a restaurant called B.F. Good Ribs. I never forget, best beef ribs, I mean I've ever--I still, you know, I can't even, even to this day, those were the best beef ribs ever. They had pork ribs there too, but B.F. Good Ribs was in Colorado Springs, right off of Academy Boulevard and great, great ribs. A lot of fun. There was a park there, and the park in itself was segregated, not because it had to be, but because you had African Americans over here, you know, Caucasians over in this area, and then Hispanics over in this area, and I'd just go all around the whole park and have a good time, you know, and didn't care. And my friends were like that too. And that was the other piece of making friends with people from, you know, all over the country, different backgrounds, people that, you know, either small town, big town, New York, you know, from other countries. Some of my closest friends were actually not from America initially. So it was really interesting being there in that time and that place and space. I mean I didn't have any cares, any responsibilities, got my first two-bedroom apartment with a fireplace and a dog (laughter), you know. Story_ID: 36101 Speaker 1: [My] senior noncommissioned officers [NCOs; at Fort Carson, Colorado], Sergeant First Class Jones and Bruno Lamelli (ph.) and Jerry Suggs, and, you know, I started seeing what non-commissioned officers were. I started seeing, you know, a lot of those sergeant first classes were, they had served in Vietnam and seeing the differences between 'em. And that's when I learned what a non-commissioned officer was, you know, the difference between a specialist Spec. 5, Spec. 6 and sergeant first Class, and a first sergeant and command--I mean that's when it hit me. You know, when I met these men and I say "men" because at that point, I had not seen any senior non-commissioned officers that were women. And so they started teaching me about being a leader and different things and saying things to me, not because they were the right things to say, but because they needed to be said. And they would say it in a way in which it needed to be said. And I could appreciate it, you know. You know, Al, Sergeant First Class Allen Williams was from, you know, some soft-spoken area around, you know, the country, and Sergeant First Class Gerry Suggs, he was from Baltimore. Bruno Lamelli, you know, Italian, very Italian, you know, upstate New York. All these guys were different. And then I saw a female who was a Staff Sergeant who was a non-commissioned officer, Linda Roberson, and she was tough. She knew her stuff. She looked like a lady, she looked like a soldier, she looked like a non-commissioned officer. And she took all of us under her wing, you know, great start. Speaker 2: So this is 1983--it's still '83 [1983]? Speaker 1: '83 [1983]. Speaker 2: '83 [1983]? Speaker 1: '83 [1983], '84 [1984], '85 [1985], yeah. Story_ID: 36102 Speaker 1: I left [Fort Carson, Colorado] in '84 [1984] to go to Germany and came back. The first time overseas was Hanau, Germany, not far from Frankfurt, Pioneer Kaserne. Speaker 2: How do you spell Hanau? Speaker 1: H-A-N-A-U. Speaker 2: Okay, it's 1984. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And you were still doing the same work? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Now, by this time, what rank were you? Speaker 1: I was a specialist promotable, E4 promotable. Speaker 2: Promotable. The [U.S.] Army's really changed from like the version I have in my mind from literature (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: You know, I've never heard of a specialist promotable, but that's-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, because you had to, you know, had to be selected, and then you had to make sure the points--there were cut-off scores and all those things, yeah. So, um-hum, E4(P). Speaker 2: So any stories about Germany? Speaker 1: Ooh, some I'll tell (laughter). It was great, first time ever in Germany. And I found out my name in German. The first thing I learned that Michele in German is really Meciala (ph.), you know. That's what they would call me. The food was fantastic. I couldn't, I couldn't see enough. I couldn't, remember, you know, from high school, I was in, archeology was one of my favorite areas. So, history was one of my favorite areas. So to look at the buildings, the architecture. America is very young. And you don't realize that until you go to Europe and you start seeing those kind of structures, and you start seeing and then when they look at you when you ask for a glass of water, and you're talking about tap water, which is something that didn't occur, which was a, a result of World War II, World War I--I can't remember which one, where the water supply was tainted. And so, and I don't know about now. I can't recall, but I know especially back then, you know, a lot of Germans did not drink out of the water faucet, water. You know, you used it to cook. And so for me, you know, my first words in German was "Ein glas wasser, bitte," [speaking in German] you know, "May I have a glass of water, please?" You know, and so I took to it like fish to water, you know, the language was very easy for me to learn [speaking German]. English is a dramatic language which, you know, I started pulling out words that I thought, you know, "kindergarten," garden of children, auto, boots, you know, all these different things. And it was exciting. Going out at night was exciting, you know, going out in an off post to a German club where I don't know the language, but I am welcomed like I am Josephine Baker in Paris in whatever years because of, you know, I was an anomaly, quite frankly. You know, a lot of soldiers would go overseas, and they would be called what we call barracks rats. They never left out of the barracks. I was everywhere. You know, you could go to Paris [France] for the weekend, roundtrip, you know, hotel and everything included for eighty bucks, for, you know, three nights, two days or whatever, two days, three nights, whatever. It was wonderful, couldn't wait to get back, changed my minor in college to German because it was just that intense. There were people that didn't like Germany. I was like, I don't understand. I said, now, did you go over there with the ugly American attitude, like, you know, I'm American, and, you know, I can, you know, why don't you do it this way? Why don't you, you know--you're in their country, you know. Even though we're there as a military force, we're in partnership or whatever, we're allies, but you're in their country. So you may, you know, you may not get French fries the way you want them. You're gonna get pommes frites, you know. These are the things you're gonna, you know, those kind of things. So, you're not gonna go in and order and get your food right there, you know, just like that because that's not how food is prepared. You know, yeah, there's a KFC [Kentucky Fried Chicken] in Germany, but you can best believe there's a little bit difference in the KFC in, you know, in the United States. McDonald's French fries do not taste the same in Germany as it does, but so what? You know, when I was there, the exchange rate was crazy. We, I mean you can buy anything and everything, you know. The dollar value was extremely high, the Mark [Deutsche Mark] low. I think it was three-Mark 80 when I was there. Of course, now they all use Euros. But even in France, I think it was 10 Francs to a dollar, you know. It was like unreal. You could buy anything, anything, went to Paris and just a great time. Speaker 2: Okay, so you were there through most of '84 [1984]. Story_ID: 36103 Speaker 1: Now, how did you decide to go back to college? Speaker 2: At that point, I always knew that I would. I always knew I was gonna go back to college. Fast forward, I got out of the active component and went into the [U.S. Army] reserves in Baltimore [Maryland]. And there was a theater Army support group. I'm like, okay, what are they doing? You know, what are these reserve soldiers doing and, you know, how am I supposed to just do this one week in a month, two weeks, during a week. But within, I think forty-five days of me going into the reserves, and I'm getting ready to get to college really quick, I was tapped to attend a course. And I did so well in the course that they asked me to be an instructor. But it wasn't enough. Being in the reserves, traditional reserve, one week in a month, two weeks in a year, wasn't enough. And then I get a call to go to Honduras. And so I go to Honduras for a year and a half. And I'm in the Reserves, but it is a humanitarian assistance mission. And it was called, Fuertes Caminos. And now you're gonna ask me to spell it, F-U-E-R-T-E-S, C-A-M-I-N-O-S, Fuertes Caminos (unclear) ADA, I went to Honduras. And that's when I learned the piece about the non-combative piece of being a soldier, the humanitarian assistance, how we're unofficial ambassadors, how we can go in a country and treat and help. So I go there, and then to fast forward, once I leave there, I say being a traditional reserve soldier is not enough for me. So one of the attorneys that I worked with in Honduras went to Fort Bragg, North Carolina. And so I went to Fort Bragg, home of the airborne solider, special operations world, civil affairs, the whole nine yards. So once I got there and once I got settled in, I decided I wanted to go back to college. It was time. And it was after Desert Shield/Storm, the first Gulf War, and I-- Speaker 1: So this is in the '90s [1990s]? Speaker 2: This is in the '90s [1990s] now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is in the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: I've got a bad note here-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: --that you went there in '85 [1985]. That's what I was trying to get to-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. '85 [1985], I left the active component in '85 [1985], went into the reserves, traditional reserves for about two years, and then left for Honduras and left Honduras in '88 [1988], and was in--actually, Honduras and Panama during that time, got back in '89 [1989] and left late that year, early '90 [1990] to Fort Bragg, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Now, '88 [1988], is that the time when-- Speaker 2: Noriega [Manuel Noriega]? Speaker 1: Noriega, yeah, was in trouble in Panama. Speaker 2: Yes. It was a--that whole region at that time was considered a low-intensity conflict area at that time. And there was a lot of activity going, there were things going on in Panama. There were things going on in Nicaragua. Speaker 1: Nicaragua-- Speaker 2: Nicaragua as well, um-hum, exactly, a lot of activity that they considered low-intensity conflict area. We had special operation forces that were all throughout that region at that time, and engaged in activities unknown, you know. Story_ID: 36104 Speaker 1: So, fast forward, Fort Bragg [North Carolina]. Speaker 2: Okay, now Fort Bragg, this is--what year is this, Fort Bragg? Speaker 1: Late '89 [1989], early '90 [1990], I think I wanna say late '89 [1989]. Speaker 2: Fort Bragg is North Carolina. Speaker 1: North Carolina. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay, now, it's from, from Fort Bragg, you go to Fayetteville [North Carolina]? Speaker 1: Fort Bragg is in Fayetteville. Speaker 2: Is in Fayetteville? Speaker 1: Um-hum, is in Fayetteville. Speaker 2: With the college, Fayetteville State? Speaker 1: Fayetteville State University. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's right, absolutely. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So the way the [U.S.] Army is set up, when you go back to college, can you devote all your time to college or do you have to work and then go to college too? Speaker 1: Well, it depends. Okay, there--the way that I went--a lot of insti--military installations, they have affiliations of universities in the area or even around, you know, University of Maryland is around (unclear) a lot of installations. Fort--Fayetteville State University had Fort Bragg, an office on Fort Bragg, with full counselors, the whole nine yards. They had classes that were held on, on the installation as well. The catered to, or I shouldn't say just "catered," but they included what they call non-traditional students. And because it is a military town, what they did, they created condensed semesters in the evening. So, and this had been going on for a while, so it was the regular classes. But instead of taking eighteen weeks to finish a semester, they would condense it into nine. So you would, for example, if you took a full load, like I did, I went to class from 6:00 at night to 10:00 o'clock, Monday through Thursday and Saturday from 8:00 [a.m.] to 2:00 [p.m.]. That was eighteen credits that I took, two classes on Monday-Wednesday, two classes on Tuesday-Thursday, and then Saturday classes. They were just, they were long, and they were condensed. And so you could do a full semester in nine weeks. Then they were in the evening. I think I had to take maybe one class during the day, actually, that I was actually on the campus proper during the day. Most of my classes were either--and the professors would come from the campus and they'd teach at night, on--you know, there's always, usually there's night school at every university. But this, that university as well as other ones, and they were probably one of the first in that area to do those really condensed semesters. So, no, I went to work at five o'clock in the morning. I left my office 5:30, 5:45 in the evening, and I went to class from 6:00 to 10:00, Monday through Thursday and Saturday, from 9:00 to 2:00 and graduated with a 3.8 [grade point average]. That's the difference of going back later when you want to be in college, and that's what I was sharing with my parents [Doris Herndon Jones and Leon Jones]. Story_ID: 36105 Speaker 1: Now, did you go to Desert Storm [Gulf War] before--were you involved in the Gulf War at all? Speaker 2: Yes, and no. Did I have to go? No. Did I have to actually deploy? No. Was I mobilized? Yes. We had all of our soldiers, special operations soldiers at civil affairs and psychological operations, all of us, all of us had to--well, we ran our own--I shouldn't say all of us. We ran our own mobilization sites. In other words, all those soldiers that were going went through Fort Bragg, went through our mobilization site. So that was my job, that was my role to do all--remember, I came in as a legal specialist. My job was to make sure all the wills, power of attorneys and all those things. So I didn't have to go. I didn't have to go, but I was mobilized. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's another thing that a lot of people, when it comes to the reserve, the difference between mobilizing and deploying, two different things, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But mobilizing, if you're called, it can be to stay within the [United] States or to deploy to go over. Both missions are critical. You gotta have people on the ground for the swell. So depending on where the [U.S.] Army wants you, in most cases, you don't have a choice. This is where you are, you know, so two different things. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36106 Speaker 1: So, now Fayetteville State [University, North Carolina], were there any particular--now, you majored in business administration, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Were there any particular instructors that stand out or any course of study that you liked better than another? Speaker 2: I won't say any of the instructors stood out, although I had one--I cannot recall his name, which is really unfortunate because he was phenomenal. He was one of those instructors that took, he really made you think. He would take the coursework and then, you know, really apply it to real world. And he had real world experience, and, again, same thing that I struggled with in elementary school, about teachers just giving you information to, you know, memorize and regurgitate, there were professors in schools as well that did the same thing, not necessarily to that, that they just wanted you to memorize it, but you're taking this degree that you're learning to go out into the world. And what I was finding of a lot of instructors, they had all the academics, but they didn't have any--this is business administration. And so to be an instructor in that field, the world according to Michele, you need to have some experience. And so, sometimes I struggled with a teacher teaching certain pieces, and I'd say, okay, so what's your real world experience so you can do that, you know, anecdotal kind of things. What would you do, if you only had the academic piece, that's not good. But I had pretty good instructors, with the exception of one. But the one person that stands out in my mind was actually a counselor, Ms. Bower. And she worked at the Fort Bragg campus. And she was just a wonderful woman. She really wanted to help soldiers to get their degree. You know, she would make sure all the paperwork was done. She'd walk you through it. She always had time for you, always a smile, kind word. She'd let you know if you were doing something wrong too. She was just a--she was a excellent representative of the university. She really was. I loved my alma mater because it afforded me the opportunity to go to school on my terms. My terms being, still being in the [U.S.] Army, still being full time, still doing what I needed to do, but also going to school at night and being accommodating because there were times when I did have to go overseas. Story_ID: 36107 Speaker 1: Okay, so you were at Fort Bragg [North Carolina] until 1997? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then what happened? Speaker 2: And then I was selected to go to the Sergeants Major Academy, United States Army Sergeants Major Academy at Fort Bliss, Texas. Speaker 1: Now, what is a sergeant major? Speaker 2: What is a sergeant major? Sergeant major is the highest enlisted position in the [U.S.] Army. It, you have two types of sergeant majors. You have a sergeant major, and their functions are pretty much specific to their career field. It, let's say, logistics, it could be administrative, it could be finance, it could be any of those areas, whereas a command sergeant major is career field and material. They are in a designated leadership position. The command sergeant major works hand-in-hand with the battalion commander, brigade commander, division commander, corps commander, the Army. It's the commander's right-hand man or woman. Their focus is one, to train junior officers, mentor junior officers. They are the enlisted soldiers representative at every level. And in the Army, the force, 75 percent of the force is enlisted. That's your privates and corporals and sergeants, etc. Speaker 1: So they represent enlisted men and women in what sense? Speaker 2: In every sense, from training, development to quality of life issues. For example, housing, be it in the barracks, be it on-post housing, be it policies and regulations that affect them. They should be intimately involved, if there is a change that is going to affect, be it for training, quality of life, development, etc., anything and everything. If it's the mission, okay. What percentage of our soldiers are enlisted? What are they gonna be doing during this mission? How is this gonna impact them? If there is a reorganization of that command or mission, okay, and you lose 10 percent of your enlisted force, okay, now, what are we gonna do, at what level? So it can be anything from organizational. You are that representative in every form and facet of that enlisted soldier, to include their families. If there're family issues at home, there're gonna come to you first, if they end up out of the home, those issues end up out of the home, i.e., and there's a soldier and their spouse who are living on post. And let's say there's an altercation. You're gonna be called. The commander is gonna called maybe second, maybe even first, but it's gonna come down to the sergeant major first. Okay, the sergeant major is gonna be the one that handles it. I like to say, and we call that, in that chain of enlisted, that's your squad leader, your platoon sergeant, you're first sergeant, your sergeant major, that's what we call the NCO [non-commissioned officer] support channel. We support the enlisted force. People hear a chain of command all the time, and they get it confused. The chain of command is not any officer. If that officer is not a commander, then they're not in that chain of command, if they're not a company commander, battalion commander, etc. That's what a chain of command, and emphasis is on the word "command," they are a commander, and then our first sergeants, your command sergeant majors go hand-in-hand with those two. So look at it as the commander as the micro and then your enlisted side, be it the first sergeant and the command sergeant major, the macro--I mean I micro--macro and micro. The, every, day-to-day activities pertaining to, we are the GSD people, "get stuff done." Speaker 1: So there wouldn't be an instance where a colonel would walk by and see a private and tell 'em to do something and he--or is that-- Speaker 2: They could-- Speaker 1: They could do that? Speaker 2: They could, you know. But most of the time, most smart colonels will say, you know, that's--you know, I'm gonna go talk to the first sergeant or I'm gonna go talk to the command sergeant major. You know, unless it's something so egregious, you know, that the colonel needs to get involved. But nine times out of ten, the colonel, if that colonel, be he a commander or not, is not gonna go to that junior soldier. They're gonna go to the first sergeant or command sergeant major. If it's a, if it's the commander, the commander is gonna go to that command sergeant major, and again, unless it's so egregious that it has to be what we like to call "on-the-spot" correction, but 99.9 percent of the time, they're gonna go to the command sergeant major. Story_ID: 36108 Speaker 1: Junior officers are officers that are below the major commander, let's say if it's at a brigade level, a colonel, full-bird colonel and their sergeant major. Those lieutenant colonels and majors at the battalion levels, they're usually gonna bounce things through the commander sergeant major before they go to the colonel, say Sergeant Major, what do you think about it? What do you think the boss is gonna say or what do you think the colonel's gonna say about this? I'm thinking about doing blah, blah, blah, and the command sergeant major's role is to say well, you know, have you thought about this? (Unclear), well, you know what, I don't think that's gonna fly? Well, I know that's not gonna fly. You know, you know, are you sure you wanna do that? You know, to help that colonel or that junior officer, you know, help them develop too. Keep in mind, usually a command sergeant major has been in longer than these other commanders. So they're advisory also. They advise their commander, and they also develop and advise those junior officers as well. So it's a very, it's a functional area. It's, that's why it's, it's non-career specific. And we actually have, you know, our own Military occupational specialty code, 00-Zulu, which you can be a command sergeant major anywhere, you know, any type of unit. Do they try to keep command sergeant majors in the types of units that they grew up in, for example, a command sergeant major in the infantry unit who grew up infantry will probably be the command sergeant major in an infantry unit. You probably won't find a command sergeant major from, you know, logistics field, being a command sergeant major in an infantry type unit. Usually you don't. Could they? Yes, but do they like to? No, because there're very specific things, but it's definitely tied directly to the commander. That's why you have your sergeant major, and then you have your command sergeant major that goes in line with the commander, yeah. Speaker 2: So the sergeant, command sergeant major basically takes care of the smaller details of what has to be done, I mean the down-on-the-ground details of something that an upper commander may brainstorm that he wants to do. Speaker 1: Okay, we have--I'll give you, very simple. We need to take, we need to take the battalions, all the battalions need to go to the range to fire their weapons, (unclear) something, qualifying their weapons or familiarization. That's the mission. Command sergeant major, the first thing I would do is get on the phone, I need to pull all my command sergeant majors together from all the other, you know, subordinate units. Okay, we all have, we're going to the range on XYZ. This is what we need to make happen, blah, blah, blah, blah. Do you--you got blah, you got dah-dah-dah-dah. It's done. That commander is worried about on the 15th of February, that all his units are going to the range to familiarize. That's the mission, doesn't worry about the details. I worry about the details. I worry about the logistics. I worry about whether or not we have the ammo. You know, I worry about whether or not the range has been reserved, all those different things. Now, I may not do it specifically, but I've gotten my lines too to make sure those happen, you know. 1st Battalion, you got this, 2nd Battalion, this is yours, 3rd Battalion, this--I need a briefing this such and such a date, such and such, to find out where we are at this point in time. Come back together, okay, where do we have some problems? We have any issues? Are we tracking, etc., etc. Commander doesn't need to know, you know, that this battalion lost the paperwork and they have to submit it again, unless it's gonna effect that mission, unless we're not gonna get it on that day, doesn't need to know that. You know, I would say, let's say if they lost the paperwork. I'd say, I'll go in and brief the, you know, the commander. We're tracking a couple bumps in the road, but we're working those out. So a good commander will say okay. If I don't make it happen, then there's a problem, you know. But that's, that's the line. They look at the overall mission, get what that mission is and most of the details, if not all, are executed on the ground. We're responsible for executing training. Story_ID: 36109 Speaker 1: What's the most crucial thing for a sergeant major to understand in Command Sergeant Major School [United States Army Sergeants Major Academy at Fort Bliss, Texas]? What do you think? Speaker 2: First of all, it's a nine-month course (laughter). One of the first things I think that every command sergeant major or sergeant major, 'cause sergeant majors go too. Command Sergeant Major course is a little bit different, has to understand how the entire Army works. That's one of the big, one of the big pieces. Because if you've been insulated in your own career field, and let's take, take me, for example, I was at Fort Bragg [North Carolina] a long time. And I was in Special Operations Command in that community, which we're non-traditional soldiers. We have different standards, higher standards than some of the traditional type career fields. We have real-world missions, you know. We go before war, during war, after war, and when there is no war, humanitarian assistance. So my world, a lot of my time spent in the Army was under the Special Operations umbrella. However, because when I came in the Army, I came in at Fort Carson [Colorado], which was the home, at that particular time, 4th Infantry Division, that was very traditional, all of those set-ups. So I brought that with me too. But if you've been in that, you know, your small arena, if you will, then you don't know how these other things operate. You don't know at the Army level sometimes, and if you've, you know, not been a sergeant major because a lot of the classmates are not sergeant majors yet. They're first sergeant promotables or master sergeant promotables. Some were already sergeant majors, and some of us, you know, had, you know, some had been sergeant majors already and were waiting to be, hopefully, be selected for command sergeant major. The promotion is to sergeant major, but you're selected for command sergeant major. Everybody selected--that is a sergeant major is not going to be selected for command sergeant major. And some don't wanna be. They don't want that additional level of responsibility. Now, again, you have a battalion command sergeant major, brigade sergeant--command sergeant major, corps, etc., all the way up to the various different levels working with general officers, okay, one-star generals, two, three and four. If you're a command sergeant major with a one-star general, two-star, three and four, your levels of responsibility have increased exponentially because so has that general officer, that commander. So we have special-duty pay because of that too. We have additional duty, additional pay because of that level of responsibility. Story_ID: 36110 Speaker 1: Okay, now was there--what was the toughest part of Sergeant-- Speaker 2: Sergeant Majors Academy [United States Army Sergeants Major Academy at Fort Bliss, Texas]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Being the class president. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was. You have, you know, 335-plus sergeant majors, or soon-to-be sergeant majors, and everybody's got an opinion. And as the president of the class, you don't have any authority. You have a position. You know, you're sort of like the class advocate, if you will. But anything that they don't like, they're gonna blame you. So just listening to that everyday sometimes, you know, you wonder, are these adults or are they children? So that was probably the most difficult part, is being the class president, and you really don't have, you don't have any authorities at all, you know. It's like class president at a university. Now, what authorities do you have? You know, it's just like any other university school, but it is a learning experience, you know. You get opportunities to do certain things that your classmates don't, represent them as best as you can. You know, you have a team of, I think there were four, three--three or four vice presidents, a treasurer and an adjutant. So, in a leadership position. So, but that was probably the most difficult. The other part wasn't difficult at all. Actually, it was really enjoyable because if you think about it, here you--you don't have to worry about your job and your soldiers and troops. You don't have any (laughter). You know, you, your role is to go to school, all day. Speaker 1: Okay, now, how many other--what would you say would be the percentage of black soldiers involved in school when you were in school? Speaker 2: At the Sergeant Majors Academy? Speaker 1: The Sergeant Major--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I think maybe, out of my class, maybe 30 percent, maybe 35 percent of the class. It was about 300-some odd classmates-- Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: --which were male and female. Speaker 1: What would be the percentage of females? Speaker 2: 10 percent. And we had a large percentage of women. We had twenty-five, I think, twenty-five women. That was huge. It was the largest female class, largest attendance of women in the Sergeant Majors Academy. Speaker 1: So would you say today that there's a high percentage of blacks and women than it was when you were in school or is it about the same? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. And I say that with a real hesitation because listening to some that are in, it seems like the trend is actually, is getting smaller, actually. Don't know why, but, you know, and I don't know. I don't know for sure. Speaker 1: Just wondering. Story_ID: 36111 Speaker 1: So, anything else about Sergeant--is there any particular instructors or courses of study that you liked the most in Sergeant Major school [United States Army Sergeants Major Academy at Fort Bliss, Texas]? Speaker 2: One of the things that I really enjoyed about the Sergeant Majors Academy was the fact that, you know, again, you have a group of senior non-commissioned officers who have totally focused on, you know, their soldiers and everybody else, and you're given an opportunity for nine months to develop yourself--because for those that didn't have a college degree were afforded the opportunity to go to class. For those that spent a lot of time, you know, away from home, your spouses were allowed to come as well. So they, you know, got to reconnect with their families. We did a lot of work in the community. My class, Class 48--that's not 1948, but Class No. 48, we did a lot in the community. We did, we had, we helped rebuild elderly home. We did home improvement repairs in the community. We got involved with a lot of the schools. All of our kids--our kids, when I say all of ours, we didn't have a school on post. Our kids were off-post in the community. So as a class, we would go to support, if one of our classmates had a basketball game, the whole, you know, Academy, we'd go and support them. We even went over to Juarez, Mexico, and it was an orphanage, Los Francheros Amigos, and they really weren't orphans, as we would say. They really were--if they were in the United States, they would be in foster care because they had a parent somewhere, but they were just pretty much dropped off there. And we would go, and we would spend time with these kids. We rebuilt their playground and plumbing and all kinds--this was donated by us, individually, you know, but we came together as a class. No money came out of the government. This is what we wanted to do during the Christmas holiday. We all, every last class, and there're small subgroups, as you say, and of the 335--I can't remember however many classes, small groups there were, but we all chose--some of us had two kids--some of us had one, to purchase things for them for Christmas. We brought them all over to Fort Bliss, and piled all the gifts in one--it was so many gifts in the, in the community center. And every child that walked out of there had at least anywhere from seven to ten gifts. This was out of the goodness of their hearts. So to see a group of soldiers touched that much by some, you know, other people's misfortune, be it within the United States and out of the country, was really phenomenal. I can't, you know, those are moments in time that people that didn't along per se, you know, you see them sitting there painting, you know, a playground, you know, or hammering a nail to build a bunk bed. You know, that's the best of the best and just being a person, a human being. And so I met some great friends, introduced two people. They're still married to this day, catered their wedding (laughter), did all the cooking. I don't know what I was thinking. But, yeah, so good times, good fun. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36112 Speaker 1: Now, what year did you graduate from Sergeant Majors Academy [United States Army Sergeants Major Academy at Fort Bliss, Texas]? Speaker 2: 1998. Speaker 1: 1998, okay. So what was your first assignment after graduation from-- Speaker 2: An instructor at the Academy for the, what they called the non-residents course. Those can take, I was in residents course, but non-resident, they go do the, a series of correspondence courses over a two-year period. And then they come in for two or three weeks--I can't remember, to do the residents portion. I became an instructor, and then immediately following that, I went to, was assigned to the 78th [Infantry] Division [training support] in Edison, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Now, this is what year? Speaker 2: That was '98 [1998]. Speaker 1: 1998? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so training support, were you basically teaching and, or-- Speaker 2: Training support, we had five missions, four missions. The Number One mission was to prepare units for mobilization. That was one. The second mission was military support to civil authorities. Any time there's anything going on, and the civilian community, such as so on September 11th [2001; terrorist attacks on the United States], when they needed helicopters and all those things, that's what we did, military support to civil authorities. We provide between, you know, people, assets, the whole nine--resources, I should say. The other third was provide, what we call lanes-based training, that is, simulating different war-time activities for units during peace time. So those are three--I said five, three primary missions that we do. Speaker 1: Back in, I guess in 2001, Ted Koppel devoted a whole episode of 'Nightline' to simulation of a bomb threat in New York City or something that would happen, you know, and the [U.S.] Army participated in it, and New York Police and Fire Department. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So those were some of the things that we would do too. But, yeah, and it was a unique type of division. It was active and reserve, and it extended from the New England area all the way down to Fort Bragg [North Carolina]. So it had both active component soldiers and reserve component soldiers. Speaker 1: Now, this is the, in the actual 70th [ph.; 78th] Division? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36113 Speaker 1: Now, what--were you on duty when, in 2001 [September 11, 2001; terrorist attacks on the United States], when 9/11 happened, actually? Speaker 2: I was on my way to retirement. I literally had just left my office that morning, no, yeah, that morning. I was retiring. I was moving my things to Fort Jackson [South Carolina]. I was getting ready to hit my twenty years. And I was two hours from Jacksonville, Florida when the first plane hit. And I was thinking that, wow, we're gonna have to support civil authorities. Somebody made a mistake 'cause at that point, we didn't know it was a terrorist act. And shortly after the second plane hit, and I called the, my general's secretary, and she told me what was going on, 'cause remember, we were based in, the headquarters was in New Jersey [Edison; 78th Infantry Division]. So by the time I could pull over, the next one hit the Pentagon, and then I had to call and find out, you know--then my boss called me. And he said, Sergeant Major, you know your retirement's pulled, don't you? And I said, I kind of figured that. So he said, where are you? I said, I'm about two hours from Jacksonville, Florida. I said, let me just get there, unload my car, and I'm headed back up. He said, are you close to Fort Stewart [Georgia]? And I said, yeah, I am. He says, oh, you know, send a plane. I'm like, no. I'm driving back to Jersey because my units that weren't on an installation were all along the 95 [interstate] corridor. And I had to make sure that the force protection measures were in place for those units that were off an installation. And so I drove, dropped everything, took a nap, and drove back, all the way back up to New Jersey. And at that point, it was getting units ready, you know. So, I was off duty, preparing for retirement on that day. Speaker 1: Now, this is--had you ever experienced any kind of, I mean--well, no one had, I guess, experienced anything like this before. So-- Speaker 2: Actually, I did, not in the United States. If you remember Beirut [Lebanon], I was, when the Marines barracks were bombed in Beirut, those were American Marines. And I was at Fort Carson [Colorado]. And one of those Marines was Davin Green. Davin and I grew up together. I didn't understand terrorism before that day. Then I knew what it was that day. So, not everyone was affected by Beirut. So when they said it was an act of terror, I knew, I knew what that meant because I had experienced it in 1983 or '4 [1984], whenever it was, when we lost Davin. So, yeah, I knew. It was personal, it was very personal. Personal, for me. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36114 Speaker 1: In, what, 2002, you're promoted to command sergeant major of the U.S. Army Reserves. Speaker 2: I was selected. I was selected-- Speaker 1: Selected-- Speaker 2: --um-hum, yeah. I was promoted to command sergeant major in 1997 or promoted to sergeant major in 1997 and selected for command sergeant major in 1997 as well. Two months later they held a Command Sergeant Major selection board. But I was selected as command sergeant major of the Army Reserves in 2002. Speaker 1: Right, 'cause you had been previously command sergeant major of the 78th [Infantry] Division, right? Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Speaker 1: All right, so 2002, now, you were retiring on the day, you know, that 9/11 [September 11, 2001; terrorist attacks on the United States] took place, September 11, 2001. So you decided to re-enlist or-- Speaker 2: No, my retirement was pulled. Retirement, most people think you, you know, you hit twenty years [of service], you automatically retire. But, no, you have to be approved to retire from the military, under, even under the best circumstance, even without anything going on. So you request to retire and then it's approved, considering and there's no other reason not to. And in most cases, there's no reason not to. They check to make sure you have the adequate number of years, etc. But in my case, my retirement was pulled before it was approved because of the fact that we were talking about, September 11th, October, November, December, we're talking about less than ninety-four days away. And I had a, even though I was a command sergeant major with a non-specific career field, 'cause that's what command sergeant major--my background was civil affairs. So, you know, anyone in the Special Operations community, we were not, we were not being allowed. They have what's called "stop loss." Whenever there's a war going on, potential, anything like that, the military does Army "stop loss." In other words, stop anybody from leaving be it retirement, you know, the getting out. As long as it's not a medical reason, "stop loss." And so all things are put on hold. And so at that point, when, you know, my boss, Joe Ulmney [ph.], said, you know, Sergeant Major, you know, you're not gonna retire, you're--and I said, okay, how long will you think? A year, two years, probably about a year. So I said, okay. Well, then as things evolved and played out, you don't wanna retire. You don't wanna get out when someone's attacked your country. Now, you're like, okay, what do I need to do, okay. So my unit--I'm still the division command sergeant major. My replacement is not in yet. So, and that was those things that would happen in those ninety-plus days before I retired, to find my replacement to help them onboard. But now, I'm like, I've got all my unit. I got reserve soldiers that are being activated and mobilized because we run these power projection platforms, these mobilization stations where soldiers that are deploying. This is our mission. So I'm like, there's no way I'm retiring, you know. I don't want to retire. Story_ID: 36115 Speaker 1: Okay, so 2002, you're selected as a command-- Speaker 2: Command sergeant major. Speaker 1: --for the entire U.S. Army Reserves. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, what does that responsibility entail? Speaker 2: Okay, under the best circum--normal circumstances, Number One, it's still the same. It's just at a different level in terms of, you know, the welfare of the enlisted soldier. And at that level, now, you're at the [U.S.] Army level, okay. So everybody, you know--not everybody, you hear about regulations and this regulation. Well, regulations usually say, DA Regulation, Department of the Army Regulations. Well, there're regulations that work very well in the active component or for those full-time Army Reserves. But there are some pieces of Army regulations that just don't work well for reserve, you know, soldiers, traditional reserves. So those things have to be always, always have to be reviewed, you know, to make sure that when regulations are changed and policies, how does it affect the reserve component and all different categories. In addition to that, you know, we're talking about now the most contentious time in the Army Reserves history. We had never mobilized at this degree in the Army's history. You're talking major mobilizations, major deployments. You're talking about all these private-sector companies that are losing their civilian employees, for not six months like during Desert Storm [Gulf War], but up to two years of time. So all those things, Army regulations, Army policies, pay, how do you pay reserve soldiers when they're not in the pay system? How do you make sure their families are taken care of? How do you make sure the insurance piece is taken care of, you know, because they've got to be entered into certain systems. You know, how many times do they have to change and get brand new ID cards? How many times do I have to go before [U.S.] Congress and testify what soldiers in the Army Reserve needs? How is it that the Army Reserve are deploying soldiers, and they don't have the type of equipment that they need? Why is that? Why do they have to spend three, six, seven, eight months in training before they deploy? These are all the things that came in on my watch. People wanted to know. People were hammering the Reserves, people were hammering the Army. Okay, we know what the problem is. My role is to say, okay, this is what we need to do to get it fixed. How do I know? Is it my opinion? No. Remember I said, I stayed on the road all the time. That's because you cannot speak the part, you cannot be their advocate. You cannot say what needs to be changed if you're not on the ground watching. If you don't know the history of the institution. So that's the role of the command sergeant major of the entire Army Reserve, to talk about the, all five categories of soldiers, reserve soldiers, traditional, the one week in a month, two weeks during the year; the full-time which is about 25,000 of those; the individual mobilization augmentees, the individuals that augment active component staff during wartime, okay. Number four, retired or Individual Ready Reserve [IRR]. Every person that enlists in the Army comes in for eight years. It might be two years active, six years in the inactive reserve. That's why we don't have a draft because if we need extra soldiers, we pull from the IRR. That's my population too. And then the last facet are retired reserve. All of those have different laws, regs [regulations] and policies that govern them. I have to know 'em all, and, oh, by the way, because now, on my, you know, 40, 50 and 60,000 reserve soldiers are now falling under the command of an active component unit, what do you know about promotions in the reserve? If you don't know promotions, if you don't know why the soldier isn't getting paid, because you don't know the reserve system, and you don't know the process to get 'em through, I have a problem. That means my, my soldiers, my babies aren't gonna be taken care of, which subsequently means that their families are not gonna be taken care of. So my role also is to educate those that have their direct, a direct relationship with my soldiers. The position wasn't for me. It was to be their advocate, and the only way to do that is to be where they are, to listen to what they were saying, not what I thought they needed. That's the role of a command sergeant major, especially a command sergeant major of the entire, of an entire component. It's not about you, you know, and it's not about what the leaders around you are saying, not saying you don't listen to 'em. But they're not gonna give you what that soldier on the ground is gonna give you. And that's the truth as they see it. So, I guess you can tell I'm intense about that one. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And I'm sure they're glad that you are. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 36116 Speaker 1: Now, this promotion to command sergeant major of the U.S. Army Reserve is something that was celebrated. You were celebrated as the first woman in Army history to serve in this position, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Let alone the first black woman, you're the first woman-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to hold this position. Had there been any other black person who ever served it? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. There was one, actually two African American males prior to me in that position, Command Sergeant Major Collin Younger was one and then the third one, and I'm gonna be slammed for not remembering his name (laughter)--well, actually, he was the first one. Colin was the second one. So it's two African American males. Speaker 1: Okay, well, we can go back to that, but it's two. So anybody doing research on this, they know it's two. They have to find two more-- Speaker 2: Prior to me. Speaker 1: Prior to you. Speaker 2: Yep, prior to me. Speaker 1: And you succeeded a fellow named Alex Ray Lackey? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36117 Speaker 1: But you began to get a lot of attention in the media for being the first woman [appointed as the command sergeant major of the U.S. Army Reserve; 2002], 'Ebony Magazine' had a feature about you, and some other magazines. We saw some before we started it. So did that like, when you become a celebrity for something like that, on some level, I mean did you have to--how much of your time is spent like speaking and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Well, I use it as an opportunity because if you think about it, again, and I'll go back to the fact that it was the most contentious time in the Army Reserve history. So if someone wants to talk to you because you're the first woman, that's the door opener. You take about thirty seconds, and you talk about, you know, what it may mean to you--they can ask you a couple of questions about yourself. But then you turn that opportunity into educating those about your soldiers. So there had never been to that degree, the interests in the Army Reserve, prior to the global war on terrorism. So now, you have this global war on terrorism. You have the reserve that's in the media as an entity, and then now, all of a sudden, you have this woman that is in this position. So they wanna talk to you about you, but you don't want it to be about you. You want it, to use it as a platform to educate, motivate and in some cases, humiliate those to do right by your soldiers and their families. So that's what I--any opportunity that came up for me to talk about my reserve soldiers, I took advantage of it, every last one because that was an audience that did not know about the reserves, and let alone, just, the Army generally. But then as we start talking about the Army Reserve and in the media, again, they were just talking about how the reserves didn't have and all these members of [U.S.] Congress were just blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. You needed, I needed to set the record straight, you know, with facts, not speculation, not over, someone overhearing a conversation on an airplane, you know, not the letter written by mama and daddy to Congresswoman so and so. This is why, you know, it is where--this is why it is where it is now, and this is what we're doing now to make it right. Even Tavis Smiley [talk show host], (laughter) who very, very hard on, on the Army. We had an excellent interview, excellent interview because bringing forward the truth and the facts. I shouldn't even say the truth, the facts of the matter. And at the end, he understood, and that's all any soldier, ever wants, understand and do what you can, your part, to support us in doing our mission. So I welcomed every opportunity to talk about my babies and what was needed. Story_ID: 36118 Speaker 1: And what--you alluded to some of 'em, but what were the major issues [faced by the U.S. Army Reserve], I guess? Speaker 2: Some of the major issues were the fact that the equipment that the Army Reserve had during training when they did train was outdated, obsolete, etc. The [U.S.] Army never funded--the funding system for the Reserve was outdated, you know, based on some crazy calculation that didn't even make sense. So we didn't have the resources to buy current equipment. We didn't have the resources to have soldiers come in and train all the time, in an environment, as the saying goes, "Train as you fight." Well, we couldn't train as we fought. We didn't have the equipment. We didn't have the locations. We didn't have the money. The other piece of it was soldiers in the IRR [Individual Ready Reserve]. They received no training. There wasn't any resources for that. That was one thing. The other piece was, they kept talking about the fact that reserve soldiers have, are going into battle without having up-armored vehicles. In other words, all the protection that the vehicles needed. No one did, because we were fighting a type of war that we had never fought before. Those type of units weren't expected to be anywhere near IEDs [improvised explosive devices], RPGs [rocket propelled grenades]. Although they were traditionally in the rear, there was no rear. So no vehicles were--I shouldn't say, no. Vehicles that traditionally would not have been exposed, they didn't have it. So therefore, it wasn't just indicative of the Reserve. It was the simple fact that we were fighting a different war. Same thing like in Vietnam. It was a different type of warfare. So we had equipment that did not fit the scenario, period. So what did they do? And so my job was to explain. Well, this is what we're doing now. Are we building and shipping them over? In some cases, yes, but we were doing it in theater too, you know, actually physically--I could talk about what they were doing to vehicles in Iraq and Afghanistan. Why? Because I actually went and went to those facilities to see what they did. So those were some of the other issues as well, and then the third piece is the training, how long they were spending at mobilization stations to train, to prepare. Well, we didn't have the resources to train 'em more than two weeks in any given year. So you don't wanna send someone over that's not prepared. So, yes, Love One, (unclear) they're gonna stay there because I need to know that they are trained, you know, so that they can come back to you whole. So those were some of the top three issues. But taking it at surface value, you know, it was a, it was a mess. It was a "hot mess" as they like to say, but you need to delve into the whys. Speaker 1: So, I think you alluded to this earlier too, that the U.S. had never, the U.S. government had never gone as deep into the reserves as it did during the Iraq conflict? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: So reserves were finding themselves overseas in war, maybe for the first time since when, I mean-- Speaker 2: There were--reserve soldiers were deployed in Vietnam [War] as well, but, but you also had a draft during Vietnam, okay, whereas global war on terrorism, there was no draft. The extra soldiers that were needed came from the Individual Ready Reserve, who quite frankly, remember when I, as I stated, they're, you know, when you join the Army, enlist in the Army, you have a eight-year, mandatory, statutory obligation. So someone could have been in active component, let's say three years. But the last time they touched a weapon might have been three years 'cause they haven't met that eight-year mark. So you're pulling out of that population as well. So there's a, again, a lot of different dynamics to the Reserve, the larger population or the population of the reserves had grown exponentially since, you know, the Vietnam War, it was different. You could go into the Army during the Vietnam War and say, I wanna be active. I wanna be Reserve, I wanna be [National] Guard, you know. This time, we pulled, you know--or you were drafted. No, we didn't draft anybody for the global war on terror. We pulled from our own reserves, "reserves," henceforth, the word "reserves." So we were used in a different capacity, you know. You didn't have to start from scratch, but you did have to start some serious retraining for this war. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36119 Speaker 1: Now, so 2003, you're honored with the Meritorious Service Award by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And so, you get recognition for good work. 2004, now that's--I think I was asking you before we got started, about Hurricane Katrina. Now, you had a role to play in that conflict, the U.S. Army had a role to play. Speaker 2: U.S. Army, Army, Army Reserve and [National] Guard. And, the, you know, of course the media, you know, latched on General [Russel L.] Honore [also a HistoryMaker] who's a phenomenal individual and with much respect when he said, put down the weapons and stop, you know, pointing 'em at the civilians. But unfortunately, a lot of the first ones in there were active component that didn't have a lot of dealings with the private sector, quite frankly. Reserve and Guard members are more sensitive, and Guard even more so. The National Guard is a state agency--it belongs to the governor unless they are mobilized by federal order. So that's something that the National Guard was a little bit better at than the active component, you know. Active component, they know wars and go to that in-home, that type of environment, was not--most who were used for special operations soldier civil affairs were used to it. You know, my role was to make sure our soldiers got there. My role was to make sure that they had everything that they needed, period. My role also was to keep all the other command sergeant majors in the Army Reserve out of New Orleans [Louisiana], who just wanted to go 'cause ten of my soldiers are there. Well, they don't need anybody else down there, you know. That was also another role to play. And, to watch and understand, did we do this the best way? Did we tap or do, which units should be send? Do we need to mobilize all these units? No, we don't. What type of units do we need? What type of units do we have in the Reserve that can enhance this mission? Water purification, medical units, logistics, you know, all the--that came from our, that was my role in Katrina, was to determine what the Army Reserve, to help determine--not the sole person, by no means, but help determine what assets do we have in the Army Reserve, that we need to send to Katrina. And me coming from Special Operations Command, knowing humanitarian assistance and all kinds of natural disaster, having that kind of background, this was very easy for me to very quickly identify the types of units and the things that needed to be done. Speaker 1: Okay, any, you know, referring back to the General Russel Honore's command to the soldiers to put their--to take their guns, you know, untrain their guns from the civilian population, do you see, are you saying that those units were the regular Army, I mean the-- Speaker 2: Active component. Most of 'em were. I can't say all of 'em were 'cause I was not on the ground. But what I can say is that, it's a different mindset. You know, first of all, if you've never been in a situation where you have desperate people in a non-war type situation, and you have people coming at you. And you're a soldier, you know, you're gonna raise your weapon up, okay. And your commander may even tell you to do it because he or she does not understand that dynamic either. And so I, we're trained to protect person and property. So, you know, I don't want it to be misunderstood that they, you know, just wanted to shoot all these people, but you go back to what you know, your automatic instinct to protect each other and so forth and so on. But, most of those that pulled up, unless they had been given an order to raise up their weapons, which I don't, I don't think they did. But, again, I was not on the ground. But General Honore would understand the sensitivity of that, particularly, because General Honore had been in, at First Army, which the mission was military support to civil authorities. He knew, plus he knows Louisiana. He knows what it is to do those type of military support to civil authority missions. He had that background. So cool head prevailed. The worst thing that could have happened was one of the military people to shoot a civilian. It would have just been--I don't even wanna think about what it would have looked like on the ground and in the media. Story_ID: 36120 Speaker 1: Okay, now, 2007, you actually retired and, but--from the military [U.S. Army], and you also founded The Bones Theory Group-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right, LLC. Now, this is a motivational leadership training and professional development organization. Did this grow out of your speaking engagements with the-- Speaker 2: It actually did. And all those pieces, you know, the primary two at the beginning, because I'm testing the waters, was the motivational, slash, transformational speaking and the leadership workshops. Leadership's not just for people and executives but also for parents being leaders in their own home. So it did. I met Coach Herman Boone, the real coach Herman Boone from the movie 'Remember the Titans'. I was speaking at an event when I was in uniform, and he came up to me afterwards, and told me, you need to do this for real when you retire. He didn't have a dog in a fight or anything. He had no reason to tell me that. But he really watered the seed that other people had said, and he became a mentor to me as well. And so I stepped out on faith and started the Bones Theory. Speaker 1: Now, what is it? It's an interesting name, The Bones Theory. Now, what is the bones theory, and-- Speaker 2: I'll, I'll do a little-- Speaker 1: --what's the origin of that, what's the story behind that name? Speaker 2: The story behind it, it starts military. It starts being a non-commissioned officer. We have a creed. It's "No one is more professional than I," the non-commissioned officers. "I am the backbone of the United States Army." Backbone is the first bone. Backbone is having the courage to stand up and do what's right, having the courage to say you need help, we need help, having the courage of the backbone to go against the tide when the tide is going the wrong way and other areas of courage. The first bone is Backbone. The second bone is Wishbone, believing and hoping and knowing it's possible. And in the Army, there's a lot of situations that you're in that you don't know whether or not you, as an individual, can do it or your group, your team. But knowing and hoping and believing it's possible, you couldn't have told me I would have jumped out of a plane, you know (laughter), a lot of different things. But if you don't believe it and hope and know that it's possible, then you give up and you die. And so it's wishbone. The third bone is--this is for all the negative people, the "haters," as the kids say, drinking "haterade" every day. You know, instead of getting mad, instead of getting even, you know, laugh and let it go, funny bone. Your greatest revenge is your success. So laugh all the way to your success. And then the fourth bone is nothing, nothing happens positive if you don't get off your tailbone and make it happen. You can talk about it all day, and Lord knows, in the Army, we have all kinds of meetings and task force, and this kind of group. But nothing happens if you don't get off your tailbone. It is my leadership philosophy. It's my life philosophy. It's in everything that I do. And the beauty of the bones is that whether you've 5, 50, 15 and 105, no matter what kind of organization, no matter what, I can tailor those bones to that specific circumstance. And people get it. It's very simple, but it's very powerful. And it was--each bone was something happened in my military career that made me think of that. And so as I evolved as a person, and I was saying these things and trying to make it easy to remember, I put all my bones together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, that's it. The only thing I gotta make sure people don't think of neck bone and hambone (laughter). But that's the bones theory. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now, was there any special reason why you retired in 2007? I mean-- Speaker 2: I was tired. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Twenty-five years, there comes a point when, you know, you need to move out the way so somebody else can move up. You really do, you really do. Story_ID: 36121 Speaker 1: So one of the other things that The Bone Theory Group [LLC; founded by Jones] does is tutor businesses on recruiting and hiring veterans, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. That's a new piece that starts--it started actually after this year, 2013, I re-launched The Bones Theory company. And it's out of a need. The need is a lot of private sector come--the government cannot--the federal government cannot hire all the veterans that are coming out and will be coming out in the next five years, approximately one million that will be coming out. Private sector has to step up to the plate. They have stepped up to the plate. But, unfortunately, they don't know there's a lot of myths and misconceptions and stereotypes and things, and how do we get veterans? You know, well, what veterans are you trying to get? You know, what age group? What dynamic, all these different things, and are you looking at all the veterans, every ethnicity, all these different dynamics. So how do you recruit the veterans, okay. Number two, you know, how--you know, when you interview them, all those different things, what questions are you asking? You look at a resume from a military person, and you're like, what the heck does this mean, you know, especially, if you've never been in or if you were in another branch. So helping them to do that piece. The other, so they can be hired, to ask the right questions during the interview process, to learn the body language, quite frankly, you know. I sit very erect. That's my mom [Doris Herndon Jones] and the fact that I was in the military. You know, if I go into an interview, I may sit like--I'm going to sit like this if I'm a veteran, nine times out of ten. And the interviewer may say, "relax," and I'll say, okay, I am 'cause this is relaxed to me. But it could be off-putting to someone, not understanding that that's our culture, you know. So you explain those different dynamics, body language, you know, reads a lot. And it's, so you're comfortable here, but the person interviewing is not because they think that--you're making them uneasy, but you don't even know it. So understanding those differences. And then the last piece, is retaining the veteran. You went through all this to recruit, all this to hire them, and then your company has a culture that's not welcoming, you know. And so how do you educate your employees, the other team members, you know, with veteran, particularly, wounded warriors, okay. They may have a dog with 'em because of whatever reason, could be they're blind, could be they have post-traumatic stress disorder [PTSD]. So once you get 'em there, do you have affinity groups, you know, that welcome, the help that they can go to? Do you have a mentoring program, veteran-on-veteran? You know, these kind of things, so those are the things that I do, that we do as part of The Bones Theory. It's a call, it's a call from our president [President Barack Obama] for private sector, you know, to step up to the challenge. And it's me, as a retired command sergeant major, as a veteran, how can I use my God-given talents, you know, my opportunities that I've been given, to help those to continue to help my colleagues or my comrades, I should say. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36122 Speaker 1: Now, in 2008, you were invited to speak at the 2008 Democratic National Convention, right? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: How did that go? What-- Speaker 2: It was wonderful. Forty-five second clip. How I got to that point, I was asked, I received a call, asked if I was pro-Obama [President Barack Obama], and I said, yes, I was. They asked me, the next call came, "Are you the Command Sergeant Major Michele S. Jones?" I'm like, yes, I am. And so I was vetted and I was asked to be a surrogate speaker. So before the Democratic National Convention, I actually was on the campaign trail, speaking, talking about all the things that then-Senator Obama and Mrs. [Michelle] Obama had done for veterans and military families in the State of Illinois. And I knew, firsthand, because I was in Illinois quite a bit because of the reserve [U.S. Army Reserve] soldiers that had been mobilized and deployed and knew what they were doing in that state. And then I received an invitation from the committee, and I received a call first. And it said (unclear), you gotta go to your email, gotta go to your email. And I'm like, okay, and so my email. Well, they want you to speak. I'm like, they want me to speak where? You know, and he said, at the Democratic National Convention. I said, like you've got to be kidding me. First of all, being a surrogate speaker, who in the world would have thought because of my military career and because of my character that I would be asked to be a surrogate speaker for a potential President of the United States? Never in a million years. And then to be asked to speak, and I'm, I'm thinking, okay, all right, (unclear), some one o'clock in the afternoon event (laughter), you know, this is what my mind because you don't envision, you don't--you can't even imagine. And so when I got the letter, and it said, you know, you are invited to--you are invited as a special guest to the Democratic National Convention. I'm like, oh, my gosh, and oh, by the way, you know, to speak. And oh, by the way, at, I think it was six o'clock--. Story_ID: 36123 Speaker 1: And then, and it's six o'clock [invitation to speak at the 2008 Democratic National Convention], and the--six [o' clock], between six [o' clock] and seven [o' clock], which is primetime, East Coast time. And I, I could not believe it. I could not believe it. It was surreal. And so they flew me to Denver [Colorado], and I did speak at events during the day, did media events, but the night, I spoke two hours, I spoke two hours before former President Bill Clinton and right before, was it Madeleine Albright [former U.S. Secretary of State]? I think it was. And I remember walking out thinking, this is real, I mean they had me in makeup and all that, you know, and I'm seeing all these celebrities back stage. I'm like, oh, my gosh, you know, and at first I had to think of what I was gonna wear, you know, 'cause I didn't wanna look too conservative. I didn't wanna, I didn't wear--I didn't want to wear gray. I didn't want to wear Navy [blue]. I wanted to look like a command sergeant major that happened to be woman, that had retired from the military that looked like she knew what she was talking about. I wanted to command an audience for who I felt, in my heart, was gonna be the next president. I wanted them to know what I knew about this man and, and Mrs. Obama. And so, and I was okay, but everyone goes through rehearsal prior to. And so I delivered my remarks, which I wrote myself. They checked them, made sure, and I was standing at the podium, and I was like this. And so they asked me, said perfect, except for one thing. They said, do you speak with your hands? I said, normally, I do. They said, we can tell because you look really awkward, (unclear) (laughter). Okay, okay, so I did it again, and so they were like, "perfect," two takes, that was it. And so the night of the, that Wednesday, it was Wednesday night at the Convention, I'm in makeup, and I'm, I go out--oh, before that, I'm sorry, let me go back to the rehearsal. They said, now, I want you to remember that it's not, you know, it's about, you know, 60,000, 80,000 people, but that's not who you're really talking to. You're talking to the millions that are watching. That's when it hit me, you know, as the kids go, OMG, you know. And go out there the next night, and I picked an eggplant suit, and I know, it's like, too many details, but eggplant, 'cause it looked good on camera. I didn't know that at the time, had a kind of subdued shirt underneath, and pearls because I wanted my daughters [Brittney, Toya and Naiya] to know, you know, every time I touch my pearls, it was, you know, one was for them, and so I remember walking out, and my first thought was, "don't trip" because (laughter), you know, this is live. And I, I go out, and it's, largest, you know, jumbotron ever that's right in front of you, and I used it, but I didn't, I didn't have to because everything was--one, I had written it myself, number two, it what I believed in, but being in front of that, and you do get nervous, and you make sure you, you know, keep on space, place and time and deliver it in a way because this person could be the next president, you know. But the amazing thing or the thing that is most humbling is that they've asked you, a former command sergeant major, you know, in the [U.S.] Army to deliver the speech, and then you think about it, you think about that, but you also say, I have tens of thousands of soldiers that know me out there. And what I'm getting ready to say can influence them. So it's my credibility on the line too, you know, and if you don't feel this a 100 percent, then don't do it, you know. I had to ask myself and make sure that it was a 100 percent with everything that I said, and that's why I had to write my own speech. It was what Michele S. Jones believed, truly believed. They were my words, and so it made it very easy, but it's still very surreal to this day. I still can't believe it. I did not watch the video for two and a half years after because I was scared--I didn't wanna see myself. (laughter) Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 36124 Speaker 1: All right, in 2009, July until December, 2010, you served as special assistant to the Secretary of Defense and White House liaison? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: What was that? In Veterans Affairs or-- Speaker 2: No, that was actually at [U.S.] Department of Defense. Every, whenever a new president comes in, there's White House liaisons at every federal agency. Our role is to fill all those political positions. Every government agency has political positions, federal agencies, I should say. And Department of Defense has the largest, if not the second largest, I believe it is the largest political appointees. So as a White House liaison, what you do is fill those positions. You, from recommendations--some of them are [U.S.] Senate confirmable positions, which you don't have any say other than making sure those things happen the way that they should and keeping that Senate confirmable informed along the whole process until they're actually, you know, confirmed by the Senate, when they're in a pipeline. The other piece is all the other positions. They're from resumes that may come directly from the White House to people that you know, for certain positions within that administration. You have a very short timeline to get those positions in. In addition to that--and each, that's the primary for all White House liaisons across the federal agencies. Now, each agency is different. How they use their White House liaisons in different ways. For example, all the, any, what we call HQEs, highly qualified experts, all those recommendations and packets came through my office. All those boards and commissions that the Department of Defense have FACAs [Federal Advisory Committee Act] as we say, Federal Advisory Councils, etc., all those recommendations for members come in, are approved by the Secretary of Defense. And in my case, I had to approval authority to sign for members on those various different boards. You know, I wouldn't do it carte blanche. I would always check and double check to see if there was any, you know, 'cause I can't know every person that's being presented. Those are some of the other things. The other piece of that job, until all those political appointees, a good percentage of them had never worked in the Pentagon. A lot of 'em had never been in the military. So you're talking about a whole new--besides being a federal employee, working at the Pentagon, surrounded by, you know, all these five services, Army, Navy, Coast Guard, Marines and the Navy-- Speaker 1: Air Force. Speaker 2: And Air Force, I'm sorry, Air Force. You know, so helping the politicals to transition into federal employment, the Pentagon, the military, the whole--I became, you know, my office and my team, the team, we were that sanctuary for politicals to come to when they didn't understand any of the questions, etc. The perfect fit for me was the fact that I was in the military. My last assignment was at the Pentagon. I knew that world. You know, I knew that arena. I had worked at the Department of the Army level and DoD [Department of Defense]. So it was a good fit for me to come onboard as a political to help do that. For the Secretary of Defense, that's what the special assistant, White House liaison does for the Secretary of Defense. That person is the secretary's right-hand man and woman in making sure those things run smooth, period, and walk--going around as always, speaking, you know, on, not just on behalf of the administration and all the things that the administration were doing, all kinds of entities, within Department of Defense and around. Second position--I'm sorry, I was rolling on. Is that okay? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that's fine, I mean, yeah. Speaker 2: It was a great assignment. It was the first one, never had an African American in that position. So that was interesting. I didn't know that until then. So. Speaker 1: Now, your name was in the new in connection to the, to-- Speaker 2: Those people? Speaker 1: Those people, yeah, the Salahis, the (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Those people (laughter). Speaker 1: They crashed a White House event. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So what was that about? Speaker 2: I will say this because I've never spoken of it on record or publicly. The only thing that I will say about this, I did release one statement via the White House, through the White House. And that's all I'm gonna say now, and the reason that I say it is not because of any negative reason or anything hidden. It's more out of respect for the fact that President [Barack] Obama is still in the White House, and I don't want anything at any given time to--the story needs to die away. It can be talked about at a later time as a lesson, and way of how do you get through something like that when your name is, and your credibility is being questioned on a national or international level. And I will say this, and God is amazing, number one, and staying true to who you are at all times, will save you in the end. It really will and never being shady, you know. Don't work in a gray area, and if you've always been like that, it's, it's easy to come through it unscathed. And that's the only thing I'll say on that. You know, four years from now, you know, I'll go into more detail, but for now, that's the best part. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36125 Speaker 1: Now, in December '10 [2010], you served as special assistant and senior advisor to both the Under Secretary of Defense and the principal deputy to the Under Secretary of Defense in terms of Personnel and Readiness, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And basically, senior advisor, the Under Secretary of Defense, Personnel and Readiness, he was a former [U.S.] Marine officer general, and he understood the dynamics of sergeant majors, command sergeant majors and commanders in that the largest percentage of the force was enlisted. And that's when the tide really started turning about what do we need to do in the military to prepare our men and women that are transitioning out? What do we need to do inside our walls before they leave, if you will, in preparation to go into the private community or to get out of the military? So what Dr. [Clifford] Stanley [also a HistoryMaker] wanted to do was have someone that knew that world and knew that role and that could help him to develop programs and be his advisor on those things. And that's primarily one of the things that I did. And the other piece to that was to, you know, look at organizational effectiveness and strategic ways to go about to either do things better within the military and-or, you know, how to execute better these programs that we have. So as an advisor, senior advisor, you advise on everything. What is your take on these things that we wanna do? The way, where we wanna go? You know, what do you know, or how the impact will be on the enlisted person as well as their families. So senior advisor does many different things, but the biggest piece is advising, once you look at all the pieces, you know. And it's another ears on and eyes on and another way to look at things. So it was very interesting. I enjoyed--it was different. As a senior advisor, as the title, so to speak, and that was my function. It was the first time, and Dr. Stanley was very easy to work with. He understood that and respected, you know, all the things that were brought to him from me and my perspective. He really listened, which was great. But I always had, you know, what I call the B and W to back it up to the black and white. So it was good. Story_ID: 36126 Speaker 1: One of the major decisions that President [Barack] Obama had to make was in regards to "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" [policy]. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And did you play any role in that decision making? Speaker 2: The only role that I played in that, not officially, but I was asked, you know, multiple entities, if you would, what did, based on my military experience, what did I think the impact would be on repealing that? And I'll say it now, and I'll--I've always said it. You know, what someone's sexual orientation is, it's, that's their choice. It's, you know, whatever they do behind closed doors or holding hands down the street, it doesn't matter. As long as they're executing as a soldier, I don't care who they love or who loves them, quite frankly. I've always felt that. There's always been gay and lesbians in the military, always, you know. So what is the, you know, why not, why not? And for those, I mean and honestly, it was more males than females. You know, guys would say things, and I'd have to say, "Well, he's gonna be looking at me." What makes you think he's gonna be looking at you? Women don't even look at you. You're not attractive, (laughter) and so, you know, what's the big deal? But, you know, so I'm very glad because if you're an American citizen, and you wanna serve this country, you know what? So what. As long as you can pass the test, basic training, your individual, you know, training, I don't care what your sexual orientation or preference is, I don't. Speaker 1: Now, you're in touch with the rank and file, I mean officially, you've been in touch with the rank and file. Does the rank and file have, what do they think? Is there--can you generalize how the soldiers feel about-- Speaker 2: The majority of the soldiers feel the same way. You know, they, they don't care. They really don't. You know, can you do what you need to do when we need to do it? Yes. Now, is there a population that is against--yes, just like in American society. There's a population against everything, population against women in the military, population against blacks in the military, population, population. Those people that have their own biases, yes. They do. And they're in the military too, but they're not the majority. They're not the majority, and, and I'll just say, if you look at, since the repealing of "Don't Ask, Don't Tell," how many stories have you heard about? There hasn't been this, "I'm getting out of the military because--", you haven't. You know, have there been isolated incidents? Yes. But there were isolated incidents before. So, the masses, majorities, most don't really care, you know, they really don't. The average soldier is like, I'm over it, just, you know, do your job, period. Speaker 1: Okay, now, in--is there anything else from this period that we need to talk about before I go to 2012? Speaker 2: Not really, other than it--you know, I would say, no. Story_ID: 36127 Speaker 1: Okay, well, 2012, you were appointed by President Barack Obama as the director of External Veterans/Military Affairs and Community Outreach, right? Speaker 2: Yes and no, and I always say Obama Administration because there's a difference between being a political appointee and a presidential appointee. A presidential appointee has to be confirmed by the [U.S.] Senate. I did not need Senate confirmation. But political appointees, we are all of the Obama Administration. In other words, you have to be approved and vetted by presidential personnel office. But it doesn't take Senate confirmation for you to be selected to be in administration. That is different. Three different types of political appointees, Senate confirmable, senior executive, which I was, and Schedule C. And we're all political appointees, but some are presidential appointees. Speaker 1: Okay, so it'd be correct to say that you were appointed by the Barack Obama Administration, President Barack Obama's administration as-- Speaker 2: Yes, the last three actually, from, as the White House Liaison, White House Liaison--special assistant to the Undersecretary of Defense, or special assistant to the Secretary of Defense, White House Liaison; senior advisor position, and the director. All three of those were political appointments under the Obama Administration or appointed under Obama Administration. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's common that, to hold different positions within an administration, to move around as they see fit. Speaker 1: So how did this new appointment change what you-- Speaker 2: It came about with working with Dr. [Clifford] Stanley [also a HistoryMaker]--the Under Secretary [of Defense for Personnel and Readiness], the Department of Defense [DoD] and the, and Office of Personnel Management [OPM] were tasked to develop a program specifically for young veterans coming out of the Military that had minimal or no college education and minimal or no work experience and to find a career field that was, that needed, you know, that was in really dire need of building their population. So a succession plan, if you will. So we look at contract specialists, Specialist first, and so Department of Defense and OPM, and I became the lead advising Dr. Stanley. Subsequently, he left, and so we still have this mission. Well, then I--well, actually, before he left. Let me back up, before he left, I said to Dr. Stanley, it would make sense if I sat at OPM, Office of Personnel Management because they will take this program, once it's developed and they will execute this program. So I'd be there, day-to-day. So I physically sat at Office of Personnel Management and went back to my office at the Pentagon two or three times a week. Subsequently, Dr. Stanley left the administration and then OPM actually offered me, they--rewind--the president sent out a challenge to the private sector to hire a hundred thousand veterans, military family members by the year 2013, '14 [2014]. And OPM was to help the private sector develop programs, training, recruiting, etc. to hire veterans. So they looked and said, who has this experience? Ah, Michele Jones. Henceforth, they created the position to meet the president's challenge, and that's when I went over there. Speaker 1: Okay, so you've been there a year, right? Speaker 2: A year. Speaker 1: Right, okay. And-- Speaker 2: One year exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think a lot of people are concerned about returning veterans and-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --and their mental state, their economic state, their families-- Speaker 2: Their home state, whether they have one, etc. It's true, and that's--the one thing to close that volume out, because that volume is now closed with the administration. My last day was December 31, 2012. There comes a point in time when, you know, you made history, if you will, but more important, you've had opportunities of a lifetime. And it's wonderful being in a secure environment to do, to execute for others, to make things happen. But sometimes you have to walk away to do more. And so that's where I am now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The re-launching of The Bones Theory [LLC; consulting firm founded by Jones in 2007]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Effective 1 January, 2013, Volume No. III or IV, I should say, in this thing called "life." So. Story_ID: 36128 Speaker 1: So, do you have a, so your goal is to establish, A Bones--The Bones Theory, LLC [consulting firm founded by Jones in 2007]. Speaker 2: It's already established. It was put on pause. Between 2007 and 2009, when I retired before I came and worked for the [President Barack Obama] Administration, I actually started as a motivational speaker, spoke to about 45,000 youth around the country as well as helping families and, like I said, parents to be leaders in our own homes. So The Bones Theory was created back in 2007, actually, and so I put it on pause. When you're a political appointee, you have to be very careful. There're certain rules of ethics, certain things to make sure that you're not using your position in your personal business. So what I decided was to put my business on pause for the sake of serving my country once again in a different capacity. So there would never be any questions whatsoever. So nothing was mixed, and is she here as Bones or is she here, you know, as part of the administration? So, on pause. So it's re-launched. That's the difference. That's, never went away. It's been there, but, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and what are some of your goals with The Bones Theory? Speaker 2: Number One to continue to work with high school students and middle school students, especially in areas that need it, to help to motivate and transform youth into realizing that really, it's their choice, you know, which direction they wanna go, who they wanna be, quite frankly. That's one thing. I'll continue to work with veterans, obviously, to help them in transitioning from the military, and, of course, private sectors to hire them and to teach them, continue the workshops and things of that nature so they can hire as many as they can and keep them, not just a job, but real employment. And also, for the private sector to realize the face of a veteran looks like me, could be Asian, it could be Hispanic, wounded warrior, you know, all different types, twenties, thirties, forties and fifties, sons, daughters, mothers, grandparents in some cases. These are veterans. And so when you talk about the veteran population, what population are you looking for, okay? Are you talking entry level? Are you talking about mid-level, and when you're looking at the senior executives, are you looking at everyone for those positions that qualify? So these are the things that I wanna make sure that my company does for my comrades, my--you know, my sister and brothers in arms still. The other piece is, I'm a motivational speaker, you know, I love it. This is what I do. Other pieces, women empowerment, you know. What does it meant to empower a woman? What does it mean to empower yourself? You know, women are doing phenomenal things, but sometimes, it's best when we work together and talk about it, to help to get to the next level, you know. So it's a lot of different things, can't tell all my secrets right now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But those are the primary ones, to be continued. Story_ID: 36129 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Oh, boy, ooh, let me think. Hopes, Number One, I'm gonna pull out my wishbone on this one, you know, 'cause I do hope and believe and know that it is possible. You know, African American community, as a whole, we've had some great successes, you know. We've got a lot of good stories to tell. One of the things that I see is that too often, those that are successful--and successful can mean a lot of different things, we don't invest back into--enough of us, don't invest back into our community. I could a 10, I could give $10 million to one community, and it could do a lot of things. But that $10 million will never, never do the same thing as investing one thing I can never get back. That's my time. If you give a child, a youth, new notebook, new school book, new clothes, brand new school, and he still doesn't know how to read, it was for nothing. You have to invest the time. And so my hope is that those that are successful in whatever successful may be--it could be successful because they're working for Comcast. They know how to read. They're successful. They may not be on some crazy reality show. They may not be a professional athlete, but they're successful. And they have every much to give in their community, time, as that celebrity that that kid is looking up to, that is not even using their platform to give the one thing they can't give back. So my hope is that those that are successful give the one thing to the African American community that they cannot get back, and that's time and a commitment. Somebody gave it to them. Somebody did, but also in that expansion because I'm a product, and I'm the first to say, I'm African American, but I am the product of my community, my family and all those other cultures too. I am. So don't be afraid, African American community, to reach out to other ethnicities also. We gotta get our stuff together too, but other people can help you. I have mentors that look like me. I have people that have given me an opportunity that look like me, but I have a lot too that don't look like me, and not to be afraid to. So give the time, open the mind, open the doors so those opportunities can continue for those that need it the most, period. Story_ID: 36130 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on your career to this point, is there any major decision that you would go back and undo if you could? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I wouldn't have tried that diet--no, I'm just kidding. Let me think, no, no. None. And I'll tell you why. Everything that has ever happened, good or bad, there's a lesson and a blessing in each and everything, even at my worst, I find the lesson and the blessing in it. It has put me where I am today. It has made me who I am today. Even the bad decisions, nobody died, you know. They may not have been the best, but they were a decision that I made with the information that I had or youth, whatever it may be. But it put me to this spot right now. So, no, I wouldn't undue because making, changing one decision in my past could have had some other major detour now. I don't know. You just don't know where it would have taken you. Sure, if I stayed at Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia], graduated four years later, I don't know where I would be, but I know one thing for sure, if I had stayed at Howard, and I didn't go to the--go in the [U.S.] Army when I did, against everybody else's wishes, I wouldn't be here today. So was it easy? No. Did I have bumps along the way? Yes. You know, was every day a good day? Yeah, but it wasn't a holiday, you know. I've lost friends along the way, but I wouldn't change a decision because it has put me here, you know. This is my life, the one that's been mapped out for me, you know, my beliefs, you know, by God a long time ago. I'm just, you know, I'm just finding out, you know, all the different, you know, doors that are opening, and windows, and I'm peeping in. But, no, I wouldn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36131 Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look back at your career to this point, what do you see today as your legacy? Speaker 2: Wow, a couple of things. One, I get kind of emotional about it, just I'm trying not to cry in the camera. Every position that you're given, everything that you do, especially when you're given the responsibility of other people, and you're put on a platform, it's not about you. It's about what you can do for someone else. Part of my legacy is The Bones [Theory, LLC; consulting company founded by Jones in 2007]. Tens of thousands have heard that, and I know it has helped and inspired, transformed people. That's one. The second thing, if I want people to take anything away--if I died today, I want them to know your individual accomplishments and achievements tells me what you did when you lived. However, the legacy that you leave tells me how you lived, the good that you do goes on exponentially, whether you're here or gone. And I could share it with you, but you, in turn, can share it with two and three and as it goes on and on. So, it's not about you. It's about what you can do for someone else because of the opportunities and blessings that you have received. That's what I hope I leave. Story_ID: 36132 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your family? Now, you have some children that you've raised, right, and, today, well, tell us about them? Speaker 2: My three chocolate chips, as I call 'em, my mamasita, mini-mama, Brittney, Toya, Naiya. They are biologically my second cousins. I've had, my oldest daughter who's now eighteen [years old], since she was two. My middle baby, I've had since she was two. She's eleven, and my baby, baby, I've had her, since she was six months. Like I said, they're family members' children. I refused to let my family go to the system. It wasn't an ideal situation. She wasn't on drugs or anything, just not prepared to be a mom. And so instead of them being put into the system or split up or, you know, I took 'em home, and they're mine. They're my daughters, they're my babies. They are my joy. A lot of people talk about, you know, helping children and (unclear) the state of this and, you know, I'm out speaking to tens of thousands of kids and parents, and, you know. How could I not, how could I walk away and not do anything? Not on my watch, you know. I, they bring me so much joy, good, bad days, you know, teenage days or whatever, but I don't have any biological children. After Daughter One, and definitely Daughter Two, these are my children, and now, Daughter Three. I'm single, which is an interesting dynamic. But I didn't let that stop me. The oldest one is quiet and reserved. The middle one, challenge her, you know, she's the risk taker. And the youngest one is, she's like a little lion. She's a little fireball. But her roar is worst than her bite, for real. They're proud of mom, and I don't know what my life would be like without them, quite frankly, you know. But it is a challenge, being a non-biological parent, especially, when they're within your own family, when you're not the bio-mom. So. Story_ID: 36133 Speaker 1: Now, did your parents [Doris Herndon Jones and Leon Jones], did they see you become a, first sergeant major, command sergeant major? Speaker 2: Yes, my parents have been there the whole journey. They're still here, they're still with me. I'm a daddy's girl. My dad is, my dad (laughter), he's embarrassing sometimes because he, he just, you know, he tells people everything. And, and, you know, I just, dad, people get tired of you, you know. He'd say, nah, no, no. And my mom is too. My mom's very proud as well, but she's not as vocal as my dad. But she's very proud. She is the support, she is the reason that I could, you know, take care of my daughters [Brittney, Toya and Naiya], period. She supported me in the decision to take custody of all three. And so did my dad, but my mother is the rock behind that. And, but they're very proud. My brother [Michael Jones] is very proud as well. And they're staunch supporters. They always have been, even when they didn't agree with my decision, they supported me. So they've seen it all, you know. They've been at every last event, every event, significant event in my life, both my parents have always been there, from pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to now. They've flown all over the world to see me get promoted, you know, see me speak. I've been so blessed with my parents, I really have. And my grandparents, before they passed, same thing, you know. So, very, very few things bring me to tears, but the love of my parents, that's what you call unconditional love. It really is, so--. Story_ID: 36134 Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to cover before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: There's one thing. You know, I know this is history, HistoryMakers, and no one in history makes it by themselves, you know, family, but friends too or colleagues at work, colleagues and, or on your team. And they support you too, you know. They're along with you. No one gets to where they are by themselves, ever. And so in my rise, if you will, there's always been someone in my corner, loyal as a soldier, and as a friend. There're several, but you know, and I say this because it's important to me, when someone takes, is given such a horrid or receives such horrid treatment because they support, and they, their loyalty, their friendship is never questioned or never waivers, I should say, that is something that every person, I believe, that has ever made history, if you will, has had that person that has always been in their corner (unclear), that doesn't have to be family typically, you know, they're gonna. So I've had several, and I have to say--we talked about different family members' names, but I have one friend in particular. Her name's Janet Miller. She took a lot of hits being a friend, being loyal, you know, and when I brought her on my team in 2005, I think it was, okay, she's been with me the whole ride and the whole rise, always has. So that, to me, is part of the journey. If you have someone or people that are loyal and are true to you, you treat 'em well, and let 'em know how much they mean to you. So, I just had to say that piece. That's something I didn't say, important. Story_ID: 36135 Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Maybe I shouldn't say it this way, but I'm gonna say it this way, "That I gave a damn", that I really cared, really cared. Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 36136 Speaker 1: Tell us about this picture. Speaker 2: That is my mother, Doris Herndon Jones. That's her high school picture when she was a senior. Speaker 1: That's my grandparents, Magdelene and Earl Harris. Speaker 2: About what year is this, you think? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: About what year is this? Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry, oh. I think it was somewhere in the 1940s, I think (laughter). I'm not sure. Speaker 2: That was me as a Baltimore Cheer--Colts cheerleader, 1978. Speaker 1: That's my senior portrait done in the summer of 1980. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me in fifth grade (laughter). Speaker 1: That is me at my junior prom with Donovan Brown. Speaker 2: That's my father [Leon Jones] and my brother, Michael, when he was a toddler. Speaker 1: That's my mother in high school with two friends of hers. Speaker 2: Do you know their names? Speaker 1: Huh, do I know her age? Speaker 2: No, the names of the-- Speaker 1: No, I know they're doctors now. Speaker 2: My grandmother and I, 1968, February 1968. Speaker 1: This is my mother some time in 19--late 1960s. Speaker 2: That's my father in 1962. Speaker 1: That's my birthday party when I was ten years old with--do you need all the names there? Speaker 2: If you can, do it fast. We won't, if you wanna do it, we can (unclear)-- Speaker 1: My brother, Michael Jones, and myself at my high school graduation. Speaker 2: My brother, Michael, and I at a New Year's gala. Speaker 1: That's me as a sophomore in high school. Speaker 2: Three friends of mine in high school and college. Speaker 1: As a young specialist, Fort Carson [Colorado], 1984. Speaker 2: Fort Carson, 1984, my 21st birthday. Speaker 1: That was the welcome home sign when I came back from birth, basic training, basic training (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh, that was me as a freshman going to a senior prom in 1978. Speaker 1: My parents, Leon and Doris Jones with a fro [Afro] and sideburns. Speaker 2: That's me going to my high school prom. Speaker 1: Freshman year at Howard University, with my roommate, Carla Taylor from Tennessee. Speaker 2: This is my brother's graduation from University of Maryland. Speaker 1: My brother and I on my way to Honduras. Speaker 2: Bubba's Babes, Sergeant Major Academy, females, 25-mile baton death march. We came in first. Speaker 1: That's me, my mother--my mother's sister took that, testing her photography. Speaker 2: After the baton death march, I was still alive (laughter). Speaker 1: My grandmother, Fedora Brooks. Speaker 2: (Unclear) and who are the other people? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry. And my, her three nephews, my cousins, the last surviving boys, Herndon boys. Speaker 2: Me embarking on my military jet. Speaker 1: Aren't they a singing group-- Speaker 2: The "What Not's." Speaker 1: They were called the "What Not's." Speaker 2: The What Not's. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: Okay, that's my graduation from Fayetteville State University, and one of my close friends and her children. Speaker 2: This is my dad in the [U.S.] Army, somewhere in 1961, I'm assuming. Speaker 1: Family Thanksgiving dinner, when I was still in high school, I think. Speaker 2: With one of my fellow sergeant majors in Hawaii. Speaker 1: From a helicopter overlooking--I'm not sure, was I in Hawaii? I think I was in Hawaii. Speaker 2: Talking to a solider at Fort Stewart [Georgia], Third Infantry division. Speaker 1: Hugging my dad after graduation from Fayetteville State University. Speaker 2: Doing paperwork somewhere in the Army (laughter). Speaker 1: As I was being sworn in as the 9th Command Sergeant Major of the Army Reserve, my parents and my oldest daughter [Brittney], holding the bible. Speaker 2: Me, with my first Godson, Justin Lockhart (ph.). Speaker 1: My crew of friends at Fort Bragg, North Carolina. Speaker 2: Holding one of my soldier's babies when I was a young staff sergeant. Speaker 1: My brother posing on rocks. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: These are my two grandmothers actually. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): So from left to right. Speaker 1: Yes, Magdelene Harris and Fedora Brooks, my two grandmothers and friend. It's Odessa (unclear). Speaker 2: My congratulations, been selected for First Sergeant. Speaker 1: At a K-9 training facility in Kosovo. Speaker 2: Speaking at the Miami [Florida] or Dade County Police conference, training conference. Speaker 1: Talking with the former Secretary of the Army, Dr. Harvey. Speaker 2: In a helicopter in Bosnia, with Command Sergeant Major Nick Piacentini (ph.). Speaker 1: I knew you were gonna find that one (laughter). Speaker 2: In Kosovo with Germany soldiers, oh, Bosnia, that was Bosnia, I'm sorry, Bosnia. Speaker 1: That's for Christmas. Speaker 2: That was for Christmas, yes. Speaker 1: In Anaconda, Iraq. Speaker 2: Fort Benning, Georgia, Delta company, Airborne School. Speaker 1: Catering Laurie and Israel's wedding at the Sergeant Majors Academy. Speaker 2: In Japan, visiting soldiers. I was doing the cultural experience then though. Speaker 1: Sergeant Major Academy, 1998. Speaker 2: Visiting the Sergeant Majors Academy. Speaker 1: And that's the other sergeant, there's another (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Sergeant Major, um-hum. Speaker 1: At my Command Sergeant Major, division Command Sergeant Major, change of responsibility ceremony, as I was COMING IN. Speaker 2: Good friend, Tanya, mother of second Godson (laughter), I've got eight. Speaker 1: The Herndon men. Speaker 2: My mother, Doris Jones, with her brother, Sonny and two sisters. Speaker 1: Just came in from Honduras with family. Speaker 2: Sergeant Majors Academy with fellow classmate. Speaker 1: Close friend, best friend's wedding. I'm a bridesmaid as always (laughter). Speaker 2: And you are? Speaker 1: Right here, um-hum, sorry. Speaker 2: Surprising the Sergeant Major of the Army on his birthday, February 19th. Speaker 1: My second softball team. Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, doing a push-up and competing in a soldier of the year competition. Speaker 1: Taking the test for the Soldier of the Year competition (laughter), at least I think it is anyway. Speaker 2: Did you win? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Doing a radio show in Honduras, Camp Powder Horn. Speaker 1: All the females, Class 48, Sergeants Major Academy. Yeah, so actually, I could have counted them, but I'd say about 25, about 25. Those were all the females in my class out of 300 and some odd students. I think you've got all the information on that one (laughter). Speaker 2: Visit to Seoul Ukiah, NCO Association in Korea, 2003. Speaker 1: Meeting and speaking with Hillary Clinton, Caucus breakfast. Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, what grade was I in on that one? Seventh grade, no, that was eighth grade. No, that was the flip. Maybe that was eighth grade. (laughter) I can't remember. Speaker 1: 'Up the Down Staircase', high school play. Speaker 2: Speaking at social security administration, Memorial Day, Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 1: General LaPorte, General of Korea, United States, that's such a long, I probably shouldn't have said--Eighth Army, Joint Forces, got like ten letters, I can't remember all of them. Speaker 2: Mom and dad, Doris Jones and Leon Jones at Military Ball, 1962, in the middle. Speaker 1: The official photo. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Is that the current one? Speaker 1: Um-hum, that was the last one, yeah. Speaker 2: Army ten-miler. Speaker 1: You're succeeding George Patton? Speaker 2: I'm sorry? Speaker 1: Succeeding George Patton? Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely (laughter). That's the original desk too. That thing is huge and heavy. Speaker 1: Presenting my coin. Speaker 2: That's in Hawaii. Their responsibilities are to find all remains around the world and bring 'em home. Speaker 1: With the Sergeant Major of New Zealand. Speaker 2: Proud papa. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 2: At the White House. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: You're welcome..