 Story_ID: 649132 Speaker 1: We'll start by slating. I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Today is January 20th, 2017. Would you please say and spell your name? Tell us your birthdate and what you do. Speaker 2: I am [HistoryMaker] Margo Jefferson: M-A-R-G-O, J-E-F-F-E-R-S-O-N. I was born October 17th, 1947; and I am a writer and teacher. Story_ID: 649133 Speaker 1: So, we start with what we call People magazine type questions (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter). Speaker 1: Quick and easy. What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: Sh- various shades of green. Speaker 1: Food? Speaker 2: Desserts. Speaker 1: Anything particular? Speaker 2: I love chocolate. Speaker 1: Time of year? Speaker 2: Spring and fall. Speaker 1: Vacation destination? Speaker 2: Doesn't matter, according to mood-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --strictly according to mood. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite saying or phrase? Speaker 2: You know, I don't. And that's probably because since I'm a writer, you know, different, different, different expressions attract me at different times. I remember when I was in my--it must have been in the '70s [1970s], I was very, I was listening to a lot of Fats Waller, so I was always saying, "One never knows, do one?" (Laughter) You know when he says (unclear). I left that, I left that alone after a while (laughter) but, you know, I go through those little obsessions. Speaker 1: Good. Story_ID: 649134 Speaker 1: Now, we'll talk about your family history. And we'll go on both sides, but start with your mother: if you'd tell me her name, when and where she was born, and about her. Speaker 2: My mother was born Irma James Armstrong. Speaker 1: Is that an I or an E? Speaker 2: I-R-M-A. She became Irma Armstrong Jefferson. She was born in Lafayette, Indiana. Her--and then, they traveled very shortly after back to Holly Springs, Mississippi, where her mother's family was. She was in Indiana when born because her father, my grandfather was, he'd been taking courses at Purdue [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana]. And he was going to install some engineering systems at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], but he died in the 1918 flu epidemic. My mother was born in 1916. So, she and her mother, who had taught school in Mississippi, but see, I think, already had some dressmaking skills. They moved to St. Louis [Missouri] becau- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, what was, what was your, what was her father's name? Speaker 2: His was, oh, he was Jame- wait a minute, wait, wait, wait, wait, he was James McClendon [sic.], yeah. Speaker 1: McClendon, and-- Speaker 2: Her father was James Mc- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: No, her father--I'm sorry, I think he was William McClendon [ph.] and--Armstrong, her husband's father was James Arm- Armstrong, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And her mother was, what was her name? Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay, but her mother moved at--how many children (unclear)? Speaker 2: There were thirteen children. Now, so, a, a number--apparently, here is the situation. The McClendons had land, and a general store, kind of like in (laughter) Hurston's [Zora Neale Hurston] 'Their Eyes Were Watching God,' in Holly Springs. But at one point, they were clearly thinking about better opportunities. They thought about moving further north, not fully north, because they, a number of them bought property in St. Louis. Now, my-- Speaker 1: Do you know why they chose St. Louis? Speaker 2: I actually do not, no, no; but my fa- grandfather Armstrong [James Armstrong], whom Lillian McClendon [Lillian McClendon Armstrong] married, his family had come from Kentucky to St. Louis. So, the families became friendly acquaintances there. And once my grandfather died, Lillian Armstrong--well, McClendon Armstrong moved with her daughter, Irma; and made sure to settle in St. Louis because there was family support there for a young widow and her young daughter, you know, uncles, aunts on both sides. Speaker 1: And Irma-- Speaker 2: That's my mother. Speaker 1: --is your mother? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Her (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And she was an only child. Speaker 1: Okay. So, Irma was an only child? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Her-- Speaker 2: Her-- Speaker 1: --father had died young. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Her mother was Lillian. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So, Lillian never remarried? Speaker 2: Lillian did remarry (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lillian remarried in St. Louis, family friend. His name was Walter Saunders [ph.]. And when my mother was about seven, Lillian and Walter Saunders and Irma moved from St. Louis to Chicago [Illinois]. So, my mother really spent most of her life in Chicago, again, more opportunities. And I suspect my grandmother, you know, wanted a new life, not quite so much under the supervision of, you know, people she loved, but they were, you know, her dead husband's mother, and aunt and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, but she moved--the thirteen children were her--? Speaker 2: Those were her brothers and sisters. And a few had died by, in youth, but from, there are a number of them were also in St. Louis. Speaker 1: When you say her brothers and sisters, whose--? Speaker 2: Lillian's-- Speaker 1: Right, Lillian's brothers and sisters (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) brothers and sisters. All, all thirteen had not moved to-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --St. Louis, but a number of them did have property there, so she was really striking out on her own. Story_ID: 649135 Speaker 1: Before we have her move to Chicago [Illinois], just for context because in St. Louis [Missouri], it was both sides of the family who were there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: And she was living--she [Jefferson's maternal grandmother, Lillian McClendon Armstrong] and your mother [Irma Armstrong Jefferson] were living among them? Speaker 2: At one point, they were living with her dead husband's mother and aunt. And I-- Speaker 1: Do you know how young she was? Speaker 2: Well, let me see. She would have been in her twenties. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear) died very young. Speaker 2: She had gone to college in, in Mississippi. Good Lord, why is that, the name of that college that a num- Rust. She'd gone to Rust College in Mississippi [Holly Springs, Mississippi]. So many-- Speaker 1: Prior to getting married? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, college was important in the family-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --from, from a young age? Speaker 2: Yeah. She and her husband--she and my grandfather [James Armstrong] had met, I believe, at Rust, you know, and then he was getting some graduate training at Purdue [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana], so this was important. And she was considered very bright, yeah. I gather he was, too, but, you know, she took pride in that. Speaker 1: Do you know if the generation before her, were people educated? Speaker 2: I do not think so. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: No, no, her mother and father [William McClendon (ph.)] were not college educated, no. Story_ID: 649136 Speaker 1: What did her mother and father do? What was their work (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They have this land, some of which they had gotten from, you know, a white forbearer, you know. So, they had some nice land, and a few people working for them. And they had this store. Speaker 1: How far back -- Speaker 2: This general store (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. How far back can you trace your mother's family? Speaker 2: You know, not nearly as far back as I would like to. I have some researchers working on that now. I have some birth certificate information, but I really can't go, at this point, much further back than grandparents' parents. Speaker 1: And so, when you speak of forbearers, do you actually know who they were--the white forbearers? Speaker 2: The white forbearer was also--god, what's his name? His name must have been McClendon. I'm quite sure it was. And this was in Mississippi (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did they talk about, did they talk about that? Speaker 2: I don't know how much they talked about it. My mother [Irma Armstrong Jefferson] told me about that. In that generation, meaning my mother was born in 1916, that generation and earlier, they could be wary about discussing, you know, white ancestors because, you know, the stain of illegitimacy, or rape, or et cetera was all there. So, I did not hear that probably until I was in college [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: But you knew that there were people who were fair skinned in your family? Speaker 2: We knew we had--yes, absolutely, we knew we had white ancestors. But it was also rather a point, you know, black people have different opinions about this. Actually, some were quite proud, especially if they can claim, you know, descent from some aristocratic white ancestor. I didn't know that any black person ever boast about being descended from, you know, the local overseer okay (laughter), but, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Although that was probably even more (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, very often the case (laughter), that's right. But you kn- I remember, it's actually, I know it's, it's in my book ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson]. My mother would discourage us. She didn't like it when, as she put it, this was in the '50s [1950s], Negroes were always boasting about their white or their Indian [Native American] ancestors. You know, she thought that was a little, lacking a little pride, and maybe a little desperate. So, we knew it and, you know, they weren't prissy, but I did not hear specific stories until I got older. Speaker 1: But you do believe that the land that they had, came through the McClendon family? Speaker 2: Yeah. She did--Mother told me that, yeah. Speaker 1: And you said you can go back to, what, your great-grandparents? Speaker 2: Well, let me see. That would be--well, William McClendon [ph.] would be, all right, let's see, there's Grandma [Lillian McClendon Armstrong]; then there would be her parents. My grandmother's mother, or was it, had been, is this possible, had been a, a child--maybe it was Grandmother, but my mother knew her when slavery ended. Speaker 1: That makes sense. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I once said to my mother because she was blind, this ancient relative, by the time my mother knew her, but she was in St. Louis [Missouri] with them. And I said, "What did she talk like?" And my mother said, "Oh, you know, like the people on 'Roots.'" Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) "Oh, okay." But that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because she knew her? Speaker 2: She didn't--knew her, but, you know, she was a little girl. And this woman was much older, but she did know her, yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: So, that would be a great-grandmother, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yep. Her--I mean that would be my mother's great-grandmother, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Story_ID: 649137 Speaker 1: And education, the fact that your mother, growing up in the South-- Speaker 2: My grandmother. My mother [Irma Armstrong Jefferson] grew up in St. Louis [Missouri] and Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So your grandmother? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right, your grandmother growing up in the South. Your mother moved when she was young, but not before she was educated though, right? Speaker 2: Well, my--no, they moved to St. Louis when my mother was very little. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: So, she was going to grammar school first in St. Louis, and then in Chicago. Speaker 1: Got it. Speaker 2: So, she really was basically educated in Chicago. Speaker 1: And she went to Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: No, my grandmother. Speaker 1: Right, so that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her mother went to Rust College. Speaker 1: I've been confusing it. So I'm, so I'm speaking of the one who went to Rust College, this is your--? Speaker 2: Ah, my grandmother, my maternal grandmother, Lillian [Lillian McClendon Armstrong]. Speaker 1: Your grandmother, who was living in the South? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: So, this really mattered, yes. Speaker 1: And, and it was very early for many people, especially in the South to go to college. Speaker 2: Yes, though it's surprising to--you know there were a lot of these little black colleges [HBCUs], so it, it, it surprises yet moves me, you know, the number rel- still, relatively small, but the number of black parents that got their children to a small black college or to--one of my father's [Ronald Jefferson] cousins went to a kind of boarding school, little black boarding school; it wasn't a college, but it was a boarding school. Speaker 1: In the South? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, though you, this, this, this happened. And then you read about these educators, many of them black women, you know, who were-- Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) starting very small (laughter). But those schools were there. But, yes, you're right. It shows a lot of determination and a lot of ambition. Story_ID: 649138 Speaker 1: And having the general store, that was, the general store was owned by her parents, or by her and her husband? Speaker 2: No, by her parents-- Speaker 1: By her parents. Speaker 2: --by, by Lillian's parents [Jefferson's maternal great-grandparents], yeah. Speaker 1: So, they did, they had--having a general store was a source of livelihood-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --and, and a bigger source of livelihood perhaps than some of the other people in the community. Speaker 2: Yeah. The, then, you would have been, as a black family with, you know, land, and some people working for you, at least a few. And a general store, you would have been, you know, well placed in a small community like that, yeah. Speaker 1: And you've, you, obviously, in, in your book, 'Negroland' ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson], which there's so much in it that goes backwards that, I'm bringing it up, before the time that you wrote it. You talk a lot about, you know, black people's place in society and, and how different families, for many different reasons, had particular place. What would the place be for your grandparents in, in that society (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maternal. Speaker 1: Yes, maternal. Speaker 2: All right. Well, you know, they would have been--it's, it is also interesting because here gender factors. Lillian [Lillian McClendon Armstrong] and her husband, James [James Armstrong], would have been nicely placed in a middle class if he, you know, he had, if he had finished his work at Tu- at Purdue [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana]-- Speaker 1: Purdue. Speaker 2: --you know, then gone to work at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. She had already done some school teaching. Things began to shift, and became more perilous for her when she became a widow. Now, when they moved to Chicago [Illinois], but she was still, you know, taking great care. She divorced the fir- the second husband because she didn't think he was ambitious enough. She began in Chicago as a dressmaker, but she always--so she worked, you know, for well to do white people. But, you know, she always wanted more than that. So, you know, she worked her way into the political system there as a, you know, captain, precinct captain. Then she became one of the-- Speaker 1: In Chicago? Speaker 2: --yeah, one of the first black policewomen in Chicago. And that world was small, this world of the, you know, lower middle class, let's call it. You know, my mother ended up going to grammar school and high school, with all kind- all sorts of people, you know, who became jazz musicians, doctors, lawyers, you know, postal employer- (laughter). The women, of course, all made these, as we used to call them, good marriages. So, you know, they were, and my grandmother was clearly working to secure, you know, to, to make sure of, of a certain stability. I'm not sure where she got the money to invest in real estate, but by the time I came along, she owned two buildings by the-- Speaker 1: In Chicago. Speaker 2: --by the time my sister [Denise Jefferson] and I were born, yes. Speaker 1: What part of Chicago? Speaker 2: South Side, Bronzeville, yep. Speaker 1: And, and this is Irma [Irma Armstrong Jefferson]? Speaker 2: This is Irma's mother, Lillian. Speaker 1: Lilli- Irma is your mother? Speaker 2: Irma is my mother. Speaker 1: Lillian became the policewoman, and Lillian was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Acquired-- Speaker 1: --acquired property? Speaker 2: --property, that's right. Lillian began as a dressmaker, became a policewoman; and then became basically a landlady. Story_ID: 649139 Speaker 1: She was very industrious. Speaker 2: She was very industrious, very smart, very attractive, and very planful. You know, it--and very, very planful for herself and for her daughter. At one point, apparently, she was dating--seeing, as we used to say--a doctor. And he was very nice, as my mother [Irma Armstrong Jefferson] remembers, he had several older daughters by a previous wife, woman who had died. And my grandmother, as my mother tells it, they were seriously thinking of getting married. And she realized, from her dealings with the family, that the two daughters were--older daughters, were quite resentful, and were going to be very difficult. And she decided that for her own sake and my mother's, it was not a good situation to be in. Well, that takes a lot of courage (laughter) for, for a single woman, a divorcee, and a, and a widow, to--. And she was very planful, you know, and so, she saw my mother into a very good education and, you know, a good life. Speaker 1: When she was in Chicago [Illinois], Lillian [Lillian McClendon Armstrong], Lillian's your [maternal] grandmother, yeah? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Where is she fitting into black society in Chicago? Speaker 2: Yeah. She is, you know, this is hard for me to--she's obviously not at the level of, you know, the schoolteachers, the doctors, the lawyers; but, clearly, if she's dating a lawyer--I'm sorry, dating a doctor at one point, clearly she has access to this world. So, again, I think that's because if you carried yourself well, and worked very hard that w- and you were attractive as a woman, this helped. Also, that world was small. You know the world of people of color, of Negroes making their way upward was small. So, even if the parents weren't completely socializing, the children were likely to be doing so in their elementary schools, their high schools. You know, Mother, Mother was a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], you know, all of that, so it all-- Speaker 1: Your mother? Speaker 2: --yeah, it all seemed to have--and, you know, that was, that happens in college [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], so it all seemed to, to go well. Speaker 1: So, the family, through your mother, certainly fully immersed in, in that world? Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, but the, it was certainly a move up, yeah, yep, yep, yep. Speaker 1: What did Lillian look like? Speaker 2: Ah, she was pretty fair with hair that was straighter than mine, but still had waves in it; a kind of severe face. (Laughter) (Unclear) see something you'll understand in terms of all the rituals and obsessions of black women's looks. Her lips were so thin that she had to make her lipstick line bigger. This was actually something that (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Oh yes. Speaker 2: --was passed down to me. Oh, goodness, yeah. She was, she was matronly looking by the time, you know, as, as I remember her, but, you know, she wore, she wore those furs with animal heads on them-- Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Speaker 2: --and very nice suits, you know. And she would wear nice slacks around the house. So, she was, she was attractive, yeah; she had flair. Story_ID: 649140 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father and, and his side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we'll, we'll go back to your mother and do more, but-- Speaker 2: No, no, this is fine (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know--when we go back, but--yeah. Speaker 2: My father's family also--well, they went, going back, they made their way from actually Virginia to Mississippi and-- Speaker 1: And his name? Speaker 2: Jefferson. Speaker 1: His first name? Speaker 2: The first name was, oh, my father's first name is Ronald [Ronald Jefferson]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, and so, now, you're going back--yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And his father was Nelson [Nelson Jefferson]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then, there was an earlier Nelson, but who was the one who made his way from Virginia? I'm sorry, I can't remember his name. That was a few generations before. Speaker 1: And how far back was that? Is that-- Speaker 2: That-- Speaker 1: --like your great-grandfather? Speaker 2: There is a, there is a record of, there actually is a record, it would appear. I want to verify this, but some information has been found tracking. There's a ref- there's a reference to a Jefferson who seems to be an ancestor of ours in the--Jefferson, Thomas re- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, in that family. Okay. Speaker 2: --and (unclear), yeah, in that family. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And is that-- Speaker 2: He shows up in a letter--don't ask. The, the f- Speaker 1: So, you do believe that there's relationship to [President] Thomas Jefferson? Speaker 2: I am told that it, there is, it, that it comes through in our line, the less distinguished brother, Randolph [Randolph Jefferson], is what I've been told. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And, but in terms of actually tracing from generation to generation, you haven't done that? Speaker 2: No, no; I have some material gathered, but I haven't really focused on it. It's still to come, yeah. Speaker 1: So, a Jefferson came from Virginia to where? Speaker 2: To Mississippi, it appears, for reasons that are unclear to me. But, you know, as some historian friends said, there may have been more land available (laughter) by the time they got there and-- Speaker 1: Right. 'Cause going further south-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in, in the early 1900s? When is it? Speaker 2: In the nine- no, in the late 19th century. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --all right, this is where we're talking about. Speaker 2: Yeah, we're talking about the 19th century, yeah. And I do have a book of--that goes back to great- great-grand-? My father's great-grandfather, maybe great-great-grandfather, you know, tracking them down. They're mostly farm people. They're all listed in the census because a lot of them have kind of Indian-y looks, not all of them. But they seem to be listed as mulattos, which is mysterious, but that's what it is. Speaker 1: And is there any tracing directly to the whites or Indians to show this family (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Indians, no. The whites, we've got the Jefferson track, track, but Indians, no, no. That's, that's so much in the realm--I mean, it's real in terms of blacks and Indians, but a lot of it is also mythologized. And I'm told by friends who were doing this kind of tracking that, you know, you have--so many tribes have their names changed, et cetera, that it's, it's really hard to get it right. Speaker 1: Well, when you look at your father's family-- Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: --what do you see? Speaker 2: --what I see is varieties of blacks because, you know, what tribes are we talking about that makes here--what certainly appears to be Indian and, obviously, white. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And, you know, really, literally, in just my father and his siblings, my father is a, is a firm--good firm brown. His eldest brother, Edwin [Edwin Jefferson], basically looks white. The oldest sister, Ruby [Ruby Jefferson], is about my father's color. And Uncle Bernard [Bernard Jefferson], the baby, is almost a teeny bit more beige than white looking Edmond [sic.]--Edwin, sorry--but with kinky hair, so they looked like everything. Speaker 1: (Laughter) And so there are four siblings? Speaker 2: There were four, yeah, yeah. His mother, Eldora [Eldora Jefferson] is about my color. And his father, Nelson, known as Ned, was that nice rich brown with very, you know, kind of--very straight-ish looking hair on the, what appears, again, to look Native American (simultaneous). Story_ID: 649141 Speaker 1: Now, I read in your book ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson] about someone who passed. Which family was that? Speaker 2: That's on my father's side. Speaker 1: That's what I thought I read (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's Cousin Lillian [Lillian Granberry Thompson]--couple of them on that side. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that because either--during this time, and it's just, just for practical purposes, people, some people who looked white did pass, even if it was just to get to work, to have a job. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and some didn't, yeah. Well, my cousin, Lillian, could have passed, and I think occasionally did. And her mother is the one who passed to work for, in Marshall Field's [Marshall Field and Company], but she did not. She lived as a very light skinned woman of color. But their cousin, my father's uncle, Lucious, Eldora's brother, did pass. And a cousin of theirs named John Eddy [ph.] also passed. Speaker 1: Now, is Lucious the one who was the salesman? Speaker 2: Lucious was the salesman-- Speaker 1: Right, so you-- Speaker 2: --and he was-- Speaker 1: --you wrote about him. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Could you tell a bit about him 'cause that's an interesting story? Speaker 2: Yeah. Uncle Lucious, I knew nothing about him until I would have been around nine or ten. My parents [Irma Armstrong Jefferson and Ronald Jefferson] took my sister [Denise Jefferson] and me aside one day to tell us this story we'd never heard because Uncle Lucious was coming to dinner. So, they said, Uncle Lucious had been living, had been passing for white. Now, we knew what this meant, you know, you, we know something about Negro life and history as it was called in those days. But-- Speaker 1: Even though you were very young? Speaker 2: We were young, but you, yeah, yeah. I'm not sure why I knew. Maybe it was because, you know, that world I grew up in had so many people who looked like everything, you know, from Nordic to Sub-Saharan. So, maybe my sister, who was three years older had told me a little about this. I don't remember that I read it yet in anything. In any case, if this was the first time, then it was the first time. But Uncle Lucious, you know, (gesture) we got it. Uncle Lucious came by for dinner, and I found it mesmerizing, not because I'd never seen anyone who looked white, who I knew was a Negro. I had. I'd seen a number of people like that, but because he had lived as a white man, it was, to me very (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For a long period of time? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was to me very disorienting. It was as if he were doubled in front of my eyes. You know, it was like being in a, in a strange ghost story. You know, here was this white man in front of me who, in fact, was not a white man. He was (unclear). Speaker 1: And for how long had he been away from the family, do you know? Speaker 2: I am really not sure. I believe ever since he was a young, you know, a young adult-- Speaker 1: And he's about how old at this point (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for, basically for his entire professional life. Well, he would have been at that point--he retired. Speaker 1: That's why he came home. Speaker 2: That's why he came back into the world, so into the world of Negroland-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --so he would have been in his sixties by then. Speaker 1: And was it his mother who gave him a tongue lashing? Who was that? Speaker 2: No, that was, this was another Chi- sorry, not Chicagoan, another Mississippi cousin. The son of Eldora [Eldora Jefferson]--my grandmother's sister, Bessie. So, there was Uncle Lucious, their brother. Then, there was one of Aunt Bessie's sons, John Edward [ph.], whom they called John Eddy, who had gone to school, either University of Minnesota or Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan]; and then had settled. No, it would have been in Michigan--and, and created a white family there. He had a very good job. I think he was in insurance. He had moved up further than, than Uncle Lucious. He'd had a good life. And when he died, his son somehow got wind of the rumor. We do not know how. I heard this through my father, Bessie's nephew. The two sons, the two white sons, who were trying to find out whether they had a black father (laughter) made their way to their grandmother, my great aunt Bessie's house. And what she said, she did not give anyone a tongue lashing; she did what she knew her son would have wanted. She looked at them and said, "I--," you know, they asked their question, "We're looking, we're trying to track, you know, John Edward." And she said, "I've never heard of that man in my life," (makes sound) and turned them away. So, you know, there's, there's, there are lot of ways to read, to read that; but that's, those are the, those are the bare facts, which sound like myth, don't they? Speaker 1: They do. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 649142 Speaker 1: So, your father's family, you said many of them were farmers? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what about your father [Ronald Jefferson]? Speaker 2: They were near Jackson, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Ah, I see. Speaker 2: Now, what my--well his mother, my grandmother--well, his mother, Eldora [Eldora Jefferson], and father, Nelson [Nelson Jefferson], but the, the real drive, I gather, particular drive was Eldo- Eldora. She had taught school in Mississippi. I have a picture of her. My niece has it right now, but with her little, with her schoolroom. She was also, though, a dressmaker. Her husband, Ned, my-- Speaker 1: So, both grandmothers were dressmakers? Speaker 2: Isn't, yeah, yeah, yeah, them, yeah. And my--her husband, my grandfather, Ned, had his own construction crew, and they built houses. Now, they were forced under rather violent, the threat of violence to leave Mississippi when my father, who was born in 1908, when he was about seven. They were in Coffeeville [Mississippi], a little town not far from Jackson. And, you know, these little towns could be fraught, you know, one day, you'd be playing when you're just a little boy with a little white friend, and then he'd announce to you next year, you know, "You're going to have to call me 'Mister.'" As the family tells it, certain, they've taken certain actions that various townspeople didn't like. Some white boys were chasing my father and his brothers [Edwin Jefferson and Bernard Jefferson], all quite young, home from school. And one of them picked up a rock, and threw it, and cut a little white boy. That was one problem. My aunt, my father's oldest sister, Ruby [Ruby Jefferson], was in school. It may have been one of those little boarding schools, but she came back. And she was helping my grandmother deliver some clothes that she had altered, cleaned, et cetera. And she didn't go around to the back door. She went to the front door. She was cheeking. And, apparently, my grandfather was just very feisty. He drank a little, and a little too much sometimes, and he was resentful, you know, of racial constrictions, and he carried brass knuckles with him sometimes. (Clears throat) In any case, so I'm not sure what his infractions were, but I heard about these others. At one point, he was called down to the general store, after hours, late at--fairly late at night. And he walked into the back, and he had his pistol with him. And group of white men were sitting there. And whoever the leader of that pack was, said, "Well, you know, Ned, there's, you know, your family, you, you've been a little troublesome." And whatever else was said, my grandfather, who was hot tempered, pulled out his pistol. And he said, "Whatever you think you're going to do--," clearly they didn't--I gather (unclear), they didn't have a gun, "I, I can get a couple of you first." And they said, "Oh, Ned, please, you know, this is--we were just talking to you." And he said okay, and he left, and he went home; and left the town that night. I'm told that friends of his, you know, protected the house, just made sure--watched- kept watch. The next day, my father remembers being scared, and under the bed. The next day, one of these townsmen came to the house. And my grandmother, Eldora, said, you know, "No, Ned, Ned is gone." They knew he was going to be--they weren't going to, they wanted to threaten him, they weren't going to lynch him it appears. And it was understood that the family had to get ready and leave also. So, within a few weeks, they did. They had friends in Denver [Colorado], and they went there. Story_ID: 649143 Speaker 1: But a few years after that, they went to Los Angeles [California]--something to do with how, what houses were built from, in Denver [Colorado] was- you know, wasn't the material that my [paternal] grandfather [Nelson Jefferson] was used to using. So, his career, his work wasn't thriving. But just as importantly, you know, (laughter) the oldest sister, Ruby [Ruby Jefferson], had found out correctly that the public school system from elementary school to university was really good in California. And, therefore, all of them, you know, could go to good elementary and high school; and they could all take advantage of USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], which they did; or in the case of Aunt Ruby, Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], so. Speaker 2: So, they went to the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California]? Speaker 1: They went to, they--no, they went to Los Angeles. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I thought you said (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ruby got herself to, to the Bay for Berkeley, but they went to L.A. Speaker 2: Okay. Where, where, in L.A. did they move? Speaker 1: Well, you know, they-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on one second. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, we're back. Speaker 1: Okay. Their first house, for reasons that I don't quite understand, was in, but my father [Ronald Jefferson] described as a modest, you know, respectable, little working class, largely white neighborhood, which they, you know, had enough money to, to be in. But the first (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you remember what time is it? Speaker 1: This would have been--all right, my father was born in 1908, so this would have been around 19--close, we're approaching 1920. Speaker 2: So it's still pretty early to be living in a white neighborhood. Speaker 1: It's pretty--yeah, it is, so there must been a few other families of color there. But, the first night they moved in, someone burned a cross on their lawn (laughter). Hi, hello, we've come from Mississippi, and here we are in L.A. And my grandfather, you know, sat out all night, with his pistol on the front lawn. They also did have to go to court to be able to buy that house, but they did win. Speaker 2: When they left Mississippi-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --were they able to sell that land, or did they have just to give up? Speaker 1: I don't, I don't know. They clearly had--well, no, they made a little money in Denver--some. I--it sounded to me from the way they told the story, as if they just had to leave. Is it possible that some friend helped them sell it? But that's not the sense I had. Speaker 2: And I would imagine that even though it was, it was quite early, there was the thought of the West-- Speaker 1: I think, yeah-- Speaker 2: --was-- Speaker 1: --promising. Speaker 2: --possi- yeah, promise. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, look first, they went to Denver, you know. Speaker 2: So they're heading--they're moving west. Speaker 1: And then, they're moving west, that's right. Speaker 2: And there is this promise of, you know, kind of, part of the American dream-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --that out west is where possibility is. Speaker 1: Spaces, and yeah. Speaker 2: --and that racism would be left in the South. Speaker 1: I'm sure that, you know, it's not-- Speaker 2: So to have a cross burned-- Speaker 1: --so different from, you know, moving up to the Midwest from the South. You have that sense--and so, yes, so to have that cross burn that first night must have been a bitter dose. You know, things, ra- (clears throat) racism, indeed, existed there. And yet, simultaneously, there were more opportunities. It didn't mean you didn't have to fight racism. At one point, my [paternal] grandmother [Eldora Jefferson] had to go to their school, and make sure that they were not automatically slated into the non-college prep into, to their high school, and did the non-college prep track. Speaker 2: Because even though the sister--what was her name who'd-- Speaker 1: Ruby, even-- Speaker 2: --Ruby had figured out there's a great school system, they were still going to be relegated to the (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They could, yeah, they, yeah, exactly, exactly. They could still be at the mercy of what any teacher or administrator decided. Story_ID: 649144 Speaker 1: What was their work when they were in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: My [paternal] grandfather [Nelson Jefferson] was still doing construction (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was still doing construction? Speaker 2: Yeah. And it was-- Speaker 1: And the materials were materials he then knew how to work with? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was what the houses were made of. I have a cousin who explained it to me. And it keeps slipping my mind, but it was literally what materials they used to build houses in Denver [Colorado] versus what they had used in Mississippi, and what they used, you know, partly in L.A. My grandmother became a dressmaker's fitter at a Hollywood studio. I think it was MGM [Metro Goldwyn Mayer Studios; Sony Pictures Studios, Culver City, California]. Speaker 1: Interesting. Speaker 2: Yeah, so that was where her dressmaking skills went. Speaker 1: Well, that really improved her income. Speaker 2: Yes, it really did. Speaker 1: And this is at a time -- Speaker 2: So, there were these, these opportunities in L.A., you know, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Very different kinds of opportunities. Speaker 2: Very different kinds of opportunities. My father [Ronald Jefferson], at one point, he would have been in college, got a job. It was just a summer job, you know. You know he was delivering, means of helping, but he was working for a man named Eddie Schmidt, tailor to the stars. And Eddie Schmidt was making coats and suits for Douglas Fairbanks, Jr.; and all sorts of people. I found his name in a, a memoir ['Slim: Memories of a Rich and Imperfect Life'] written by the widow--not the widow, excuse me, she had been married to--her name was Slim Keith. She was married to an aristocrat [Kenneth Keith] by that time. She'd been married to the director Howard Hawks. And she had helped discover young Lauren Bacall. And she talked about tailor to the stars Eddie Schmidt, and the wonderful clothes he made for Howard Hawks. And I called up Daddy, and I said, "My god" (laughter), you know, "this was, this was your tailor." He was apparently very nice. So, you know, there were the-- Speaker 1: So he was your father's tailor in-- Speaker 2: No, no, my father worked for him. Speaker 1: Worked, okay, got it. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, but he was very nice to him. And my father worked for him on summers. You know, they would even--the boys worked on little boats that went from Catalina [Santa Catalina Island, California] to, you know, whatever, L.A. And during Prohibition, you know, they would, they could earn a little extra money with whiskey on the boats. And so, they were benefitting from that kind of open L.A., Hollywood; you know, those, that atmosphere spread itself out. Speaker 1: And Hollywood is, is flourishing--growing at this time. Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: Your mother--this is your grandmother, your--this is your-- Speaker 2: Eldora [Eldora Jefferson] is my father's mother, yeah. And -- Speaker 1: Right. Your grandmother now working in the film studios, did you know her? Speaker 2: Yes, though not, though not well because we--my father is the only sibling who left L.A. He moved to Chicago [Illinois] because the black hospital [Provident Hospital; Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], you know, it was a really top black hospital there that he wanted to work at. Speaker 1: So, then, the family was not--? Speaker 2: The rest of them stayed in L.A., so I knew Nana; and I knew Aunt Ruby [Ruby Jefferson], his older sister--1234 West 30th Street--when I was a little girl. They would come visit us. We would go visit them, but I didn't know her nearly as well as I knew Lillian [Lillian McClendon Armstrong], you know, my Chicago [maternal] grandmother. Speaker 1: I was wondering if she talked about any of the stars that she got a chance to work with. Speaker 2: I never heard her. Now, my father talked more about seeing Ronald Colman or, you know, (laughter), Douglas Fairbanks in, in Eddie Schmidt's. She enjoyed it, but, no, I didn't really hear her talk about that. I once asked her what she would, really would have liked to do. And she said, "I wanted to be, I would have liked to be a detective. I really liked to ferret things out." (Laughter) So I said, okay, Nana. Speaker 1: Now, that's interesting because your other grandmother was a policewoman. Speaker 2: Yes, that's true. These were women who liked to be in command (laughter) of situations, information, you know, who liked to be, in the sense, rulers of their domains, I would say. Story_ID: 649145 Speaker 1: Eventually, what was the neighborhood that they ended up in, in Los Angeles [California]? Speaker 2: The one that I remember when, when they were growing up, it was 1234 West 30th Street, I think it was. Speaker 1: And where is that? Speaker 2: I wish I could tell you. I can't. Their sons, my father's older [Edwin Jefferson] and younger brother [Bernard Jefferson] eventually moved to Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because Baldwin Hills is one of the elite neighborhoods-- Speaker 2: Right, right--and they were both lawyers who became judges, so that's where they ended up. Speaker 1: And I should say elite African American neighborhood. Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: Baldwin Hills and View Park [View Park-Windsor Hills, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But just at the base of Baldwin Hills is, you know, Crenshaw [Los Angeles, California] is right near there and -- Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: --you know, the, so, the hills are where the wealthier people are. And the, at the foothills are where the working class people live. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I believe that, that area, from whether, depending upon your livelihood, I guess, your socioeconomic status, you're higher up or lower, but I think that a lot of African American people lived in that neighborhood, in that area. So you know, you-- Speaker 2: They certainly had, you know, I remember from my visits there, they certainly had very nice, you know, black neighbors, or we would, again, we're calling them Negro neighbors as little, as little girls, but that was when I was a child, yeah. Speaker 1: In terms of status, where, where--your father's [Ronald Jefferson] family after they're in L.A.--? Speaker 2: You know, very much, it's very much the same story since you asked, as, as my mother's [Irma Armstrong Jefferson]. You know, they were aspiring to, you know, the bourgeoisie. They were somewhere between the lower middle class and the upper working class. My [paternal] grandmother [Eldora Jefferson], once again, through the children being very well educated, she had gone also to Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi]. You know, so she got invited to join certain clubs, you know, of more respectable women. I think there are pictures of her in her, you know, gloves-- Speaker 1: Gloves. Speaker 2: --like that and the big hats at-- Speaker 1: And the fur, was she, was it she who had the-- Speaker 2: She--oh, that was for the other grandmother [Jefferson's maternal grandmother, Lillian McClendon Armstrong]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But she, too, could, she was a little more matronly looking, but to little less flair, a little more decorous, but, you know, you get, you get the look, yeah, yep. So, she was really--ma- securing their way. And then, you know, once again, once children, young adults, you know, they're in, they're at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], they're at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], they're at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. They're joining Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] or Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], or whatever; so, you know, there you are with these successful promising children. Story_ID: 649146 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many children did they [Jefferson's paternal grandparents, Eldora Jefferson and Nelson Jefferson] have? Speaker 2: Four. Speaker 1: There are four (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Aunt Ruby [Ruby Jefferson] became a school teacher, which is what so many women did. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: The two other, Uncle Ed, Edwin [Edwin Jefferson], the older brother and Bernard [Bernard Jefferson], the younger, both became lawyers and, ultimately, judges. And Daddy [Ronald Jefferson] became a doctor, a pediatrician. So, she got exactly (laughter) what she wanted. And Aunt Ruby, I love this, all right, so the daughter became the teacher. Aunt Ruby, as if to say, I won't be left behind, acquired three master's degrees (laughter). Okay. "My brothers are doctors and lawyers, but I have three master's degrees." Speaker 1: In education, different part-? Speaker 2: Different things--one was in education; one, I think, was in literature. Speaker 1: And did she marry? Speaker 2: She never married, no. Speaker 1: Because when she would become a teacher after you got married, you weren't--in the United States, part of the law was for what were--I don't know if it was the law-- Speaker 2: Was it true in every state? I know it was true in St. Louis [Missouri], which was one reason-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know if it was true in-- Speaker 2: --which was one reason my mother [Irma Armstrong Jefferson] was determined when she got out of college [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] to stay in Chicago [Illinois]--not return to St. Louis. Speaker 1: I don't know if it was true that far west. Speaker 2: I'm not sure if it was true in, in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: But it was very common for school teachers to have to stop teaching when they got married. Speaker 2: When they got married. All right, well, that's interesting. I don't know why she didn't marry. You know, she was politically active, but I really don't know. There was, there's a family story, (clears throat) excuse me, there's a family story of a, a family legend of a possible romance with a Japanese schoolmate, of which neither family approved. I do not know if that is true. She did once tell me that when she was a student at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], their, their class, whatever it was, they'd taken a test. And the day that the teacher brought in the papers to return, he announced before returning them, "Ladies and gentlemen, you should be ashamed to let a colored woman and a Japanese gentleman get the highest grades in this class." Speaker 1: Hm. Speaker 2: So, California again, yeah. Speaker 1: Wow. Your fa- Speaker 2: They were there-- Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but they were going to be (laughter) made to pay for it at-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --different points, yeah. Story_ID: 649147 Speaker 1: So, your father [Ronald Jefferson] becomes a doctor-- Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: --and you say he decides to come to Chicago [Illinois]. And why was that? Speaker 2: Well, Chicago had a wonderful black hospital, the oldest black hospital in the U.S--it was Provident [Provident Hospital; Provident Hospital of Cook County]. And he, in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], I believe had no black hospital at that point. He had done his residency and internship in New Orleans [Louisiana]. And he didn't, you know, he had an opportunity to, to work at this very, very good hospital in pediatrics, and that's what he wanted to do. That's what he chose to do. Did he also maybe want a little family indep- a little independent from the family? I don't know. That was never said. It's possible. Speaker 1: Where did he go to medical school? Speaker 2: He went to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 649148 Speaker 1: How did he and your mother [Irma Armstrong Jefferson] meet? Speaker 2: They met actually in New Orleans [Louisiana]. My father [Ronald Jefferson] was--that was--also [U.S.] Army, station there, though he had also done his internship and residency there. And my mother was visiting friends, and, you know, they were introduced. Again, these worlds were so small. Speaker 1: And where was she living at that time? Speaker 2: She was living in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She had done, graduated from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]; and she had done some graduate work in social work. But she didn't finish her master's [degree], but she did begin working as a social worker there, so that's-- Speaker 1: So, she's on vacation-- Speaker 2: So, she's on vacation-- Speaker 1: --when they meet? Speaker 2: --with, with a girlfriend, that's right, when they meet. Speaker 1: And how long from that time 'til they marry? Speaker 2: They married, that was around 1940. They marry in '42 [1942]. My sister is born in '44 [1944]. Speaker 1: And your sister's name? Speaker 2: My sister's name was Denise Adele Jefferson [Denise Jefferson]. Speaker 1: And she's, and, and you were born? Speaker 2: Forty-seven [1947], three years later. Speaker 1: Forty-seven [1947], yes. Speaker 2: And they were at Fort Huachuca for a couple of years-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --where there are all (laughter), all the black doctors and nurses were--not all, but many. Speaker 1: And where is that? Speaker 2: In Arizona. Speaker 1: Oh, so, after they move to Chicago, just in terms of-- Speaker 2: Well, they, they met in L.A. [sic.]; then, actually, my mother was a young-- Speaker 1: They met in Louisiana? Speaker 2: I'm sorry, they met in Louisiana, in New Orleans, that's right. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Another LA. Speaker 2: No, I'm seeing a photograph of them visiting L.A. [Los Angeles, California] after they're engaged in my head, but, no. They meet in New Orleans, but my mother--they marry in Chicago, but then, my father goes, you know, the Army calls him. And so, they spend a couple of years in Fort Huachuca. Speaker 1: And eventually come back-- Speaker 2: And then, absolutely, come back to Chicago. Speaker 1: --to Chicago? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Your sister's born three years later. You're born--what is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two years actually. Speaker 1: Two, okay. Speaker 2: She's born in '44 [1944]. They marry in '42 [1942]. Story_ID: 649149 Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Oh, golly. What would it be? (Pause) You know, I'm not sure, maybe being out, held in my mother's [Irma Armstrong Jefferson] arms out in the yard. That's, I'm kind of seeing, had some nice smells, it's like that, sun--that might be it, that might be it. And I was very little when we moved from one of my [maternal] grandmother's [Lillian McClendon Armstrong] buildings to another house and the stairs would be--I remember my sister [Denise Jefferson] helping me up the stairs because I was probably around two, and I couldn't do it. But the other, the earlier memory would be, I was in my mother's arms, so I was younger. Story_ID: 649150 Speaker 1: When you think of your early childhood, what are the sights, sounds and smells that you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, I always remember lovely smells from--cooking smells. Mother [Irma Armstrong Jefferson] was a good cook. That was, oh, that was very nice. Speaker 1: What was she cooking? What did you smell? Speaker 2: It would, might be a dessert, or it might be, you know, some kind of beef, or some shrimp dish; that smell of also of biscuits or cornbread. I remember Chicago [Illinois] parks, Jackson Park and Washington Park--all, that huge expanse of beautifully ordered green. That was lovely. I remember, you know, Chicago's a car city. And I remembered just whether we were visiting friends or going to, you know, to parks or the movies. You know, I remember being in cars, and gazing out always at that lake--at that lake line [of Lake Michigan], which, which I loved. Story_ID: 649151 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What neighborhood did you grow up in? Speaker 2: I grew up in Park Manor [Chicago, Illinois], which was virtually all white when my parents [Irma Armstrong Jefferson and Ronald Jefferson] moved there. But by the time I came along, I remember it as virtually all black. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --which is hardly surprising (laughter). Speaker 1: White flight. Speaker 2: That happened in Chatham [Chicago, Illinois], too--white flight, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And, so Park Manor being, when you moved in--well, as you recall anyhow, being virtually all white, this was a middle class neighborhood? Speaker 2: It was, yeah. And it still was, you know, when it was all black, but, you know, it was, there was variety, you know. There were, there was a doctor at one end of the street, not just my father. There was a cab driver next to us, you know, there were--. And so, it, you know, that was, that was true of cities often, but very true of black neighborhoods. Speaker 1: When did your family move to Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: They moved to Hyde Park when I was--I had finished my sophomore year in high school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], so it would have been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh so, it was after a while? Speaker 2: --yeah, it would have been around '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: You were in Park Manor in, in that same neighborhood, in that same house-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --leading up to that? Speaker 2: --from, yes, I was. Story_ID: 649152 Speaker 1: Where did you go to school? Speaker 2: I went to the University of Chicago Lab- Laboratory School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Let's talk about that-- Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) because that is-- Speaker 2: And I went there from kindergarten-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --through twelfth grade. Yeah. Speaker 1: Famous school. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, very highly regarded. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you went in, in the, was it at the beginning of the school? It was early? When did the school (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, the school was--no, no, the school started, god, this is in my book ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson], and I forget the dates, but it started early in the 20th century [sic. 1896]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Were African Americans, were you in the beginning of African Americans going? Speaker 2: I was in the, I wasn't at the very beginning. Speaker 1: Right, that's what I remember being, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: But, but they really began to think and talk about integration and, therefore, act on it. It was World War II [WWII], you know, and the Nazis and the bigotry and the, you know, the, and the anti-Semitism and the slaughters; and the whole ideology of, you know, Nazi, i.e. white superiority that apparently galvanized a small, and vocal community of university [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] parents to start this. So, the first student came in a few years after, I guess, in the late '40s [1940s]. So, you know-- Speaker 1: And you start in what year? Speaker 2: I started '52 [1952]. Speaker 1: Right, so it was, it was, it -- Speaker 2: So, it wasn't-- Speaker 1: --still in the beginning-- Speaker 2: --yeah, it was within the first, yeah. Speaker 1: --of integration, the first few years. Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah, first decade, absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah. And, as such-- Speaker 2: Now, might there have been, you know, a very occasional student of color before? I have never read that there was, you know. The official history says, it really started after war- but it is possible. Nevertheless, here we were, a small cluster of us. Speaker 1: Going to school with a small cluster of Negro students, it--what was your experience? You know were you, did you feel welcomed? Did you--? Speaker 2: You know, I have to say, basically, I did. That does not mean there weren't moments, incidents of--but it was very much the, very different from what I'm describing, say, with my father [Ronald Jefferson], and his family in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. The general feeling that I got as a kindergartener was that I was welcomed and thought well of. Speaker 1: And, and not marginalized in terms of what class you were in or as you described that your [maternal] grandmother [Lillian McClendon Armstrong] had to (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, because once, you know, that's, once you get to that school, you--was I, you know, first of all, they aren't tracking it. So, everybody, it's assumed, until you prove otherwise (laughter), and unless you prove otherwise, is very bright. As it happened, you know, I was, for example, in the advanced reading group, so I was a very good reader. Story_ID: 649153 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And was your sister at the school? Speaker 2: Sh- my sister came in the same year, but that meant she came in second grade. She had been at an all-Negro, all-black nursery school called the Rosenwald, which was attached to this famous building, the Rosenwald [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois]. And then, she had gone to our Episcopal church, St. Edmund's [St. Edmund's Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois]--she'd gone to their school [St. Edmund School, Chicago, Illinois] I guess for first grade. So, it was a little more (clears throat) excuse me, of a shock for her. She said it was more physical than anything else. I said, "Well, what do you mean?" And she said, "I'd never seen boys with bangs before" (laughter). Speaker 1: Boys with bangs? Speaker 2: Boys and bangs. And I thought that was such a funny way to like, you know, siphon off the, the shock of racial difference. But, and I said, "Now, Denise [Denise Jefferson], I'm seeing, you know, your Rosenwald and St. Edmund's class pictures. It was full of Negro kids who looked white, not just those of you who clearly look black." She said, "Margo [HistoryMaker Margo Jefferson], none of the boys had bangs." But, you know what else it was, and this was huge. They were all the children of family friends, and they all knew it. So, you know, the, the strangeness for her also was moving into this world that, you know, yes, well, all the mothers, including ours, they looked, they looked, they dressed, they could, they'd drive the same kinds of cars. But no, you are not with--and, you know, children know that immediately: you are not with, in a, in a world in which, you know, you are known, your, your parents are known, and every other parent is greeting them warmly. Speaker 1: And when going to the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], they're strangers? Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: And, and not racially diverse in the way--I mean, she'd gone to a black school--schools. Speaker 2: She'd gone to a black school, exactly. And where everybody looked like everything, but it was a black school. And all the families knew each other, and they would be sheltered. You know, there was that generational pass down, you know they were being nurtured. So, it was more of the shock for her, though she made friends. She liked it, you know, she, too, was welcomed. But these little, you know, these, these are, there're very various levels of strangeness. I would also say, I felt, (clears throat) I felt welcomed by, I had no problem with my school friends. But their parents were never blatantly rude, but, you know, the parents were not always as welcoming or as warm. And I could, would sometimes overhear my parents [Irma Armstrong Jefferson and Ronald Jefferson] talking about which parents were genuinely polite and gracious, and which ones, in fact, were distant and cutting (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you go to others students' homes? Speaker 2: Yes, but not with--yes, but, and they, but not with the same ease, not as frequently, and not with the same ease. And then, once we moved into-- Speaker 1: Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: No. Once we moved into adolescence, the whole issue of, all right, your friends, but you won't, you don't date--coming from, you know, our parents, as well as from white parents (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Both sides. Speaker 2: Exactly. And, you know, there are certain parties you don't go to, you know, so, socializing becomes more sexually segregated. Story_ID: 649154 Speaker 1: I'd like for you to talk about your experience. And also, you know, you, you, you've, you've looked at this phenomenon of, of--I call it an obsession, but just real interest in black hair in its very textures and the relation- what, what happened for you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you mean an interest now or, or ongoing? Speaker 1: Let's talk- let's--when you're growing up. What happened for you? Speaker 2: In the black world? Speaker 1: You, you can tell me both. Tell me both. Speaker 2: Because, yeah, all right, you know, at, at home. Speaker 1: 'Cause they're, they're different stories, but they're-- Speaker 2: At, while at home, of course, in the home world, you know, we were constantly coping with, addressing, you know, assessing, redressing our hair. You know, it's, it's the world, the, the black world, the, the Negro world. You could open any issue of Ebony magazine or Jet. It, you know, hair oils, and hair creams, and hair--hot combs, and curling irons. And then, at a certain point, you know, straighteners that aren't lye filled come in, you know. And that's, that's a sign of real progress. You know, so we were thinking about it, oh, all, all the time. Speaker 1: And in your house-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the hair textures, based upon the skin colors that you've described as so broad, what are the hair, what's happening with hair textures in your household? Speaker 2: All right. You know, my father [Ronald Jefferson]--it's short hair, and the men used to wear stocking caps. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: They'd put cream on and then wear the stocking caps, and would come out in nice little close cropped waves. My mother [Irma Armstrong Jefferson] and sister [Denise Jefferson] and I all had, you know-- Speaker 1: Curls. Speaker 2: --nappy hair, and it was called nappy in those days. They're kinky. My mother--my sister's would have been considered--and I mean she was the brownest of the three of us, the quote worst hair as we used to say, meaning it was-- Speaker 1: Coarser? Speaker 2: --coarser, right. I mean, didn't grow quite as long. Mine was a little, a little quote better unquote. And my mother's was maybe a teeny bit easier to handle than mine, but so, that's where we were. Mother and her friends went to the beauty shop all the time, you know. They were always-- Speaker 1: They straightened it. Speaker 2: Yes. Again, in the early days, 'cause I think I remember hair straighteners not coming in, you know, the ones that were safe to use on women. I'm not talking about, you know, the processes and, you know, the du rag, But ones that would not, supposedly wouldn't break off your hair. They were called like Hair Strate, S-T-R-A-T-E--things like that. Those-- Speaker 1: But also just the, the hot comb. Did they--? Speaker 2: Well, those were always there, but the hot comb, at one point, was kind of superseded-- Speaker 1: Yes, of course, yes. Speaker 2: --by the straighteners that lasted longer but, oh, yeah, I can't remember a time when there wasn't a hot comb and a curling iron in the house. Speaker 1: How did you wear your hair? Speaker 2: Braids, with ribbons. Speaker 1: Like two braids? Speaker 2: Two braids. Occasionally, sometimes there'd be two braids on top, and two braids there. You know, and then, you know, some- maybe a ponytail sometimes or, no, might be curled. You'd love those, you'd love the curling irons if it was a fancy occasion. Speaker 1: And in, at school, 'cause you're in a predominantly white school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], how are you, how are you and your hair greeted? Speaker 2: You know, in grammar school, it wasn't, and--it wasn't an issue because we weren't taking swimming classes yet. And, you know, lots of other little girls basically--I mean, I was certainly aware that I didn't have straight hair. And I was certainly aware that many of the little white girls I was in school with had quote good hair. You, you couldn't not be aware of these things. But I wasn't getting any, you know, I remember no comments because we were all wearing our hair the same. I remember things getting trickier in swim class. Now, when would that have been? It was certainly high school, but it could have been earlier. You know, we were--we, those of us who were black, you know were always looking for ways--you had to take swimming--to keep your hair dry, you know. So I remember at one point, we were wearing shammy cloth [chamois] under our swimming caps. So, someone would say, "Well, what is that," you know? And then, you'd kind of explain, "Well, it's keeping my hair dry," you know. And, of course, you were much more worried afterwards, you know. You had to then dry your hair, and was it going to--because if it had gotten wet in the swimming pool, you know, lose its straight texture and quote go back, as we used to say. So, you know, and were, was this going to be noticed? Of course, it was noticed. It was probably commented on behind our backs, but never to my face. But was I self conscious about it? You bet. Was it being noticed? Of course. Speaker 1: You go from-- Speaker 2: And was that maybe one reason my sister was so intrigued by bangs? Probably. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: For these dead straight bangs. Yeah. Speaker 1: Which she had not seen before, wasn't--didn't register for her? Speaker 2: No, and also maybe it is--first, you know, they were on boys. But probably the sheer fact of just how straight they were, was, you know, with no effort because a boy didn't have to be careful about his bangs, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. He could play rough, and get sweaty; and if he was white, the bangs would stay straight. Story_ID: 649155 Speaker 1: Beyond hair (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Ah yes, there is a world beyond hair (laughter). Speaker 1: --beyond hair, what were the highlights of being at the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] for you? Speaker 2: Well, you know, there were intellectual and social highlights. It was the first place that I wrote, and got appreciated for, you know, by teachers for being a really good writer. And that started in elementary school, so. Speaker 1: What were you writing for? What--? Speaker 2: I was writing little stories and essays. Speaker 1: As a young child? Speaker 2: And sometimes poems, yeah, yeah, yeah; and some of these were school assignments. I wasn't writing, you know, all the time on my own. But we had--I did write a couple of poems that my mother [Irma Armstrong Jefferson] got published in a black magazine that a very celebrated Chicago [Illinois] black librarian, Charlemae Rollins [Charlemae Hill Rollins] published, so that was important. Otherwise, you know, I was really being--we were writing all through grammar school, as well as high school at Lab. And, you know, all my report cards, and all my teachers were admiring of this, so this was fun. Yeah, there was a lot of, there was a lot of nice educational stuff going on there that I felt--theater stuff and music stuff, as well as literature. I can't claim that I was deeply interested in, in arithmetic, which became math--I wasn't. You know, I, I--that was interesting to me; that was exciting. I enjoyed elementary school more than high school because, you know, in high school, I was kind of living in two worlds. I was living in an all--living and had, with an all-black social life, but I also had this carefully, as I've explained, kind of carefully scripted and, you know, navigated white social life. And, you know, that was a bit of a strain. Speaker 1: Let's talk about that a little bit (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In fact, it was sometimes a huge strain (laughter). Speaker 1: --because both-- Speaker 2: And I wanted--in both worlds, I wanted to be an individual. I wanted to be distinctive and unusual, but I also really wanted to be popular. And those two things are not in adolescence necessarily compatible. Story_ID: 649156 Speaker 1: And you talk in, in your book ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson] about having to wear glasses. Speaker 2: Ah, thank god, I got contact lenses after my freshman year [at University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], yes. Speaker 1: And from what age did you wear glasses? Speaker 2: I wore glasses from about the age of two on. Speaker 1: And you, and-- Speaker 2: I was really nearsighted, yeah. Speaker 1: And you had strabismus, right? Speaker 2: I did, yeah. Speaker 1: Which is when your eyes cross? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So, you must have been very self conscious? Speaker 2: I hated my glasses, and I was self conscious. They made me feel ugly, yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And they made me feel, I'm a little--I can't pretend I really thought I was handicapped, but they made me feel vulnerable in that way, yeah. Speaker 1: When did you have the surgery to correct your eyes? Speaker 2: I had one surgery when I was about four. And it really did help, but it didn't help enough, so I did some eye exercises. And then, in sixth grade, I had to wear a patch over one eye for most of the year. Speaker 1: In sixth grade, wow. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--it was awful. Speaker 1: That's pu- beginning of puberty time. Speaker 2: It's, it--almost. Now, we were little--I mean, I was, let's see, how old would I have been? I was thirteen, fourteen in high school. We had some (unclear)--they put seventh and eighth grade into one year. So, we were a little younger, but still, that self consciousness-- Speaker 1: The self-consciousness -- Speaker 2: --is kicking in. Speaker 1: --is beginning. Speaker 2: --and the awareness, boy-girl awareness is absolutely kicking in. So, this was definitely a handicap. Speaker 1: And you have to wear a patch. Speaker 2: I had to wear that patch, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: And back then--I mean, I read you said that I've been wearing glasses since forever. I mean, glasses were not cute, if you had thick lenses (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was ridiculous, cat's eyes. Speaker 1: --they didn't make them thinner. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --girls, or maybe boys, too, but girls would call four eyes, and so were you, right? Speaker 2: I wasn't called four eyes. Speaker 1: Not called that? All right. Speaker 2: No, oddly enough, I wasn't. And there were, there's a little cluster of girls. There were about three of us, even four, who all had the same problem. But mine was a little worse, and for various reasons, I mean--these were all black girls. They all--I felt they were all prettier than I was so. But I was not called four eyes, but I was, for a time my freshman year in high school, a couple of the so-called cool guys--these were black guys--called me Blind, as in B-L-I-N-D. (Laughter) No. So, at the end of that year, I got my contact lenses. Speaker 1: And that was it. Speaker 2: Oh, It was li- it was a life saver, yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 649157 Speaker 1: You talk about not being pretty. In, in your book ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson], you, you write about this; and, and also, about the--I guess, is it cast of what your mother [Irma Armstrong Jefferson], that--your mother's being able to identify between beautiful, pretty, and attractive (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, god, yes, this was so much part of the female world, yes. Speaker 1: Can you describe that? Speaker 2: Yes. You know, it, it was all a part of this world of looks, and clothing, and hair, and makeup and, you know, fashion magazines with this endless counseling of, you know, exactly what you needed to do to, not only just be alluring and exquisite. But you, if you draw this little line down your nose, and this was even in white magazines, you know, it would make it a little narrower. If you powder a cheek here, then your eyes, if they look too small, (unclear) a little larger, you know, it was this con- it hasn't changed-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --quite enough, has it? But it was constant, and in the '50s [1950s], it was obsessive to the exclusion of, you know, the '50s [1950s] did not contain, as the world now does also all sorts of other, you know, models--lessons for what a girl can do. This was looks, manners, et cetera--this was destiny in part, however well you were doing in school. And the, the, the intensified pressure, if you were black, because, of course, the assumption was if you were black then you were working at physical disadvantage if you were black, by which I mean if you were Negro, colored--I mean, that just goes back, whatever we call ourselves in this country. You know, if you didn't look white, then you were at a disadvantage. So, you know, take everything that women are all, being inculcated with, partic- you know, I wouldn't, shouldn't say particularly middle class women, but, you know, it's that level of culture. It's mass culture, and operating wildly. And add the pressure of being black, you know, and then, the, the details of, you know, Lena Horne, and Dorothy Dandridge are beautiful. Maybe [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll is almost beautiful--she's certainly very pretty (laughter). Speaker 1: And is her (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But then, but there are those, those differences-- Speaker 1: Distinctions, yeah. Speaker 2: --and attractive many, many everyday women. You don't have to be a movie star, can achieve that, but, you know, it takes work. It means you're attending to your figure, and attending to strengthening your best features, and downplaying your worst. So, it's, being attractive is much more of a construction, whereas pretty comes more naturally, and beauty is a gift from the gods, right? Speaker 1: And why did you feel that you weren't pretty? Speaker 2: Well, I grew up with--well I think a couple of reasons. One, really those glasses but, you know, little, little brown girls, in general, if they had some version of, you know, black hair, of curly, kinky, nappy hair, and were brown, and somewhere along the spectrum. Yeah, I can remember plenty of friends who were pretty, but we were not, we did not assume that we were because we were measuring ourselves by other standards. You know, whether it was someone we were in school with, whether it was, you know, some cute little girl I was at Lab [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] with, or the daughters on 'Father Knows Best.' (Laughter) Remember that; or, you know, 'I Remember Mama,' yeah. Those, those, those were the measures. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: But I think my glasses for me played a huge part. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so, being in high school, and being freed of the glasses finally-- Speaker 2: That helped a lot because then, I could move into the realm of attractive, and just look at my face and features, and see what was good, and what needed help. I had a very good figure. That really helped, to--so, you know, I entered that world that was partly fond of, you know, girls and women, you know, getting interested in style and fashion and, you know, playing that with your personality, too. Speaker 1: You mentioned-- Speaker 2: But I tended to think of myself in, then, as really cute. I di- (laughter) you know. Speaker 1: So there was some level of acceptance of-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --of positive, of the way that you looked. Speaker 2: Yes, definitely. I thought, oh, she's so cute, yeah. And I had personality (laughter). Speaker 1: And you were smart. Speaker 2: And I was smart, right; and I was a cheerleader for two years. Speaker 1: Yes, so you were a cheerleader in high school-- Speaker 2: I think that was, it was very important. I think that was very important for me as a--almost like, you know, if you're a cheerleader, then you're almost designated, like, like really cute, you know, or really pretty, and really successful, right (makes sound) (laughter)? Story_ID: 649158 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And at this point, was your sister already dancing? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: When did that begin for her? Speaker 2: She began, she began dance really as a, as a young girl. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: She started with one teacher when she was probably about five or six, and then, she really liked it. And she said to my mother [Irma Armstrong Jefferson], "I want to be serious about this." So, my mother went to some friends of hers to find out who, you know, the top teachers in Chicago [Illinois] were. And a black friend of hers had studied with a woman named Edna McRae, who was the first top white teacher to accept black students. And so, Denise [Denise Jefferson] went and danced for her. And Edna McRae said, "You're very--your daughter is very talented." Denise was sitting right there. "I'm happy to have her, you know, in my school. If she wants to be a ballet dancer, you know, you all have to understand that that's, there are no compan- it doesn't happen, you know, she will--it's not, it's not happening in the world. She will, she will most likely have to dance with either Inter Modern [ph.], or she'll have to dance with Pearl Lang [Pearl Lang Dance Theater], or another modern company." Now, as it turned out, my sister, in her own way, eventually fell in love with modern dance, but really to the end of her life, she remembered how devastating that was. She liked this teacher very much, but she was sitting in the room, you know, when that pronouncement about, you know, racism in ballet was being handed down, even at the same time as she was being offered it because she was talented (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And was this a black teacher telling her this? Speaker 2: This was a white teacher, yep. Speaker 1: Saying, you can study if you want, but basically you're-- Speaker 2: She was saying, you are really talented. You know, she didn't say it even nastily. She said, "What you need to understand is that there are no opportunities for a well--very, or very few for a well trained ballet dancer. If you really want to pursue a dance, you know, your best options are going to be Katherine Dunham [Katherine Dunham Company], you know, or another black modern company." Speaker 1: And what did your sister do, what? Speaker 2: She kept dancing (laughter) because she did love it. But it, you know, it stayed with her and, luckily for her, when she went to college, she joined the dance club. She was at an all-girls school, Wheaton College in Norton, Massachusetts, and they asked her to improvise. You know, they were interested in modern dance; and she went into shock, but something started-- Speaker 1: During this classical program? Speaker 2: During the--this classically trained person, you know, suddenly is supposed to improvise. But something spoke to her, and then she got a scholarship to--Connecticut College [New London, Connecticut] had a summer dance program, and she encountered Martha Graham's choreography and [HistoryMaker] Donald McKayle's. And that changed her life. And she was a modern dancer; and, ultimately, became the director for over twe- well, certainly for twenty years of the Alvin Ailey school [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], so happy ending. But, you know, it's interesting that that's, that's how she fulfilled and th- and thwarted it. That's how she fulfilled what could have been a limitation and turned it into a kind of triumph. Story_ID: 649159 Speaker 1: Well, especially working for Ailey, I mean she was-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --and did she work with Mr. Ailey [Alvin Ailey] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was--oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know, she, she was running the school. [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison, after Mr. Ailey died, was running the company. And [HistoryMaker] Sylvia Waters was running the second company. So, it was this great triptych. But she began teaching there long before she ran the school. So, she worked closely with, with Alvin, as she called him, but with Mr. Ailey, yeah. And he approved, you know, he saw, too, yeah, to her rise, her ascent. Speaker 1: There's a good friend of mine who worked with your sister, Yvette Campbell [Yvette L. Campbell]. Speaker 2: Oh, my god, of course, you're a friend of Yvette's? Speaker 1: Um-hm, so she's-- Speaker 2: Oh, she's a dear, yeah. Speaker 1: --and she talked about how your sister was so important to Ailey in, in keeping the curriculum as Mr. Ailey would have wanted it to be-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --the integrity of the curriculum. Speaker 2: Oh, that's great to hear. And she started a joint B.F.A. program with Fordham [Fordham University, New York, New York], you know, which was really also kind of groundbreaking----which I also think came out of this pressure that my, that our family had put on her. You know, if you want to be, you can be a dancer if you want. You're going to go to college, you're going to get a master's degree. My sister had a master's degree in French from NYU [New York University, New York, New York], so there was also this desire to establish something that would allow dancers to go to college, but not to have to give up, you know, or cut short. Speaker 1: And just contextually, Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, correct-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --is, it became one of the best established and, and now, one of the longest established African American dance companies. Speaker 2: And, yeah, and one of the most successful modern dance companies, period, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yes, period, yes, yeah, and she was there for how long? Speaker 2: Golly, she taught, between teaching and running the school, it would have had to be thirty something years, but she ran the school for twenty. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: And so, most of the company members, you know, of, of a certain generation were all (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. And she was there pretty much until she passed, correct? Speaker 2: Yeah, she, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Which was when? Speaker 2: She was really, she died in 2010; and, you know, a lot of 2009, those late, last months or the early, you know, months of 2010 were iffy. But she was still conducting auditions, you know, she was pretty much there until, yeah, the end. And she appointed her successor so. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yes. My daughter [Carrie Emmanuelle Cole Chinsee] also went to the, to the school from age four to age nine (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, that's so nice. Speaker 1: --so, she was there during, during that time-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: --yeah, yeah in the beginning. Story_ID: 649160 Speaker 1: I want to go back to your education. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: In the summers, you know, the, the notion of what a child does in the summer, and what an African American child does in the summer, you know varies dramatically from, from family to family. But you went to a very special program, Interlochen [Interlochen Center for the Arts, Interlochen, Michigan]. Speaker 2: Oh, that was in high school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, before that, I, you know-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --you did some summer camps. You took vacations with the family. There was, yeah, always a lot of emphasis on when we were in Chicago [Illinois], you know, we're going to the library every week, you know. We're going to read, yeah, but there were programs at the Y [Young Men's Christian Association]. But it, yeah, starting in what would have been seventh, eighth grade, I spent three summers at, at Interlochen. Because I'd been playing--while Denise [Denise Jefferson] had been dancing, I'd been studying piano, and I was good at that, and I'd been doing that diligently so. Speaker 1: And, piano, I don't know if this is true in, in other communities, but in the black community, like everybody had a piano. You're supposed to learn how to play the piano. Speaker 2: You know and that seems to have, that's gone back, that goes back, yeah, absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: What, you started playing at what age? Speaker 2: I, probably at around seven or eight. Both my sister and I, because there were those mandatory piano lessons, particularly for girls, but I'm, you know, Denise was really good at ballet. I took it, but I was only adequate. Same thing with music, but reversed. I was really good, and I liked piano. And she, you know, did it until Mother [Irma Armstrong Jefferson] allowed (laughter) her to stop. So, yeah, I had a wonderful black teacher named Muriel Rose, who had been part of a black classical music world in Chicago. And then, when she grew sick and died, when I was about to enter high school, I went to a very excellent white teacher, who was out of Chicago Musical College at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois]--her name was Molly Margolies. And I had just started going to Interlochen or just--Ms. Rose was dying as I, you know, you had to sent a tape in to Interlochen as I applied. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So I-- Speaker 1: Which is still true. It, it's high- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do, do they still--? Yeah, yeah, it's-- Speaker 1: Oh, yes. It's highly competitive. Speaker 2: Competitive. Story_ID: 649161 Speaker 1: So, can you describe Interlochen [Interlochen Center for the Arts], and what your experience was like there; and, and, and are there other black children there when you're going? Speaker 2: (Laughter) There were, you know, the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] seemed like teeming masses (laughter) compared to Interlochen, which was very beautiful, you know. I can-- Speaker 1: But where is it? Speaker 2: It's in Interlochen, Michigan, near Traverse City [Michigan], in the part of Michigan with, you know, huge (unclear) pine trees, and just beautiful, and it was gorgeous. And, you know, I'd gone to camp before. I was, you know, when, and when I went off, the night I went off, we were all taking the train--all of we little Chicago [Illinois] people and, you know, I was the only black person I could see anywhere. My, you know, my parents [Irma Armstrong Jefferson and Ronald Jefferson] later confessed, you know, they saw me kind of square my shoulders. And there were whole clusters of kids, who were coming from Winnetka [Illinois], or Wilmette [Illinois]. And so, you know, they'd all gone to the same elementary school or middle school. And they were all going to go to New Trier [New Trier High School, Winnetka, Illinois] the next year. So, you know, oh, my god, I am kind of alone here. One friend of mine, white, from Lab, also was there, but we weren't in the same cabin, you know, and she wasn't on that train, but that, that did help. And, then, you know, and, again, as with Lab, the day to day doings, partly because it was a demanding place that did operate to a large extent on a merit system. The day to day doings were fine. I think it helped that we were all in a kind of suspended animation from our regular really socially determined lives. In some way, the assumption was we all cared about the arts more than anything else (whispers) even if we didn't, you know (laughter), and that, honestly, helped. You know, it, you would giggle, you were silly, but, you know, so you talked about the same things, you would. But you also were really talking about your dreams, and, you know, what artists you loved. And you were practicing, and it was, you know, and you were doing scenes in your drama class with people. All of that was, was very lovely for me. It really was. Speaker 1: And did it also have-- Speaker 2: Also, boys and girls were very much separated-- Speaker 1: Separated. Speaker 2: --so I didn't have to worry about that. Speaker 1: In, in addition to the arts aspect, which is, you know, the, the draw-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --but there's always sports and swimming and all of that, too, is there not? Speaker 2: Yeah, it, I don't remember it that clearly. And there may be more of it now than there was, but you know what? You're right, yeah, we were all (unclear)--we were on that lake, and we had nights on the beach. Yeah, that was fine with me. You know, I'm coordinated, so I didn't, I'm, I'm, well--actually no. Here's, I, I don't have great hand-eye coordination. I'm good with anything that's like gymnastic-ish; you know, I'm a good diver, and an adequate swimmer. So, you know, it didn't work--I didn't much care. The sports were fine, but that was not crucial, but I, you know, I wasn't embarrassing myself. Speaker 1: Did you think that you were going to become a pianist? Speaker 2: No, secretly, I knew that I wasn't. Or I suspect that I wasn't because I did not--I, I really didn't love it enough. So, I would say, oh, maybe I'll become a teacher. And I was, you know, I was quite good, but there are a lot of people who go to Interlochen who are quite good on their instrument. It doesn't all mean (laughter), you know, that they're going to join--become pianists, or join, you know, the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, or become, you know, Interlochen now--the arts academy has a jazz program that, doesn't mean they're all going to become top jazz musicians, right? So, we have to put these things in perspective. So, you know, I, I had a good time, but I didn't think I was going to become a pianist. And I started to get interested in acting when I was at Interlochen, which began to absorb, you know, more of that energy--or more of my fantasies, I would say. Story_ID: 649162 Speaker 1: In 19--is it, when do you go to college, what year? Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 1: In '64 [1964] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-four [1964], '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: And you go to Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: How did you make that choice? Speaker 2: Combination of things. I did want, because I'd been at Lab [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] all those years, I liked the idea of a smallish, intense coed school, but I also wanted to go east. And I just was still trying to decide what, what I, what I wanted to do. My--oddly enough, my first choice, even though I liked the idea of a coed school, was Sarah Lawrence [Sarah Lawrence College, Bronxville, New York]. Brandeis was my second choice. I didn't get into Sarah Lawrence, so I went to Brandeis, which I was fine with. Speaker 1: And what did you study there? Speaker 2: English and American lit [American literature], like so many girls. If I had it to do over again, I would do that combination of literature and history, they used to call American studies. They started--you know, they didn't have women's studies or AFAM studies [African American studies]. I think the first black studies course came--would have been my junior year, which was the same year that we were starting black student organizations. And, you know, all of that, so it was interesting. Story_ID: 649163 Speaker 1: Was an amazing time to be in college. Speaker 2: Well, because there's so much going on in the United States-- Speaker 1: Dear lord, yes. This, you know, you go to s- if you go to college in '64 [1964], then you are going as the Civil Rights Movement is peaking, as the anti-war movement is really starting. Civil-- Speaker 2: And you've gone east, so now you're in Massachusetts, and there's a lot more activity-- Speaker 1: So, there are thou- exactly, demonstrations constantly about everything; and lots going on--demonstrations, tutoring, you know, meetings, you name it. Then, by '66 [1966], you know, black power is contending with civil rights, and has risen. Anti-war movement is at a vehement and violent pitch. And then, you know, I get out of college [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts] in '68 [1968]. And I'm moving to, in those next couple of years, when I'm starting my--you know, I'm going to graduate school [Columbia University, New York, New York]. I'm thinking my future, the women's movement and gay rights hit as all of this other agitation continues. It was amazing. Speaker 2: And, and how are you fitting into all of this movement and--a very spirited, animated movement, especially on a college campus-- Speaker 1: Campuses. Yeah, I'm, you know, I'm-- Speaker 2: --because students are speaking up and out; and how are you finding your voice? Speaker 1: You know, I'm finding my voice by embracing, you know, all of this. I'm going on marches, you know. I'm talking fiercely about all of these things. I'm one of the founders of our little nascent, in '66 [1966], black student organization [Brandeis Black Student Organization]. So, that's what, that's what I'm doing, you know. Speaker 2: Had you talked about these issues of civil rights when you were at home with your family? Speaker 1: Yes, but in a much more--yes, partly because you heard your parents [Irma Armstrong Jefferson and Ronald Jefferson] talking about it all through your childhood. But by the late '50s [1950s] and early six- you know, really starting with the late '50s [1950s], it's all over the television sets, you know, young black kids in the South integrating schools, and being assaulted, you know. Emmett Till was from Chicago [Illinois], you know. I don't remember seeing his picture in Ebony, but my sister [Denise Jefferson] saw it, you know. So, everything is being churned up. And all the dinner parties, your parents are at, and, you know, we're talking about it in, in schools, in school, too, and it, in a decorous way, but it is there. You can't, you can't miss it. So, you know, college, you're freed up. There all of you are. You're freed up to, to immerse yourself in it. Not--(laughter) let me not pretend that I wasn't doing any of other more self absorbed things. But, you know, it, it, it intensified me. It helped, it galvanized; it helped make me more serious, intellectually as well as politically. And it was, you know, it helped, it helped express, you know, anger (laughter), and vehemence. And, you know, I was, I was, I was in many ways a, you know, a well behaved person, so it was--a well behaved good girl, a good Negro girl, so it was very useful for me, you know, to experience. Speaker 2: Did you feel like you were--was it uncomfortable shedding some of that? Speaker 1: Sure, you bet it was (laughter). You know, just think of the move, even from civil rights to black power, which was also very involved with, you know, kind of leftist class analysis. So, you know, we are really looking at, you know, ourselves critically as this privileged black elite. We're getting Afros, (laughter) you know; we're changing our internal, and, and, we're challenging, changing our internal and external look, ways at being, or at least challenging them. Speaker 2: Had you been wearing your hair straightened before that? Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 2: And, and now, suddenly--I mean, 'cause this is very liberating-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --for so many people, suddenly that curls are the best thing ever. You can, you can grow them out. Speaker 1: Yeah, and, of course, there's money being made by all these companies on new hair treatments for the Afro (laughter). But it all, it's, it's exciting, you know. Speaker 2: How did your parents receive you--(laughter)? Speaker 1: They were not happy with the Afros, they were not happy with the Afros. You know, also, there were, there were political arguments. My parents were, are not, were not, you know, conservatives or reactionaries, but they were definitely good integrationist liberals. And, you know, I wanted, I wanted more. So, we argued, you know, not-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --and they were not, they really did not like my Afro, but they came, they came, they came to terms (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and one thing that we-- Story_ID: 649164 Speaker 1: When you were growing up, did you do Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]? Were you involved-- Speaker 2: I did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in those different organizations? Speaker 2: I did, yes. I did Jack--did--my sister [Denise Jefferson] and I were both in Jack and Jill. There were also all these little clubs, you know, that girls had. Some were local, some like, one called the Co-Eds [ph.]. Some were national. Now, by the time I went to college [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts], three years make a difference. My sister pledged Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]. Speaker 1: Where? Speaker 2: In Boston [Massachusetts]. That was also a good way for it, you know, young black women who were ver- all these white colleges around Boston, you know, to come together and have a social life. She pledged Delta. By the time I came along three years later, you know, because of black power and leftist politics, you know, I wasn't going to get near a sorority. Speaker 1: So, your sister kind of followed in a sense the--? Speaker 2: It was that three years' difference. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: She went to college [Wheaton College, Norton, Massachusetts] in '61 [1961] and graduated in '65 [1965]. You know, she also got an Afro (laughter), you know, you know, had an intense affair briefly with a Black Muslim. You know, her politics became mine, but, you know, be- some of the, some of the paths to them were a little--those earlier years were different. Story_ID: 649165 Speaker 1: Because we started out talking about kind of the social place that different members of your family found themselves in, when you were growing up, your father's [Ronald Jefferson] a doctor, your mother [Irma Armstrong Jefferson] was a homemaker at this point, is that right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was the social place for your family in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: You mean in black Chicago? We felt very much at the, you know, top of the black elite, yep, which-- Speaker 1: So, as your family evolved, by the time your parents were established, that's where you were? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, you're, you're at college [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts], and this is why I asked the question-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --because being of the black elite, there are lots of expectations that the Black Power movement, and others, sort of, there's a clashing. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's partly what I was talking about when I said, we really had to turn this serious critique on the way we had grown up. You know, I didn't--some people, you know, really kind of dropped out of that and became, you know, community organizers who maybe didn't finish college, or--I didn't. My politics changed, but, you know I, in that way, I graduated. I moved to New York [New York]. Speaker 1: And when did you realize that you wanted to be a writer? Speaker 2: I, you know, it was a little bit happenstancey. I had still been toying with acting. I had been in an experimental, you know, kind of radical theater group when I got out of college. We did a piece called 'Riot' [ph.] which was a kind of challenging--it was meant to be a kind of black power piece. And I, when I moved to New York from Boston [Massachusetts], I really thought I might try acting. And then, I, you know, really thought about it. And I thought, no, I, I don't, I can't do this. I can't audition and (makes sounds); and (mumbles)-- Speaker 1: So you tried it out? Speaker 2: I didn't even. I thought about going to graduate school and-- Speaker 1: And when did you move to New York? Speaker 2: I moved to New York in '69 [1969]--'69 [1969], '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: So, right after school? Speaker 2: Ye- well'68 [1968], '69 [1969] I was in Cambridge, Mass [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: What were you doing there? Speaker 2: I was in that theater group for half the year. And then when-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) we disbanded, we toured New England with the show; and, and actually, got an Obie Award [Off-Broadway Theater Award] in New York after a very short run. Story_ID: 649166 Speaker 1: Then, I moved to New York [New York], which I'd always wanted to do anyway. I got a job as a secretary at Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America]. Girls got jobs as secretaries (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Whoa. Speaker 1: But Planned Parenthood was a good place to be, and the women's movement hit in '69 [1969], '70 [1970]. So, you know, literally, speaking of questioning things, you know, the three young college educated secretaries in my office, the three of us said, my god, we have to do something serious with our lives (laughter), you know. What's going on here? We can't stay like this. Now, I just sat down and thought, you know, I, I really--the, the acting, the theater troupe had kind of finished me (unclear). I thought, my god, what do I do now? I, I haven't been thinking about this. I thought, I write well. I've always done that. I've always done it well, and I've always taken it for granted. My options at that point, I wasn't just going to launch myself, you know, trying to sell pieces. I thought, graduate school. I could have gone to an M.F.A. program, or a journalism program. I knew I wanted to be a non-fiction writer. And I believe virtually no M.F.A. programs in those days--this was the late '60s [1960s]--had non-fiction concentrations. You were--they were all poetry and fiction. So, I applied to journalism grad schools. And I wanted to stay in New York, so I went to Columbia. And I knew that I wanted to be, in terms of journalism, I wanted to be a critic. I wanted to write about the arts and culture. I didn't really want to be a reporter. Speaker 2: And you had read criticism--? Speaker 1: At, you know, I, partly as an English major, I'd done that. But when I got out of--I, I guess I did--when I got out of college [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts], that year that I was working in an art gallery and being an actress, maybe I was preparing to be a critic. I suddenly started reading, say, all of Ralph Ellison's criticism. I'd read 'Invisible Man' tha- I was reading that. I was going over Baldwin's [James Baldwin] essays. I was reading Mary McCarthy's critical writing. You know suddenly, this was becoming, you know, important to me; and I, I didn't really think about it. It was just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was as you were in graduate school? Speaker 1: No, it was before. Speaker 2: Before? Speaker 1: Yeah. So, when I suddenly said to myself, oh, ma- I, I guess I'll be a critic. I can write. I did not realize that I had, you know, in a way, by instinct, then starting to prepare myself for that when I got out of college, just doing all this reading--novelists and, and poet, writing about culture, and writing about the arts being critics. Speaker 2: And what about cri- being a critic appealed to you; like what did you think you would be able to do? Speaker 1: Hm. Speaker 2: You, choosing that particular way in? Speaker 1: It's a good, it's in- it's a good question. What do I mean by that? Because I'm not sure I have an answer completely. I, you know, I didn't think about it at the time, but I liked the idea of having the power to take on (laughter), you know, to express clean- cleanly, compellingly loves and, and passions that I had, but also to take on, you know, ideas. I still was a creature of the '60s [1960s]. And, you know, I was very interested in all the challenges that black writers and women writers were, were making, you know, to the traditional canons. And I really did see myself as, you know, in, in that, in there, as part of that movement. I thought, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, like having seen, for example, you mentioned Ralph Ellison--I mean, he wrote one, 'Invisible Man'; but he wrote many, many critical essays. Speaker 1: Yeah, and that book, 'Shadow and Act' [Ralph Ellison]--that was absolutely a knockout. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so, you saw writers who published criticism-- Speaker 1: And, who were also really serious writers that they, that the literary person in me totally respected. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: When you-- Speaker 1: I, I saw that, and I saw that, you know, in a sense, I was on the, the right side of cultural history is the way I felt. Speaker 2: Did Columbia University [New York, New York] have an emphasis in criticism? Speaker 1: No, it did not then. It now has an arts programs, but I found--there was a concentration called magazine writing. And I found, you know, a cluster of very good teachers there under whom I started to write, you know, these longer critical essays. And Judith Crist taught a movie reviewing course, and you had to, you know, audition for that, and I got in. Speaker 2: Audition for the course? Speaker 1: Yes, I mean you had to submit a piece of writing. She only took ten people. And I got in; and, you know, there, that was exciting. So, you know, I found a way to make that, to make that my focus. Story_ID: 649167 Speaker 1: You're in New York [New York]. Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is now the early '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: Six- '70 [1970], '71 [1971] is the year I'm at Columbia [Columbia University]; and then, I stay in New York. Speaker 1: What happens after you leave? Do you get a job right away? Speaker 2: No. I didn't want to. I was (makes sounds). Speaker 1: Because Columbia is good at helping you if you, if you want t- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's very good. And it did, yeah, it did, it makes you part of the old boy network actually (laughter), right. So, I did get some freelance assignments through, you know, a teacher here, you know, someone who knew someone else there. But I also was just, you know, I was, I just kind of thought I'm, I'm still on my own. I still didn't quite want to become part of an institution, a system. I mean, that was the part of me that was still very '60s [1960s]. But it started to become hard to make money. I, I would--worked on a textbook with a black anthropologist named Elliott Skinner for kids ['Roots of Time: A Portrait of African Life and Culture,' Margo Jefferson and Elliott P. Skinner]. You know, I did a few freelancing--it was getting hard. I got my first piece published in Harper's [Harper's Magazine]--it was raw criticism. So, in '73 [1973], I had enough clips, as we used to call them. I thought, I need to apply for a job. There's a little semi-recession going on, and I applied. I went to Newsweek. I got a job at Newsweek as a book critic. The timing was very good because wom- Newsweek had been challenged. It's all, all male, you know (laughter), all white male writer staff had been challenged by women, and by minorities. So, you know, I had very good clips. And I'd graduated the top of my class at Columbia. But history was the--you know, history and politics were on my side. Speaker 1: And, and timing because-- Speaker 2: That's what I mean. Speaker 1: --Newsweek began to open the doors--? Speaker 2: It--the women had brought, had arrived at a memorandum of understanding, as it was called. And if, and more black writers had been hired in like, '72 [1972] -- Speaker 1: Was [HistoryMaker] Sylvester Monroe there? Speaker 2: I came in '73 [1973]. Was who? Speaker 1: Sylvester Monroe, was he there then? Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yep. Speaker 1: Well, who-- Speaker 2: He was a correspondent. Speaker 1: And who, who else was there who's black? Speaker 2: Ruth Ross was there. Let me see, Sylvester, [HistoryMaker] Johnathan Rodgers had just left. He was an editor. He later married a friend of mine [Royal Kennedy Rodgers] from Chicago [Illinois] (laughter). Ruth and Sylvester, oh, (claps hands) John Dodson [ph.] was in, yeah, he was like, human resources. There were some other reporters in other cities, but I can't remember, no. Speaker 1: And were there any other black women other than you? Speaker 2: Researchers, yes, a couple. Lynn [ph.]--I'm forgetting her last name. And the young writer, the writer, Michele Wallace, who did 'Black Macho' ['Black Macho and the Myth of the Superwoman'], and the--came as a researcher, and we became very good friends. There were no other black women--there, you know, there were bla- Ruth Ross was a correspondent reporter. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: There were no other black women, you know, writers. Story_ID: 649168 Speaker 1: So, working--Newsweek magazine then was certainly very highly regarded, well respected publication (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In those days, it still was, that's right. Speaker 1: Yes. When you were working there-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --during at that time, it certainly was. They spent a lot of money on covering stories. Speaker 2: Yeah, yep. Speaker 1: And you come in to do, to be a film critic, correct? Speaker 2: No, no, to be book, book critic, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Book critic, ah. Speaker 2: I occasionally wrote about film or music, but, you know, that had really been most of what I'd done. And I had that literature background and-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --that position was open. Speaker 1: And how did that job work? How many reviews do you have to do in a week? Speaker 2: I'd--one or two, and sometimes other like I think, you know, periodically, other stories. That's how it worked. Speaker 1: Did you get to select the books? Speaker 2: Within (laughter) these limits. I was the junior reviewer. There were three of us, so my colleagues got the first choice. Here's how that worked well for me. I had a dual mandate as I saw it. One of it, one of them was to make sure that books by all kinds of women, and all kinds of--you know, every minority, black, Native American, Latinx, also, you know, books by Indian writers or, you know, whatever. I, I want to do that. Those books aren't being reviewed; so, I had a very wide choice there (laughter). I also felt, wait a minute, you know, I'm a very well, very broadly trained person who has a wide range of interests. I am not going to be ghettoized because that also could make me less--can make me more dispensable. But also, I just didn't want that intellectually. So, how it worked there was I tended to find, you know, when the writers were white--sometimes, you know, often, they were women--but I tended, I often found younger, you know, writers whose careers were on the rise (gestures). And so, that was interesting, too. Story_ID: 649169 Speaker 1: Can you describe navigating the Newsweek culture as--? Speaker 2: It was my first formal, official job. There's a lot of politicking in every department. There is, cor- you know, magazines and newspapers are a version, you know, they're somewhere between a, you know, there are, they're a corporate culture in their way. So, there're languages and there're texts and subtexts; and I've often talked with other women, certainly of my age, of all races, about how ill prepared we were for our jobs at law firms, or at magazines, or whatever because we had not--this is a whole kind of training that men get, navigating their way through the languages, the politics, the assumptions of these cultures. And we didn't have it, so you had to learn it from scratch. There were, you know, Ruth Ross, in particular, you know, black reporter talked to me a little about some of that navigation racially. And that was helpful; but it's just as true, it's just as true of blacks. You know, we, we were the first generation. There were some older than I, [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault. You know, there was a whole group of people a little older than I who had been at The Times [The New York Times], but we were all making our way early on, so. Speaker 1: Now you-- Speaker 2: So, you know, you're always reading--there's always a double life in any corporate culture. And then, there's a triple life (laughter), you know, when it comes, when it comes to race. And there can be a quadruple life if you throw in gender. Speaker 1: You were there for a number of years? Speaker 2: I was only there five years, Newsweek. Speaker 1: Five years is-- Speaker 2: It's a lot, but I was like thirteen at The Times. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so in a sense, you, you grew up there. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was-- Speaker 1: It was your first job. Speaker 2: --it was my first full time job as a journalist. That's absolutely right. Speaker 1: And what would you say were the highlights of working there? Speaker 2: Well, highlights is a strange word. I learned--high- highlights in the positive sense, I really learned how to be a professional; you know, to meet deadlines, to cover intelligently, lucidly, a wide body of material. Negatively, I learned how stale you can become; and that's why I left after five years. If you're writing the same length, in the same, same voice in the sense that it's the same temperature, you know, and there are certain stylistic things that, you know, every magazine or a newspaper forbids. So, if you're doing that year, after year, after year, after year, pretty soon it's very possible that you won't be able, however much you may want to do anything else. So, that was the, the low highlight, let us say (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. And at, at what point, 'cause you, you've written about experiencing depression. Does that begin while you're there? Speaker 2: That's, yeah, I really became aware, aware of it there. When I think back on it, this is really something that I was grappling with in college [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts] very much, too, more muted in high school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. But I've always been a very (makes sounds) up and down kind of person. I became much more aware of it as a young professional woman. And that may have had something to do with these challenges that were very--but were new, and that also were deeply consequential because I was a grown up. Story_ID: 649170 Speaker 1: And so as you--you leave Newsweek and go where? Speaker 2: I leave Newsweek, and I spend a semester at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. I kind of tried to retread; I thought, oh, I'm going to do American studies. I'll get a Ph.D. And I, I couldn't do it because I'd been working for five years. Other people had made this transition by the way, so this was just me. I thought, my god, I'm turning in papers for grades. I (laughter) I (unclear)--what? I don't want to move to New Haven [Connecticut]. I don't want to commute. It was my way to leave Newsweek, and construct a different kind of future. So, I came back to New York [New York]; and I did a combination of freelancing, which meant I could write for The Nation, for the Village Voice. I could try different things, different kinds of pieces at different lengths, and to some extent, different voices. And I started teaching at NYU [New York University, New York, New York]. I taught there in their journalism program. And then, in the early '90s [1990s], I went to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], and I taught in their writing program, and in their English lit [English literature] program. And then, in '93 [1993], I'd--oh, been freelancing, like I said, and I'd done a number of pieces for usually The Times Book Review [The New York Times Book Review]. And The Times [The New York Times] had talked to me once or twice in the '80s [1980s], and I hadn't wanted to make that move. Speaker 1: Well, and it, isn't it true in the '80s [1980s], for a while, you worked for Vogue? Speaker 2: I was on contract with Vogue, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, that wasn't on staff? Speaker 2: Yeah, I wasn't on staff. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had, I was a contract writer from like, yeah, '84 [1984] to-- Speaker 1: And during the same, from '84 [1984] to '89 [1989]-- Speaker 2: I was mostly doing, yeah, I was, I did a lot of book reviews, but I also did some, you know, big, kind of essay theses, which were fun. Speaker 1: But that was part of your freelance-- Speaker 2: That was part of, yeah-- Speaker 1: --career (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that was a kind of stable freelance, yeah, yeah, yeah. And I was also teaching while I was, some of the time I was doing that. Story_ID: 649171 Speaker 1: Then, I went to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]; and then, I went to The Times [The New York Times] after, you know-- Speaker 2: What year did you go to The Times? Speaker 1: I went to The Times in '93 [1993]; and I left in 2005, '6 [2006]. Speaker 2: So, that was a long run? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: And what did you go to The Times to do? Speaker 1: I went there--I was hired as a book reviewer. And then, in '95 [1995], I think it was, after I got the Pulitzer [Pulitzer Prize for Criticism], I became the Sunday theater critic. And then, a few years after that, I went--I actually became what they call a culture critic, meaning a critic at large. And I started writing about--which really was what I most enjoyed, you know, one week, I might write about literature. Another week I'd write about sports, or fashion, or some cultural, you know, obsession, or trend. That was really the most exciting to me. And then, I would periodically do, I did a monthly column through the Sunday book review [The New York Times Book Review]. I also continued to do some theater. I had a kind of avant-garde theater beat for a while; but the, the staple became that, that column. Story_ID: 649172 Speaker 1: In the context of building your career, which you were busy ver- you know, you, you have had, from the academic jobs to your editorial jobs-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --I want you to talk about how--a, a bit, about how you are managing your internal role while you are building your career. 'Cause you've talked--you, you've written quite a bit about the seriousness of your depression, and even considering suicide-- Speaker 2: I had. Speaker 1: --in the midst of a very active career. Speaker 2: An active career, and an active intellectual and social, and in that way, emotional life. But it, it was, you know, I, again, it was, it was a double life. There would be many weeks where--well, for example, I was doing my column every other week. And the newspaper [The New York Times] really wanted--and I understand this--me to write every week, as I'd done when I'd been a book reviewer, or a theater reviewer, and I really could not manage that. I could do every other week and periodically additional pieces. But in terms of, you know, my grappling with depression, I could not do more than that. Speaker 1: And di- were you telling them-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: --or was-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: --this was the double life? It was a secret. Speaker 2: This was the double life, yeah, yeah, yeah. So, we would just, you know, they would say, "Why aren't you writing more?" And I would say, "But look at how complicated the pieces I'm writing are" (laughter). You know, it was, it was, it was tricky. I was, I was in hiding, I was hiding it somewhat, and still very much trying to keep up. And also, though, trying to figure out, you know, if I--what, what else would give me in this part of my life more pleasure, more excitement? You know, do, do I--what other kinds--I want to write a book. What do I want to do? So, I was also trying to, you know, trying to face up to that. Speaker 1: And you were exploring your, I guess, darker thoughts through words. You did a lot of writing about your contemplations of, of how to live your life or, or end your life? Speaker 2: Well, I did that in private. My public writing, you know, was criticism. People sometimes say is always a form of autobiography. So, if you track the number of the things I wrote, you could, you could no doubt find that I was, you know, very interested in certain kinds of conflicts, struggles, certain writers, or performers who were grappling with angst, or you know, performing in the face of it. Race and gender always allow one to write about struggle and unsettled, unsettled alliances and needs. Story_ID: 649173 Speaker 1: But I was not writing about any of that publicly. I do think that, as odd as it may sound, you know, my first book ['On Michael Jackson,' Margo Jefferson], writing about Michael Jackson actually, you know, with this enormous talent, and these enormous troubles, and these, you know, internal and external transformational, and yet, trapped, you know, moves. I, you know, I think that probably was useful for me. I was fascinated by him, but --you know, it's, it's a-- Speaker 2: We--a lot of people were curious that you chose to write about Michael Jackson (laughter). Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: When was that book published? Speaker 1: It--Pantheon [Pantheon Books], same-- Speaker 2: When? Speaker 1: Oh, when? It was 2005. You know, it, it was a natural in that I'd always--you know, I'd written a lot about performance. And he was a black performer, but he was a troubled, (laughter) you know mutable black performer. He was a, a genius; and yet he was undermining himself. And he, he was such a sight for projections, you know, racial, and gendered, and black performance traditions. And that all, to me, was absolutely fascinating. Some people did say to me, you know, "This is, you're more serious than that. Why aren't you more high culture?" But I, I'd always thought of myself as moving. One of my strengths is being able to find ties and links between what was supposedly high and what was popular, or en masse, you know, and to find the language that, that expressed, and accommodated those, those, those variations. Story_ID: 649174 Speaker 1: Michael Jackson-- Speaker 2: Michael Jackson (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at the time that you wrote the book ['On Michael Jackson,' Margo Jefferson], he had fallen from grace. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, you know, I wish it had--(laughter) I wish, in some ways, it had taken me less long to write the book. I had a very interesting talk with my editor. It--brilliant black editor named Darrell McDonald [ph.], when we were first talking about the possibility of this book. And he said, "I really want him to get his due as an artist before he self destructs." Well (laughter) you know, if I'd published the book a year or two earlier, that might have happened. But he, he had very much, he had been technically, legally exonerated. But, you know, the, the decline, the crash was huge; and in certain ways, he was kind of being written out of, of, out of the culture, out of pop, yeah, except as this disgraced freak. Speaker 1: How was your book received, given the timing? Speaker 2: Mixed. There were some very, very good reviews often by, I would say, people whom I would call cultural critics. Music reviewers tended, they admired certain things about the book, but they, a number of them tended to suggest that, you know, I was venturing into territory, pop culture--pop music that, that really wasn't mine. So, I got a few little (gestures) there. You know, I would say I was pretty, pretty lucky with the reviewing. You're supposed to get some bad reviews, as well as some good ones from people you respect. It sold okay. It got a paperback, but, you know, I think the timing in that way really was not, not good. Story_ID: 649175 Speaker 1: I want to go back for a moment. In 2001, you created the one woman show, 'Sixty Minutes in Negroland.' Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Kind of a precursor to the book that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very much so. Speaker 1: --later created? Speaker 2: A lot of material from that in its, (gesture) in, in a way found its (gesture). Speaker 1: And this is also where you, not only get to create a piece, but you perform the piece. Speaker 2: I did, yes. Speaker 1: So, this, your love of acting from a very young woman that you kept up a bit-- Speaker 2: I, I kind of-- Speaker 1: --you, you were able to--. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: Where, where were--were you working, were you independent at this point, or? Speaker 2: Here's what happened. In a few years before that, I think I did '60 Minutes in Negroland' maybe in 2003 [sic. 2001]. But a year or two before that, my niece, Francesca Harper, who is a very good dancer and performer, she had been working with Anna Deavere Smith at Anna's institute [Institute on the Arts and Civic Dialogue, New York University, New York, New York]. And she and I applied to do a piece together. And we would spend a summer working on a joint piece at Anna's institute. And then, I decided--she went on, you know, to form her own dance company [The Francesca Harper Project], et cetera. And I decided to write this particular piece, which really was, you know, very much a kind of--full of source material for 'Negroland' ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson]. Speaker 1: Can you describe what, what this piece included? Speaker 2: It was a series of largely monologues, entirely monologues. What am I saying, largely? Speaker 1: So, it's a one woman show? Speaker 2: It's a one woman show. It absolutely was not longer than sixty minutes. And some of the material that found its way into the book included some of the suicide confessions and musings. Some of the stories, stories about my, my struggles in the '60s [1960s] with my parents [Irma Armstrong Jefferson and Ronald Jefferson], and with myself; some of those early childhood encounters with race. For example, the day I came home singing "Oh, darkeys, how my heart grows weary," ['Old Folks at Home'], when we had to sing a Stephen Foster song, I had no idea what darkeys meant. And my mother came wheeling (laughter) out of wherever she was, you know, to confront me. So, these kinds of-- Speaker 1: To confront you and let you understand that that was pejorative? Speaker 2: Exactly, yes, I mean, she wasn't (makes sound) (gesture), being mean to me at all, but she said, "Margo [HistoryMaker Margo Jefferson], don't you know what you--!" And I said, "What, I--?" And she said, you know, she had to explain that it was basically like nigger, is what she said. It was--that the people didn't use it very much anymore, but that's what it was like. And, you know, then, she said, "Your teacher, you know, she should have known better." It, this was an interesting, just Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] reflection. A year before, we had also sung a Stephen Foster, that same Stephen Foster song, but my music teacher that year had changed that word to lordy. Then, another year, and another teacher come along, and she doesn't have-- Speaker 1: She's unconscious (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) as my mother put it, the sensitivity (laughter) to--so. Speaker 1: And did your mother go to the school and address it? Speaker 2: No, she did not. Unh-uh, she didn't. And I'm sure, I know she stewed over whether she should, or whether she shouldn't. You know, if something else had happened, she might have; but it didn't, so she let it go. I, but I--yeah. Story_ID: 649176 Speaker 1: Were you still working at The Times [The New York Times] when you made this piece ['Sixty Minutes in Negroland']? Speaker 2: Yes, I was. Speaker 1: So, so this is quite self revelatory. I mean, you're, you're sharing-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --many secrets. Speaker 2: I, I am, I am. Speaker 1: What, what made you decide that you should bring this to the fore? Speaker 2: I think this sense that I had that all--that my struggles with depression also had to do with my needing to push expressiveness, my, my writing, my capacity for expressivity, and some form of truth; I needed to push it further. Speaker 1: Where did you perform? Speaker 2: I performed in two places. One at the Cherry Lane Theatre, lovely little place in the West Village [New York, New York]. They have two, two stages, and I was on the smaller one. Then, at a place called the cul- that was then called the Culture Project [New York, New York], which was on Bleecker Street, right near the Noho Star [New York, New York]. So, you know, there were two, you know, kind of off off off Broadway producers who were very nice about my doing this. It really began, though, with my doing that work with my niece [Francesca Harper] with, with Anna Deavere Smith, yeah. But, yes (laughter), that was my first--and then, it took a while. I then went to 'Michael Jackson' ['On Michael Jackson,' Margo Jefferson]; and then-- Speaker 1: How was it received? Speaker 2: --you know it really wasn't until 2008. Speaker 1: How, how was it received? Speaker 2: It was very well received actually. That was exciting, yeah. Speaker 1: And did your paper, did The Times cover it? Speaker 2: No, no, it was set up, so that it was--I forget what the technicalities were, but it was non-rev- it was not reviewable. Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Probably can't do that now (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a workshop or something out there, some term like that, where it's a--yeah, yeah. You know, because I'd been a theater critic, so it, it was tricky. Story_ID: 649177 Speaker 1: When did you leave The Times [The New York Times]? Speaker 2: In 2005, '6 [2006]--right after 'Michael Jackson' ['On Michael Jackson,' Margo Jefferson] came out. Speaker 1: And why did you leave? Speaker 2: Well, I had written this book. I knew I wanted to write another book. I knew that if I stayed at the Times, you know, we would keep jostling about how, you know, how much I was going to write; and I was going to have to do more. And so, they were offering buyouts. And I thought, this timing is perfect, so that's what I did. Speaker 1: So, you leave with the buyout. That's a great way to leave because you've got a cushion. Speaker 2: And I had also been teaching as an adjunct at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]. So, I leave; and I do go to Columbia. Speaker 1: And what are you teaching at Columbia? Speaker 2: I'm in the, I'm teaching non-fiction, essay, critical writing, and I'm in the School of the Arts, actually--not in the journalism program. Speaker 1: Okay. 'Cause there--offers more opportunity? Speaker 2: School of, the School of the Arts has a writing program. Speaker 1: And now, how long did you stay there? Speaker 2: Well, I, I'm still there. Speaker 1: Okay, so you-- Speaker 2: I started half time and then, I also taught at Eugene Lang College [Eugene Lang College of Liberal Arts], so I was doing both. And then about-- Speaker 1: Where is that? Speaker 2: That is part of The New School in the West Village [New York, New York]. Eugene col- Lang is the undergraduate component of The New School. And then, I went back full time to Columbia, which is about seven years ago, eight years ago, which is where I am now. So, I have been there part or full time since 2006. Story_ID: 649178 Speaker 1: And being there [Columbia University, New York, New York] part time gave you the opportunity to develop your book, and work other projects, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To, to start doing, really doing the book, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: How long did it take you to write 'Negroland' ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson]? Speaker 2: I got a Guggenheim [Guggenheim fellowship]--you know, so I turned in that official proposal, and was kind of, yeah, sanctified in 2008. And it, I didn't, I turned it in, basically, the final version in 2014, so it took a long time. Speaker 1: And with the Guggenheim, are you given time limits on what you do with the money? Speaker 2: You have it basically for every year they pick, you know, new people. What do you mean by time limit? Speaker 1: Well, you-- Speaker 2: You-- Speaker 1: --let me ask this differently. Can you explain, when you get a Guggenheim, how does the process work; and, and are you -- Speaker 2: Oh, you mean, in terms of your university and all of that? Speaker 1: And, and in terms of what you're agreeing to do? Speaker 2: You're, you are, you are proposing--you're agreeing to work on the proposal that you have turned in. You do not have to produce, you know, a book at the end of your year, or even a half book at the end of your year. It's understood that this is part of a work in pro- it's a contribution to starting or continuing a work. Speaker 1: So, you just have to work on it? Speaker 2: That's right. Now, depending on--the Guggenheim will, depending on, let's say, you're working at a university as I was. Your school might give you a leave of absence, you know; or they, and they might pay the difference between the Guggenheim and your salary, or they might not. So, you know, you figure that out yourself. Story_ID: 649179 Speaker 1: You work on it ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson] for several years. Speaker 2: More than several (laughter). You're very nice (laughter). Speaker 1: Well books--it--books can take time, and this book is constructed in a very different way from a traditional memoir. Speaker 2: Yes, it is. Speaker 1: You've got a tremendous amount of history in the book. And one of the things that I, I noticed is you look at black elite culture, say, and just black culture in general--the, the evolution of African Americans in this country with a tone that is different from some, some other writers, let's say. I mean, there's, there's, there's a certain, sometimes a little snide (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: It's true. Speaker 1: And sometimes self disparaging-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --very critical, very self critical-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: --which is not the most common way that we look at this information. So, so can you talk about that tone because it, it certainly is, in my reading anyhow, different--perhaps unique. Speaker 2: Interesting, thank you, for saying it's unique--perhaps. I think it had a lot to do with the fact that I was--a lot of the history has to do with--is centered in this, you know, rarefied world of the black elite. You can't not, and, and, hopefully, what we've talked about makes clear that, you know, I'm--there are many things about that world that I love, and admire, and honor. But you can't not also critique it, you know; in that way it would be like writing a novel of the manners without looking sternly and seriously at the manners and the society. That is--that kind of criticism is actually part, should be, and is--look at Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], you know, he turned that critical eye over the course of his lifetime. Speaker 1: Well, even it, it involved his, his viewers-- Speaker 2: His politics, exactly. Speaker 1: --he espoused the Talented Tenth, and then-- Speaker 2: And then he becomes a Marxist. Speaker 1: Right (laughter). Speaker 2: So, you know, that, that's there, and there, and there are other examples. So, you know, there are just, they was no way. This, this was inside me. Also, though, in terms of craft and training, I realized, as I was realizing, I, I want the form to be more experimental and more-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --fractured. I also realized, wait a minute, I had spent all of my professional life as some--as a critic of some kind. That voice, that way of looking at the world, you know, and at the material, you know, whether it's a life, or a social world, or a race, or a gender. That's not going to disappear suddenly into confession (laughter), and, you know, and meditation, and, you know, all the materials of memoir. That is a part of who I am as a temperament, as a writer. And I began to think of it also as a cultural memoir with a number of voices in it. Story_ID: 649180 Speaker 1: As you look--I mean, one of the things that strikes me when I, as I'm reading the book ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson] is, in, in looking at the ways in which African Americans have tried to figure out how to navigate in a culture-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that is often hateful, no matter how much money you have-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: --no matter how light your skin is, how sharp your nose it, how straight your hair is. Speaker 2: You can be punished (laughter), yeah. Speaker 1: You- part of what you described is that you are often punished, that you are often not really safe, and that you often are looking for--how, how do you make your way? Does it require so called fitting in? Speaker 2: And does it, and what performance does it require because I think, you know, again, the structure and the different, you know, first person, third person, you know, confession, scene is reflecting, you know, the truth of this, this world, this life requiring a series of performances. You know, the self is being constructed and reconstructed; and, you know, now, you're with your parents' all black friends. So, that requires one thing; and now you're, you know, with your white friends and that requires a modulation, not a complete diff- and there's always going to be something said that you may not be expecting. So, you know how do your manners cover that? You know, then you move into the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s]. And the selves absolutely multiply--meaning the circumstances, you know, the politics, the sociology, the, the aesthetics. Story_ID: 649181 Speaker 1: And you mention, because there is a lot of history in the book ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson], which I think is very helpful for context. Speaker 2: Good, yeah. Speaker 1: You, one of the things that you--you point out a number of books that people wrote about black culture, including-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I do a kind of history of that, yeah. Speaker 1: --which I do think is helpful. And one of them, which was very controversial, Lawrence Otis Graham's 'Our Kind of People' ['Our Kind of People: Inside America's Black Upper Class'], which is taking a look at this elite culture kind of from the outside, but sort of-- Speaker 2: It's sort of in the in- yeah. Speaker 1: --but sort of in the inside-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --which many people within the, that culture took great issue with. You know, and so, so the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: --looking at this culture by black people has been-- Speaker 2: It's charged. Speaker 1: --very charged-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: It, and, and in your book, you're looking at it, looking for what is the most honest view, or I'll say views, that you, because as you said, there are many voices when you're looking in different ways. What are your conclusions? What do you, what do you coming to understand about the plight of black people, including black people with advantages in, in this country? Speaker 2: You know, the basic-- Speaker 1: In Negroland (laughter)? Speaker 2: In Negro- well, you know, every, every land within black life has its own particular struggles. And they might range from, you know, a struggle for social status to a struggle for a job. So, you know, one, one challenge (laughter) is how did those, how did those worlds, in fact, serve; you know, how can they, how can they do their work, but collaborate, cooperate? How can the ones, the people with the most power be of use, not only to themselves but to those with the least power? That is a longstanding challenge and question, and sometimes it's answered very well, and it is often answered badly. And that's why we are still asking it. Racism exists for black women; sexism exists for LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender], you know; anti-LGBT, bigotry exists; and all black people are in all of these categories. So, we are struggling within them, and we are struggling constantly against everything from, you know, subtle white prejudice to venomous, potent racism. What are, what new methods do we need? You know, I don't have profound answers. We need to keep asking the right questions; but, yeah, what new strategies do we need to evolve? How do we stay focused and yet inclusiveness; how do we recognize the struggles of other groups? We're not only a black and white society now. We are black and brown, and, you know, there are all of these other non-white groups who are also grappling, struggling. How do we collaborate with them, rather than competing? Story_ID: 649182 Speaker 1: There's another topic that comes through very clearly in your book ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson], which is about how people within the African American community are judging each other, and devaluing each other based upon so many standards and criteria that really reflect back to racial oppression; and, you know, the, the ways in which we've come into this world. You take, you look at it, you show it, you describe it, you, you, from, from the judgments about skin tones-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --and hair, and, and diction. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I mean, all of these things-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --what do you hope people take away from this, 'cause we see, you show it really well. Speaker 2: The ability to self, to question, you know, let every reader take away maybe--writers are so arrogant about their hopes--the willingness, and the ability to question themselves, to take nothing about their assumptions, their upbringing, their, the prejudices that they can consider righteous and justified, to take nothing about that for granted, to assume that they are shaped and somewhat named by all of these cultural and social assumptions; and to want, to break, to want to break them apart--to begin with the analysis and then, you know, to end with some kind of revelation and desire for change. Story_ID: 649183 Speaker 1: Did you tour with your book ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson]? Speaker 2: Ye- yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: I, I'm curious as--it--did you go into any of these kind of society women's clubs perhaps (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went, I went to some, yeah. Speaker 1: --and, and how, how did you talk about, or how, how do you talk about these topics with groups of people who, who are buying in, in some, in some ways to-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, if you're at a, if you're in- if you're invited to a book club, there's a certain percentage of people who are there because they're stirred, you know. And they, and they want; you know, they're interested in what you're saying, and not only resisting it. So, there is room there for a discussion. I would always start--well, almost always start with reading some passages; and then that would set questions or comments in motion. This would happen at book fairs too, because, you know, often, you'd get representatives from, you know, different groups, or you'd have a very integrated group with blacks and whites, all, you know, all are reacting very strongly to different parts of the book. I was never in a group where everyone was against me. But, you know, can I read, you know, certain willed silences? Yeah, but some of those also came from--yes, some of them came from people who had bought in, and thought I was being too critical. Some of them came from people who thought, you know, okay, criticize everything you want, but you're still a privileged little snot, so. Story_ID: 649184 Speaker 1: You describe many stories in 'Negroland' ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson] about strong black female figures. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: And one of whom from many years ago, Mary McLeod Bethune. Can, can you talk about her from your perspective, you know, what of, what, what made you decide to include her? What about her is so powerful for you? Speaker 2: I was partly--a little fact that shows up at some point in the, Mary McLeod Bethune se- section, which is these mixed feelings that I had towards her. And then, like my sister [Denise Jefferson] did, too. You know, my mother would speak when she was, you know, talking about the black women's club movement or (makes sounds), you know, of a woman like Mrs. Bethune. My parents' [Irma Armstrong Jefferson and Ronald Jefferson] generation were always very proud of her because she'd been in Roosevelt's [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] cabinet, you know, as well as National Council of Negro Women. And yet, I was--she wasn't glamorous; you know, she, she kind of represented duty and worthiness when, you know, I was looking for show business thrills. And, and you know, my sister was saying to our mother, "Who do I look more like: Lena Horne, or Dorothy Dandridge?" You know, I liked reading about her accomplishments, but, her school was very far away from the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. And I, you know, I knew we weren't going to go to, you know, a college that Mary McLeod Bethune had started so-- Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: Because we were basically being brought up and trained to go to prestigious white colleges. Do I, did I have, grow up with some people who went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Yes. But those would be the only two black colleges [HBCUs], or just about the only two--Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, and Spelman. Speaker 2: Yes. You know, maybe a few others, but that was it. Speaker 1: But not Bethune-Cookman [Bethune-Cookman College; Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida]. Speaker 2: No, not Bethune-Cookman, no. So, you know, I was so aware of that, as my child's memory, and I began to, I really started reading about women like this in the '70s [1970s], you know, and in the--as black feminism, black feminist scholarship and history. So, I wanted to put those selves, those kin- those levels of consciousness together. And she did it, she did it by force of will and intelligence, you know; she didn't have all those tools I'd been brought up to revere. So, you know, the, the glamour, the, the manners, et cetera. So, it was interesting for me. It was like, entering--if I, again, if I were a novelist, it would be like entering the life of, and therefore, creating another character who was very removed from me, and a huge figure. Speaker 1: And, as you describe her story, for those who don't know, she kind of stumbled upon the reality that education for white students was much broader than it was for black students. Speaker 2: And she was trying to read as a little girl-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and she was discouraged, you know, in the house where her mother [Patsy McLeod] was working. So, yeah, education--missionary work first, but then, finally, education became for her, and that was a message that I really had been brought up with: education, you know, is, is a form of salvation. And no one can take that away from you. Story_ID: 649185 Speaker 1: When did you--I know when you just mentioned the '70s [1970s] as being the time that you learned a lot more about women. Do you consider yourself a feminist? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: And when did that take hold? Speaker 2: Early years of the, the women's movement. For me, again, I would say '69 [1969], '70 [1970], when I was in New York [New York] and starting to read these early documents of feminism and starting to look for, and then over the next couple of years, also finding black feminists-- Speaker 1: Well I was going to say because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) as well as--yeah, as well as white feminist friends and allies, but, of course I wanted black ones (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, there are people who--women from that time, some who look now at the start of the, the feminist movement in, at least at that time, because we know it started before. But this wave, that it was kind of closed off in terms of there were not nearly as many black feminists. Speaker 2: And there were--no. Speaker 1: And it was very highbrow-- Speaker 2: It was very haute bourgeois. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So there were no nearly as many black feminists of any class and there were not many working class women-- Speaker 1: Of any-- Speaker 2: --if any race. Speaker 1: That's one of the biggest criticisms-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of Gloria Steinem during--I mean yes, the movement is important, was important-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: --but it was very exclusionary. Speaker 2: Um-hm, all of that is true. Even something that, you know, like I was just reading about the history of this, or maybe hearing, you know, abortion, legalized abortion--absolutely, I couldn't support it more. One of the things, though, that, that women of color insisted on adding to that slogan was: and no forced sterilization, because young, poor black women were being forcibly sterilized. You know, so it was these kind of expansions and broadenings that were absolutely critical. Plus the, and, you know, the analysis of racism, you know, gender and racism are not exclu- (laughter) do not cancel each other out. So, and the particulars of black women's history, as indeed both black and female, but discriminated against on gender by black men, and on racial terms by white women. So, you know, our particular history and position needed its own analysis. And, yes, I absolutely consider myself a feminist. Story_ID: 649186 Speaker 1: And as a critic in New York [New York] writing during this period, were you, were you able to write about, or even cover, like did you review bell hooks, for example or--? Speaker 2: I never reviewed bell, but I've, I've reviewed a lot of, you know, black women scholars, artists, fiction writers, poets, playwrights--yeah, yep, yep, yep. Speaker 1: And have you ever-- Speaker 2: And also people I quote from, and, you know, it's also just part o-- Speaker 1: So, tell-- Speaker 2: You know, I'm a critic, so I make statements about the culture, or I, I, I attack, you know, prejudices so, yeah. Speaker 1: Who are some of those black writers and thinkers who you've--? Speaker 2: Oh, golly (laughter), you're asking me to go back to the '70s [1970s], '80s [1980s], '90s [1990s]--oh, god. Who have I written about? I wrote, I would, I wrote about Toni Morrison. I didn't get to do--which one did I not get to do because Peter Prescott scrammed it? But I wrote about 'Song of Solomon' [Toni Morrison]. I wrote, reviewed Alice Walker when she was young. I reviewed Toni Cade Bambara. Oh, who else there? I reviewed Leslie Marmon Silko--that amazing Native American woman. I review- did a lot of history. You know, you've probably gone through it. I just can't remember all the stuff. I, I've written about Anna Deavere Smith. I've written about [HistoryMaker] Suzan-Lori Parks. I, you know-- Speaker 1: That's (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) many, many, many. Story_ID: 649187 Speaker 1: The title of your book is 'Negroland' ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson]. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: How did you come to that and what does it mean? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Negroland is--I made this name up myself some time ago. And when I decided to use it, here's what I was thinking. The book is really focused on the first, you know, half, two thirds of the 20th century, but it goes back into the 19th--and those were the years when Negro capitalized was the honored and chosen term. National Association for the Advancement of Colored People [NAACP], early 20th century; and then, we shift over into Negro. So, you know, this was the sanctioned and powerful word I knew until black in the mid-'60s [1960s]. So, I wanted that word, the fact of it, the memory of it to evoke, and kind of represent a whole kind of history of racial struggle, civil rights, integration, propriety if you will, advancement. That's, so it, yeah, it stood in for a lot of historical, social, and tonal realities. The land, to me, a land is literally geographic. And I was thinking, of course, of a city like Chicago [Illinois], many others, where, you know, segregation, racial segregation actually divides groups and sometimes classes, into neighborhoods that function like neighboring but separate lands. I think black people have always operated and been forced to--sometimes we've made gorgeous things out of it, but it was originally imposed. We've operated and, as a separate people within, you know, the United States of America. So, that's, that's a land, you know, a kind of homeland mythologically. And, you know, the cultural, black culture, a culture is also, you know, people also think that, that is part of their, part of what their homeland has to offer them. So, I wanted all those ideas, and associations, and myths, and facts to be caught up in that. Story_ID: 649188 Speaker 1: When you talk about, you know, the, the concept of Negroland, and also the--feminism, which we were just speaking about, I'm curious--in, in Chicago [Illinois], I'm curious to know your thoughts about what impact you think Michelle Obama had, has had on our culture, you know, based upon all the research that you've done in your understanding of placement of black people, women, et cetera. Speaker 2: Yeah--no, no. Michelle Obama has been just phenomenal this way. I just wrote a piece about her for The Guardian, and one of the things that so struck me was how she summons up so many threads of black and women's history. You know, she was born and grew up, you know, at the time that the ERA [Equal Rights Amendment] was, you know, being enacted; and Title IX. Her--she's from, you know, she's a, a child of the Great Migration. You know, her family made their way to Chicago from the South. She's part of that generation that integrated all-male schools, as well as largely white schools. And, you know, she's this, she was carrying into the office these antique stereotypes about black women. She didn't seem to smile enough. She was so pushy. She was kind of domineering. She was, in some way, implicitly unfeminine. And then, she just (gesture) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And she--brown. Speaker 2: Very brown, that's right. You know, and she has a great figure. It's not a tiny, you know, it's not that skinny Jackie O [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] thing. And she just blasted through it all, and became this--she brought people, you know, an, an excitement, a thrill that they had no idea (laughter) what they were in for. You know, this expression code switching? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: She code switches, you know, I mean, I'm a funny black girl, I'm p- toying around, you know, with Ellen DeGeneres, or and with Mary J. Blige. Now I'm making, you know, a very serious speech at a college. You know, I'm in the garden. I'm talking about food. She code switches, but not to like speak just to one group, and pushing other group aside. She code switches is to, you know, expand the conversation, and our range of possibilities. And I, it's just extraordinary, it's extraordinary. And she's just, she's bold, and she's forthright; and there is no conflict, you know, between, you know, her being glamorous and serious. Oh, she's been sensational. Story_ID: 649189 Speaker 1: There is a march on Washington [D.C.] for women [Women's March] that you're about to attend, that's happening-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --tomorrow. So, that's January 21st, 2017. Why is it important to still march at, at this point? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: What does it mean? What--? Speaker 2: It means, you know, and a march is a performance, and performances matter. Trump [President Donald John Trump] has been performing bigotry, and exclusivity, and an astonishingly arrogant form, form of class privilege, of sexual privilege, of manhood privilege of abuse, abusiveness. The, the privilege, the power to abuse people, and to bully, and to belittle. And so, for masses of women of every kind, you know, to gather, and verbally and physically, simply perform--stage a performance that says, get ready, we're not, (laughter) not going to be quiet. You haven't scared us. You haven't, you know, made us decide to kind of go back. You know, we're going to be watchful but, you know, no, we're not just sitting here, saying, well, we wish you the best. We're sitting here--we're standing here, shouting, and saying, and singing, you know, watch out because we're not going to have our rights or our privileges taken away from us. We deserve them, we earned them, we want more of them. And there are more--I, I just love the range of, of people, of groups who'll be there. And we will find ways to ally, you know, to make alliances. So, don't think you can just do clever things to split us apart--you won't. Speaker 1: It, it, this is interesting on so many fronts. One, one--53 percent of white women voted for Donald Trump-- Speaker 2: Yep, yep. Speaker 1: --which is astonishing in and of itself. Speaker 2: It really was horrifying. Yeah. Speaker 1: This march--for many black women, the thought was this march was organized by white women. It took a lot to convince black women to decide to participate. Speaker 2: Well, and then, once they did (gesture)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know, the, the expansion was great, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 649190 Speaker 1: I want to ask you about your career and your life as you, as you look--I mean obviously, you're still leading the charge. You, you're getting, you're, you're heading to the march. You're, you're not stopping (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well-- Speaker 1: You're, you're not stopping-- Speaker 2: --I'm not leading it. I'm, I'm part, I'm joining it, yeah. Speaker 1: You're joining it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you're joining it. And, and I say that in the sense of you are certainly actively participating in helping to effect change. Speaker 2: I'm trying, yeah. Speaker 1: As, as you look back at your career and your life, if you had to say what you would like for your legacy to be, what would that be? Speaker 2: Well, it did happen that I ended up with a number of firsts, you know, which always for, for black people, and for black women--and women matters, you know, the first black and woman, you know, arts critic at Newsweek, the first at The Times [The New York Times], and various others. Those things symbolically matter. And I want to be remembered as someone who made the most of it; who, you know, as, as a writer, as a, as an intellectual, as I hope, an artist. You know, who took everything that had made me historically, socially, emotionally, and really tried to make, you know, material--tried to make something of it that mattered to people; and that helped--I'll just say, I won't say that it helped--that it mattered. And that, you know, will be worth reading a while from now, and that it's challenging and pleasurable. Story_ID: 649191 Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets? Speaker 2: Sure. I've lost time, you know, to anxiety, to depression; you know, to, you know, to just the effort, you know, it takes to, to change, to go forward. You slip back. So, yeah, I would say, lost time, but this is the human, this is the human state, isn't it? Speaker 1: And, you know, to, to the point that there was a time when you didn't think that life was worth living-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: --what made you understand that it was? Speaker 2: Well, I'm going to give one very direct and literal answer: I had a lot of therapy, and I had good therapy. And I have had some very good medication, which combined with therapy really helped me. Now, that means I decided (laughter), you know, to get all the help I could. And I guess that came down to a part of me knowing I don't really want, you know, there has to be, you know, I've had enough moments, so that I know there's more, you know, there's, there's more knocking around here, I don't want to waste. There was also a sense that I didn't want to waste what I'd been given by my family, you know, by, in a sense, my people. You know, I grew up feeling that whatever one did mattered--it mattered for the race, it mattered for progress. I came to also believe it mattered, you know, for, for my gender. I wanted to be, to get satisfaction and pleasure out of that, and also not just feel that it was just another burden. So, I took the steps (laughter). I set about reconfiguring. Speaker 1: I'm glad you share that because for many, many black people-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: --there's a stigma attached to getting support for any kind of mental health concern. Speaker 2: Yes, exactly. And that's why I said it. I--this is something else I want. And I see a lot of my younger black students are very aware of this. And they're writing about it and, you know, and advocating; and this makes me happy and proud. Story_ID: 649192 Speaker 1: You write in 'Negroland' ['Negroland: A Memoir,' Margo Jefferson] a lot when you're, when you're talking about yourself, about confidence, or lack thereof, about kind of this battle, the interior battle that you had surrounding confidence, which is very common for women-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --of any race-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --in particular, common for many black women. What advice would you give to a young woman, a young African American woman about you know stepping into that space of confidence? Speaker 2: Hm. Well, one piece of advice I would give is really look for--choose your friends with real care; find however small a little core of people, you know, who believe in you, who have ambitions that you believe in and respect, you know, who share your, your spiritual, you know, aims, your rebellions--who are sympathetic to your rebellions. So partner each other--that is huge, so that you're not always just afraid that the, you know, that you're hearing, listening only to your own voice, so that maybe I shouldn't reveal this part of myself, you know, to this friend because I won't be approved of, you know. Really look for little core of people who can help you, who want, like you, to break those barriers of, of uncertainty, and fear, and conventionality. Story_ID: 649193 Speaker 1: And another piece of advice I would like for you to share, for anyone who would like to follow the path that you have, you know to become a writer, a critic in this environment, you know, where there are way fewer traditional publishing models (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's true. Speaker 1: You know, the landscape has changed a lot. Some suggest maybe it's broader because of the Internet, there's so many opportunities but they-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they just don't pay, most of them, yeah. Speaker 1: --which is-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --which is why it's a real concern. So, what advice would you give to--I mean, you're teaching now, so I know you give it to them anyway. What advice do you give to your students on, on how to navigate a career and, and be able to support yourself? Speaker 2: Yeah. They have to kind of multitask. You know, I can give a lot of advice about, you know, what it takes to, you know, to, to chan- improve as a writer. But, you know, to navigate a career, you, you want to think on, on more than one platform, just as a writer. And you probably want to have another kind of job as well. You know, you probably want another, another skill that you can use--might, you know, I don't know whether it's, it's teaching or, you know, some computer knack you've got, or whatever, but multitask here professionally. Story_ID: 649194 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would like to share that I have not asked you? Speaker 2: Hm, (pause) no, I don't think--I'm just thinking back to young, young black women, you know, and finding their, you know, finding their supporters; but also, don't, don't be afraid to be different from whatever is around you. You know, if there's some style, some way of singing, or writing that, that draws you, that even, you know, the black people around you that you--you know, and some- sometimes, we'll be more used to expecting resistance, you know, or discouragement from white people. And if you get it from a black person, you might think, oh, my god, I'm, I'm not being a good enough black person (laughter), you know, I'm, you know, just really trust the range of your passions and interests. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: Okay, thank you..