 Story_ID: 296619 Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Larry Crowe; I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Evelyn Pounds. Sir could please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Colbert Isaiah King, C-O-L-B-E-R-T, I-S-A-I-A-H, K-I-N-G [HistoryMaker Colbert I. King]. Speaker 1: All right and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: September 20, 1939, Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Okay and sir what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am deputy editor of The Washington Post, editorial page and I'm a columnist. Speaker 1: All right and what is today's date? Speaker 2: (Laughter) May 3rd, May 4th, (laughter) 19--2005 [May 4, 2005]. Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time, and you don't have to give your address but you know. Speaker 2: We're in my home here in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay, Northwest Washington. Speaker 2: Northwest Washington. Story_ID: 296620 Speaker 1: Okay, before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled by management to ask you (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer, the first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, yes I do, chicken. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Not yet. Speaker 1: No vacation yet (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) I take 'em so seldom. Speaker 1: Okay, now the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: It is what is. Story_ID: 296621 Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Amelia, A-M-E-L-I-A, Colbert C-O-L-B-E-R-T. Speaker 1: Can you give us her maiden name? Speaker 2: Colbert. Speaker 1: It's Colbert? Speaker 2: Colbert and her last name is King. Speaker 1: Oh, Colbert, that's right, I'm sorry. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 28, 1932, '32 [1932]. Speaker 1: Okay, thirty--no? Speaker 2: Twenty-two [1922] Speaker 1: Twenty-two [1922] okay. Speaker 2: Twenty-two [1922], '28 [1928]. 19--hm? Speaker 1: Okay, now let's get it, which one is it? Speaker 2: May 28, 19--'18 [1918], 1918. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighteen [1918] okay, all right and where was she born? Speaker 2: Takoma Park, Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: I went down to the Culpeper County Courthouse [Culpeper, Virginia] where the family was and I was able to trace the family back to about 1830s, 1830s and that would have been my grandfather's [Robert Colbert] mother, so my great-grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who at the time was listed in property records as a young girl who was a slave. Speaker 1: Do you know where she was a slave at? Speaker 2: Yeah, Culpeper, Virginia. Speaker 1: Do you know whose property? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the property of--at the time the family was not, not the Culpepers, they were called the--the Rixies. Speaker 1: Okay R, R? Speaker 2: R-I-X-I-E, this--even they are Rixeyville, Virginia. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: But the Rixies owned that property and they were sold. The Rixie property was sold to the Colberts, a large family also in Culpeper, Virginia and that's how I found her name. She was part of the property that was conveyed from the Rixies to the Colberts. Speaker 1: Okay, now did they pronounce it Colbert or in those days, 'cause I know we have that actress Claudette Colbert? Speaker 2: Colbert, not it was Colbert. Speaker 1: But Colbert, okay all right. Yeah, so you know maybe. Speaker 2: Didn't get the French pronunciation, no. Speaker 1: Maybe when she got famous she changed hers (laughter) like so many do. So are there any stories that are passed down from those days? Speaker 2: Yeah, the reason I learned about--got interested in this was my, one of my aunts remembered my, my--an uncle that they had who was telling the story about the, about the family and they had insisted that the family name was not Colbert, it was really Rixie, and so I went down to the courthouse in, in Culpeper and checked it and what happened was the store there remembers that the family had gotten separated when they sold, when the Rixies sold property to the Colberts, but some of the family members got--and they got split up in different places and one of the uncles was down in the, working around the creek cleaning, doing something around the creek and he heard some noise over in the bushes and then wondered what that noise was and he challenged the person over there and it turned out to have been his brother who had been sold to another family and they hugged together, but they all came together at a certain point in--I can't exactly say, but it would have been around 1850, '60 [1860], '70 [1870] during the Civil War period, maybe post-Civil War period. They were all together and all the Colberts grew up in the Culpeper area and then they scattered. Speaker 1: That's, that's an interesting story, very few people have stories from slavery that they can tell you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was passed down like that. Story_ID: 296622 Speaker 1: Okay, any other stories in that, on that [maternal] side of the family that are passed down? Speaker 2: How they managed to steal from the owner, you know the prize item was salt and sugar and the way the owner would make sure that they weren't stealing was that he would always leave a little mark in the sugar, this is--probably others have talked about this too, but he'd leave a little mark and the way, what they would do--the way my grandfather [Robert Colbert] told the story is that they would get some sand and practice making the mark in the sand to make sure (laughter) it resembled the sugar mark and then they'd go ahead and do it and take the sugar and put the mark back on and keep going. Speaker 1: So it's just an impression in the sugar or you know what they--like a dent, indentation (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah he would, he would just draw a line, he would make a certain impression in the sugar, the owner would and go off and they would just practice at making it and then they would get the sugar. Speaker 1: Okay, any other stories, now these are good. Speaker 2: No I'm not gon' tell you more of our family secrets. Speaker 1: Nobody's, nobody's told that story before and it's, probably, it might be in some slave narratives and that sort of thing, you know or stories from those days, but I haven't heard it you know personally. Speaker 2: Yeah that story was--my grandfather passed it on to my mother [Amelia Colbert King]--told us about it, but they use to laugh about it lot you know how they did it. Speaker 1: Oh, that's something, that's something. Did they, is there any, are there any African holdovers in your family that they know about, I mean that they talk about a lot? Speaker 2: I was in, I was in Liberia on a business trip and one of the Liberians told me that there were some Colberts there that were buried in a, in a cemetery nearby. I got interested enough that I came back here, I went to the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] and looked up the records of the American Colonization Society and there were in fact some Colberts who did return to Africa or did migrate to Africa as part of the American Colonization Movement and these were Colberts from Virginia as well. I'd never made the direct connection between the Colberts there and the Colberts here, but they were all from the same area where the Colberts lived in the Culpeper [Virginia] area that they moved back and there were a number of Colberts who, who did go back. Speaker 1: Now that's interesting, that's the first story like that we've heard I mean from somebody, now, but the American Colonization Society did regularly send people back. Speaker 2: And the records are extensive in the Library of Congress, I was surprised I mean page after page, not just from the Colberts in the, in the Virginia area, but other states as well. Speaker 1: Yeah that was a solution to what to do with the free Negro, and-- Speaker 2: Right, it was. Speaker 1: They didn't know what to--they didn't want 'em to stay there so they'd send them to Liberia. Speaker 2: It was not a, a desire to see us uplifted, it was a desire to get us out of the country, and-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --and some of the people who were behind it, some of the great fathers of the country too. Speaker 1: If not all of 'em (laughter). Speaker 2: All of yeah (laughter) yeah. Speaker 1: You know [President James] Monroe, [President James] Madison [Jr.]. Speaker 2: Monroe, was a. Speaker 1: [President Thomas] Jefferson, I mean, well Jefferson wasn't in it but. Speaker 2: A major--Monroe was a major player. Speaker 1: Yeah, Monroe was the major man yeah, that's right now [Vice President John C.] Calhoun. Speaker 2: But you go, you go to Liberia and what do you find is the capital of Liberia? Monrovia. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Named after him, and you go up and down the streets in Liberia and you see there's a, there's a Pennsylvania County in Liberia [sic.]; there's a Maryland County in Liberia. Street names, main streets and, and all the streets that we would have here, it was completely an American society that had been transferred over there when the Africans went back and, and really remade--went over and colonized Liberia and pushed the indigenous Africans out of the area and that's part of the reason for the Civil War that we saw here in the '70s [sic. 1860s]. Speaker 1: That's right, and you--I was reading one of your--well, an article ['Pat Robertson's Gold'] about, an article you wrote about Pat Robertson's activities in Liberia, but we'll talk about that later. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I--this--I just find it great yeah. Okay, so any other stories from your side of the family? What other family secrets now? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm not gon' tell you any more of our stories of theft (laughter). Speaker 1: We know how to steal sugar. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Some of us leaving the country, I'm not gon' tell anymore of that (laughter). Story_ID: 296623 Speaker 1: Now, so did your mother [Amelia Colbert King] grow up in--? Speaker 2: She, she was born--at that point the family, her parents, her father [Robert Colbert] and mother [Hattie Colbert] moved from Culpeper [Virginia], came up to Washington [D.C.], lived for a while I guess in Takoma Park, Maryland, which is not far from where I am right now and that's where she was born and they lived in, partially in Havre de Grace, Maryland and Baltimore, Maryland then they came back here to Washington. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, is there any story about why they moved so many times or? Speaker 2: Well my grandfather was just a great traveler and he was--well, no (laughter) he moved 'cause he needed to find work, I mean (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He, he followed opportunities to get jobs, that's what--and he worked on the railroad for a while and when that job dried up, he was living in Havre de Grace at the time, when that dried up they moved to Baltimore and I'm not quite sure what he was he doing then, but it was like most people that, you know finding, finding work and moving the family where there was, where there was employment. Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother talk about growing up in Takoma Park? Speaker 2: Not so much Takoma Park, but she talked about growing up Havre de Grace, where and where she remembers there was a time of, of relative you know, plenty because they had a--they were able to grow their own vegetables and they had, raised chickens and they sort of farmed, or a farm-like setting and she could--and, and because they were near the Susquehanna River they were able to fish,--and they loved fishing so they ate a lot of--they never for want of anything in Havre de Grace and she tells the story of my grandfather from time-to-time having to respond to train wrecks and the one good thing about that is that they was a lot of bounty they had--you know. Food had to be--was gonna spoil so they gave the food to the people who cleaned up the train wreck. So he would always come back with, laden down with hams and sides of beef and things like that. She remembered those days. Speaker 1: Okay tragedy becomes (laughter)--. Speaker 2: We always you know make good off of something else like that you know. Speaker 1: Okay, now did she, did she go to school in Havre de Grace? Speaker 2: She went to grade school; she talks about grade school here in Washington. I think she went for a few years in Baltimore. She was a real young kid then, but she finished her grade school here in Washington at [Thaddeus] Stevens Elementary School [Washington, D.C.] which is where my father [Isaiah King III] attended also; where my brother attended, my sister and I attended Stevens Elementary School, and from there she went to junior high school, Francis Junior High [School, Washington, D.C.]. Every member of my family attended Francis as well, and from there she went to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], finished Dunbar in 1934, '33 [1933], '34 [1934], '35 [1935]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And had a long stretch before she went back to college after all of us were grown with families, the children, my brother and my sister and I, and then she went back to college, got her undergraduate degree and then got a master's degree in early childhood education and taught for a few years before she was forced to--forced to retire 'cause of illness. Speaker 1: Okay, so. Speaker 2: In between she was a domestic worker, took in washing and laundry, worked hard. Speaker 1: Yeah, sounds like she really--she was really focused on. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was focused. Speaker 1: On finishing school. Speaker 2: She, when she was in junior, elementary in Dunbar High School, we lived in a part of Washington called Foggy Bottom and of course schools were segregated but Dunbar was the sort of the academic oriented high school for African Americans. She didn't have the money to take the streetcar, so she walked to school and walked back every day, which was a distance of you know three miles each way, three and a half miles each way, but that's what she did. Story_ID: 296624 Speaker 1: Well can you tell us about your father, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Isaiah, I-S-A-I-H [sic. Isaiah] King III. Speaker 1: Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 15th, and the year would've been 19--when was my mother's [Amelia Colbert King] 1913? He would have been 1913 also. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Whatever her year was--yeah. Speaker 1: She was '18 [1918], 1918. Speaker 2: His was 1918 too then. Speaker 1: Okay all right and where was he born? Speaker 2: New Bedford, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Okay that's a seafaring town you know? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You bet. Speaker 2: Home of Daddy Grace [Marcelino Manuel da Graca]. Speaker 1: Yeah, so what do you know about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: I know a lot now, his grandfather--I wrote a column ['A Heavy Legacy of Wars'] about it so and I have some materials on it. His grandfather was in the Civil War. He was a young boy of about sixteen, he was Isaiah King I; sixteen, seventeen when he was recruited, it just was shortly after [President Abraham] Lincoln authorized the enlistment of black troops or colored troops as they called it. He joined the Massachusetts Fifth Cavalry [5th Regiment Massachusetts Colored Volunteer Cavalry]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That, that they were formed after the 40th, 54th--(unclear), but he was the Fifth Cavalry. He joined the Fifth Cavalry because he was told that he could ride horses and not have to walk so, and he was also--he said his mother assured the recruiter that, "Don't worry ma'am at the first sign of shooting we'll bring your son home" (laughter), so he joined up (laughter), he said that never happened. I say this because there was a story. I came across an article written about him in 1934 [sic. 1932] by, in the New Bedford newspaper [New Bedford Evening Standard; The Standard-Times] where he was interviewed about his, his service. He, he was part of the, the group that went into Richmond [Virginia] right after Richmond fell. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he even tells the story about seeing Abraham Lincoln. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Coming through, he said he wanted to see the president 'cause he heard the president was coming and then they waited in this large dining hall and then he--so this old farmer come in and said he was so tall he had to stoop down, he said, "Who's that farmer," the guy said, "That's the president of the United States," and it was Abraham Lincoln, but so I know about him but I also know about his family, my great-grandfather's family through Leon Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash]. Leon Dash use to be a reporter at The Washington Post he's now at the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], but Leon and I were talking at The Post, just teasing each other about various things. It turns out that--I mentioned I had the connection in Massachusetts, he said he had one too and I said my family were the Colberts, but were the Kings, and he said, "Well I know the Kings too, I'm related to the Kings." It turns out that--. He did a family tree, he showed me his family tree that showed my--that showed his family marrying a King or a King marrying his family in something around 18-, the 1850s and so that would have been probably my great-grandfather's sister who married one of his, young Dash's relatives. So they've been up there, they've up in that area for some time in Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah; yeah Leon Dash is--yeah he was with The Washington Post for a long time, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So Leon and I are distant cousins. Story_ID: 296625 Speaker 1: Okay, now so, so how long did your great-grandfather [Isaiah King I] live, I mean he was still around in the '30s [1930] and? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was well up until his--I guess he was up in his nineties then at the time he was interviewed, and they have a plaque up there in New Bedford [Massachusetts] and they're commemorating his service, and he was one of the last members of the Grand Old Army. Speaker 1: Oh the Grand Army of the Republic? Speaker 2: Of the Republic, Grand Old Army of the Republic Colored [sic.], it was called Colored, not reserves, but it was a large (unclear) of they had up there, but he was the last sole surviving member of that group. Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's something that needs to be, yeah, need to check that out. So any other stories from that side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, he, this, this great-grandfather of mine was quite, quite a guy just from reading the stories. From Richmond [Virginia] they chased one of Jefferson Davis' top officers down into Mexico. They tried to capture him, but he got across the border. He came back from Texas, he went out became a whaler, and out of, out of Boston [Massachusetts] or out of Massachusetts got shipwrecked, went up to Alaska, the North, was it the North Pole, Alaska? Speaker 1: Newfoundland [Canada] I guess. He was, he was quite a rambunctious guy. My grandfather [Isaiah King II] himself was, was--came, came down to Washington [D.C.] and settled here and he was not the same kind of adventuresome guy, he was much more sedentary. Sat on the porch, watched the kids. Speaker 2: Right (laughter), now you have the story about him sitting. Speaker 1: Careful, careful (laughter), when he sat on, when he sat on the front porch of our home in, in Washington down on L Street and he watched us and I thought that was just great that he kept such an eye on us. We have photos of him sitting on the top porch. It wasn't until my mother [Amelia Colbert King] was really, really near the end and she was talking about my grandfather and disclosed that really what he was doing, he was the lookout for the, for the numbers operation that was taking place across the street. He sat up there and kept watch on the--to make sure--to give 'em the high sign when the police were coming you know. Speaker 2: Okay, now what did he do for a living otherwise, I mean before you? Speaker 1: I don't recall my, my--that grandfather ever working. Maybe that was what he was doing (laughter), but I don't, I don't recall him working. I, I just never remembered him going out, 'cause he died when I was ten or eleven, but I just don't recall--and we lived in the house for a while, I just don't recall him ever going out to work. Story_ID: 296626 Speaker 1: Okay, now did your father [Isaiah King III] talk about growing up in? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh, yeah he, my father and my mother [Amelia Colbert King] both talked about growing up in Washington [D.C.], what it was like, their friends, the neighborhood. They all knew each other pretty much, what school was like, anecdotes from that. It was a segregated city at the time and so most of their activities were confined to the immediate neighborhood or going to the same theaters that I ended up going to which were theaters on U Street, which was sort of the Black Broadway in Washington or the local neighborhood theater, the Mott Theater [Washington, D.C.], using the same swimming pools, same schools, talking about the teachers we had. I had to--I shared one of my father's teachers in junior high school. I mean that's how stable the situation, the situation was. His teacher taught him electricity in junior high school, taught me electricity in junior high school, and my mother's English teacher in, in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] taught me as well, and we just had that kind of--that's what. A segregated community there are obvious shortcomings especially if you're black in a segregated community, but there's some strengths there too and part of it is the fact that there is some stability; there are relationships that run deep in the community. So I could walk six to ten blocks either way and in any direction from my house, and if I didn't run into a relative, I ran into somebody who knew me from the church [Liberty Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.] or knew me from the school or some family members, and there was that sense of security you had in a rather unsecure--insecure environment as far as the segregation is concerned, but in the neighborhoods in which we lived there was security and I think about that a lot you know as I get older because you don't see that as much in, in some communities. Speaker 2: You know, is there a story about how your--oh, I didn't ask you about your father's--now, did he, he went to Stevens [Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] too and went to? Speaker 1: My father went to Stevens School; my father went to Francis Junior High School [Washington, D.C.]. He went from Francis to Armstrong High School [Samuel Chapman Armstrong Technical High School; Armstrong Manual Training School, Washington, D.C.] and in the first, as he tells the story during his first year at Armstrong, this teacher was--somehow got on the--I guess they must've been reading 'Ivanhoe' [Sir Walter Scott] and she began to describe in lavish detail what it was like at the, at that era and what it was like when Ivanhoe came into the Village that hamlet--and she was describing the, the ornaments and the horses and the way the town looked and my father said he raised his hand and he said, "Ms. So and So?" She said, "Yes." He said, "Were you there?" And she said, "Collect your books, leave and don't come back without your parents," and he never came back and that was in the ninth grade. So that was the extent of his public education, I mean tenth grade, the extent of his public education. Speaker 2: Did he ever explain why he asked the question or what? Speaker 1: He was being a smart aleck, he was being a smart aleck and he, he always, he always had a great sense of humor, sometimes a little wicked. I can remember when he was on his deathbed and, and he had just converted, just become a Christian after all those years. He would always see us off to church [Liberty Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.], he would make sure that clothes were clean and dinner was gonna be ready when we came back from church, but he never went, but near the end he did become a Christian and, and he was in his deathbed, he literally was confined to his bed and some of the greats, wonderful sisters from my mother's church where he had joined came over to see him and they went upstairs to see Brother King, and we were downstairs and my mother was downstairs and the next thing you know we could hear the sisters upstairs just laughing and laughing and laughing. That's my father, he started telling his jokes, and he had a tendency to cut right to the edge (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 671384 Speaker 1: So your father [Isaiah King III] had a good sense of humor? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah he had, he had a wicked sense of humor. He, he--there wasn't a joke he couldn't pass up or pass along. Speaker 1: Okay now, now is there a story about how your father and mother [Amelia Colbert King] met? Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't, don't recall ever hearing how they met. I mean they were, they were--they lived in the neighborhood [Foggy Bottom, Washington, D.C.], they were classmates, but nothing comes to mind as exactly what happened that triggered their, you know their relationship. Speaker 1: Okay, but they probably knew each other a long time I guess, they were in the same neighborhood? Speaker 2: Yeah they did, yeah they did. Speaker 1: Same neighborhood, same age, okay, now, now what did your father do for a living? Speaker 2: He, he was a laborer at the Naval Gun Factory [U.S. Naval Gun Factory; Washington Navy Yard, Washington, D.C.] and then he, I mean first his first job I think was helping to build the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] as a laborer, then he was a--for a long, for a number of years a laborer at the Naval Gun Factory. Then he went into the [U.S.] Department of Commerce and he served as a clerk, and then as a patent clerk and he retired from the U.S. Patent Office [U.S. Patent and Trademark Office], which is part of the commerce department. Speaker 1: Okay, now that's a pretty, that's a--that's quite a jump from being a, from doing construction work on these big projects, I mean how did he make that transition? Is there a story there? Speaker 2: No, he, he there was I guess maybe the expansion of the government and he applied for a clerkship, and was hired. It--the way the hierarchy ran into time you could go in as a messenger, you could go in as--from messenger you move to the next level as a clerk and then various levels of seniority in the clerk area, in the clerical area, and that's, that's what happened. He didn't start as a messenger, but he, but he transitioned in there. Speaker 1: Okay, so he just, once he got in there he could do the work necessary. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And just move on up. Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it you know he stayed in that area of clerk, but he was--but it enabled him to get a steady living and also he worked part-time in the evenings too. He worked part-time doing laborer work or janitorial work. He did that for a number of years, he had two jobs. Story_ID: 671385 Speaker 1: Okay, now who do you think you take after the most? Your mother [Amelia Colbert King] or your father [Isaiah King III] or do you get a little of both? Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know it depends on the day and it depends on moment and it depends on the occasion. It--I can find myself responding in a certain way to something and realizing oh, this is, this is really how she would have done it, how she would react and other times I can do something with humor and I know this is, this is my father, but it's, it's you know there, I can go for long stretches and say well she's a dominant influence and then I can realize, oh my God he's really got a hold of me and; so it's hard to say, it really is hard to say which one is the most--has, had the most influence. Speaker 1: Okay, now how many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: I have one brother who is younger, and a sister who is older. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you're right in the middle? Speaker 2: I'm right in the middle. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 671386 Speaker 1: Now can you describe your first childhood memory? Do you have an earliest childhood memory? I mean some people can't remember but? Speaker 2: Yeah, I--my--it, it goes back--I would put it somewhere, I would put myself somewhere around three, because I was certainly two years away from elementary school [Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], and so I can see myself playing at 716 23rd Street, which was my [maternal] grandparents' [Hattie Colbert and Robert Colbert] address and I recall their, their dog, Ronnie [ph.], and I can recall going out into the yard and the backyard and I hadn't started elementary school and that would've been at least maybe two years before I was five--maybe two years old I think. I remember a lot of those experiences on that street, 23rd Street Northwest, playing outside, and I can recall experiences with my other grand-, my other [paternal] grandparents' [Gertrude King and Isaiah King II] home on L Street. I would've been four; I hadn't started elementary, elementary school then. This is the house where my grandfather sat on the steps upstairs. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I remember things up and down that street, playing up and down that street. I remember my grandmother--the other thing I use to do, course I may have been five or six then I think 'cause I was able to write and count, and take down numbers. The reason it was important for me to be able to do that is because in the afternoons she would be ironing. I think she took in ironing, but the--they would announce the results of the horse races on the radio and my job was to take down, you know when they said, "Horse so and so paid 390, 460 and 150," I'd take down those numbers and what you do is you take down the numbers and you add the first column and the first column's the number for that, first number for that day, and the next race was the second number. So you had to do, follow three races and then you'd get your three numbers and so that was my job for which I got like a nickel to take down the numbers, because we had to know what the number was for the day. So whether, so when the guy came around you know we could look for him to pay off if you hit the number, and I didn't have a childhood of criminality, but it, but I learned something about numbers, stuff like that (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter). Story_ID: 671387 Speaker 1: What were some of the other sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, the sights that, that, that are probably most prominent--the occasional car with big fenders. Speaker 1: So what are most of the (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Skater mobiles. Speaker 1: What, what do most of the cars look, look like? I'm just. Speaker 2: Most of the cars looked, they had, they were, they were sloping backs, big fenders on the side, oh and running boards, they all had running boards and you could all stand on the running boards, thick headlights. Speaker 1: These are the '40s [1940s] right? Speaker 2: This is '40s [1940s], sounds, sights, war, uniforms, a lot of uniforms because my cousin, my uncle went off, both cousin and uncle went off to war [World War II, WWII] and we'd go down to the train station to see them off at Union Station [Washington, D.C.] and it'd be full of soldiers and sailors coming back and forth. Across the street from where we lived was a Columbia Hospital for Women [Washington, D.C.] and the Weather Bureau and, I remember years in the early '40s [1940s], there was a machine gun placement on the top of the Weather Bureau, and--in case we were attacked from the south by the Japanese (laughter), but we had, we had machine gun placements there, and our sights the horses trough you know the little thing at curbside with water and so the horses could drink because we had a lot of vendors who came through with horses, selling things and horses were such a common sight in the neighborhood. The, the guy who sold vegetables and watermelons had a horse. The guy who carried the ice through had a horse, and I think cops had horses too, but they all had a place every now and then--with space a long, the water was pumped and the horses could stop and just drink water, things you don't see these days. Streetcars, you don't see streetcars any more, the sounds of streetcars. The screeches, there are other familiar sounds that are just gone you know just disappeared. And also the smells, you would you know, the horse came through you'd know it 'cause he'd leave something behind and you, you got use to that. We didn't have air conditioning so the, so the window stayed open and you could, you knew what people were eating down the street or around the corner, or next door. Yeah, odors were very strong in those days. Odors were very strong because we you know--some people had refrigeration in some places. Like we had iceboxes for a long time, I don't know--get us a refrigerator until I was well into elementary school [Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]. Coal, you don't see coal now. We had a coal burning stove, you'd get some aroma from that. I remember gas came in so late. I mean natural gas, that was like I don't know, nuclear power or something so strange. Turn something on and it comes right up you know--what do you mean, what is this? Matches don't do anything with matches around the house anymore, we use to--matches to start fires. Just the whole, the whole time, everything around us was different then. The city [Washington, D.C.] smelled differently, looked differently. People laughed more, always laughing about something, either laughing or you're crying you know. We had a lot of funerals in those days, funerals are not like now, 'cause we had a tradition of bringing the body home in my family, but in most of the neighborhood. So you didn't see--bodies didn't lie in state in funeral homes before the funeral. We bought the body home so the smells that came along with that you know the gladiolas in your living room you know that's a terrible smell, I mean I still hate the smell of gladiolas because of it's associated with that guy coming into the house bringing that casket into the house, setting it up and putting these big draperies in your living room, putting the casket there, and opening the casket and there's your grandfather, there's your grandmother, there's your aunt. Story_ID: 671388 Speaker 1: And so that you know, think about it those were sights of the childhood and you'd walk down the street and you could see this big black--no, it's not a creche, but it would be on a door and you know that somebody had died inside the house and that there was a body inside the house, and when you saw that your voice--you would lower your voice as a kid you going by you know, 'cause kids walk along the street talking at the top of their voice you'd, shh, drop your voice because there's a body in there, and there was a lot of that in my neighborhood [Foggy Bottom, Washington, D.C.], as it was in my house and those are, those are things that, that you don't see now. You know you couldn't probably go anywhere around the city and find a situation where a body is brought home after death. Speaker 2: Yeah, it doesn't happen anymore, you know it just doesn't happen. Do you think it kind of impersonalizes the--I mean that's the thought I had about that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, it, it does. I mean funerals are not like they use to be now. There used to be a time you'd have a wake the night before, now they have the wake an hour before the funeral. You know the wake is at ten, the funeral is at eleven, you gotta get to the cemetery by twelve, one o'clock at the latest. If you don't get there by one o'clock it can't happen until the next day. That, that's I mean back in the--when I was growing up grief had a chance to play out. The night before you know you had that long wake and then the, and at the end of the wake then the bottles come out and people start drinking and talking and feeling better and then they get ready for the funeral and the funeral is the next day and they go at it but then after the funeral they come back and people work it out over the next two or three hours at the home, food and drink and stuff and you had a time to get through it. Now it's cut and dry and I think that, I think has a, I think that works on people on ways that they don't even realize. I think we worked out a lot of things emotionally in, in--back in the day you know back in the days I was growing up that people don't work out now and they, and they carry a lot with them and there is a lot more stress, I mean not that we didn't live in stressful times, but we worked out our stress. People don't do it now, they carry it inside and it's, it's they don't shout anymore, they don't--at church they don't (laughter), hear 'em cry you know--then some type you know doing it the right way and they would get up screwed up. Story_ID: 671389 Speaker 1: Now you described it, I was reading one of your columns ['Turning a Deaf Ear to the Displaced,' Colbert I. King] about gentrification and you were describing how the middle class black people related to the lower classes and the economic classes in those days and there was an interaction you know between people that you don't--see people you know walk through your neighborhood on the way to some government job and they would maybe, but they, they brought something with them, they didn't--they weren't just passing through. Speaker 2: Well, let me talk a little more about that it, it--we had, we had a very strict class structure growing up in Washington [D.C.]. We did in our neighborhood have a range of people economically--African Americans, we had doctors, two doctors, three doctors. We had, there was Lawyer Pinkette [ph.], his first name was Lawyer you know you didn't call him Mr. So and So, it was Lawyer, Lawyer Pinkette, Lawyer Jones [ph.]. Had some teachers, schools teachers who lived in the neighborhood. Primarily a working class neighborhood, but we get to high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], well even before high school I learned--these are things that happen around the dinner table that we did know that there was a pecking order in our community, a pecking order that we had to deal with before we had to deal with the wider community outside which is the white folks outside and within our own community. In Washington, there was an area called Up on the Hill, people lived up on the hill which was close up around the U Street area. They were the more middle income blacks, middle class blacks. That was mostly your doctors and your lawyers and your--people who worked at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] lived through the Joy Park [ph.] area of Washington. That was my neighborhood, I mean that was--I didn't, I wasn't welcomed there. Churches had that kind of pecking order. There were the big churches, first tier black churches where the teachers and the doctors and they all went. Baptist churches primarily, some Catholics but Baptist churches, and there was a lower end of it, Baptist church scale. Most of 'em, a lot of 'em in the Foggy Bottom area [Washington, D.C.] where I lived, smaller churches, and there was no law requiring blue collar people, working class people to go to this church, and the professionals go to that church, but somehow it happened that way, and when you get to high school level, it's still segregated, you found that Dunbar High School tended to attract the kids who were college oriented, going to a college and then Armstrong [Samuel Chapman Armstrong Technical High School; Armstrong Manual Training School, Washington, D.C.] where my father [Isaiah King III] attended was technical. You had Cardozo High School [Francis L. Cardozo High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.] which prepared kids for commercial jobs, and the interesting thing about Cardozo High School even to this day, you know what they call--we were called the Crimson Tide at, at Dunbar. Another school, a technical school called themselves the trainers at Cardozo they call themselves to this day the clerks. Speaker 1: That's their mascot? Speaker 2: They call themselves the Cardozo Clerks and that's what they were preparing themselves for, to go under the government working as clerks. Speaker 1: So but not the--there were no wolverines or titans or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, clerks, the clerks. Speaker 1: The clerks? Speaker 2: Cardozo clerks, which was a reflection of what the aspirations were of the kids there, and certain kids went to that school, and my mother [Amelia Colbert King] had aspirations for us to, you know, move up a couple of notches so she took that walking business to Dunbar High School, and we went to Dunbar, I went to Dunbar, my sister went to Dunbar. We encountered some class prejudice you know, it's, it was there and it, it stung, but you had to work your way through that before we could even deal with the wider world, and the other stuff that was gone come our way. Story_ID: 671390 Speaker 1: Now how would you describe yourself as a little kid, I mean what were you like and what did you, what'd you like to do and-- Speaker 2: Uh. Speaker 1: --what bothered you? Speaker 2: As a, as a little kid now going back now to you know before ten or ten-ish or before that era--did all the things that all the other kids in the neighborhood [Foggy Bottom, Washington, D.C.] did. We'd shoot marbles, go swimming, hiking, you know stuff like that, ride bikes, make skater-mobiles. I also like to read, probably liked to read a little bit more than some of the other kids, and took as much time as I could to do that, but peer pressure being what it is you know, the, the--reading wasn't encouraged I mean at home it was, but when I wasn't in the house I was doing the things that all the other kids did. I was smart, much smarter, smarter than most of 'em. Had a family that, where the parents [Isaiah King III and Amelia Colbert King] really were intent on us going up the next level. That meant there was always tension between what I wanted to do with my friends, and what my parents wanted me to do. That was really pronounced in junior high school [Francis Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] when, when there's a tendency to run with your buddies and the pressure says, "Come home, do your homework," and stick around home and the pressure says, "At this point we're gonna go out and go to the dance," and she said, "Yes you can go to the dance, but you got to be home at ten o'clock," and everybody else can come home when they want and there was always that kind of tension growing up. Speaker 1: Were your parents pretty strict in terms of? Speaker 2: They, they were, they would--they set limits and they held to those limits, and they, they didn't bulge. My mother set the limits, my father enforced the limits, there was no, no appeal. I grouched a lot, I was probably the worst of the three, and probably got more discipline than, than the others because I warranted it. I mean I had had it, I deserved it. Without it I don't know what would have happened if they hadn't stayed on me, but they knew what I had come to realize myself as a parent, that if you don't set the limits and you don't have goals, you're just not gonna get there. Kids not gonna get there by themselves, not with all the influences you have and part of them what they had to do was to make sure that they kept me directed, because left to my own devices, I don't know what the hell I would've done. I didn't--had my mother told me over, and over again, and she was absolutely right, I didn't have the sense I was born with so you know, somebody had to think for me at (laughter) at critical, at crucial moments in my life, and they did, they had no, they had no--some parents these days they have reluctance to step in. My parents had no reluctance whatsoever, they'd just say, "You're stupid anyways so you just do it" (laughter) you know. But I, they were, that was, that was the best part of it. I mean they really did have an idea of what they wanted out of us and what they wanted us to do and they were just unwavering. I mean they just didn't--there was no negotiating, not, not in that household, you just didn't negotiate--you didn't negotiate over, over things like that. You didn't have any discussion, family discussions, exchange of views or what's best, they knew what was best for us, you know. Maybe it wasn't always right, but they knew what was best for us and there was no disputing that. Story_ID: 671391 Speaker 1: Okay now, now was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, church was--there's you know Sunday school every Sunday, every Sunday. Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your church, did you attend one church only? Speaker 2: Liberty Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Liberty Baptist? Speaker 2: Liberty Baptist Church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Born into Liberty; was in Liberty up until the time I met my wife [Gwendolyn Stewart King] who was Episcopalian from New Jersey and decided that I had to step up a notch. I had to leave (laughter) my, no more singing and shouting, (laughter) you go to that church where you can't sing songs and you hurt your throat 'cause it's so--anyway. Speaker 1: Do, do you miss that? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah I miss it, I miss it, there's nothing like a good Baptist service, you know with good singing, good preaching, you know. They don't preach in the Episcopal church, they lecture (laughter), they give you a lecture. There's a lot to learn I mean, you take notes and the bishops give little note pads and you come home study your notes and (laughter), but you know the text of a Baptist sermon is not very complicated, you know. He's got his one little point he's gon' get across and he'll get it--it takes him an hour and a half to get it across, but he does it in all these different ways you know, you work this paragraph, you work that paragraph, sit back, come back, related to your life, related to your home, work, but you got, you know you got the message, got the message and you worked the whole Bible, through the Old Testament, New Testament, find quotes and everything to make that point, and make you cry too every if, you know, make you cry. Speaker 1: You don't cry in the Episcopal church, right? Speaker 2: Not, not in the Episcopal church unless it's a good, one of those songs that hurt your throat and you start crying cause it's, the music goes to high and low and (laughter). Speaker 1: Let me see, well okay, now did you have a jobs in the church when you were coming up, did you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They give you like responsibilities and? Speaker 2: Well I was, let's see, yeah, what did I do? I was, I was, I was, oh yeah, I was in the junior choir and stuff, but I was also, I was a junior deacon for a while, junior deacon. They were training me, I was too young to be a deacon but I started as a junior deacon, served under Deacon John Henson [ph.]. I saw a lot about that, that ministry that I didn't know existed. I mean what happens, this, I saw this also with ministers though you know, people think it's all a matter of what happens on Sunday, I mean you know between eleven and one or two. That's not true, I mean ministering to the, ministering to the sick and the shut-ins is a, is work that's, that's really blessed and important and people don't realize that. We use to go around after the services to the sick and the shut-in and administer Communion, I'd go along to help, and that's, that's really important to go there and pray with people, listen to them, talk to them, people who just can't get out of the house. We did that--some real blessed work, I mean really, really good work, and Baptist church was--see that's a part of the neighborhood and the community. You go through this city now, Monday through Saturday, churches locked up tight as drums, part of it is because people live outside the city, and they--but they keep their churches here. When we were a part of the community, the church was opened every day of the week, every night something was going on, choir rehearsal, meetings of the clubs but it was the safe haven. You walking back from somewhere, you have a little trouble and you see some people down the street that you know, you had some trouble with. You pop into a church, the door was open, somebody was there. Story_ID: 296635 Speaker 1: Tell us about school now. You went to the same grade school your mother [Amelia Colbert King] and father [Isaiah King III] went to, was it Stevenson? Speaker 2: Stevens Elementary School [Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Stevens, okay? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell that 'cause it? Speaker 2: S-T-E-V-E-N-S, it's named after Thaddeus Stevens. Speaker 1: Okay, oh, okay, oh that's something that's--. Speaker 2: One of the oldest schools in the district, I believe it was the first, if not one of the first, the first, maybe the first or second, third public school for black kids after the Civil War. Yeah, but it's been there for a long time. Speaker 1: Do people remember who Thaddeus Stevens was? Speaker 2: We did, we did because we were taught that, we, we knew exactly, I mean I knew him as Thaddeus Stevens when I was a, when I was in grade school and the other grade school nearby was Sumner School [Charles Sumner School; Charles Sumner School Museum and Archives, Washington, D.C.], named after Charles Sumner. We just knew those names and knew why, knew who they were, we were, we were taught that. Speaker 1: That's good, that's unusual too 'cause a lot of people nowadays when you ask them who their school is named for they don't know, especially some that's as significant as, I mean a name as significant as Sumner or Stevens in a black community that. Speaker 2: Well, you know every-that was the thing about a segregated school, I mean everyday was Negro History Day, I mean you'd just walk into the schools and the photos and the pictures, all around just, you know the stores were always there, something had happened in our community, a picture would go up there with a story about it. Teachers would tell you about it, teach about it. Speaker 1: Now this is even during the '40s [1940s]? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, absolutely! Speaker 1: In [Washington] D.C.? Speaker 2: Absolutely! Speaker 1: Now this makes this place unusual on some level because in other cities you didn't necessarily have this level of-- Speaker 2: Oh we had it here you know Granville Woodson [sic. Carter G. Woodson] of course, the father of Negro History Week [Black History Month] is right from here from Washington [D.C.]. I went to high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] with his grandson and I see him on the streets every day (unclear). Speaker 1: Carter G. Woodson, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, so but that was, I mean this was, this was true of almost every school that I know of. All of our teachers, as a matter of course, not only--they didn't just formerly teach it but if you go into the little assembly area all the photos were there and the stories were there and newspaper stories were there and it just sort of--part of your, your life. You just could not walk down the hall and not see something about you know Booker T. Washington, or, or somebody shows up in--I remember Noble Sissle came to Francis [Junior High School, Washington, D.C.]--came to Stevens School. At the time of the inauguration of Harry Truman [President Harry S. Truman], that would've been what '48 [1948], and the reason I know that is because Noble Sissle knew one of the teachers or the principal and sat down at the piano and had us all singing, "I'm just wild about Harry, and Harry's wild about me," he's playing the piano and we're just signing to the top of our voices about Harry. I didn't know who Harry was at the time, that was Harry Truman but I did know who Noble Sissle was. Speaker 1: The song ['I'm Just Wild About Harry'] was written by Noble Sissle from, it was from 'Shuffle Along' written in the '20s [1920s]. Speaker 2: Was that his? Speaker 1: Yeah, he wrote the song. Speaker 2: Yeah, well he converted this for Harry Truman to make it for his inauguration and we knew he was going to go participate in the inauguration, but Noble Sissle right there, I can see him as plain as I can see you right now in me--in this little assembly area. Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of people don't know that Noble Sissle wrote that, you know. Speaker 2: I didn't know he wrote that. Speaker 1: I didn't know it until about five years ago (laughter). Speaker 2: But he was just a singing, you know he was playing it and his leg was going and (unclear) he moved Ms. Chase [ph.] off the piano and he started--Ms. Chase was our regular music teacher, he was just working out on it. We was just singing, 'cause we liked anything that was up beat you know and he--that was just kind of the way it was you know, we, we, people would come in do things that were celebrating who we were and just as a matter of course, we, we, it's, it's amazing you're right. You go into schools today and these things are treated like special events and stuff, it wasn't a special event, I mean I, I can just see all the faces now around our little assembly area and our little walls and up and down the hallways so. It was just a real reinforcement of all the positive things for me. Story_ID: 296636 Speaker 1: Now when you went to school [Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], it sounds as if from what you described earlier you were more than prepared you know to start elementary school if you were like taking down numbers and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: At, at home. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well it's, it's you know my mother [Amelia Colbert King] was you know she was a high school graduate [from Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] at that point, and she, she in--she was, and my father [Isaiah King III] although he was a dropout, loved to read, loved to read. I mean we had all the papers there and he read to us and read to us from the comic papers, pages and she was--work on us on multiplication and addition and the way she taught it at home to reinforce it she'd have a hair brush. What's a hair brush? Speaker 1: She, she wasn't brushing your hair? Speaker 2: No, no she wasn't brushing hair you--bam (gestures) you know, my sore sister were crying, crying to do her multiplication tables. My mother would be in jail now today for what she did (laughter), but we learned it. She'd be incarcerated for child abuse (laughter), but she got it across to us. She just, you know she beat it into us that's all, but we just--know, felt that this is what you had to do. This, this came with the territory you know you to learn this stuff, had to know it. It was important, I mean that's the other, you know--I'm not gonna suggest that, that we were all kids on a mission, but we did in a sense all know that we were doing something, we had to do something that bigger than ourselves, and, and grade school and junior high school [Francis Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], I mean that message was driven home in subtle ways and not so subtle ways, not only by teachers but by Sunday school teachers, school superintendents, Sunday school superintendents said, "Kids you gotta do this, here's why you got to do this. This is important you gotta overcome this, overcome this, overcome," and so that was kind of a feeling you know that you got riding than just your own self; that you have to do this. You know it's something that's important and, and you gotta uplift the race, don't do anything to bring shame to the race. That was, that was there in high school. I was telling my wife [Gwendolyn Stewart King] we kept the front side of Dunbar High School clean because we didn't want anybody driving past our school to think that we didn't know how to keep our schools clean, especially people going down to Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] from where Dunbar was located. Principal told us, I don't know whether it's true or not that every now and then some congressmen, members of [U.S.] Congress pass by our school so therefore we had to keep our schools clean, but the idea was not to make up to the white power structure, but to show people, said, "Look, don't look down on us, and don't think that we don't appreciate cleanliness as well," you know. The idea that you always had something, you know that you had something to, to show, to prove, to--not to win acceptance, but, "Dammit don't look down on us, don't look at us as inferior." That was, that was--even got down to behavior, "Don't behave that way because, this is what they will say." "Don't do it because," and we had enough sense even when we were acting crazy, knew when to stop acting crazy, because we weren't going to give 'em a chance and an opportunity to do that, and that was, that was, I mean that was sort of an undercurrent all the way through. We heard it over and over again. That was one message that was reinforced and the thing when you live in a, in a legally segregated society, but even if it's there the more than the segregation, the prejudice, you know that people are carrying in their heads, unfounded views of you. You don't wanna play to that, don't play to that. They may think that, but don't play to that. Don't reinforce that, you know and so you don't have new shoes, but you keep your shoes shined. You keep your clothes clean you know, that was, that was just driven home. Not just in my family because people were working class, but we didn't go to school dirty, didn't go to school dirty. May have come home dirty from playing, those clothes got cleaned, washed, dried, hung up on the line if you didn't have any washing machines or dryers, clothes were cleaned and ironed, and that was, that was a matter of pride, and pride was what, what we had a lot of. Story_ID: 296637 Speaker 1: Now tell me did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: What would've passed as social studies, not--they don't even teach that anymore do they I guess? Social studies was sort of a mixture of the government and civics and-- Speaker 1: History. Speaker 2: History and stuff like that. I liked that, I liked that a lot, and as a matter of fact it sort of informed me as I've gone on, you know I've sort of stayed in general area, but I always enjoyed social studies. I guess I was never big on math and science, some art maybe but I think the social studies, history, government those things interest me. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now do you--are there any teachers that really stand out as being? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah all the way through, there was Ms. Lee [ph.], my, my kindergarten teacher; Mr. Cole [ph.] who was the only male teacher in elementary school [Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] who was a sixth grade teacher, in between there are some other teachers there and--Fannie Johnson [ph.], junior high school [Francis Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], Mr. Burke [ph.], Mr. Heard [ph.] who was an art teacher, Mr. Burke was an electrician. Mr. Heard was an art teacher, there was a guy named Mr. King [ph.] who was not necessarily my favorite teacher 'cause he wasn't that smart but he was, he was certainly one of the funniest teachers we had, I mean he was fun in the sense that he, with all due respect, he was a 'Bama [Alabama] (laughter), he came in there and the kids gave him a hard time, the brother was just trying so hard, and he, he was--and we gave him such a hard time. He'd wear black socks, black shoes and white socks with a blue suit and we stayed on him. One time he came, and I was so bad, he came to my house to talk to my mother [Amelia Colbert King] about me. He said that he almost started crying, "Ms. King I'm trying so hard, these kids are not working so well." The man had tears in his eyes, I was so embarrassed, you know my own teacher from junior high school, but he was a nice guy I mean but Mr. King was a nice guy. Speaker 1: When you say he was 'Bama now that's something that said in the Washington, D.C., Baltimore [Maryland] area. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Bama meant. Speaker 1: That, we've heard around the country but what was it I mean? Speaker 2: 'Bama, 'Bama meant that he may not have come from Alabama, but he came from somewhere way down below the Mason Dixon Line (laughter), and, and he, he manifested it through at the time his haircut, you know which was sort of closer on the side and thick on the top you know, and, and he didn't have a comb and brush it on the side or anything like that. He tended to, to talk with a hurried, thick southern accent and he was slow moving and so, and he, so he didn't, he wasn't you know smooth and slick and stuff and so, Mr. King had that, had that designation you know, he wore it well (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He, he was a grade A. Speaker 1: And the socks and so on, now that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pure unadulterated 'Bama (laughter), with his white socks, and black shoes and blue suit. He wore that blue suit every day, every day, but he was you know, he--it was his first job. It was his first job, we didn't realize that. Then we took--Mr.--the last day of school we went to the Rock Creek Park [Washington, D.C.] for, it's a junior high school, went to Rock Creek Park for an outing, mixed the two classes, two ninth grade classes and Mr. King had bought some beer that we weren't supposed to see. He had bought some beer and hid it under the seat of the car and somehow, I don't if we missed the bus or what, but he gave some of us a ride back to school with the beer and he was so high he couldn't, he had to put the emergency brake on just to stop in front of the school, anyway we all remember things like that and laughed at that. Mr. King was not very cool, he wasn't very sophisticated. He was kind of, he, he just didn't know how to do the stuff that the other teachers knew how to do and get away with it. Speaker 1: He was kind of 'Bama as they say. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a 'Bama. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sorry Mr. King, God rest your soul wherever you are. Story_ID: 296638 Speaker 1: But, well now, now you went on to, did you go to junior high school or? Speaker 2: That was in junior high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went on to high school went to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay, so Dunbar High School, so you didn't have junior high school really you just went to Stevens and to. Speaker 2: No, Stevens Elementary [Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], Dunbar and Francis Junior High School [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Oh, Francis Junior High School. Speaker 2: That's where Mr. King [ph.]. Speaker 1: That's where Mr. King was okay. Speaker 2: Anyway mentioning my teachers yeah, then I got to high school and I had just, oh I had just every--just a great experience with teachers. CeCe Calloway [ph.] taught me geometry, and advanced algebra; Mr.--oh shucks! My football coach [Jesse B. Chase]--why am I drawing a blank? It'll come to me in a second. Speaker 1: So you're an athlete too? Speaker 2: I played football. Speaker 1: Played football. Speaker 2: In high school. Speaker 1: What did you play on the team? Speaker 2: I played guard. I was a 155 pound guard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) At the top and there was Bill Rumsey [William Rumsey], Bill Rumsey was assistant professor of military science, we had Junior ROTC [Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps (JROTC)] there, but that doesn't convey the importance that he, he was to that school. To understand it, drill, they called it drill was, was a very important activity in public schools. When I went to Dunbar we had just desegregated. It was 1954 and the, the activity that really brought the segregation together was the drill competition. Bill Rumsey convinced the students, the male students that this was more important that football, basketball, baseball, track together. That we were competing for something much larger and that we--to excel under this would, would--was important because it went beyond our athleticism. It reflected our ability to learn some other things and it really was drilled according to Field Manual 22-5, 'Drill and Ceremonies.' You can find it now in the [U.S.] military. Complete description of how you do a number of things to individual drilling to squad drilling to regimental drilling, complicated. He made us all learn that and he made it, he had this ability to make it such an attraction that our star athletes wanted to become part of the drill team. This is what you wanted to do. This is what the girls started to appreciate. The guys who were doing this were attracted to girls, 'cause that's always the major incentive in, in high school what the girls like, but he, but he used that also to teach us other things. To get us prepared for manhood, to prepare us for, to be, to be--for socialization, to treat women properly, to speak properly to women, how to deal with teachers, how to deal with adults, he used that, that activity to reach us in ways that no teacher had ever reached us before, and we've had big celebrations in his honor, William Rumsey. He's now dead, I spoke at his funeral as a matter-of-fact, just an amazing individual and I wrote a column about him. Story_ID: 296639 Speaker 1: He taught us how to dress; most of us had never been to a restaurant before. When we won the big competition, and we won everything in the city [Washington, D.C.], we swept the city. First integrated drill competition, Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] swept the city, every category and he said, "Well we should, what we should do then is have a dinner but not in the school cafeteria." The city had just started to desegregate restaurants. He picked out a restaurant downtown, a white restaurant. He knew that we didn't, most of us had never been out to a restaurant, most of us had never taken girls out on a date, a formal date. We may have gone to a movie or something, so he taught us how to behave, how to eat, how to order, knives, forks to use, how to go to the girls house, not just say I'll meet you there, don't go on the bus. How to get a cab if you didn't have a car, how to see her home; how to behave the whole way through and we did it and it, it was important for us as young men to learn that, it was important for young women to learn how men could treat them. It was important for the city to see downtown how we behaved, 'cause this was a major restaurant. All of us coming in were dressed in our dress blues; he told how to get the girls flowers, things like that. It was, it was such a learning experience, but it was so, I mean the word now would be empowering, but the word wasn't even in exist then, but it, it was such a confidence builder and he did that all the way through. I remember he taught us why it sounded stupid to call each other motherfuckers, he heard that a few times and he stopped us and pulled us together, a group of us together, and talked about that word. First of all, what it says about your vocabulary and the reason you resort to that is because you can't think of better words to use to make the same point, but then he did something else. He talked about mothers and how we should think about our mothers and this was--as, as a macho of guys you can think about but he said you know, my mother died and they had to put me in bed for a week. He said that's what she meant to me. He talked about that need to respect your mothers and he turned--I mean he turned all of us around in one way or the other from one thing he did. This guy was just amazing an amazing individual who pulled together a desperate group of guys you know, some of us middle class, some working class, some are athletes, some were, you name it with polyglot. He shaped us into something where we all came out there with certain basic values that he passed on to us and he stayed there went far beyond drill. He talked to us about how to speak to adults, how to deal with teachers, how to deal with teachers who were difficult, and he was just an unbelievable influence. I had, I wrote about him in a magazine as well but--William Rumsey just an unbelievable character. Story_ID: 296640 Speaker 1: So when you were in high school were you involved in clubs and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I was up into a lot of clubs, I was in--we had a great glee club, I mean we, we were down at the--performing at the Pageant of Peace, White House [Washington, D.C.], we cut a record for the Voice of America [VOA], got--see in those days because of segregation you got some pretty good teachers. The law wouldn't let 'em go elsewhere, you know Ph.D.s teaching us music and stuff like that. We had a lot of doctors, people with doctorates in high school, teaching in high school in those days because of opportunities were limited but we got the best at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]. I was in a Latin club, Rex Club [ph.], the Rex Club was for high achieving boys, what else? I can see those pictures now--officers club. Speaker 1: Did you run for class office or anything? Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and I was something, I was something. I wasn't president of it, but I was something in a club, in class, one of the--it wasn't the first, it wasn't the senior year, maybe it was the junior year, but I was something. Speaker 1: Okay, any other teachers or anything from that time period? Speaker 2: Oh, Chase is the football coach, Jesse Chase [Jesse B. Chase]. He was another person that had a major influence on us, I mean he treated us all the same you know as I said about (unclear) he treated us like dogs you know. The man came up with a curse word for me that I'd never heard before and I've never heard since. He called me a farting ass bastard, now I'd--that was one I'd never heard. He called a lot of us that, but he could--he cursed but he had it, he cursed in a rather imaginative way with, with words of his own making, he was (unclear) and I won't go through all of that because I don't need to go into it but he, he was an unbelievable person, but he was also, he was a graduate of Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], I think he went to Dunbar too, but he was a graduate of Boston University and insisted on, on academic achievement. Didn't push through athletes who couldn't cut it, and didn't look to teachers to give us any cut or any slack, he pushed us on it. He ended up marrying the Latin teacher as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Great principals, great principals, Charlie Lofton [Charles Sumner Lofton], great assistant principal, Hal Bolden [Howard F. Bolden], I just went to his wake for his funeral about a month and a half ago. Speaker 1: So yeah, so high school was a pretty positive experience by, by-- Speaker 2: Not, positive and negative--you know--no, no all positive, I mean--let me look at it this way. I came out of high school stronger than when I went in. I had a lot experiences that weren't always positive, but I learned from them. It was a good learning experience. I met different kinds of people, had to cope with a lot of different situations, a lot of social stress, ran into the class thing a lot, but came out better for it. Speaker 1: Well what are some of the bad experiences, I mean can you remember a story about something that? Speaker 2: Well, yeah the first day, I came from Francis Junior High School [Washington, D.C.] which is over in the Foggy Bottom [Washington, D.C.] area in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] and most of the kids at Dunbar at that time came from Up on the Hill [Washington, D.C.] which was the more professional area, the middle class black area. So the teacher in biology, the one o'clock class asked us--went around the room and asked us which junior high schools did we come from and a lot of the kids said they came from Banneker Junior High [School, Washington, D.C.] and the teacher knew their parents so, Dr. Sso and So's kid or so and so's father, they got to me and I said Francis Junior High School and she turned up her nose, and I wrote about this because I said next to me was a guy named Benjamin Riley who attend Terrell Junior High School [Washington, D.C.] and she did this to him too, and I wrote this in a magazine piece. I hadn't seen Benjamin Riley since high school, '57 [1957] and this was last year I wrote about it. And Riley called me, and no wrote me a letter and said he remembered that experience too and we also remembered telling the kids because they could (unclear), his mother was a seamstress and his father was a paper hanger I think, and the kids laughed and he remembered that experience too and this is, and Ben, and Riley and I never talked about that. We talked about nine--the difference between 1954 and 2004 when I wrote about it. Story_ID: 296641 Speaker 1: Okay, all right so when you were on the verge of graduation from high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], what did you--you were a good student, you were in the, what do you call it the club. Speaker 2: The Rex Club [ph.]. Speaker 1: Rex Club right, right so I mean you. Speaker 2: I knew I was going to--went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], there were a couple of other schools that I had a chance to attend, I didn't really know it at the time, one was Wagner College [Staten Island, New York], the other was Hamilton [College, Clinton, New York]. One of them even approached my parents [Isaiah King III and Amelia Colbert King] for a scholarship; I think it was Wagner, so a partial scholarship, an athletic scholarship but the rest of the money would've had to come out of their pockets which they didn't have. Speaker 1: Is Wagner in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], is it? Speaker 2: It's in New York I think. Speaker 1: New York okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Hamilton is-- Speaker 2: --Hamilton, New York I think. Wagner is--I think Wagner's New York too, was it--, is it Pennsylvania? Speaker 1: I'm thinking it is but I'm not sure. I think it's Pennsylvania [sic. New York] though. Speaker 2: But they wouldn't--they so, she never told me. The recruiter came, sat and talked to her and I didn't know until about two years later that he had even come by to see her but they couldn't of afforded it so. I was--you know I'm not sure I would--if I'd have done that I wouldn't be sitting here now. I mean everything I--by going to Howard everything that's around me now is because of that decision. I mean starting with my wife [Gwendolyn Stewart King] and you know from there everything else, so it was the best decision. I can't imagine what life would've been like had I not gone to Howard because all my friends and everything here is built around there, come from there, children [Robert King, Stephen King, and Allison King], everything. Speaker 1: Okay so you graduated in '57 [1957] is that right? Speaker 2: High school. Speaker 1: High school '57 [1957] okay and you started Howard that fall right? Speaker 2: That fall, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay well what was Howard like? Now did you know a lot about Howard before you started? Speaker 2: I, I thought I did, but I didn't know much about it. I mean I knew it, knew of it, I knew where it was, I knew a lot of people--a lot about teachers, Howard graduates, there are a lot of people who are famous in the African American community who were Howard graduates. So I--it had that reputation of you know of excellence, but that was it. I, I think I'd been on the campus maybe once with my grandmother for something that had nothing to do with Howard, but they were using the locale for that purpose. So I just didn't you know, I, I was going into something new. Speaker 1: Okay, now was Mordecai Johnson the president when you? Speaker 2: Mordecai Johnson was president when I got there, yeah, yeah, yeah. And know that, that all of that was just so different to see a college president who always wore a hat when he walked across the campus and always lifted his hat to everyone young woman he'd pass, he just lifted and, every--you know just to see all these, these people of great status, you know all sorts of professors and what they are, and what they've written and their books and stuff. That was, that was a really kind of arresting you know to see that and then the students themselves, for the first time I was running into, meeting students who weren't from Washington [D.C.] and that's when you saw different backgrounds and cultures come in you know, kids from the North who sounded different and spoke differently, danced differently, they, they--we, we you know we, we didn't--well some of us liked the same music, some of us heard different music, different artists, it was, it was a coming into an African American community that was very diverse, much more diverse than anything that I had, had seen growing up in Washington. I knew we had diversity, but nothing like what I ran into at Howard. Story_ID: 296642 Speaker 1: Now, in those days, now in '57 [1957] that's like around or shortly after the birth of rock and roll and that sort of thing. Is it, what kind of music did you like then? Speaker 2: Rhythm and blues. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was coming from Washington [D.C.] it was still rhythm and blues. There was rock and roll but the rock and roll that I'm thinking of, thinking about then had Fats Domino. Speaker 1: Yeah, Chuck Berry. Speaker 2: Chuck Berry, that, that group, but rhythm and blues still carried the day. Speaker 1: By rhythm and blues what, what artists are you really talking about? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson and the Miracles, had--the Spaniels had pretty much gone out then but the. Speaker 1: Doo-wop groups were big then. Speaker 2: Doo-wops, when I say rhythm and blues I mean doo-wops. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You had The Flamingos, Coasters, groups like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You had Nina Simone who wasn't really into blues but she was popular on campus [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], Dakota Staton, and one who I really liked, what's her name? God I haven't heard for a long time. It'll come to me, but you had individual artists of that era, most of 'em African Americans, and most of the students seemed to know of this music, but not all of 'em, not all of 'em. 'Cause we had kids coming there who had come predominately white schools as well, and they had different experiences from those of us who came from you know segregated schools. The kids from the Deep South had different experiences, different outlooks and kids from the West Coast were different, then we had a pretty heavy infusion of kids from the Caribbean, some from Africa, so it was, it was quite a learning experience for, for me and it was, it was the kind of thing that I just found you know exciting you know to meet people from such different backgrounds. Story_ID: 296643 Speaker 1: Okay now what did you major in at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Government. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Government and that's exactly what I wanted to do from the day I got there is to major in government. Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers there in those days? Speaker 2: Oh we had Robert Martin, Bernard [B.] Fall, Bernard Fall was killed in Vietnam, he was a French professor--he was French, he taught political science. He wrote several books about Vietnam [Vietnam War], sort of well known, one of the best observers of Vietnam. He wrote the 'Street of Joy' [sic. 'Street Without Joy'] and a couple of other books about Indochina, but he was a professor, we had Robert Brown [sic. Vincent Brown], and Emmett Dorsey. Emmett Dorsey was one of my favorite professors. Speaker 1: Now what did he teach? Speaker 2: He taught government also, he taught some advance courses in government. He was a-he was called before the House Committee on American Activities [House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC)] a couple of times, they never got the goods on him. He was, he was a just a--he'd come in with his notes, take the rubber band off his notes, and the notes were yellow and he would just go through his notes reading, he'd take some questions, but he just knew his stuff and he expected us to know it. I mean no playing around with it, he expected for us to know it but he had a, had a, had a deep appreciation of how government worked in peoples' lives and the philosophy and he, and he had a way of getting it across to us, but, but he wasn't a teacher like Robert Martin who got to know his students, and kicked it around with us. Robert Martin did that, not Dorsey. Dorsey was really standoffish but he was such an imposing figure. Physically he was imposing but also through his intellect he was imposing and so at least for me I found it a joy to be there because I knew I was getting something from somebody who was very important, and I just liked his, you know his, his the way in which he taught and the way in which he conveyed it, stuff with such, such power. We had a, we had a great--this department [Department of Political Science, Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was started by Ralph Bunche when he was at Howard and the political science department at the time had a reputation of being just very solid, not only did we have academically-solid teachers I mean with strong academic credentials, they were published and just well-respected in the academic community, real heavyweights. Speaker 1: Okay now was, was Ralph Bunche around when you were when you were? Speaker 2: No, he wasn't. Speaker 1: I think he yeah, yeah he left. Speaker 2: He left then, he left then. Speaker 1: By then, did you run across--I know a lot of people that went to Howard ran across Howard Thurman at some point? Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I didn't (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You didn't, okay. Speaker 2: No I didn't, I know--I know who, yeah I know who, I know his work and but I never did meet him. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause he use to hold like meetings at his house for students and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 296644 Speaker 1: Now, who else, did you take other courses and other sub- well? Speaker 2: Yeah I, there was, there was Lorraine [A.] Williams who taught social science and I took maybe two or three courses from her. She was my, she was one of the first teachers I had as a freshman who got me grounded in the classics, got me grounded in, in Aristotle, Plato, some of those writings, fascinating woman, she's--had a, let's see. I had a, had a teacher in political and economic geography, set the course as political geography and economic geography. I don't know if they teach those courses now but his name was Anadnus [ph.], a professor and he gave me a way of looking at the world that I had never looked at before. The geography--how the world can be viewed geographically and in economic terms together, sounds more complicated than it is, but it was just a, it was just a fascinating perspective on, on the world that I had never had up until then. I had a full year with him and I enjoyed every second of it. It's one of those classes, or teachers that I just looked forward going in (cough) and hearing from. Speaker 1: Okay, trying to think--I think there are some other people at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] I guess I (unclear), but you were in political science mainly? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, oh was William Leo Hansberry there, the history teacher, I know he? Speaker 2: Yeah, I never had him, but his daughter was in school with us, they lived next door. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah his daughter Gail [HistoryMaker Gail A. Hansberry] lives right next door. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause he was teaching African studies on the college? Speaker 2: Um. Speaker 1: I think it was only African studies professor on a black college campus in those days. Speaker 2: At the time yeah, I got a couple of his books here. Speaker 1: Yeah, E. Franklin Frazier was there I think? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was there, he was there. I didn't take any sociology classes so I never took anything from him. I think I heard him lecture once, but I never took a class from him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, but he was there right across the hall. We had Frank Snowden [Frank M. Snowden, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Who was a real classy--who got caught up right after I left Howard, we, we went into the--that period of on college campuses where not only did you have emphasis on black studies, but real tension between the--at least on Howard's campus with Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] then, and, and the kids who wanted to have more Afrocentric courses in the school versus the classics and Frank Snowden was of course a, a classic professor, a professor of classics, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], B.A., Harvard M.B.A., Harvard Ph.D., all the classics and just could not abide the new changes and there was World War III on the campus. At that point I was off campus, but. Speaker 1: We were talking Frank Snowden and the kind of war around black studies. Speaker 2: That, I, I encountered it when I came back from graduate school--I came back from the [U.S.] Army, I took a graduate course at Howard in public administration, took a couple, and when I enrolled it was an evening course, this was the first day of class and I just, this was--the professor stood up and he was outlining the class activity, the program for the year, and a student stood up who had just finished undergraduate school I guess. He was dressed completely in black with a black hat and a black cape, and he said, "Wait a minute, we're not going to, we're not--that's what you say, now let's all come together and decide how we're gonna structure this class and what we're gonna have in this course," and I said, "What the hell is going on here?" And I subsequently learned that this was a new way things were happening on campus then. I mean kids would, students were challenging professors, challenging them over course content, challenging them over sources, the curriculum, everything, and it was quite a, it was quite a learning experience. They went through that phase and I know some people who are casualties of it as well you know on faculty, but Frank Snowden ended up being a also a casualty of that. He was dean of the College of Liberal Arts [College of Arts and Sciences] at the time and I think he eventually left the school. Story_ID: 296645 Speaker 1: Okay, now who were some of the students who were around when you were there that we might know now or, or that you think are, were important now? Speaker 2: Oh, my class and the class behind me we, we--they produced some good, good graduates. I don't know, I don't, you stop with one you leave somebody else out, and I don't know if I want to go down that road, I mean there, there are a lot of people who have achieved quite well in their professions at this stage, but I think it--I have a hard time, only when I take out my wife [Gwendolyn Stewart King] who was a year behind me who became the commissioner of social security, the first African American to do that. Speaker 1: So did you all meet at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: We met at Howard, there are very few people in this world, in this country who's doing what she's doing. They're on the board of directors of Monsanto [Company], Lockheed Martin [Corporation], Marsh McLennan [Marsh & McLennan Companies, Inc.], major directorships. They run their own company; you all have interviewed--I ought to move out of this seat and let you all talk to her. I--waste your time talking to me. There are people far more accomplished than I am. I haven't done anything, but she has. I mean she's, she's a distinguished Howard graduate, recognized by the university as such. Speaker 1: Well we'll come back, we'll come back. Speaker 2: Come back good, I can change seats right now if you want me to. Speaker 1: Well it's in the middle of the interview. (Laughter) We still think you might have something to say, but so when you--now did you--any other experiences at Howard that stand out before we get you? Speaker 2: Oh yeah we couldn't, we couldn't even start to talk and stop and at Howard everything happened there. I mean it, the social experiences that were outstanding. I mean I enjoyed my college fraternity there, Psi for life, Kappa Alpha Psi [Fraternity], it was ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], finished and became a lieutenant, got a commissioned officer from there. I met all my, many of my close friends, met my wife there, lifelong friends. I can't even begin to, to talk about the impact that Howard University's had on me and my life. It's been major, just absolutely a major influence, still is an important part of my life. Story_ID: 296646 Speaker 1: Now did you start--how did you--I mean when did you first feel like you had a, I guess a talent for writing?--Yeah we were asking you about writing, when did you start? Speaker 2: When did I start--I mean writing? I guess I wrote, I started writing in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], freshman year, a teacher named Bunkum [ph.], English teacher, had us writing essays and I wrote an essay about my hometown, and that was well received by her and my whole thrust of it was my hometown is not Washington, D.C., my hometown is the area of Washington where I grew up [Foggy Bottom] and why it was different. Then I wrote a piece that same year '57 [1957] about why Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was one of the most important people in the country and at that point he was majority leader of the [U.S.] Senate, but I had spent that summer working in the--as a summer job as a messenger in the agriculture department [U.S. Department of Agriculture], basement of the agriculture department and I had a lot of time on my hands in between messenger runs and I read the Congressional Record and that summer they were debating the Civil Rights Bill of 1957 [Civil Rights Act of 1957], Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] had proposed it, and I read that record every day and I just marveled at the way that Lyndon Johnson handled that debate and worked the civil rights bill through, through the Senate in 1957. It wasn't a major bill, it wasn't as big as the one that came in '64 [Civil Rights Act of 1964], but it was nonetheless the first civil rights bill since Reconstruction and, and Johnson just stayed with me as a major figure then. I mean he wasn't talked about at that time, but I wrote a piece about him or an essay about him and I thought it was pretty good. I wish I had it around just to see how good I thought it was, to see if it's as good as I remembered, but I, that kind of stayed with me as, as something I liked doing. I wrote another paper during college and this is takes 'em to four years, about unknown, or no, small religious sects and how they influence life in the country and what I was trying to do was to, to talk about, write about the role that small Baptist churches and, and Pentecostal churches played in, in this country and I spent a lot of time at the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] trying to research this. As a matter of fact that's when I remembered the dearth of information about our churches, about our religious institutions, but that research effort helped me in the vacin- I had, I'm trying to think of the professor who taught, who directed this. He didn't, he cared less about content, but he cared a lot about research, how to footnote, how to write a research paper, when to do the ibids and all that other little stuff, and that technique stayed with me and I applied it to this, this paper on small religious sects and how they influence the country and it somehow, the research effort itself excited me, at being to look at something that people had looked before and find something that's worthwhile writing about. Okay then it was a long hiatus and I went on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.], it's jumping several jobs ahead, and I wrote a lot when I was working as a staff person on Capitol Hill, write speeches, floor statements, stuff like that and I developed a technique of writing, but I was writing for somebody else and somebody else's voice, not my own, but I learned by working on the Hill so that the fun and power of words and what words can do as far as conveying ideas and, and getting points across to people, and I liked that, but it was doing--I learned all that, did all that vicariously because I was writing for somebody's else's, for somebody else's voice. It stayed with me and to jump ahead, I got a chance to do what it took, to do it in my own name at The [Washington] Post and how I got there I'll tell you about you know whenever you ask me, but and then I've just been able to express that for the last fifteen years of just writing what I think, what I feel either in my own name or in the editorial, editorial read for The Washington Post. Story_ID: 296647 Speaker 1: When you were in college, had you--I mean did you take courses in journalism at all? Speaker 2: No I've never had a journalism course in my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The closest would be you know writing, essays, writing term papers, that kind of writing, but I've never had a course in journalism, and I don't even practice it now, I mean I don't, I do reporting in the work that I do, but I'm not a reporter. I'm a commentator, I'm an editorial writer, I'm a columnist, so I, I express opinions more than I gather news. Speaker 1: Now did you spend a lot of time in--when you were in college the Civil Rights Movement was really brewing you know, with the Montgomery Bus Boycott in '56 [sic. 1955-1956], that's the year before you got there, but it was you know in full swing in '57 [1957] and you know just a lot of activity, I mean the sit-ins started when you were in school? Speaker 2: Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] didn't send students to--Howard didn't send students to Montgomery [Alabama]. Howard did send students to the Eastern Shore of Maryland. I mean I remember active recruiting areas to do that, I never went there. We did go to the White House [Washington, D.C.] and we had some on-campus demonstrations that were sympathetic and we had demonstrations at Glen Echo Park [Glen Echo, Maryland] which was segregated, but the major, the only recruiting effort. Speaker 1: Now what is Glen Echo that was an amusement park or something? Speaker 2: Amusement park, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right over across the district line in Maryland, but my participation didn't come until post-Howard, I mean as far as demonstration. My class of '57 [1957] did not become, we had only one student, one or two students as I recall who became part of really the movement. The class, two classes behind us did, Stokely Carmichael's [Kwame Ture] class is where the real activism came from, but--I'm trying to think of the young woman, that may have been my class or the class behind me, who married Bevel, James Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel], who, the name. Speaker 1: Diane Nash? Speaker 2: Diane Nash, Diane Nash somehow--she must've been on campus while I was there, maybe in--I don't remember her as a member of my class, she could've been in the class behind me, but Diane Nash I remember becoming very active, and it was surprising because--we didn't expect Diane to be--just from the person that I knew on campus, didn't expect her to become an activist but--and she may have been behind me, but it didn't heat up '57 [1957], 1960 and '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: Okay, so but was there a lot of discussion on campus about, about sit-ins and about you know? Speaker 2: I don't recall it, I don't recall discussions on campus about sit-ins. Speaker 1: Did they talk a lot of politics on Howard's campus, I guess that's what I'm trying to figure out, if you were in government, did--were there a lot of, was there a lot of student discussion and talk about current events and? Speaker 2: You know I'm tempted to say yes, but I don't recall the activism at the time. There, there was discussion about it because--there was discussion about it because I remember question--oh, questioning [Senator] Hubert Humphrey about it when he came to campus, and I remember questioning a congressman about it but to act, but I don't know, it was more of an intellectual argument than a activism you know what I mean? You see to me yeah there were discussions, it was nothing like what followed in the later '60s [1960s] in terms of student activity, student activism, campus demonstration, campus acti- it wasn't, it didn't, hadn't reached that point when I was there. It was talk, activism, discussions small groups, speakers would come on campus, talk about it on campus, but direct action, I guess that's where we hadn't moved to the point of direction action that I can think of, there was--I don't even remember. Story_ID: 296648 Speaker 1: --Campus and discussions of, 'cause you have like African countries becoming independent, a lot of-- (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, see I remember--that I remember, 1960, '61 [1961] because we had [Prime Minister] Patrice Lumumba come to campus, and he had just been, had just assumed office and as a matter of fact my wife [Gwendolyn Stewart King] was, because she was a French major served as an interpreter for part of the delegation. There was a lot of talk and a lot of discussion about the decolonization effort because Ghana, they had Ghana that had become independent--Bernard [B.] Fall talked a lot about, the professor talked a lot about it because the French were giving up their colonies too and there, so there was a lot of discussion on campus about that. Speaker 1: Do you remember Lumumba's, I mean did you--were you there when he? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was there when he came through I saw him, yeah. Speaker 1: Did--how, I mean how students showed up to hear him? Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was a big thing on campus when he came. He--it there must've been a delegation of six or seven and they were all wearing khakis, khaki, military khakis, not highly decorated, but military khakis and we just, you know everybody wanted to be around to see them. I think that was the second biggest thing that happened on campus in terms of outside visitors. The first, obviously, was Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came and spoke at a Sunday service and I remember going there and that was clearly the biggest event that I saw at Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] campus at my four years as far as an outsider was concerned and the year would've been 1960, '59 [1959], '60 [1960], and by the time I got to the chapel [Andrew Rankin Memorial Chapel, Howard University, Washington, D.C.] it was overflowing but I stayed outside and they had speakers and when he came out, I saw him when he came out and walked past me but he was even in, a major celeb and he was Dr. King you know he was--it was big, and it was just sort of magnet--, it was magni- there was a magnetism there I'd hadn't seen anybody else, Lumumba didn't quite do that, but Lumumba attracted a lot of attention too because we knew, you know kind of a head of state coming here, you know African head of state. Speaker 1: So was he dressed in khakis too? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he had, he had khaki pants on and like they had almost like a sweater, like military sweaters they had, as a matter-of-fact we were surprised because we were all ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] cadets and our uniforms looked better than what they were wearing, and that's why it was so striking because we kept saying, "Looking at how they're dressed" you know and these are military people and they looked like they were wearing hand-me-downs. That's, that's the impression that I had you know. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah he didn't last much longer, I mean after he. Speaker 2: No, they killed him. Speaker 1: Yeah they killed him as soon as, it was soon as he got back. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 296649 Speaker 1: Anybody else come to campus [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that you remember? Speaker 2: Yeah, Walter White, who was then executive director of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. I went to a meeting where he spoke and I was surprised, embarrassed because this was--I guess my first year on campus, spoke in the same chapel [Andrew Rankin Memorial Chapel, Howard University, Washington, D.C.] where King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] spoke in the evening. King was there for a Sunday service, and I went to the chapel and there six people there. That's all we ever had. Speaker 1: Six people to hear Walter White? Speaker 2: To hear Walter White, six people. Speaker 1: That's amazing sort of you know when you think back to those days. Speaker 2: Yeah, even at the time you know, and it was--the flyers were up on campus and I mean it's just somebody I knew by name and he spoke about--then he was speaking about anti-lynching laws and I can't (unclear) I remember the anti-lynching laws, but I was sort of awed that he was there and then I was so close to seeing him that, that I was trying to figure if the guy was the president of the NAACP chapter, but he I didn't--I'd seen him on campus he said come, and I said okay I'm gon' come back. I lived off campus then, but I came back that evening and went into the chapel I just couldn't believe it. Speaker 1: That's something, so tell me now, it. Speaker 2: And then Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] of course came and spoke. Speaker 1: Okay, Lyndon Johnson spoke too. Speaker 2: Yeah, he spoke at our commencement. Speaker 1: What did, you remember anything that he said or? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, that was the, let's see that would've been 1961 [sic.] and that was his major speech about, what he talked about, we shall overcome, I think it was '61 [1961], major civil rights speech. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But you know when you're graduating and you know you're gonna go outside and a minute later you're gonna get your bars on your shoulders, he's second, (laughter)--he was in second place. I can, can, you know I wish I could say that we caught the significance of all of this. You know what was more catching was to watch him on the stage or watching the Secret Service moving around and all the atmospherics, I mean that's you know. I can't say I caught the weight of the day then, you know. In retrospect you can look back and say that or even maybe a couple of months later after the event, but at the time it was all about graduating, getting the bars pinned on, celebrating your big day, and that's the reality of it. Story_ID: 296650 Speaker 1: Okay, so after graduation [from Howard University, Washington, D.C.] now you were, were you in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so you went in. Speaker 2: Yeah, I went on active duty a month later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got--after graduation I got married on the 3rd of July; on the 5th of July I went on active duty. Speaker 1: Now this is in 1964? Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961]. Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961], okay '61 [1961], okay, that's right, okay so--. Speaker 2: Stayed on active duty until '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Now where, where'd you, where were you stationed, and you're, you're in the [U.S.] Army right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Army, I went to Fort Benjamin Harris [sic. Fort Benjamin Harrison, Marion County, Indiana] in Indiana, then from Fort Benjamin Harris into Fort Niagara in Youngstown, New York, I stayed there 'til I was released from active duty in July of '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Okay so you didn't stay in very long? Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Just two years, okay. Speaker 2: Two years during which time we had the Cuban Missile Crisis and the Berlin Crisis that, causing the institute a big draft of troops. Speaker 1: Okay we were just starting a little bit in Vietnam [War], but not. Speaker 2: At that time we were sending people to Vietnam under classified orders. They had a military assistance group there, military advisors there, but they, they--that was before the big build-up--They had a, they had military advisors there at the time and they were--they were sending people there under classified orders. I mean it was, it was before the major, major build up. At that time Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was still president and I left active duty in July of '63 [1963] and Kennedy was assassinated in November of '63 [1963]. Story_ID: 296651 Speaker 1: Okay so what did you do after you left active duty? Speaker 2: I went to New York, worked for a couple of months, three months maybe with the New York State Professional--New York State Employment Service's Professional Placement Center and then I came to Washington [D.C.] and worked with the U.S. Civil Service Commission as an investigator and then I went to the state department [U.S. Department of State] in July, in 1965 maybe July '64 [1964] or December '64 [1964], and I was at the state department for about six years. Speaker 1: And what did you do there? Speaker 2: Well I started out at the state department as a special agent, went overseas as a attache at the American embassy in Bonn [Germany], where I had regional security responsibilities for Germany and Berlin, West Germany [Federal Republic of Germany] and Berlin. At that point Germany wasn't unified. Speaker 1: Now what does that mean (laughter) what you just said, I'm trying to think of what is that I mean? Speaker 2: We had, in Germany we had an embassy, six consulates and a mission in Berlin, and this was during the height of the Cold War and my job was to handle the defensive security for all those places and counterintelligence for those places. There was a lot of intelligence activity taking place in Germany by the Russians [Soviets] and by the East Germans and my job was to put in the counter measures. Speaker 1: Now this is really spy versus spy activity and stuff (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the height of this. Speaker 2: It was the height of it, it was the real deal. Speaker 1: During the Cold War and all that I mean this is the classic period of all that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was the real deal. Speaker 1: And so you were in charge of security for those two (unclear)--? Speaker 2: Yeah I started out as assistant and then I ran it for a good while, as a matter of fact while I was there, I had to go down to Luxembourg and handle the--they had a NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] meeting in Luxembourg and I had to handle the U.S. operation there, security operation there. Pat Harris [Patricia Roberts Harris] was then the ambassador of Luxembourg, Patricia Roberts Harris, and so I worked out of her embassy down there for, on temporary duty for a few weeks, but that was, that was a different time, it was a different time, different world. I came back, I was supposed to go on to Belgrade [Serbia] but in '68 [1968] you know what happened here, with, with King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and, and Kennedy [Senator Robert F. Kennedy] and, and I wrote a letter saying that I couldn't go to Belgrade, that I had to come back home because this is where I felt I had to be and I didn't want my kids to be away while we're going through what we're going through then. I mean '68 [1968] was a--you know it was one of the toughest years we've had in this country and we had you know the disturbances in the cities and all so I came back. I was supposed to go with the model--I was on temporary duty with the Model Cities Program, that's what I had arranged for reimbursable detail, but instead I went with EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] and worked with EEOC for three or four months and then I returned to the state department only to leave to quit, and I quit, in good measure because partly because I didn't belong there anymore and with the Vietnam War was at its height and I remember signing a petition to the secretary of state [Dean Rusk] saying, what [Spiro] Agnew was saying and what the administration was saying about Vietnam and the protestors and what was going on in Jackson State [College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] and Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio] was wrong and you know next thing you know we're being hauled in to give a lecture on loyalty and I said what the hell is this, lecture on loyalty given what I was doing over there in Germany and so I said I don't belong here and that plus I came back and I discovered that some of the same things that I worried about when I was in Germany protecting us against, was happening in the United States. I mean I came across situations where it was clear that the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] was surveilling kids on college campuses, had introduced what turns out to have been listening devices on college campuses, all the things that came out in that [President Richard Milhous] Nixon COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program] activity that came out later about what Nixon--about what was going on during that time. Story_ID: 296652 Speaker 1: I discovered some of it and now anyway I left and got a fellowship at HEW [United States Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] in 1970. This is where I met Jim Farmer [James Farmer]. What Farmer had done when he got to HEW was to make the very clear observation and look at the senior level of government. There were no African Americans, and if you tried to use the traditional route of training and bringing people on and moving 'em up it would be you know decades before we'd even penetrate the, the upper reaches let alone even the middle, middle reaches. So he said what we needed to do was to assign people on fellowships, the key top leaders, to study how government operates at the top level so we would be prepared to move into those positions, and he went around to--I don't know how he did it, but he went around the country asking various people to identify individuals who would go to go into these top level positions as sort of fellowships, you know you didn't have to be there to be eyes and ears and study under somebody watching them, observing them for a year to learn how things were done. I was assigned to the undersecretary of HEW, a guy named Jack Veneman, Veneman [John G. Veneman], and I did everything, I went everywhere. He went up through House and Ways Means Committee [U.S. House Committee on Ways and Means] for closed-door hearings. I could go; wherever he went I could go and sit there. He had meeting with people would come in there. I could sit there. Elliot Richardson became secretary of state--secretary of HEW. I could sit in on some of his meetings. I learned a lot, I saw how decisions were made and the whole idea was to see how it was done, but also I had an opportunity to, to--we were supposed to do one big project and I wrote a project on sickle-, what they call sickle-cell anemia, and how it had been neglected at the federal level as far as research grants concerned and I had come up to the NIH [National Institutes of Health] to look into it, and I wrote a paper about it to Veneman and to the secretary and it went over to the White House [Washington, D.C.] and it became a White House initiative, and that, now this may sound like horn blowing but the whole sickle-cell thing that got initiated in 1971 was because of the paper I wrote. Now that's, that's documentable, and then I did another paper while I was there on significant--the way I called it the title was 'Significant Non White Health Problems that are Neglected at the Federal Level' [ph.] and you could find that same kind of work being done right now but it was on you know the various cancers that don't get addressed in the African American community, you know that you--you know you could look at breast cancer, that's one thing, but if you look at cervical cancer, which has a high incidence in African American women, and find--and you look at the research money that's spent on that, it's very little versus breast cancer which has a high incidence among white women, you can look at prostate cancer for African American men. All that was there documented, but the thing that was significant about the paper is I found a statement that was written in 1934 making that same observation about the disparities in health status between whites and non-whites as they put it then in '34 [1934], 1934. Speaker 2: Who was the author of that--? Speaker 1: I have it in my paper. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I can't remember but it, it may have been done by the American Public Health Association but I have it in the paper if you--I can find that paper and I can dig it up for you, but I was--the point I made in the '71 [1971] paper said not much had changed since 1934, and you can find papers today that shows the same kind of disparity as the Congressional Black Caucus was talking about this year, and it, it--as a result of what that, that second paper, the first paper I wrote on sickle-cell did put money in, did raise the visibility of the disease, and it did create an advisory committee that helped push more grants out for work on sickle-cell and this legis- this last one they just went crazy over the NIH. I mean they just, they tried to savage the paper I wrote, you know, "Who is he," you know "Dr. King [HistoryMaker Colbert I. King], are you?" "No, I'm not Dr. King." "Who the hell is he?" And fortunately I had the secretary standing behind me so they, so they--what they did is they had to acknowledge as far as it went that the advisory committees that they had at the NIH that approved grants, because all the grants that NIH approved for medical research, biomedical research must go through advisory committees. They had to acknowledge that the advisory committees had no African Americans at all and that the diseases that were being identified for, for research were diseases that had the greatest interest to whites, and was of very little interest to African Americans, thus hence very little being done on cervical cancer, very little being done on, on asthma, very little being done on those diseases in which you could find a higher incidence of African Americans. It was all documented and my thesis was very simple, that if you changed the composition of the advisory committees and add more people of interest, you know you're get a corresponding change in the grants which they all said, "What are you accusing us of" you know, but (laughter), but it was so obvious. Anyway that was my contribution and that was a big year for me on one year's time. Speaker 2: That's 1971? Speaker 1: Seventy [1970] to '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: Seventy [1970] to '71 [1971] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy [1970] to '71 [1971]. Story_ID: 296653 Speaker 1: And from there I did a little short stint at the National Institutes on Alcohol and Alcohol Abuse [sic. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism], then I went to VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA], chief of policy for VISTA, and I worked for Connie Newman [HistoryMaker Constance Berry Newman], who is now assistant secretary of state for African affairs. Speaker 2: Now at VISTA you were at VISTA in what year was this? Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971] to '72 [1972]. Speaker 2: Okay, '71 [1971] to '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: We did something kind of useful there, I mean we did a couple of things I think were important, a) we put in a better system for creating projects to work in poverty, high poverty areas to organize really anti-poverty programs. The other thing is that we changed the composition of the VISTA pool. Most of the VISTA volunteers at the time we got there came from a national pool, most of 'em were white kids, college kids. We changed it to have fifty-fifty national pool, fifty-fifty from the community. The argument being a) we want them to go through the same training, but when it's all over and they go in and they do their year, we want people left behind who are gonna live with the consequences of what they've done and can see these things through, 'cause it's one thing to have a kid going through the community with a credit card in his pocket, organize, try to organize something then his year's up, he says goodbye, you know and out of there they go and the whole thing falls down, if they do anything at all, but, but it's better to have people from the community who are involved in the planning of the project from the beginning, you know where they're gonna go with it and they can see it all the way through and so we changed that and that was, I think an important innovation that we made in that program that keeps us alive even to this day when Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] was trying to kill it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's, that's significant, it is because a lot of leadership is developed in, in the community as a result of that policy. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Before it was like they were calling the, the domestic Peace Corps, basically and you'd have white people, as you said white college graduates come in. Speaker 1: Yeah, took us a year to put that thing through and I mean I, it was a war to get that argument across and traveling all around the country going to our regional offices and stuff, and, and that was--we, we pulled it off and, and it's a laughing monument I think to the work that we did year. Speaker 2: Okay, so what happened after VISTA? Speaker 1: Well what did I do? I went to the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.], went to the Hill worked first as a legislative assistant to Senator Charles Mathias of Maryland, then I became minority staff director of the Senate District Committee and while there we did the home rule bill [District of Columbia Home Rule Act of 1973] for the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. I worked on that, the drafting of it and got it passed in 196--, 1973, created a mayor and elected Council for the District. Speaker 2: Now, now what was your role in this now? You helped draft it, the home rule bill? Speaker 1: Yeah, I was a minority staff director of the Senate District Committee, helped draft it, went to the floor, sat on the floor of the [U.S.] Senate with the senators while we got it through, wrote speeches, wrote responses to debates, went to the conference between the House [U.S. House of Representatives] and the Senate, worked on the final bill, got it so it go--signed into law, then I wrote the Conflict of Interest Campaign Financing Bill [District of Columbia Campaign Finance Reform Act of 1974], major drafting on my part and it's still on the books, created the Board of Elections and Ethics in the city and then I folded my tent and moved out smartly in 1974. Story_ID: 296654 Speaker 1: Now why did you leave [the Senate District Committee] in '74 [1974], 'cause--now that was the year that Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] resigned and-- Speaker 2: No, in '75 [1975], '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975], okay. Speaker 2: I left because it was time to go and I had a good talk with the senator [Senator Charles Mathias], but I talked to his wife [Ann Bradford Mathias] and she said something, and somebody else had talked to me and it was important that, "You know you're doing good work, but you're doing it all vicariously, you're doing it in somebody else's name, and it's time that you go out and do some things in your own name," and I, I first I, I took that as rejection and it wasn't rejection, but they have to kick you out of the nest. It was too comfortable an existence. You can go up there on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] and work as a staff person, and it can be very comfortable. You know what the routine is, you know what needs to be done, and you're doing it for the boss and the boss is happy and, but at the end of the day you say, "What have--they say what have you done," and you've done it for the boss, and that's, there's nothing wrong with that, but the people who were talking to me, his wife, and, and a couple of good advisors said, "Look you got some ability of your own, you got some talent and you write well, go out there and do it for yourself and on your own and be able to something that you say that this is mine, I've done it, you know, not in a selfish way, but, but be able to say this is what I bring to the table," and so I, I left, and I went to a job that much better paying and big office and all the things in wanted and I hated it, 'cause it was private sector, it was PEPCO [Potomac Electric Power Company]. I was director of government relations for our public utility, and a friend called me a year later and said, "Look Colby [HistoryMaker Colbert I. King], I you know this will be the last time we're gonna have for a while to work for a Democrat." Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was, had just gotten elected, he said, "Come with me to the treasury department [U.S. Department of the Treasury], and we're really gonna make this thing work." I went over to the treasury as a deputy assistant secretary in legislative affairs under the Carter administration in 1976. We had a hell of a year at time, for three years. I mean they, [U.S.] Congress kicked our butts but we worked, we had a good team of people. Met some great people in the Carter people, Carter White House, and-- Speaker 1: Who were some of the people there? Speaker 2: Oh, Bob Beckel [Robert Beckel], now Bob Beckel is, is a political advisor. Doug Bennet [Douglas J. Bennet] is president of Wesleyan University [Middletown, Connecticut]; he was in the administration, Gene [E.] Godley who's a law, a major, a managing partner of a major law firm in town. It's, its a laundry list of people. Did you know Bill Beckham [William J. Beckham, Jr.]? No. He's from Detroit [Michigan], he had worked for Coleman [ph.], Bill died last year, two years ago, but it was a, no it was [Stuart] Eisenstadt over at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. I mean what was, who was the woman who handled the house for Jimmy Carter, the sister? Valerie Pinson-- but I just met a group of people and so what happened they--Carter nominated me to go to the World Bank [Washington, D.C.] as a U.S. executive director and I was confirmed by the [U.S.] Senate and went over in December of '79 [1979] or was confirmed in December of '79 [1979] and served there until Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was elected and then I left. I was asked to stay on until they could find a successor and the person they found died in a fire so they asked me to stay a little longer (laughter) and I stayed too much longer but I said I was leaving because I went with a Riggs Bank here in Washington [D.C.] as a vice president for the Middle East and Africa and you-- Speaker 1: Now that was in 1970, '80 [1980] or so or '80 [1980], '81 [1981] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to World Bank, went to Riggs Bank in 1980. Story_ID: 296655 Speaker 1: All right we were talking about the Riggs Bank [Washington, D.C.] and-- Speaker 2: Well it, we mentioned, go back to the World Bank [Washington, D.C.], 'cause I feel in that time we did one thing that, that was really important and that was the (unclear) needed to seat the, what was then called the People's Republic of China, they had indicated that they wanted to assume their role in the World Bank that they had before and it was politically very difficult to do, but at the time given that it was 19-, it was 1980 but what--as a result of bringing China into the World Bank and a program with China in there, but today China is a major economic power. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And at the time we started and I was--I had my doubts but they said if you bring China in there, make China part of the global economic system, you're gonna see a different China down the road if we can get them to not only industrialize but to change their economic policies, and I look at China today you know, a major, major producer, a major consumer, driving up the oil prices they're going so, so well, and so but I go back to that decision. I--as a matter-of-fact I got the secretary of the treasury's Distinguished Service Award for handling that--these, the seating of the People's Republic of China. Speaker 1: So you had to be convinced that it was going to work first before, I mean you (unclear) think about it okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we had, as a government we had to be convinced, I mean I had my doubts but as a government we had to be convinced and then we had to-- Speaker 1: Who lobbied in favor it, I'm interested in? Speaker 2: How did they come about? Speaker 1: Yeah I mean who was lobbying favor? Speaker 2: What happened the Chinese first of all made it clear they wanted it and they called in the five ambassadors of the major countries and Beijing [China], Peiping [Beijing, China] and said this is what we wanna have happen, but then they convinced Bob McNamara [Robert McNamara] who president of the World Bank to push for it. I was representing the United States on the board of the World Bank. They couldn't have come in without our acceptance because the board, the U.S. is a major shareholder in the World Bank. At the time we were trying to get legislation through [U.S.] Congress with the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] administration, and there were a lot of people who were opposed to China coming in, so it was a very delicate way of to negotiate the timing of bringing China in without jeopardizing some of the stuff we were trying to get done on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]. There was tension then between me and McNamara about the pace in which he was going. We had a big showdown at the treasury department [U.S. Department of the Treasury] with the secretary of the treasury who was then Bill Miller [G. William Miller], and McNamara and myself, Dick Holbrook [Richard Holbrooke], who is now, who was with the, with the [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton administration and then the Carter administration, but he was handling East Asia. We all got together, McNamara was saying that I was not representing the U.S.'s position in the board accurately and all the people I mentioned backed me up, but we ended up--oh, the Chinese and the delegation he had--they had me at the Chinese embassy trying to convince me along with some other people that it was time to bring them in. We, we worked it, the concern we had, the reason--let me think about this. At the time China was a rather poor country, they would have had to borrow in a same pool from other poor countries with a limited amount of money that we had in the pool. Those other poor countries were mostly African countries and India and some Southeast Asian countries. The African countries were really afraid that if China came in they would--and demanded their share because it was a proportion that they would suffer. Speaker 1: They would suck up all the money. Speaker 2: Suck up all the money, that, that was a major concern but they couldn't speak up because not only was this a Third World solidarity, they had scared the hell out of China, and this (laughter) (unclear) the others (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Chinese soldiers in some of those countries. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Zambia, and Tanzania. Speaker 2: That's right and so it fell to us to, to negotiate that. We had to negotiate a larger pool of money to make sure that money would be available so when China came in and got what their population required that it wouldn't suck up all the rest and that take--called for getting negotiations with Congress that they would support a larger replenishment of this fund called the International Development Association and that is what was all behind this thing, so it took some negotiations but we pulled it off and, and I guess I'm kinda proud of that definitely, that's, that and then I went to Riggs Bank after Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] came in. Story_ID: 296656 Speaker 1: So, so when Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] came in you just knew it was time to-- Speaker 2: It was, it was time to go and I wrote a letter to that effect and I couldn't, I couldn't, I could not carry out the policies of the Regan administration at the World Bank [Washington, D.C.], they had a different view of, of the bank of development lending, of, of developing countries and that's you know they needed their own person, that's not, wasn't for me. Speaker 1: I know a major theme in, in your writing I mean for The Washington Post is the disparity between rich and poor and how you people run over the poor, but what did, what did the Regan administration do in that you know with the World Bank? I mean what was their aim when they came in? Speaker 2: Well their feeling was that the World Bank was not necessarily the instrument for lending and they wanted to have more emphasis on direct lending through USAID [United States Agency for International Development] where they could control the money. See what happens to the World Bank, U.S. contributes, other countries contribute, but the World Bank then goes out as an international institution and negotiates with a country. The Regan administration wanted to put its money where it could have its greatest influence on a direct basis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that meant buying, not buying but influencing on a bilateral-basis countries, if you're gonna, if we're gonna do go where our direct interest carry us, political interests carry us, in our fights for larger interest with a Cold War fight. Whereas World Bank will say, this country may be politically here and may be politically there leaning one way or the other, but it's important to develop this country economically. Just like the argument with China [People's Republic of China], it was a good argument that yes, it's, it's a Marxist country, but it's an undeveloped country as people develop, they're gonna have desires and wants and needs and they're gonna eventually put the pressure on their own governments for things that they want, but you got to give them the ability to, to get off their knees, to start developing, to start acquiring things so that they can start making demands on their government and that's the way you get before 'em. Well it's slowly coming in China, the political development is not as quickly as I'd like to see, the economic development is faster but this is the way you do it, the World Bank, the Regan administration had a different view, and it's a sort of a muscular thing that we'll take our money and go in here and we'll get a Sergeant [Samuel Kanyon] Doe in Liberia and, and what we did was just the opposite you know, we when the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] administration was there and Doe took over and (unclear) Liberia we said, "Listen, let's back up, let's not lend," you know, "let's not lend because of the way he took over and the what he did and we're not going to lend until we see that there's going to be more of the democratic participation in the country." Just different philosophy. Story_ID: 296657 Speaker 1: Well, okay. Now I guess we're ready for Riggs [Bank, Washington, D.C.] now (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Riggs. Speaker 1: Now how did that take place, I mean how did? Speaker 2: I knew, I knew the president of Riggs Bank when I was at the World Bank [Washington, D.C.] and I, and he knew that I was going to leave with the [President Ronald Wilson] Regan administration coming in and he wanted to know I'd be interested in joining them as a vice president. I wanted to continue in the international area, they made me an offer making me vice president for the Middle East and Africa. At the time I was going to make the decision there was a takeover of Riggs by Joe Allbritton, who owned the local TV station [WJLA-TV] and owned, had owned The Washington Star. A friend of mine who knew Allbritton and knew the then owners of Riggs Bank said, "Look, I know both of them, you'll get along with him, go on to join Riggs," and I did, and actually for ten years I did well with Joe Allbritton, I mean I, I worked my butt off but I started as a vice president and became a senior vice president, he made me an executive vice president and then he put me on the board of directors of the bank and I left Riggs at 1990 and God, what happened afterwards, just anyway. I had a good ten years there while I was there with him, we did a lot and I learned a lot but I was started out with the charge of Middle East and Africa and ended up handling all of the Third World indebtedness, traveled broadly not only the Middle East and Africa, but also in Latin America and I left the bank in better shape than in which I found it. Speaker 1: Now Third World indebtedness, I mean a lot of the countries are in heavy debt, you know. How, how does? Speaker 2: How did Riggs get into it (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and deal with that yeah? Speaker 2: Well Riggs, Riggs was the bank of most of the embassies here and they did that very well. When I joined the bank, I discovered that Riggs and Allbritton discovered also that Riggs had also entered into participation in several jumbo loans as a participant, in several jumbo loans to various countries around the world, loans that they really should never have participated in given the size of the bank. When the Third World debt crisis occurred in the late '70s [1970], Riggs found itself caught up in participation of those loans. My job was to reduce Riggs' exposure by selling off as many of those loans as I could or negotiating new arrangements and that's what in effect I did and I did those to the extent that well enough that I was recognized for it, promoted for it and, and, and nicely compensated for it. I had, we had a lot of exposure in Mexico that I was able to negotiate our way out of, not out of, but negotiated those loans and reduced that exposure. Speaker 1: Okay, so 1990 what, what, so you were with Riggs for ten years. Speaker 2: Um-hm, just about ten years. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 296658 Speaker 1: And my father [Isaiah King III] died--my last kid [Robert King] finished school, my son finished law school, that was the last one in school and I was coming back from his graduation at Columbia [University, New York, New York] with my wife [Gwendolyn Stewart King] and I said, "That's it." I don't need to work like I was working to get the money for college tuition and law school tuition and all that and now and my father's gone, I'm thinking about you know what of own mortality or whatever I wanna do and said whatever I wanna do and what I really liked doing was writing and they had tried, The [Washington] Post had tried to recruit me when I was on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.], the editor of the editorial page, Meg Greenfield and I declined them because I had to earn money for the kids who were going to college, et cetera. So I came back and I was at another funeral with a couple of people for The Post and afterwards we went to lunch and they--I was telling them what was on my mind. They said, "Call The Post. Call Meg Greenfield and see what she says." So I called her the next day and she said, "Are you really interested this time?" I said, "Yes if you're interested in me." A week later, I had breakfast with her and Don Graham [Donald E. Graham] who is now the chairman of The Washington Post Company. At the time his mother [Katharine Graham] was, and he was editor, major--would I--got together with him and I was hired and I called Joe Allbritton and told him I was leaving [Riggs Bank, Washington, D.C.] and I've been with The Washington Post ever since. Speaker 2: Okay, so what were you immediate duties there at The Washington Post? Speaker 1: I was an editorial writer. Speaker 2: Okay, now at this time you are a little bit more right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now I'm deputy editor of the editorial page. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I am a columnist. Speaker 2: Okay, so as an editorial writer you may not, you--did you get a byline as an editorial writer--? Speaker 1: As an editorial writer I, most of my work was spent writing editorials meaning writing for the paper and, but after--and I occasionally wrote a column with a byline but after the about the fourth or fifth year Meg Greenfield said she wanted me to write a weekly column and I was scared of the idea you know. What I'm gonna say every week and maybe I can't do this and so I said well, let me write on Saturday nobody reads the paper on Saturday and if it bombs you can take me out of the paper and nobody will know the difference, and so I started a Saturday column and I've been writing one ever since and that's--I guess I started regularly eight years ago, seven, eight years ago (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is it still a Saturday column for the most part? Speaker 1: It's still a Saturday column. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: It's still a Saturday column featured across the top. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But it's, it's doing all right, got a following. Speaker 2: It's just one a week? Speaker 1: One column a week, I write maybe three sometimes two, three editorials a week. This week I had three that I've written so far, but just one column generally. I had put in another one every now and then on special occasions if something special happens, but generally it's one column on Saturday. Story_ID: 296659 Speaker 1: Okay, well what, what do you like to write about? Speaker 2: At about this time of the week I'm trying to think about what bothers me or what concerns me or what interests me. I started out writing about local issues, writing about things that I think people I know are interested in but they don't see in the paper [The Washington Post] that they wanna talk about or what, wanna see some discussion of. First I start out with of course what really does interest me or bug me or excites me, but I, I try to have people in mind as my audience and they generally are people who live around here, I see and see in the supermarkets and I socialize with or I know they read the same things I read, then every--then, then I'll slip away from the local thing and get to something national, if it a national issue that I think cries out for my response, not, not for, I don't just look for a national issue to write about but at if it's something that grabs my attention I will write about that, but I'm pretty much free to roam where I wanna in a column you know. I write about the war, I write about--I try to write even locally about people who, who don't have a voice, who need a voice, who, whose situations go unattended by us in the press that we look past--try to be a megaphone for some people. Speaker 1: That's, for instance give, give us an example of? Speaker 2: One that I've written about a lot that's, this is a young man [Jonathan Magbie] who is quadriplegic who was arrested for possession of drugs, first offense. The judge [Judge Judith E. Retchin] put him in jail for a week. Speaker 1: He's a quadriplegic? Speaker 2: He's a quadriplegic. Speaker 1: That means arms and legs don't work, right? Speaker 2: Quadriplegic, since, since he was four years old at the time he was twenty-seven. Speaker 1: He's arrested for possession of drugs? Speaker 2: Possession of marijuana. Put him in jail, went in on a Monday, which was my birthday last September, Friday he was dead. Didn't have his respirator that he needed, they didn't have the ability to take care of him in jail. There was testimony that the judge had heard that, had been told that although the judge said she had been told otherwise, but I wrote six columns about it, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, stayed on it. Right now the inspector general is inspecting, it's investigating this. The judge has been investigated but the bar association kind of let her slide, but the investigation is still going on into what happened in the jail, whether they, whether they dropped the ball, what happened at the hospital where he went twice during that week. Whether they dropped the ball and I know they did in both places, and so that's the kind of thing I get into and what bothered me is that it happened, he died and that was it. I said, no, no, no you know. Institutions, somebody's gotta be held accountable, you just don't have that happen and nobody gets held accountable. Speaker 1: An interesting question that just comes to mind I think, most people they would hear this story would probably think of it, that his best defense would be that he couldn't possibly put any drugs on himself 'cause he doesn't have use of his arms and legs. Speaker 2: It was, it was stated on the record, the judge acknowledged that. The judge acknowledged it, she said he couldn't of done it, couldn't of done it and it was, as a matter-of-fact there was somebody there who testified that he did it, that he put it on him, you know I mean, it, it but he told the judge that yeah, I use it, I smoke it, he said you know, this is one thing he does, he could do, and he said he would probably keep doing it. Well he didn't use the marijuana defense which he could of use and his lawyer should have used it but anyway she was gonna teach him a lesson, and so you know that's the kind of thing where--in or paper and the reason I jump into these things 'cause our paper ran a little story and let it go. I said, oh no! So I, you know, six consecutive editorials or columns about it and this is what I, this is what I, this is what I will do. Story_ID: 296660 Speaker 1: If I come across a situation where I think--last Saturday I wrote about a guy [Dennis Dolinger] who was found in 1999 with multiple screwdriver stabs in his head, you know. In his brain, twenty-five, the last one cut the brain stem off, all right. The cops come, they find a trail of blood, his wallet is missing, money is missing. A week later they arrest the guy who found, that his credit cards, that the guy's DNA shows he's not the guy. They take the DNA from this unknown person in the house, send it to Virginia, test, the cops down there they test it, say, aw it's Vincent Garrett [sic. Robert P. Garrett]. Vincent Garrett went into the system, Vincent Garrett is really a guy named Andrew Jenkins [sic. Raymond Anthony Jenkins]. They go out and investigate Jenkins and somebody said, oh yeah I saw Jenkins on the day after the--this thing has occurred and they found Jenkins with scratches in his face and money and the jewelry and all this stuff that this guy had. Sent Jenkins'--his DNA to the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], the FBI comes back and says, "Oh this DNA matches the blood on the shirt, and the blood on the floor in the basement and blood on the second floor and blood on the sidewalk and the blood on the first floor," and they arrest Jenkins in 1999. Jenkins has yet to go to trial. Speaker 2: Well this is, what six years later? Speaker 1: Yeah, two weeks ago the judge threw out the DNA evidence, so I wrote about that last Saturday and I look for things like this where institutions failed people and where the people that they failed are not the big people and therefore--'cause you say, if this guy stabbed in the head had been the son of a senator, this would not be happening. If that quadriplegic [Jonathan Magbie] had been George Bush's [President George Walker Bush] son it wouldn't have happened, he wouldn't have gone to jail, and you, you know and, and if, if you don't say it, if you don't write about it, if you don't expose it you don't call it to the public's attention, whose gonna know about it? I don't live to write for this kind of piece but this is the kind of pieces that I, that get me going when I see that institutions are not treating people fairly or even equally, that, that will either get me to write an editorial or sometimes I write a column that I can actually express it even in greater detail. I get bothered, bothered when you see that somebody whose, you know steals thirty thousand dollars' worth of some crap in a city agency gets sent to jail for years, and you got somebody who is a national security advisor who lies and misrepresents something, and the secretary of state, swears one thing as this way and it turns out to be that way and the person at the defense department [U.S. Department of Defense] declares that things are going well, they're not going well, people tell you that weapons of mass destructions and it turns out to not be weapons of mass destruction, you end up with fifteen hundred people killed on the U.S. side and the end result is that one person gets promoted to the secretary of state and one person gets the freedom- medal of freedom who said it was a slam dunk and, and somebody else becomes president of the World Bank [Washington, D.C.], and you say, "Where's the damn justice?" "Where's the damn justice?" So I've written that kind of a piece, that's what gets me going and that's what I give voice to. Sometimes I miss, sometimes I don't, you know, I miss a lot. Sometimes I drive people crazy. I wrote two weeks about this religious gathering that took place in Louisville, Kentucky where they said if you oppose, if people oppose Bush's judges against people of faith and their judges are undermining our Christian heritage and so I just wrote a piece ['Hijacking Christianity...'] about that two weeks. Speaker 2: That's the one that Bill Frisk [sic. Senator Bill Frist] was involved? Speaker 1: Yeah, Bill Frisk and went after him on that, and you know. Four hundred emails, people still writing, most of 'em like it now that right wingers are weighing in but that's what I do. Story_ID: 296661 Speaker 1: There is a one I remember reading about that had to do with Pat Robertson ['Pat Robertson's Gold'], another fundamental Christian whose had, had a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter) Liberia. Speaker 1: Tell that story, that's a-- Speaker 2: Pat Robertson, we discovered that Pat Robertson was over in Liberia, flacking for Liberia and what he was trying to do was get the right to build, to dig, to mine for gold in Liberia and in, in exchange for mining for gold in Liberia, he was trying to pressure the U.S. government to back off its pressure on, on. Speaker 1: Is that Charles Johnson? Speaker 2: Charles Taylor (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Taylor, Charles Taylor. Speaker 2: And he was trying to suggest that Charles Taylor was one great friend of America and, but he had this little side deal worked out where he was gonna be able to mine for gold and so I, I wrote, what I don't know two or three pieces about it exposing him for what he was doing over there, and just stayed after him. Speaker 1: And it's clear, here's a man who's always talking about morals. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And he. Speaker 2: See that, you point out the hypocrisies of some of these folks you know, that's, that's what I had the ability and the opportunity to do, I don't know if I had to do it with any ability, but that's what I had the opportunity get at, to especially the people who hold themselves out as such great authorities, moral authorities. I don't go around looking trying to, to puncture anybody's image but when you such see such hypocrisy such as Pat Roberts [sic. Pat Robertson], you know, you just (unclear) out for it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jerry, Jerry Falwell is one that I read that you commented on Jerry Falwell's call for people to vote Christian or something. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: What does that mean? Speaker 2: Yeah, yep (laughter) I did go after him on that too, yeah. So I, it, it--what--I think something very serious is happening here in the country that, that people are not stepping up or recognizing for one reason or another, and that is, there's a very serious political effort underway to convert this country into a theocracy, and a theocracy that's gonna work against the interest of the majority of people. They're using Christianity, not just religion, but they're using Christianity to, as a, as a battering ram and if people don't recognize what they're doing, we are all gonna end up paying for it because it's a very intolerant group of people. They only have a view of one, one way how that'll work in this country and it's, they won't accept another point of view, and so what they will do, you know what my fear is, what they will do is once they gain power then they will take action against those who don't share their view. That's, that the worry, I don't mind them having the views they have, but it's what they will do if they ascend into power to those who don't share their views, and they're not going to, I mean when they, when we start adopting the view that you're good, I'm evil and therefore you're justified in taking whatever action is necessary to put me down, then you become my problem. I mean you and I have difficulty co-existing if you tell me that I have to be put down and that's what these people essentially do, they don't, they don't preach tolerance, the Falwells and, and the Robertsons, and that's why I see them as being a real serious threat..