 Story_ID: 67647 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, and I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is, our videographer is Paul Bieschke. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, it's Charisse R. Lillie, C-H-A-R-I-S-S-E, the middle initial R, for Ranielle, R-A-N-I-E-L-L-E, last name Lillie, L-I-L-L-I-E. Speaker 1: And could you give us your date and place of birth, please? Speaker 2: Yes, April 7th, 1952, Houston, Texas, Harris County. Speaker 1: Okay, and can you give us your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an attorney. I'm a partner at Ballard Spahr Andrews and Ingersoll, and I'm chairman or chairperson of the Litigation Department. Story_ID: 67648 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, before we get into depth, there are like "People Magazine-ish" type questions that we always ask. Speaker 2: Okay, all righty (laughter). Speaker 1: And the first one is--and they just require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) My favorite food. Probably some sort of Mexican food, you know, enchiladas with lots of tabasco sauce. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite, red. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I think I love the summer the most. Speaker 1: Okay, how about your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, right now it's Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh, boy, favorite phrase or saying (laughter). That is too hard. I don't know. Not really (laughter). Story_ID: 67649 Speaker 1: --Well, let's talk about your background. Can you please give us the names of your parents, and spell them for us, please-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --along with their birthdates? Speaker 2: Sure, uh-huh. My mother's name is [HM] Vernell, V-E-R-N-E-L-L, Audrey, A-U-D-R-E-Y, Watson, W-A-T-S-O-N, is her maiden name. Her last name is Lillie, L-I-L-L-I-E. And she was born May 11th--and she just had her 71st birthday in 2002. My father is Richard, R-I-C-H-A-R-D, Lysander, L-Y-S-A-N-D-E-R, Lillie, L-I-L-L-I-E. And my father was, his birthday was--he's passed away. It was July 29th, and he died in 1983 at the age of 52 of stomach cancer. And my parents were both natives of Houston, Texas. My parents lived in Houston until 1969. My father was a jazz musician who also taught school. So my father was a tenor saxophonist and played almost every instrument known to man. My mother is also an artist. My mother was--when I was growing up, a speech and drama high school teacher at Phyllis Wheatley, W-H-E-A-T-L-E-Y High School in Houston, Texas. And she left Houston to go to Carnegie Mellon University [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. And at that time, Carnegie Mellon had created a program--this was in the early stages, really of integration in Houston--they had created a program for school teachers from Southern states to come and get their Ph.D.s with the idea that they would go back and be leaders in education. And my mother, along with a number of people from the Houston area went to Carnegie Mellon. She got her Doctorate in English and she was one of maybe two or three folks that actually stayed in Pittsburgh. So then she began a career at the University of Pittsburgh and was the Department of Africana Studies. And she's still, still teaching there as a tenured professor at the Department of Africana Studies. Speaker 1: She was there when [HM] Barbara Sizemore was there? Speaker 2: She was there when Barbara Sizemore was there. She and Barbara are friends. And my father went on to get--he continued to play jazz. And he got a Masters in Counselor Education at University of Pittsburgh, and then began doing Counselor Education and did some jobs with the, with the--with city government, but always stayed a musician, always played his horn and practiced his saxophone every day, which was an amazing lesson for my sister and me as young kids to watch. And my mother is the founder and director of the Kuntu Repertory Theater which is the longest running repertoire theater group associated with a university in the United States. And I think it's about twenty-seven years old now. And she still is doing plays by emerging black artists, Rob Penny, August Wilson was a part of the Kuntu stable of writers very early on in his career. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's from Pittsburgh. Speaker 2: He's from Pittsburgh. And mother has maintained relationships with all those folks. So she's still in Pittsburgh and still doing black theater. Speaker 1: Okay, that's exciting. Speaker 2: Very exciting. Speaker 1: Exciting parents. Speaker 2: Very exciting parents, yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, did they have a story about how they met? Speaker 2: How they met? They knew each other from the time that they were young kids. They went to, they went to church together, and they were friends. My mother went to Dillard University in New Orleans [Louisiana]. My father went to Kentucky State [Frankfort, Kentucky], and ended up finishing his degree at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas]. But they were lifelong friends. And my mother used to tell the story about how she would walk him in the summer times during--when they were in college, to mail letters to his girlfriend from Kentucky State. But this friendship ended up in their getting married, and they were married for thirty-two years, I guess, when he passed away. Story_ID: 67650 Speaker 1: Did either one of them have or know stories or did your grandparents have stories about the, your ancestors and what your family was doing during the days of slavery or Reconstruction? Speaker 2: Right, but not during slavery. My mother [HM Vernell Audrey Watson Lillie] actually did the search on her family at the Smithsonian [Institute], and it appears that family after slavery settled in North Carolina. And then there was a branch of the family that moved to Oklahoma. And my grandfather, her father, they married black--they were Blackfoot Indians and African Americans. We have one great, great--one great aunt--this is my mother's aunt who says that she knew a relative who was Ebo from Nigeria. So apparently, there are, there is someone actually from Africa that made themselves known to the family. But we don't know that person's name. And we don't have any pictures of them. But this would have been shortly after slavery ended that they would have been in North Carolina. There's still family in North Carolina. But then they moved to Oklahoma, and then to Texas, and my father--my mother's father, father's father was an entrepreneur, was in a funeral home business. And he bought a lot of land, and they were in the funeral home business. And they moved from Hempstead, Texas, then to Houston, Texas, and then my grandfather was in the funeral home business, but then had to work at Hughes Tools, something. But I've never quite understood, associated with World War I, and then worked at Hughes Tool, retired and then went back into the funeral home business in his 60's. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On my father's side of the family, we just know that the folks settled in New Iberia, Louisiana, near the Tabasco plantation, and those folks then moved to Sealy, Texas--well, that's my grandmother's side. My grandfather's side, they moved from New Iberia, Louisiana to New Orleans [Louisiana], then to Houston [Texas]. And on my grandmother's side, as far back as we go is probably to the early 1900s, and they were in a place called Sealy, Texas. It's S-E-A-L-Y, Texas. I'm not really sure how they got to Sealy from slavery. And then they moved from Sealy to Houston. Speaker 1: Okay, did you know your grandparents? Speaker 2: I know my grandparents. My--I had grandparents until about five years ago. My grandparents lived into my forties. I lost my first grandparent when I was forty. So I was blessed. Story_ID: 67651 Speaker 1: Well, I want you to think back and tell me what it was like to grow up in Houston? What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up and what neighborhood did you grow up in? Speaker 2: I lived in a place called Pleasantville [Texas]. It's P-L-E-A-S-A-N-T-V-I-L-L-E. Pleasantville is on the, it's very near the Houston Ship Channel. It was a brand new development in the early 1950s. And this was, this place was sort of plunked out with the idea that there was gonna--that the Urban Renewal would met it, but the Urban Renewal never met it. So even today, it's sort of surrounded by a lot of industrial buildings. And I do remember segregation very plainly. I remember going to the grocery store and seeing the "Colored" water foundations and the "Colored" bathrooms. I remember not being able to go--there was a drive-in theater that was very close to our house, and we would always ask my mother [HM Vernell Audrey Watson Lillie] and father [Richard Lysander Lille], well, you know, "Why can't we go to the drive-in theater?" My mother would say something on the order of, "Well, you have to belong to a special club to get in there." And I remember, you know, going to the black movie theaters, going to very few--going out to dinner very seldom. You know, you go--there's a place in Third Ward called the "Groovy Grill." And we would go to the "Groovy Grill," and that was sort of a big night out for black families. And I guess it was probably when, probably in my high school days--I was probably ninth grade when integration really started in full force in Houston. Now, my sister and I were in the first group of kids to integrate the Catholic schools in Houston because even though you had minor attempts at integrating the public schools, the public schools really weren't truly integrated really until--I graduated in 1970 so it was probably '69' [1969], '70' [1970] when the schools really started getting integrated, when black teachers started being assigned to white schools and vice versa, when you stopped having kids being essentially bussed past schools in their neighborhood to go to either all-black or all-Hispanic or all-white schools. Speaker 1: Okay, when you were a small child, a little girl, like what are your memories of the neighborhood? I mean what kind of things would you do or what kind of a little kid were you? Speaker 2: Right, well, (laughter) see I don't think of myself as being nerdy, but, you know, I always loved school. And so we, my sister and I studied a lot. The other thing about my mother is my mother, as I told you was a theatrical person. And my mother was in charge at Phillis--Texas is a big football state. Everybody goes to the football games--well, when I was growing up, you went to the football games. People got dressed up. They wore their hats, their Sunday-go-to-meeting to go to the Thanksgiving Classic, the Thanksgiving Classic. And this was from a hundred years probably, was Phillis Wheatley [High School] versus Jack Yates [High School], Phillis Wheatley, Fifth Ward, Jack Yates, Third Ward. And my mother was in charge of the theater group, and they were called the "Stage Crafters". She was in charge of the majorettes for the marching band and the cheerleaders. And so in the afternoons, my mother always paid a student to pick us up from school. And we would come, and my sister and I would do our homework--and this is from first grade on, we'd do our homework in the stage room at Phillis Wheatley. And then we would sit and watch my mother's plays in rehearsal. So there was a time in my young life when I could give you, I could say the lines from 'Medea' [Euripides] 'Antigone [Sophocles], (laughter), 'A Day of Absence' [sic, 'Day of Absence,' a play by Douglas Turner Ward]. I knew all of those plays, '[A] Raisin in the Sun.'[Lorraine Hansberry] So as a young kid, I guess that we, my sister and I probably would qualify as being sort of nerdy. And then we did the whole thing. We did "Jack and Jill" [Jack and Jill of America] for a while until--my mother says we didn't wanna do it. But I think it was that she didn't wanna do it. So we did "Jack and Jill" for a while. We did ballet and tap dance, piano lessons, and my sister and I played violin from second grade to, I guess eleventh grade. And at some point, we integrated the Houston Youth Symphony Orchestra. And my sister was always a first-chair violinist, and I was always way back in the end of the second chairs because I was a decent musician, but I also didn't like to practice. So, so those are my, those are my earliest memories. Story_ID: 67652 Speaker 1: Okay, what was the name of your school? Speaker 2: The school, for elementary school, we went to Turner Elementary School which is in Third Ward on Rosedale Street. And in sixth grade, we went to St. Peter's [St. Peter the Apostle], which was on Old Spanish Trail. And I think it is still on Old Spanish Trail. And then for high school, ninth through twelfth, we went to Mount Carmel High School. It's M-T, C-A-R-M-E-L, High School, and that is a school that was, is still in existence, the Carmelite Fathers and Sisters. It's Carmelite Order of Nuns which is a teaching order of nuns. And so those were the schools. Speaker 1: Okay, now, who were some of your mentors at school? Did you have like some people that took special interests in you? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, definitely. In elementary school, we had a number of teachers who were--the thing that you have to remember about going to school in Houston, Texas in the '50's [1950s] and '60's [1960s] is the school teachers at Turner Elementary School, thirty years--like now, those school teachers that were teaching me today would be lawyers, doctors, physicians. These women had no options. There were two or three men that taught us. So these people were brilliant. And they cared very deeply about us. They also, I think had historical perspective. I remember them talking to me all the time about what it meant to be "Colored"--we were "Colored" then, what it meant to be Colored and how in order for us to be successful, we were gonna have to work three times as hard. They also sort of told us that white people were like really, really smart and that we were gonna have to work really, really hard in order to be successful. But they wanted us to be successful, and we knew, we had a sense that we were going to be successful. And I guess my biggest role model at Turner Elementary School was probably Vivian Harrison who is my Auntie Vivian. Her husband, Uncle Jimmy, is still alive, is a very talented bassist, jazz bassist. And he was a music teacher in the Houston Public Schools. She was the voice teacher and choir teacher at Turner Elementary School. And she is the person who taught us to stand up straight, to be proud, to elocute, to sing, to, to be, to be just strong and to be unwavering. And so she probably was my first mentor, first and most important mentor and still is a mentor to this day and is very encouraging and very supportive. My mother [HM Vernell Audrey Watson Lillie] also had a number of friends who were professors at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas]. And J. Reuben Sheeler who was, he was a contemporary of Carter Woodson. And they, he was a part of the--I guess it's the American Negro History Association. And Judge Sheeler -- Speaker 1: Association for the Study of Negro Life and History. Speaker 2: Association--yes, the Association for--that's right. And Dr. Sheeler and his wife, Winifred Sheeler as a high school teacher with my mother, and was a friend and mentor to my mother. And these folks were just very strong presences in our life. We used to go visit them on the weekends. We would have dinner. Dr. Sheeler and I would talk for hours on end about history and how he did his research, and we always dreamed of working together. And he unfortunately, passed away before then. At Mt. Carmel, I had a number of, really nuns and priests who were very much involved in the speech and drama aspects in Houston at that time. And I think that this may continue to this day. In Texas, there were speech tournaments in the same way that you have basketball tournaments now here where the kids would do poetry readings, original oratory, and my sister and I both participated on behalf of Mt. Carmel. And I have all kinds of statutes and trophies and--so there were a number of teachers who were very, very important mentors. But I think the Sheeler's--other mentors, Martha Collins and Lawrence Collins. He's an architect, and she was a social worker, but very active in Delta Sigma Theta with my mother. My mother's a big Delta person. And these were folks who we visited on the weekend, very, very successful African Americans living extremely well, very well versed in history, very confident people. I was just always surrounded by--the village that raised me was just an amazing group of really accomplished folks who just were at the top of their game and there was just no doubt that, that I could have the kind of success that they had. And they were always very encouraging, are still very encouraging to this day. These people are still very much a part of my life. Story_ID: 67653 Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about high school at Mt. Carmel [High School in Houston, Texas]. Speaker 2: Mt. Carmel. Speaker 1: Now, you were at Mt. Carmel, but you also had the opportunity to attend a prep school in Massachusetts? Speaker 2: Andover, right. That's right. The Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts were--those were two--it was a summer program. At that time, Phillips Academy was all boys, and they had summer programs in the summer. And these were academic programs where you would go and study for eight weeks. We studied--I don't know, you know, I studied African American History at--well, let me tell you the story about the African American history. The first summer I went, there was no African American history. And there were a group of really amazing kids. And we sort of complained, and they said, well, you all think that we should have African American history, why don't you recommend somebody. I, and this is what Dr. Sheeler used to always say. He said, "Charisse got me a summer job" because I recommended Dr. Sheeler, and Dr. Sheeler and Mrs. Sheeler went up. And he taught African American history my second summer there. But it was an amazing program. Our advisors were college kids from Harvard [University], Wellesley [College], Wesleyan [University], and the teachers were both university professors as well as Andover teachers who came in for the summer and taught us for eight weeks. We also did a coffeehouse every Friday night, and we would do poetry readings. And it was, it was a great program. It was academic enrichment as well as developing friendships and sort of a summer camp, but very highly intellectual atmosphere. Speaker 1: This is like 1966-- Speaker 2: It would have been the summer of '69' [1969], and the summer of '68' [1968]. Mm hm. Speaker 1: Okay-- Story_ID: 67654 Speaker 1: Mm hm (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And people, you know, black people then were talking about black power and-- Speaker 1: Um-hum, yes. Speaker 2: It had been a, kind of a switch, you know, and Black Panther Party had emerged,-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --a lot of activity in the black community, a lot of consolidation of resources and people trying to focus on what they can do to uplift their community-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --and uplift themselves. Speaker 1: That's right, and I think that my, because of my parents and the exposure of my parents, my mother [HM Vernell Audrey Watson Lillie], we--my sister and I both participated and my mother had a theater group in Houston that was out of Phillis--what she was doing at Phillis Wheatley [High School]. And we traveled all over the South doing collages of black poetry, essays by Frederick Douglas, scenes from, really revolutionary-type plays, and then we would have a discussion. It was almost diversity training. And I think that at that time, my view on making change was very much through the Arts, that arts was a vehicle for education and I had--even though in the back of my mind, I always wanted to be a lawyer, I also, I think during my last two or three years in high school really felt that I would do something in the Arts and something that was gonna be designed to both educate folks in the black community as well as educate the broader community about what our capacity was and I still believe that the Arts are a powerful tool in terms of both diversity and really having black folks emerge as whole citizens. But during those last two years, I guess '68' [1968] to '80' [1980], I worked along with my mother and then, in her theater group. And then when she left to go to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], I actually spent that final year in Houston, staying with my grandparents, and I did some theater with the local, black theater group which--I guess we performed at University of Houston [Texas]. Speaker 2: What was the name of the group? Speaker 1: I'm trying to remember. You are really testing me today (laughter). I can't--it was-- Speaker 2: You seemed to have a lot of theater--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Texas was a hot bed. I mean we were really-- Speaker 2: Did you know Ted Shine, the playwright? He was-- Speaker 1: Ted Shine, no. I tell you who was working--oh, gosh. It'll come to me if I start thinking. But there were two or three young, black playwrights who were working. They were either at University of Houston or Texas Southern [University in Houston, Texas], and they were producing plays. But the plays that we were doing were really traditional--I mean we were doing, you know, 'Day of Absence' [Douglas Turner Ward] and those kinds of things. But, yeah, I cannot, I can't think of the name of the theater group. I, I know my mother has newspaper clippings which would have the information about the play. And I did "Sister Son/Ji", I did [HM] Sonia Sanchez' play when, during my senior year in high school in Houston, at University of Houston. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that was widely done then. Speaker 1: Um-hum, it was. It really was, and my sister actually did it in Pittsburgh as a high school kid. So, and at that time, [HM] Sonia [Sanchez] was actually teaching at the University of Pittsburgh [in Pennsylvania]. So she and my mother are friends also. Story_ID: 67655 Speaker 1: Okay, now, what other activities were you involved in, in high school [Mr. Carmel High School]? I know that's a lot. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, it's a lot (laughter). So I was doing plays. I had just, I guess by 11th grade, I had stopped playing the violin. I was very active on campus. I'd, I, you know, was the vice editor of the school newspaper. I was doing the, I guess poetry reading is probably oratory in the speech tournaments. And I was working very hard being a student also. So I was, I was busy. Speaker 1: You didn't seem to waste any time. You were--(laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) No. Speaker 1: --doing something productive every second. Speaker 2: Yes, it was. I don't know. I said, I--I never considered myself a nerd. But when I look back on it--and I do think I had fun. I mean I had, I did have fun, but I worked very hard. My parents [HM Vernell Audrey Watson Lillie and Richard Lysander Lillie] really inculcated a very strong work ethic. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, sometimes I think it's unfair that people, you know, say someone's a nerd because they focus on work. Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Speaker 1: It's not, I mean it seems like it ought to be that way, you know. Speaker 2: Right, exactly, exactly. But, yeah, no, I was very busy. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 67656 Speaker 1: So you had a--what gave you the idea that you wanted to become a lawyer? You said you always had that in the back of your mind. Speaker 2: I did. Well, in fact, I've given you some--I'm gonna give you some material on my cousin. My cousin, Craig Washington, who took the Barbara--well, she took the Barbara Jordan/ [George Thomas] "Mickey" Leland--he took the Barbara Jordan, Mickey Leland seat in the United States Congress. But Craig was a lawyer. He was a young lawyer when I was growing up, did criminal defense work. I admired him greatly. And so that was one role model, Craig Washington, and he's now back in Texas, still practicing law. My other role model was Barbara Jordan who was a family friend, and who was just an outstanding lawyer, was beginning--I guess when I was probably in high school, probably in high school, she was beginning to get involved in State government. She was a Johnsonian Democrat. I thought she was just fabulous. And so I had these early role models of people who would, who were involved in the law. I also--we would attend rallies. See, my sister and I were very involved in the Black Power Movement in Houston. And we were young, so I mean basically, it involved us sort of attending rallies and we were writing things. My sister and I were writing poetry. We were involved at the "Hope Development" that I was telling you about where I met, then, Don L. Lee [HM Haki Madhubuti]. And so we were, we were pretty deeply involved in the Black Power Movement. And at that time, there were a couple of people, Lee Otis Johnson, who was a black activist, had been put in jail for 30 years for--they, they--we think they planted one marijuana cigarette on him. He had been an activist. So there were a lot of things--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: He got 30 years for one--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He got 30 years for one marijuana cigarette. And I think that that sentence was ultimately overturned, but it was after a lot of agitation, a lot of court appeals. So I was involved also on the periphery of the legal system, both not working and working. And so I always had an interest. I just always had an interest in the law as a vehicle of social change. And once I got to undergraduate school--I went to Wesleyan University in Middletown, Connecticut, I just began to think more and more and more about it and decided I wanted to go into law. Story_ID: 67657 Speaker 1: Now, before we pass by Barbara Jordan, there's something, do you have any reflections about Barbara Jordan? Speaker 2: On Barbara. Well, I think that Barbara was, for her time, a really amazing person because one of the things that occurred both in the black movement as well as the world at large is that even when doors began to open in terms of integration, they were generally opened for men. And so for Barbara as an African American woman to come forward to--the Johnsonian Democrats were open enough to give her an opportunity. But then when they opened the door, she just shot through it and just, the sky was the limit. And I remember, I don't, you know, I don't have recollections. I know that I, there were many times when I was in the same room with Barbara. I don't really remember having that many direct conversations with her. I met her one time when I was in Austin, Texas, probably between my, it was probably between my 10th and 11th grade because it was the first time that I went to Andover. And I was at Girls State, and that's the program where you go and you pretend to be in the State legislature, and Barbara came. And I think she spoke to us. And I had caused this real controversy because the Bill that I introduced into Girls State was to add Black History (laughter) to the Texas school books. And this was all fake, but I'm telling you, these girls freaked out. I mean they were really, really unhappy and nervous, and, and felt that this was an attack on, you know, all that was good and right with America. I mean it was really sort of interesting, and so I do remember talking to Barbara for a few minutes. And I just sort of reintroduced myself, and I said, "I'm Vernell and"--we called my father Dickie Boy, "I'm Vernell and Dickie Boy's daughter." And, you know, she sort of embraced me, and that was, you know, very special (laughter). But for me, it was not so much the personal contact as my parents [HM Vernell Audrey Watson Lillie and Richard Lysander Lillie] had the personal contact with her. But it was just seeing a woman who was smart and who had political savvy and who was so articulate. It was just, I, I just found her to be amazing. I found her to be very inspirational. Story_ID: 67658 Speaker 1: Now, how did you decide to go to Wesleyan University [in Middletown, Connecticut]? Speaker 2: I decided to go to Wesleyan--it's actually directly connected to my experience at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass [Massachusetts]. I, I met these amazing college who were our, who were the counselors. And I knew that I wanted to do, have--get an East Coast education, and I applied up and down, from Harvard [University], Yale [University], Wesleyan [University]. And I think that I chose Wesleyan--well, there're two things. One is that they had a very strong community of African American students. They had an organization called Ujima that was very active, and they actually reached out to all of the minority students before school started. The other thing was that I was in the first class of freshman women at Wesleyan. Wesleyan previously had been all male. And the school did a real push. They sent people out to Houston to meet me, and so it was kind of exciting, and I think also my mother always really wanted to go to Yale Drama School. And she kept pushing Yale, and I kept thinking, well, you know, I think I really wanna do, I really wanna sort of go where my, where my gut tells me to go. And it's funny, but, you know, this is how life is. I, every--I had interviewed every--I had gone every place else except Wesleyan. I really went to Wesleyan, sight unseen, and have never regretted it. It was a wonderful education. The school was very small. I got very, very personal attention from my professors, and there was a very strong community of black students. And I am friends with many of those people to this day. Story_ID: 67659 Speaker 1: Okay, well, who were some of your mentors at Wesleyan [University in Middletown, Connecticut], and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: At Wesleyan? Speaker 1: --and some of the students that stand out? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I mean the mentors I had, really the two biggest mentors were my History professor, and my Political Science professor. There were two--I'll start with Professor Vose. Clement Vose was a political science professor, and he taught Constitutional Law and Political and Civil Liberties type courses, which were right down my alley with my interests in civil rights law. Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Speaker 2: It's C-L-E-M-E-N-T, and V-as in Victor-O-S-E, Clement Vose. And Professor Vose was very widely published in sort of the history of how politicians make decisions and how politicians are elected. And during one of his--I used to talk to him a lot after class. During, I guess, my junior years, I said to him that I really wanted to do some in-depth study, that I wanted to have a personal--you could have a personal tutorial and do some research and write a paper. And he pointed--I never will forget this. He pointed to a shelf on his bookcase, and he said, "Charisse, there's a paper over there I've been trying to write for the last two years. Why don't you just take this material and go for it?" Well, the paper was the "History of the Appointment Process of Black Federal Judges." And that year, Professor Vose helped me get funding from the Davenport Foundation as well as funding from the University. And at that time, there were, there were only 15 black federal judges. So we're talking 1969, 1970. I went around the country and interviewed all those black federal judges, and two of the judges that I interviewed--and I interviewed everybody but Judge [Constance Baker] Motley in New York. I think she was the only person that I didn't, that I didn't interview. Professor Vose's theory was that there was probably something different in the way that African American judges were appointed to the federal bench that was different from the way white judges were appointed to the federal bench. And around that time, there were a couple of books that had been written. And our theory was not borne out. (Laughter) What--I mean our ultimate theory was after talking to these people who had been appointed--and the interesting thing that you all should know is a big chunk of them at that time, the largest number of black federal judges had actually been appointed by Richard Nixon [President Richard Nixon]. But these judges basically were very, very highly educated, very successful academically, but they also had to go through the kind of political processing. And many of them had been active in the Civil Rights Movement and had built law careers based on the Civil Rights Movement. But all of them--none of the, I should say, downplayed the importance of politics in getting the African American judges appointed to the federal bench. Now, what judge, what Professor Vose did for me was that he set me up for the rest of my life because during the course of those interviews, I met two black federal judges in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And the first one was A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr., who I went on to serve as a research assistant for Judge Higginbotham, and he became a lifelong mentor. And the second was the Honorable Clifford Scott Green who, for whom I clerked for two years after law school. Both of them at that time were U.S. District Court judges. Judge Higginbotham went on to be elevated to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. But getting to know them then created a network for me so that when I came to Philadelphia to go to law school, they both eventually hired me and both of them were lifelong mentors and have really, in many ways, been the keys to my success. So Professor Vose was a huge mentor for me. Story_ID: 67660 Speaker 1: The other mentors that I had were two Jeffrey's. Two Jeffrey Smith's, one from South Africa, one from England. They were both professors of African History though. And-- Speaker 2: They were both named Jeffrey Smith? Speaker 1: Both Jeff--both were named Jeffrey Smith. And Jeffrey Smith, the South African, had one, had his arm amputated, I think just above the elbow. And he had fought in one of those wars in South Africa. And then the other Jeffrey Smith had been, was from England, and he had taught at--I wanna say the University of Ghana [Legon, Ghana] for years and then taught at Wesleyan [University in Middletown, Connecticut] probably for about twenty years. I think, I think the Jeffrey Smith from South Africa is still alive. I think the other Jeffrey Smith has probably passed away now. Speaker 2: But they taught African History? Speaker 1: They both taught African History. And they were just amazing. They helped me to hone my writing skills. The Jeffrey Smith from England actually had a seminar of no more than ten students. He would give us an assigned reading, and you wrote a paper a week. And then the paper, we would go to his house, and he would serve sherry, and we would discuss the paper for two hours. He was--we would discuss all the papers for two hours. He would critique it. We would write it, and so it was a real exercise, it was a real exercise in writing and research. But the thing about the Jeffrey Smith from England is that he was the first white person who I ever met who loved Africa. I mean, I, I mean he loved, he loved Africa. He respected Africans for the struggle. And he transmitted that to his students. He was just, he was just an amazing oh, just amazing professor. Speaker 2: But he lived in Ghana for--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: He lived in Ghana for probably 10 or 15 years-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and had taught at the, maybe the University of Ghana, but he had, he had lived in Ghana. But he loved everything African. It was really amazing. And he used to (laughter)--there was one time--I never will forget this. I came to his class late because I had, I'd had dental work, and, you know, he just, he just said, "Ms. Lillie, I cannot believe you. You are the descendant of African women who, you know, who, you know, go, have the baby in the morning and then they're in the fields in the afternoon, and they're selling in the market (laughter) that evening. And how could you, how can you tell me you had, you know, a, you know, a dental problem, and that made you late for class." I mean, but he was, I mean he, he loved, he loved and admired Africa. I mean it was just amazing. I can't really, I don't know. It was a transformative experience for me because I didn't, you know, I knew that I had this sort of mystical admiration for all things African, but it was very unusual to feel that same sense from a person not of color. So those were sort of my big mentors. Speaker 2: Okay, what about the South African Peter [sic, Jeffrey] Smith? Did he have stories to tell? Speaker 1: He did, I mean most of which I have forgotten. But I mean he was, I mean it's interesting. I don't think that he was, he was rather conservative. I, you know, I don't know where he was on Apartheid, but I don't think that he was one of these people who would have been a leader in the Apartheid movement. So I think my relationship with him was different. I mean I respected his, his love of history, but I don't think that he was necessarily somebody who was a liberal, necessarily. But I did respect his mind and he respected my mind, and it was just a very important educational experience. But, yeah, I think that he believed in, you know, he believed in proportionality, which meant that I think white people were gonna always be in charge in South Africa. Speaker 2: That's odd. Story_ID: 67661 Speaker 1: So at Wesleyan [University in Middletown, Connecticut], what were some of your other activities? Is there any other--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, well, at Wesleyan, I was a student leader. I was involved in the Ujima organization. We also had--Wesleyan, see this was after--when I started at Wesleyan, it was a year after the Cambodian Incursion [1970]. And so when we came to Wesleyan, the year before the students had shut the school down and there had been a lot of political activism. And during my years at Wesleyan, people were more into working in the system, although there was a chapter, there was a student chapter of the Black Panthers that was actually on the campus. And at some point, another one of my mentors was Faye Boulware, who ultimately, who is a New York historian who ultimately was the director of the African American Institute. But before-- Speaker 1: What's her name again? Speaker 2: Faye Boulware, B-O-U-L-W-A-R-E. And her son, Billy Boulware, had been a student Wesleyan and I guess graduated in 1972 or three [1973] probably. And Billy went on to be a very successful television producers in California. But before Dr. Boulware came to Wesleyan as the head of the Afro-American Institute, the institute was actually run for about a year by students. It was like a student-run activity, and we had faculty oversight. And so that was sort of interesting to me 'cause it was the first time I was ever involved in administering something. And we really sort of kept it going. I mean there were several faculty members and Wesleyan had a Malcolm X House. They actually had a separate residence for black students who were interested in doing that. They have now changed their focus so that there is a black house, an Asian house, an Hispanic house but white kids have the right live in these houses, which during the time that I was at Wesleyan was not allowed. And I don't think the white students really have much of an interest in doing it, but now in the interest of diversity, the houses that are geared toward students of color have to be integrated and if white kids wanna live there, they're allowed to. Speaker 1: So, it kind of seems like it kind of subverts the point of having it. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But, I guess-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't know. I think it's political correctness, and I don't, and I don't know how many white kids have actually lived in the building, in these buildings, but I think that it saves the administration some fights-- Speaker 1: Grief (laughter). Speaker 2: --yes, some fights, some grief with alumni and that kind of thing. Story_ID: 67662 Speaker 1: Okay, so your experience interviewing the judges that, that really sort of fired you up for law, right? Speaker 2: It did, it really did, yeah. It really did. I mean during that process, I became more convinced than ever that I wanted to be a lawyer, and I saw these very, very successful lawyers who were operating at the highest levels of the legal profession. So that was very exciting for me. Speaker 1: Okay, so you decided to come to Philadelphia to attend Temple? Speaker 2: That's right, to attend Temple Law School [now Temple University James E. Beasley School of Law]. And once again, you know, you don't always sort of know (laughter) why these things happen, but coming to Temple Law School was, once again, I mean in terms of the progression of my career, it was a place where I met the mentors to end all mentors. Now, Judge [Clifford Scott] Green, who I'd interviewed for my black federal judges' paper was my evidence professor. And he ultimately hired me to be his law clerk for two years. [HM] H. Patrick Swygert, who is now the President of Howard University [in Washington, D.C.], was my contracts teacher during my first year of law school and became a mentor during law school as well as a lifetime mentor. He's still a mentor of mine to this day. Drew [Saunders] Days [III], who went on to become the Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Rights Division of the U.S. Department of Justice under [President] Jimmy Carter was a mentor and still remains a mentor today. And he hired me as an, as a trial attorney in the Justice Department, when he was in the Civil Rights Division. And so I developed--Peter Liacouras, who is the former president of Temple University, was at that time the Dean of Temple Law School. And I worked as Peter's research assistant. And Peter was a mentor then, and also has been a lifetime mentor. So the Temple Law School encouragement was just, I've just been very blessed throughout my life to have these amazing mentors who recognize the fact that I was working hard and then have done everything they can to be supportive and to really push me and to be very helpful. Story_ID: 67663 Speaker 1: Yeah, now, you had the experience of helping Leon Higginbotham [Judge A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, who many think should have been a Supreme Court justice, you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --work on a book that he was writing? Speaker 2: Yes, 'In the Matter of Color,' yes. Speaker 1: It was his first book. And this first book really looked, this first book reevaluated the history of America from the perspective of, "Let's look and see what the, what the states were doing around issues of slavery, freedom. How did, how did the Fourteenth Amendment either work or not work." And I actually worked on the, the Pennsylvania chapter of the book. And with that, we did original research. I mean we went right back to the books, went back to original cases, and talked about the interpretation of law, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court and looked at--I mean it really was a, it was a changed look at the, at the history of Constitutional Law in this country. I'll tell you a story about my working for Judge Higginbotham. The summer that he called me--I had stayed in touch with the judge. You know, I, whenever he would go to speak, I would go listen to him. And then we would talk. I would drop him a line every once in a while, and he actually called me and said, "You know, I'm working on this book. I'd love for you to work for me." Well, I was a poor, struggling law student. And I guess, the week that the judge called me to say that he wanted me to come and work on the book, I had gotten an offer from a very large law firm in Philadelphia. And they were going to pay me probably, I'll just say, they were gonna pay me six times the amount of money that Judge Higginbotham was gonna pay me because Judge Higginbotham had grants from the, I believe the Ford Foundation and Rockefeller Foundation. And part of that was that he had summer research associate money so that he could pay students to do his, to do his work. And the judge called me into his chambers. I went down to the courthouse, and he said to me, he said, "Charisse, don't tell me about making money. You're about to have a chance to be a part of history." And so he said, "Do you know what this book is that I'm writing?" And I said, Judge, yes, but I don't know if I can afford to work for you. And he said, "You can afford it. You need to figure this out." And so (laughter), so what we figured out was, I worked, the day after my last exam, I started working for Judge Higginbotham. And I worked for him for six weeks. Then I started working at this law firm, and I worked for them for eight weeks because in law firms, you have to work for six to eight weeks. And what I would do is, I did sort of a very good first draft during those first six weeks. And I would meet Judge Higginbotham at chambers at 7:00, 7:30 in the morning. And we would go through our rewrites, and I would do my research in the evenings, and then I would go to work at the law firm. And once again, I have, I always have these people in my life who are such hard workers. When I got to the courthouse at 7:00, 7:30, the judge had already been there an hour. And so he was doing his scholarship on top of doing the work for the court. And so he was just an incredible role model, and oh, just an incredible friend. It was a big loss to me and a whole lot of other people that he's mentored when he, when he passed away. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's true. It's a shame he never, you know, got a chance to serve on the Supreme Court. Speaker 1: Well, you know, it's interesting. I don't think he ever--people always said that, and I don't think that the judge ever had any regrets about that. But I think it's timing; it's who the [United States] President is, and he served--at the time, he was one of the youngest federal judges ever appointed to the district court bench. He was only about thirty-four when he went on the bench. And in his retirement--I think that there may have been opportunities along the way for him to try and put the politics together, but he really enjoyed being the Third Circuit judge. And then in his retirement, he wrote more. He started his autobiography which his wife, [HM] Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, is now finishing, along with his nephew, Michael Higginbotham. But I don't think he had any regrets, but would he have been a great Supreme Court Justice? Yes, no question. Story_ID: 67664 Speaker 1: Okay, so you go from Temple Law School [now Temple University James E. Beasley School of Law] to Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (Unclear) I don't know if that's immediate (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I worked for five years. I clerked for two years for Judge [Clifford Scott] Green and with a law clerk, you're basically writing legal opinions, writing first drafts of legal opinions for the judge. You sit in on court proceedings. You really are the right hand, and each, I guess at the time, Judge Green had two law clerks. And he had his law clerks staggered, so the senior law clerk really teaches the junior law clerk. And then you're doing the business of the research and writing on behalf of the judge. I left there and went to the Justice Department for two years and worked as a trial attorney. And I did voting rights litigation in Mississippi and Alabama and Georgia. And under the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Voting Rights Act gave the Justice Department the right to go into various jurisdictions and take a look at the election systems. And there were statutes under which you could go and challenge the legal election system, if, in fact, you always had a result that resulted in a lack of equal representation. And so I was involved in a number of cases during that process. I then came back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for a year as the Deputy Director of Community of Legal Services. And this was the first year of the [President Ronald] Reagan Administration when legal services was just totally under siege. And I had always, in the back of my mind thought about law teaching, but really, I, I just--I don't know. I had just sort of rejected it, and during the year that I was at CLS, I--being the perpetual student that I am, I decided I'm gonna go back to. I'm gonna get an "LL.M.", and the Masters of Law is basically fourth year of law study, and at Yale, you're allowed to design your own program. So I basically took a year of Constitutional Law, Constitutional Theory, and I took a few other things to fill in. But it was just a fabulous year of studying Civil Rights. And I also took a couple of courses in ethics because once I got hired by Villanova Law School, I knew I was gonna teach ethics, and so I took a couple of courses in Legal Ethics. But I studied at Yale [University Law School], got my Masters of Law, and then I went into Law teaching for three years. Then I really missed practicing so that I went back into government again. Story_ID: 67665 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you've been involved in, oh, I don't know. It just seems to be hundreds of activities (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Right (laughter)-- Speaker 1: --and organizations. Speaker 2: Lots of organizations, lots of organizations. Speaker 1: So I don't even know where to start-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: You--tell me about the National Council [sic, Conference]of Black Lawyers. Why don't you start there? Speaker 2: Right, well, the National Conference of Black Lawyers is a, really the revolutionary (laughter), the revolutionary group of black lawyers and people like [W.] Haywood Burns, Margaret Burnham, these were lawyers who felt the American Bar Association was doing, was beginning to get a little progressive, but not progressive enough. The National Bar Association, which was started because black lawyers weren't allowed to join the American Bar Association, we--they felt was doing a lot of good things, but it tended to be not as left leaning. And so the, the "National Conference of Black Lawyers really involved setting up programs that were designed to deal with more grass root efforts in terms of grass roots program, doing the street law programs and also being active in the South Africa Movement. At this time, the Anti-Apartheid was growing and the National Conference of Black Lawyers, lawyers were filing Amicus briefs [amicus curiae] and doing other things to support the efforts for Apartheid. And I was involved in NCBL, in starting the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] chapter of NCBL [National Conference of Black Lawyers] and attended a number of the conferences and really was a part of that political movement for some time. Speaker 1: Okay, are you still involved? Speaker 2: With NCBL, no. I'm really, right now, I'm more involved with the National Bar Association and the American Bar Association. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what's the National Bar Association? Speaker 2: Okay, the National Bar Association is the, the organization of African American lawyers that was originally created in the--I wanna say the early 1900s, in part, because the "American Bar Association" had a written policy of not allowing black lawyers to join the ABA. And if they found out, for example, if you just happened to get in, and pay your dues, if they found out that you were a member, then they would expel you. And it was an explicit racial bar. So the National Bar Association really functions as a--they provide continuing legal education, they provide leadership opportunities for lawyers, and they also do political activities, including, for example, you know, lobbying the, the president for more diversity on the federal bench, those kinds of things. And it really is an analog to the American Bar Association, which is getting more diverse, and one of the committees that I worked on in the ABA [American Bar Association] was the American Bar Association Commission on Racial and Ethnic Diversity in the Legal Profession, which is really looking at ways to try and get more people of color into the legal profession, and also make the American Bar Association more diverse and more responsive to the needs and desires of lawyers of color. Speaker 1: Okay, I know the American Bar Association just had a milestone-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --when they selected Dennis Archer as the-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --President, right-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --of Detroit, the former mayor of Detroit. Speaker 2: That's correct, that's right. And it's a very exciting development for the organization. And Dennis Archer is a visionary. He's been working at, in various positions in the American Bar Association for the last twenty years, and he's just gonna be marvelous for the organization. And I'm looking forward to working with him because it's a milestone. And next year, the president-elect--the person who will probably be designated as the president-elect in January, there's gonna be an election of the person to follow Dennis, will probably be Robert Grey from Richmond, Virginia. So after a history of exclusion of African Americans, we will have two African American presidents of the American Bar Association in the world. So it's really exciting. It's an exciting time to be involved with the ABA. Story_ID: 67666 Speaker 1: Okay, but there's still some work to do there (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, there's still an awful lot of work to be done because one of the things that is occurring is in, for example, the law firms. You have excellent statistics on getting minority lawyers into the law firms, but the retention issue is a real problem. People come into the law firms. They don't feel that they have opportunities for advancement, and so they sort of view it as, "We're gonna do this for three or four years, and then we're getting out of there." Now, in terms of the government agencies, the American Bar Association Commission on Diversity publishes a biannual report called 'Miles to Go.' And literally, we are about seven percent of the minority licenses. This includes Asian and Hispanic and African American lawyers, about seven percent of the profession. And with the attacks on Affirmative Action in the law schools, you actually see these numbers are going down. The other thing is that people are, people of color have so many more options now. So they're going to get the M.B.A.'s [Masters of Business], and they're going to medical school. And the legal profession is going to have be responsive to the need to have diversity. Clients now are demanding that if you're going to do--if you do work for almost any major corporation, if you go down the Fortune 500 list, these corporations are saying to law firms, "We want to hear, we want to have a diverse legal team doing our work. We are selling whatever, you know, we're selling soap powder. We're selling cars. We're selling to people who are diverse. Therefore, we want to have our vendors, people that are doing our legal work to be diverse." So there's a lot of pressure on the legal community to up the numbers, to increase the numbers of minority lawyers that are coming in and also to make sure that they are retained in whatever venue they want to practice. Story_ID: 67667 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, you were Deputy Director of the U.S. Department of Justice, the Civil Rights Division in the Eastern Region of-- Speaker 2: I was an Assistant U.S. Attorney. That's right. After I left Villanova Law School [Villanova University School of Law in Villanova, Pennsylvania], I went back into government. My boss at the time, Edward S.G. Dennis, Jr., was also a Judge [A. Leon] Higginbotham law clerk. He had actually clerked for Judge Higginbotham. And Ed was the U.S. Attorney at the time. And I was in the Civil Division. And what the Civil Division of the U.S. Attorney's office does is you are essentially the civil lawyer on behalf of the United States in the region. And the Eastern District encompasses--it's basically a hundred mile radius of 6th and Market. And in that capacity, I had a general legal practice, and I defended--we had a Navy hospital at that time. So I defended Naval doctors who were accused of medical malpractice. We had the Federal Tort Claims Act where if somebody slipped and fell on a piece of federal property, and had, needed surgery or whatever, we defended those cases. We also did affirmative litigation in the form of Medicare-Medicaid fraud, so that we did investigations about hospital--hospitals, nursing homes, any kind of health care provider who were accused of making false claims against the government for Medicare-Medicaid benefits. And then it was just a general civil practice. We handled employment discrimination cases, any sort of statute under which a person could sue civilly in federal court against the United States government, we handled. There were also Food and Drug Administration cases where if a company had food that was tainted, the FDA [Food and Drug Administration] would go and close down the plant. So it was a general civil practice on behalf of the United States. Story_ID: 67668 Speaker 1: Now, I wanna ask you about, now you're the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, I'm Chair of the Board of the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: How did that happen? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Well, it, I think it is a part of this theme of my life of the wonderful mentors that I have been blessed with. And the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia which is one of the twelve regional Fed banks. There are twelve regional Fed banks around the country. The general counsel to the Philadelphia Fed from, let's say 1975 to 1995, for about 20 years, was a man named Hiliary and his nickname was Hip, Hiliary "Hip" Holloway, H-I-L-I-A-R-Y, H-O-L-L-O-W-A-Y. He was, Mr. Holloway was a big Kappa. He was the Grand Basileus of the Kappa's, but a very accomplished lawyer and had been a mentor to me. Now, he was a contemporary of Judge [Clifford Scott] Green and Judge [A. Leon] Higginbotham, and once I had that association, Mr. Holloway would invite me over to the bank. And he would always have a kind word. He would call me up every once and a while, and we would talk. When Mr. Holloway retired from the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank in probably '95' [1995], '96' [1996], he joined a law firm and became a partner at another law firm here in Philadelphia and always stayed in touch with me. He called me one day and said, "I want you to know that I made a recommendation for you." He made a recommendation to the president of the bank, then Ed Boehne, that I be considered for a position as a board member. And there are several classes of board members. There are Class B and Class A directors that are appointed by the regional banks in the region. I'm a class, I am a Class C director, and I am appointed directly by Alan Greenspan and the Board of Governors out of Washington [D.C.]. There're always two Class C directors on the board. The Class C directors are the only people under the legislation that are allowed to be officers of the board. So you can be chair or deputy chair eventually. This network, though, was expanded by the fact that the chairman of my firm, the then chairman, Peter Mattoon, was a good friend of Ed Boehne's because they sat on a board, a board of a major hospital here in Philadelphia. And when my name was raised with Ed Boehne, Ed said to Peter Mattoon, "You know, I've been--Charisse Lillie has been recommended to me as a board member. What do you think?" And Peter said, "Well, I think she'd be great." And so Peter and Ed set up a lunch. We had lunch and by the end of the lunch, Ed said to me, "We'd like you to join the board. I'm gonna make a recommendation to Alan Greenspan that you be appointed," and there're various politics. They're Fed politics, and he dealt with those politics, and I was appointed by the Board of Governors. And I've served on that Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Board for--this is my seventh year. And I served as Deputy Chairman for three years, and this is the second year that I've served as Chair of the Board. And as Chair of the Board, I basically run the board meetings. I am in fairly frequent contact with the president of the bank so that we have a whole staff. You've got a president, vice president, and in Philadelphia, we have a little over a thousand people who work in our bank. And they do the regional banking for the region. And so the Federal Reserve Bank is the bankers' bank for the banks in our third district. And I also, twice a year the chairs and deputy chairs of each bank attend a conference of chairman in Washington [D.C.] with Chairman Greenspan and the other members of the Board of Governors. And in that, we just have input into general policy making on how the twelve regional Fed banks work. So it's been an exciting opportunity. I've learned so much about banking. I've learned so much about central banking. We also have two board meetings a month, one in the bank, one via conference call. And part of what we do in our in-bank meeting is that we have tremendous educational presentations by the economists. We have about fifteen economists on staff at the Philadelphia Fed who do nothing but research and writing on the state of the economy, both in this region and the country and the world. Story_ID: 67669 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were also City Solicitor [for Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I was City Solicitor. I was the last City Solicitor to [HM] Mayor W. Wilson Goode, and Mayor Goode was, had a--was a two-term mayor [1984 to 1992]. During the last two years of his term the city was in very, very dire economic straits. And there were problems with the city getting the kind of financing that it needs. Any city--and it's just--the city's no different from you and me. With the city, the kind of payments that the city gets in the form of tax revenue tends to be bunched towards April to January. And during the course of the year, the city will both issue bonds as well as do some short-term borrowing, but when they get all of the tax receipts in, they can then pay that money back. And towards the end of the mayor's second term, the, there were political difficulties with the leadership in Harrisburg [Pennsylvania] in the State Capital. And they actually, I mean they actually stood up and said that they didn't think that the city should be allowed to borrow money. And the mayor was able to work out some deals with the local banks so that the city could do the long term--the short-term borrowing for the, to keep the city afloat. But it was tough times. And then at the end of the administration, the administration also was able to introduce legislation in Harrisburg, through the Philadelphia delegation, and a financial or fiscal review board was created. And I was actually appointed to that--after I left city government, I was actually appointed to the PICA Board. It's the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Authority. And that agency was then allowed to borrow funds, and during the [Mayor Edward] Rendell administration, the city was able to really get back on its feet financially, really able to get back on its feet financially. Now the job of City Solicitor under the Philadelphia City Home Rule Charter is, you are appointed by the mayor. You are confirmed by the City Council, and the City Solicitor serves as the lawyer to the mayor and the lawyer to the City Council. And in that capacity--at the time that I was with the Law Department, and we had 128 lawyers who were on the staff of the City Solicitor, and those lawyers handled every civil aspect, so that our lawyers--giving advice to City Council on legislation that they're gonna introduce. The lawyers defend the city in all kinds of proceedings from slip and falls, police--alleged police misconduct, commercial disputes, bond deals. So the City Solicitor is really the civil lawyer for the city and, of course, the district attorney is the criminal lawyer for the city. Story_ID: 67670 Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about the firm, how you came to join the firm of Ballard, Spahr, Andrews and Ingersoll [Ballard Spahr LLP]? Speaker 2: Yes, well, I, I joined Ballard Spahr--and as we have talked, I mean my--all I ever wanted to do in my life was (laughter) was to be a government lawyer. I wanted to be a Civil Rights lawyers, and I wanted to protect the rights of poor and disenfranchised people. And I wanted to be a government Civil Rights lawyer, and that's all I ever aspired to be. Through my hard works and lots of mentors, I kept climbing this ladder, this governmental ladder. And once I was City Solicitor, in terms of government, there wasn't really much else that I could do in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] because once you've been City Solicitor, you're not gonna go back and be an assistant U.S. Attorney or be an Assistant City Solicitor. So I decided, I said, well, I'm gonna apply to the law firms, and I'm gonna see what happens. And I talked to my mentors, Judge [Clifford Scott] Green and Judge [A. Leon] Higginbotham, and they both said to me, "You should go ahead, and you should go for it." Judge Higginbotham was most concerned about my making a correct choice because if you look at my career, I've had some wonderful experiences, but up until the time that I came to Ballard, I had never been in any one job for longer than three years. And Judge Higginbotham just said, "Charisse, you've got to do something for keeps now." And so when I looked around at Ballard Spahr, Ballard was the firm that I interviewed with in Philadelphia that had the greatest amount of respect and great amount--and placed the greatest amount of value on my governmental experience. A number of big law firms have a sort of ethic that the only kind of way that you can practice law is to be a big-firm lawyer. And at Ballard Spahr, I just found that they had great respect for the fact that I had done the work in government, and they respected the work that I had done in government. And I felt that this was gonna an environment where I can grow, I can grow and I could prosper and I could be successful. And, and ultimately, I have been given a huge platform at the firm to do all kinds of work in terms of diversity in the legal profession. I am still very active with the American Bar Association. I'm doing work with the National Bar, and with the local Philadelphia affiliate of the National Bar Association, the Barristers Association. And so the firm has just been wonderful. I have been a part of the management team since my second year here. I was an elected member of the board for six years, and then I rotated off for a year, and then I've been elected. And then now, I have been appointed as of July 1st [2002] as chair of the Litigation Department. Now, there are five department chairs. And in my capacity as chair of the Litigation Department, I am basically responsible for profit-loss, hiring, firing, administration of 125 lawyers in our six offices around the country. And there are only--in fact, [HM] Cheryl Blackwell Bryson who is a part of this, this effort, is chair of the labor group at Duane Morris in Chicago [Illiois]. But there're only two or three African Americans that are chairing any departments, in any major law firms. So it's a very exciting development. And I think it's a testament to my hard work, but it's also a testament to my law firm which basically, you know, has recognized my hard work and has just given me every opportunity to be successful. Story_ID: 67671 Speaker 1: Tell us about some of your other activities, and organizations. There's a list here. I think we can read but-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well-- Speaker 1: --some of the highlights? Speaker 2: Well, okay, I think one of the, one the things that I enjoy most currently is--well, this last three years [1999 to 2002] I have served as chair of the American Bar Association Commission on Racial and Ethnic Diversity in the Profession. And I have to, I have to speak on the essential mission of the Commission on Racial, Ethnic Diversity. The American Bar Association is mindful of the history that it has of exclusion. And what the American Bar Association is doing is both an internal push to make sure that lawyers of color are given every opportunity to be in leadership positions, i.e., Dennis Archer is being given this opportunity. But the other thing that our Commission on Diversity does is, it really does research and writing. What we are trying to do is to establish--it's something similar to what you're doing. We are trying to develop a history of the lawyer of color in the legal profession. And to that end, the Commission issues this bi-annual report, 'Miles to Go,' which talks about what kind of progress are we making in terms of making the profession more diverse. The Commission on Diversity also has programs that are designed to assist lawyers and law firms to get opportunities to develop business and to grow, to create the sort of natural kind of networking that exists for many white lawyers that lawyers of color don't get. And so the--I'm very proud of the work. And I was chair of that for the last three years. And I've just rotated off that. The new committee that I'm working on now with the American Bar Association and once again, this is sort of my life coming full circle, is I'm now a member of the American Bar Association Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary. Now, that committee is a committee that vets any judge that is appointed by President [George W.] Bush is vetted through the ABA, Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary. We interview judges, lawyers, opponents. We review their, the written work of these folks, and then we make a recommendation to the United States Senate Judiciary Committee of either "qualified," "not qualified" or "well qualified". Now, President Bush has gone on record that he is not gonna pay any attention to what the American Bar Association says about the qualifications of the judges that he has appointed. But the ABA is, has been included in the process by the Senate Judiciary Committee. And so we are continuing that work. So that's pretty much my national work. On a local level, I'm on the Board of Directors of the Franklin Institute, which is the science museum that was started by Benjamin Franklin when he first came to the, to the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And this, this museum does science education. We do outreach to the public and private schools. We are trying to bring in young kids of all colors so that they can understand about science. They can understand about the stars, and hopefully, we can create a new generation of kids who are excited about science and will go into science as a profession. Story_ID: 67672 Speaker 1: Okay. I guess I'll just--I just wonder if I should ask you about your opinions about some of the legal, popular legal-- Speaker 2: I'll, if I have an opinion (laughter), I'll give you that, okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, you know. Well, the appointment of [Supreme Court Justice] Clarence Thomas, I mean it--you're now in a capacity on this ABA [American Bar Association] Committee to review qualifications. In retrospect, do you think that he was really qualified when he--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, sure, he's qualified because the qualification for being on the Supreme Court are that you have to have the credentials. I mean the man is a graduate of, of Yale Law School [in New Haven, Connecticut]. So certainly, he has the qualifications. He had served as the chief counsel for the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, a very, very important federal agency. He had been a judge on the [Washington] D.C. Court of Appeals. So he had the qualifications, but the question in my mind really is the legacy of Thurgood Marshall and whether or not--and I have to say that I still have hope for Justice--you know, I, I have to believe that if he is on this bench and he is a young man. So he's gonna be on the bench for another thirty-four years. I, I really, I pray (laughter), I really hope that the institutional pressures will be such that at some point he understands, he's not gonna be removed except for very bad behavior. He can let, he can come to terms, full circle with his history, and not be, you know, what I call, you know, a slave to some, any particular philosophy. And let these cases come before him and decide them based on his history and his understanding. And if he does that, if he stays on the bench long enough, I'm hopeful that, that he will come full circle and not be so conservative. But once he qualified, yes, and at a very basic level, I think that the ABA Committee probably rated him as "qualified" because he had done those things in his career that people have done before him. And it was sufficient. But it's, it's, you know, when you think about the legacy that Justice Marshall left, it just seems unfortunate that if you're gonna have a quote, quote "black seat" that, that you don't have someone who's more sensitive to the concerns of their community. But I just think, hope springs eternal, and I just hope that, that Justice Thomas, really just takes the time, remembers his roots and goes back to that. And I think the history is, the history of the Supreme Court is that, as the, as people become more ingrained in the institution, they very often--not always, but they very often will soften in terms of some of the views that they have. And institutionally, nobody can de-elect him. You know, he's not gonna be decommissioned. So I'm, I'm hoping, but, yeah, I think he was technically qualified. Story_ID: 67673 Speaker 1: Okay, now, the criminal justice system is widely--there's a lot of discussion about it in the black communities with all the, with the incarceration of so many black men-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and women now too-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in the prison system, which has been completely out of proportion to the population, and the, also, you know, these popular cases that have become, have been taken up by people around the country. There's the [Orenthal James] O.J. Simpson case-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --was one thing, and then in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you have the Mumia Abu-Jamal case-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --which is widely known all around the country-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and people have raised money in Chicago [Illinois] and New York [New York City, New York] and other-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to, for the defense of Mumia. Now, what do you think--what's the significance--I guess there are three questions in that question-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --but, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, see I think, I mean I--look, I wasn't there. I've read an incredible amount of press, and I have read that there were eye witnesses that saw him. There seemed to have been some irregularities. There was also a confession. So there seemed to be some irregularities in terms of the court proceeding. And I think that the appropriate response would be that he get this new sentencing hearing and that the court really evaluate whether or not it was a sort of a hysterical moment when he was given the death penalty. And, you know, as I think that people are examining, just from a general rule, it--the, I mean the death penalty is not something that I really support. So I think that the appropriate result here would be, not that he get a new trial because I think it would be unprecedented for him to get a new trial at this stage of the proceedings, after you've had all these different courts look at it and say, we accept his confession, and the new witnesses that have come forward, the courts have not found to be credible. But clearly, on the issue on whether or not he should be sentenced to death, it seems like it would be appropriate to have a new hearing on that. Speaker 1: Now, do you have any thoughts on the O.J. Simpson trial and-- Speaker 2: Not really (laughter). I, as far as I'm concerned, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Maybe (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You know what? I feel like the system worked, and what the O.J. trial shows you is that when you have the capacity and the resources, the system can--I, and I don't--look, I don't know if he killed his wife or not. But the system worked, and he had some of the best lawyers on this earth to handle his defense. They created reasonable doubt in the minds of the jurors. I don't believe that this was a case of jury nullification. I believe that those jurors, just based on the few interviews that I saw, these jurors have reasonable doubt. And they issued the appropriate result. And I think that, that what O.J. tells me about the world is not that O.J. got cut a break because he was rich. It says to me that we need to be making all these resources available to every citizen. And it means that--my husband [Thomas McGill, Jr.] actually is a criminal defense lawyer. But the kinds of resources that these lawyers get on these court-appointed cases is infinitesimal compared to what somebody like O.J. Simpson has. So the lesson for me from O.J. is, I can't really speak on his personal guilt or innocence. As I said, I don't believe it was jury nullification, but it really is that the state needs to make sure that if everybody's gonna get a fair trial, more resources from the state are gonna have to be, have to be placed in the defense of the ordinary citizen that comes forward, the ordinary citizen who doesn't have the kind of extraordinary wealth that O.J. Simpson has. Story_ID: 67674 Speaker 1: Okay, you've made, I guess you've made or lectured about sexual harassment cases--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and what are your thoughts on that? Speaker 2: Yes, well, the case--and I guess I should say for the record that my career has come full circle now because now, in fact, I am a management side lawyer, and I defend big companies (laughter) that are accused of discrimination. And I, and I actually have done a number of lectures on sexual harassment issues because I have won a couple of big cases, very high-profile cases for my clients. But I, but the issue of sexual harassment is one that has really grown in the last 10 or 12 years, in part because people now are recognizing that the kinds of things that women--and by the way, I mean now, men are actually filing lawsuits for sexual harassment. But this is primarily been an issue of, of women and a lack of power that women have in the workplace. And so what I do is we, I do sexual harassment training so that we spend a lot of time at our clients' offices teaching people from, literally, from the C.E.O. to the person that empties the trash, about sexual harassment, about the responsibilities of the company, that the companies have, encouraging people to come forward to make a complaint. The way that the law has been developing in the Supreme Court is that a company really has to have a program, a procedure whereby a person who feels that they've been sexually harassed can make a complaint. If you have that procedure and you have trained your staff and people know that the procedure is there, then a person can't show up at the courthouse door a year later, two years later and say, "Well, I knew about the procedure, but I was afraid." And so what we're really doing is educating the public, that if you feel like you've been sexually harassed, you need to complain to your employer. You need to make them do an investigation. They should do a prompt investigation, and if they find that there is sexual harassment, they need to stop it or else that company is gonna be on the hook for paying big damages to their employees. So I'm, I'm spending a lot of time doing the education and, you know, also occasionally, trying a case every once in a while. Story_ID: 67675 Speaker 1: Okay, and you also deal with, I guess racial discrimination in the workplace, and-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --and sexual discrimination. Speaker 2: Absolutely. The, the--every once in a while, I will be talking to, making a lecture, and people will ask me a question that goes something this. "You know, my, you know, my doctor's a woman, this one's a woman. Everywhere I'm surrounded by all these women. Why do we still need these laws on the books?" Well, we still need these laws on the books, and the racial discrimination laws are still on the books because there're still instances where companies are--and sometimes it's not intentional, but sometimes, either in the way that they--either in the way that they execute their hiring policies, and their promotion policies, either result in discriminatory action. And then there's still people out here who have very, very bad, both racial attitudes and attitudes about people on the basis of gender. And so these laws are out here to protect the average employee. It is probably--the problem I think for the, for most employers is that you are held responsible for whatever attitudes your employees bring in the workplace. And that's why an employer has to take the responsibility, has to really take the bull by the horns and make sure that they educate every employee in their workplace to say, "This is an environment where we value the individual, we value diversity. Discrimination on the basis of race, gender, religion, etc., etc. is not something that we accept. And we find that you're engaging in this kind of activity, you're out of here." And so one of the things that we are doing in terms of the work that we do in the anti-discrimination area, is really using the laws to try and create an environment where people can go in and they can work, and they can do their work. And they can be successful, and hopefully, they can ultimately advance. Story_ID: 67676 Speaker 1: Now, do you believe in affirmative action? Speaker 2: Yes, I believe in affirmative action. The whole concept of affirmative action is, is first of all, it is generally a short-term remedy that is designed to deal with--it's dealing with a history of a lack of opportunity. And what we are dealing with in terms of affirmative action, both in hiring and in promotions, is really saying that if you create a situation where a person has no opportunity for years and years and years, you can't just plop that person in and say, "Okay, we're gonna give you the opportunity; run with it." The affirmative action says, we're going to give people the opportunity, and then we're gonna give them the support so that they can be successful in the environments. So, yes, I very much believe it, in the context of college admissions and also law school admissions, and in hiring and promotions. Story_ID: 67677 Speaker 1: Okay, now, as a lawyer that's conscious of who she is and conscious of the condition--our historical condition in this country, I mean what are your thoughts about reparations? Speaker 2: Reparations. Well, see I believe that--I think that we have gotten beyond the stage of the forty acres and a mule. I, I just--I think we've gotten, we're too many generations away from slavery and governmental enforcement of slavery. What I would really like to see if some sort of process for creating greater opp--educational opportunities for the descendants of slaves because see, I think this is all tied up with why our prisons are full. Our prisons are full because we aren't spending enough on education. And so the educational opportunities that kids could have, is in part because families are having a hard time, and you know, in some instances, it's young families. They're having a hard time creating educational opportunities. And so what happens is, we have the government spending all this money on prisons, and the easy thing to do is just to get people out the street and warehouse 'em. I view reparations as a way of creating bigger head-starts, and, you know, making sure kids are getting the elementary education and making sure that the educational, the public educational system really works so that kids are given an opportunity and that there is money available for kids to get scholarships to college. So I don't really review--I don't--I believe that reparations are appropriate, but I don't believe that it's appropriate that every African American who's a descendant of slaves gets--I don't know, an "x" amount of money. This isn't the kind of situation that you had with the Japanese, when the Japanese were corralled and taken to the--many of these people are still alive. They have current memory. They have actual injuries for which they can never be compensated, but for which I think the sort of forty acres and a mule-type concept was more appropriate. I think that just because of the passage of time, we've just probably gotten too far along for that. But I, I think that reparations or monies that are set aside in order to deal with the after-effects of slavery are--is very appropriate. I think it's very appropriate. Speaker 1: What do you think about reparations for discrimination and injuries caused by the past, I guess, within the last 20, 30 years in terms of racial discrimination in the South and in the North by African American people, you know. Do you think that there's a basis for compensation for those--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: See, I think it's really hard. I mean I-- Speaker 1: Being allowed to vote and (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, see, I just think it's very, very hard--the problem is that if the government is going to pay, you're gonna have to prove that it was the government doing these things. And if you had a situation where people were being employed by specific employers, there are laws on the books to give them or--well, the truth is, one, is that there are laws on the books to give them some remedy. And you also have statutes of limitation, so that if they have not met the statutes of limitations under our system of justice, I think it's appropriate that, if something happened twenty years ago, and folks didn't take care of it, then I don't really see how you can justify saying, well, then the government has to pay because they didn't pursue their individual remedy. So I think that the real issue is the individual remedy. I think it's very, very hard for the government to craft an affordable--because when we're talking about the government paying, it's coming out of the taxpayers' money. So I, I--it's hard for me to figure out how you can have an affordable remedy to sort of remedy discrimination generally. I really think that it's gonna have to be a more focused approach on identifying those people who have been victimized and then giving them greater opportunity as opposed to writing a check to them. Story_ID: 67678 Speaker 1: In light of all you've done-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --(unclear) just tremendous amount, you've done so much. I mean what, what are you looking at for the future? Do you think you might become--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: For the future Speaker 1: --a federal judge or you'll continue-- Speaker 2: I don't know. I mean at this point, I'm very happy at my law firm [Ballard, Spahr, Andrews and Ingersoll]. I've got this new position, and I just wanna run with it and be as successful as I can. I don't know if I will ultimately go on the bench. Obviously, my early mentors have all been federal judges, and so that, I guess it's something that's always out there. I can always go back into law teaching, but right now, I'm really enjoying being in the law firm. And it's, it's challenging and I enjoy the business development. And I'm enjoying running the department. So for now, I'm gonna sit tight. I'm really enjoying the firm. Speaker 1: Okay, and you teach too at Villanova [Villanova University School of Law in Villanova, Pennsylvania], right? Speaker 2: Well, I did. I taught at Villanova--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You did. Speaker 2: --from '82' [1982] to '85' [1985], and I've maintained my contacts there. I just have not had the time to go back. I think ultimately, I would like to maybe teach as an adjunct, to maybe teach one course a year. But I taught for three years there, and it was a great experience, and I still have maintained my contacts with the faculty. Story_ID: 67679 Speaker 1: Okay, well, what are your hopes and aspirations for the black community? Speaker 2: Well, for the black community, what I really hope is that we can save our children. I think that what worries me most, and one of the reasons that I'm, I--my work as a member of this, this Board of the Franklin Institute [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] as well as my work on diversity in the American Bar Association is really about having opportunities for our children so that our children can grow and develop and become self-sufficient, and exercise the political power that they now have been given. We now are in an environment where opportunities exists, but we've still got a glass ceiling. We've still got--some people say a concrete ceiling. And so what I really hope for the black community is that we are gonna reach the stage that we have a critical mass of kids who are coming up, who understand the value of education, who are willing to work hard, be successful and then still create opportunities for other people behind them. And so that's the other thing that, for those of us that have had some modicum of success, we just can never forget. We can never be in a situation where we are not attempting to do something to uplift our community. So I wish for educational development and spiritual fulfillment and ultimately, success, and then giving back to the community and making sure that people are, are always feeling that they've got mentors, and they've got someone who's willing to give them a hand up. Story_ID: 67680 Speaker 1: Okay, are you still involved in the Arts? Speaker 2: You know what, I'm really not, except for trying to see as much theater as I get an opportunity to do. I, I really try to see theater. I'm working, I'm doing some legal work now for a fantastic organization in North Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] called Art Sanctuary. So that I'm not, I mean at this point, I am not able to really any acting or poetry reading. So I'm really more of observer and the Art Sanctuary is, was started by Lorene Cary who's the author of several books about being black, being African American in America. And Lorene has created at the Church of the Advocate which performance artists, visual artists are showing their work and doing performances. And it's very, it's funny. It's very much like the work that my mother [Vernell Audrey Watson Lillie] was doing in Houston [Texas] in the '70's [1970s], although my mother never had a physical, physical plant. So I'm providing, Ballard [Ballard, Spahr, Andrews and Ingersoll], we're providing some pro bono legal services to our sanctuary. But at this point, I'm not involved in the Arts, but I've got to because I, I think I'm never really totally at peace with my soul unless I am. So that would be another one of my goals for the further (laughter), is to have some real serious involvement with the Arts. That's one of those things that I plan to get to. Story_ID: 67681 Speaker 1: Okay, and I know you still have a lot to do-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --but if you look back on your life at this point, what do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, boy. Well, I think that I have been a first. In many things in my career, I have been a first. I didn't tell you this. When I was in kindergarten, my class was, was among the first little black children on public television in Houston, Texas. My whole life I've been the first. I, you know, I was the first, you know, class of kids to, to integrate the Catholic schools in Houston. And what I, what my legacy is, and I think what my legacy will be, is that in everything that I've done where I have been the first, I have always been working very hard to create opportunities so there's a second, third and fourth because in the end, if we're the first and we try to slam that door behind us, then being the first has no meaning. And so I hope my legacy has been that I have, I have been blessed with a lot of opportunities and a lot of wonderful mentors. I've been blessed to be the first in many things that I have done, and I want my legacy to be that I've been there trying to hold that door open and to make sure that there're second, third's and fourth's, people following behind me. Story_ID: 67682 Speaker 1: Okay, of course, your parents [HM Vernell Audrey Watson Lillie and Richard Lysander Lillie] had a chance to see you become successful on a level-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They did. Speaker 1: --what did they think? And you've got one sister, right? Speaker 2: I have one sister. And let me just tell you about my sister. My sister was, is a graduate of Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. And she has a doctorate in Public Health from Johns Hopkins University. And her name is Marsha, M-A-R-S-H-A, Lillie, L-I-L-L-I-E, hyphen--Blanton, B-L-A-N-T-O-N. And she now works as a vice president at the Kaiser Family Foundation in Washington [D.C.], and she does public health research and writing. So she publishes and books and studies. And then she also is in charge of the Barbara Jordan Scholarship Project which is a program which--it highlights the talents of minority students. They write speeches and do research on the life of Barbara Jordan and they attend a summer program in Washington during the summer and they meet lawyers, doctors, people that are involved in health care. But the focus of the Kaiser Family Foundation is, is always health care. She also has a program involving college scholars. And the kids come in, spend a summer at Howard University and have educational activities. And so, and she's very involved in the black community in Washington, D.C. So she's, she's living in D.C. So, yes, our parents were able to see both of us be very successful and we're, you know, thank God we still have our mother. But she's very proud of us, you know. She's very proud, but I think that my mother is--and my mother who is the, sort of the ultimate community activist still at the age of seventy-one. I mean this summer, my mother was attending an international black theater festival in South Africa, and she was at the Black Theater Network in San Francisco [California] and so, my sister and I both say, we wanna be just like her (laughter) when we grow up because this is a woman who loves the Arts, who even at the age of seventy-one is jumping on airplanes, flying all over the world to pursue her love of her craft. And so she's very proud of us. I think both of my parents would have liked for one of us to be involved in the Arts. My father always had hoped that one of us would develop our talents as musicians and--not that he was disappointed. They were very proud, but I, I think that both of them ultimately would have liked to have seen us go into the Arts, but it just wasn't to be (laughter). But they're proud--my mother's very proud of her girls. Story_ID: 67683 Speaker 1: Okay, and this is slightly different from legacy, but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Well, it's interesting. One, I haven't talked at all about my husband [Thomas McGill] and daughter [Alison McGill]. I first of all wanna be remembered as, you know, Tom's wife and Alison's mother. My daughter is going into her junior year in high school, and she is, you know, in a sense, finding herself. I'm not really sure what, what Alison is gonna do. So I wanna be remembered as somebody who was active in the community, someone who worked very hard, someone who tried to be a good wife and a good mother. And then I want to be remembered for the--I really wanna be remembered for the work that I am trying to start and continuing to develop on the issue of diversity in the legal profession because in the end, I think that for all of us, whatever it is we're doing in our, our particular lives, it is important that there be diversity and that there be opportunities for people of color in whatever path of life. My life, the life I have chosen is the law, and so I wanna be remembered for my efforts to try and make sure that there's complete diversity. But, you know,--and I do have a particular concern about the African American community because I do believe that we occupy a, you know, a certain place in terms of the history of this country. So I, I want to be remembered for my work in diversity. Story_ID: 67684 Speaker 1: --Reese [Charisse] Lillie, and some time during my first year, so this would have been some time, I guess in 1953, probably. And it's at my grandparents' house, the home of Richard and Reffer, R-E-F-F-E-R, Lillie, and 2525 Stevens Street in Houston, Texas, S-T-E-V-E-N-S. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Describe this photograph? Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture of me at grandparents' house, 2525 Stevens Street, with my father, Richard Lysander Lillie, Jr. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next photo? Describe this photograph for us? Speaker 1: Okay, this is my mother, [HM] Vernell Lillie, in front of my grandparents' house, 2525 Stevens Street, Houston, Texas. And that's my sister, Marsha [Lillie-Blanton], and that is me. And it looks like we're about two and four. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, and describe this photograph? Speaker 1: This is my sister and me in front of my grandparents' house at 2525 Stevens, and it looks like we're about one and three (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I'm sorry, are you older? Speaker 1: I think we were younger. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): No, no, are you older-- Speaker 1: Oh, I'm the older one, yeah, I'm two years older, yeah, I'm two years older. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next photograph? Speaker 1: Okay, these are the McGill first cousins. In the back row, it's Alison McGill, my daughter, Thomas McGill, Jr., my son, my nephew, Brian McGill. Then on the front row, Leslie Pina, my daughter. My nephew, Chipper Charles Bounds, Jr., my niece, Alexandra Bounds, my nephew, Christopher Bounds and my niece, Lauren Arrington, A-R-R-I-N-G-T-O-N. This was taken on the occasion of my in-law's 52nd anniversary. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next photo? Can you describe this photo? Speaker 1: Okay, that's my grandfather, Richard Lysander Lillie, Sr., and that is my sister. I'm on the left, and my sister and I, we would go to church on Sundays with my grandparents and we would stand on the front steps, and we would pose, usually in our white gloves. I don't see white gloves this time, but we would normally pose each Sunday, and we had a different outfit every Sunday. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And describe his photograph? Speaker 1: Okay, this is my grandmother, Mrs. Reffer, R-E-F-F-E-R, Louise Washington Lillie. And that's my father's mother. And she's standing in front of their home at 2525 Stevens Street in Houston, Texas. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): She's got her gloves. Speaker 1: Oh, yes, she has her white gloves, definitely (laughter) and her hat. She always wore a hat to church on Sunday. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next photograph. Okay, describe this photograph? Speaker 1: Okay, this is my beloved Auntie, my Lee--my Aunt, Lee Audrey, L-E-E-, A-U-D-R-E-Y, Lillie, and she was a graduate of Wylie College [Marshall, Texas] and worked at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas]. And this was a day when we, one of the important activities in Houston--social activities in the, the black middle-class community in Houston, Texas was the dental picnic. And every year, all the black dentists had a picnic out in some fancy park. And my aunt would take us and, you know, they would have their kids, and we would go. And it would be very fancy. You'd have to be very dressed up. And it was just a grand affair. So every year we would go to the dental picnic with my auntie, and this is one of these occasions. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next photograph? Describe this photograph for me? Speaker 1: Yes, these are my grandparents attending my graduation at Wesleyan University in Middletown, Connecticut in 1973. On the left is Mrs. Reffer Lillie. On the right is my grandmother, my mother's mother, Mrs. Lillie, L-I-L-L-I-E, Mae, M-A-E, Watson, W-A-T-S-O-N. To the left is my grandfather, Richard Lillie, Sr., and then to the right is Walter, W-A-L-T-E-R, Jennings, J-E-N-N-I-N-G-S, Watson, W-A-T-S-O-N, my mother's father. And they came up from Houston, Texas for my graduation. They never missed one of my graduations. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next photo? Describe this photograph for me? Speaker 1: This is my sister and me with very big Afro's (laughter) in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. And I think my sister is pregnant with my niece, Jamel (ph.), so this would have been around 1960--1976 or seven [1977] in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next photo? Describe this photograph? Speaker 1: This is my mother at her prom. It's Vernell Watson at the Phillis Wheatley [High School] prom. I'm not sure where this was, but this would have been in the late '40's [1940s] in Houston, Texas, it's Vernell Lillie. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next photograph? Speaker 1: This is my graduation photo from Mt. Carmel High School. This would have been 19--May of 1970. Big hair, big hoops. Speaker 2: I was sold on natural hair, though. I still am. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, me too. I'm telling you. Speaker 2: My daughter is a great hair braider. Speaker 1: Is she really? Speaker 2: She's thirteen and she can do that-- Speaker 1: Oh, isn't that something. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, that's something. Speaker 2: She can do all of that stuff. Speaker 1: That is something. Speaker 2: She's sought after. People trying to-- Speaker 1: Oh, that is great, good for her. Speaker 2: I have to try to control it. I don't want her, you know, to spend all her time braiding hair. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 2: Yes, this is my father, Richard Lillie, with his beloved tenor saxophone. I'm not sure of the date of this picture. I think, it looks like, I think he may have been graduating from high school, but I'm really not sure. Speaker 1: Is this him too? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, this is, he was--he wasn't, he was on the cover of this article about Pittsburgh jazzmen, in Pittsburgh. Speaker 1: Really, did you know Doug Carn in Pittsburgh? Did you all know him? Speaker 2: We didn't know Doug Carn, but I'll tell you who my parents do know is Nathan, you know Nathan Davis? He's, he teaches at University of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. He and Grover [Grover Washington, Jr.] used to perform together. Speaker 1: Oh, you (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, I know who Doug Carn is, but I don't--I didn't know him. But see, I was never in Pittsburgh. My parents may have known him. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next one? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Describe this photo? Speaker 2: Yes, this is a picture of my father in the cover story of a "Pittsburgh Press" Sunday roto article, October 19, 1980. It was an article on Pittsburgh Jazzmen and daddy was on the cover of this magazine. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next photograph? Describe this photograph? Speaker 2: This is my daughter, Alison McGill, A-L-I-S-O-N, M-C-G-I-L-L with Michelle Ridge who was, is the former First Lady of Pennsylvania. Her husband, Tom Ridge, was governor for the last, I guess, six years. This was at a dinner at the Governor's Mansion in Harrisburg, [Pennsylvania] about four years ago--three years ago. My mother, [HM] Dr. Vernell Lillie, was inducted into the DD's. It's called the Distinguished Daughters of Pennsylvania. And Mrs. Ridge was there, and we attended a very fancy dinner at the Governor's Mansion, and Alison took a picture with Mrs. Ridge. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next photograph? Describe that for me. Speaker 2: This is my husband, Thomas L. McGill, Jr. and me at my mother-in-law's house. We were dropping my daughter off to be babysat, and we were attending one of a number of Barrister's Balls. The Barrister's Ball is the annual event given by the Barrister's Association which is the National Bar Association affiliate in Philadelphia, and we raise money for scholarships for minority law students at Temple Law School [Temple University Beasley School of Law], University of Pennsylvania Law School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Villanova [University] Law School [Villanova, Pennsylvania], and Rutgers Camden Law School [Rutgers School of Law in Camden, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next photograph? And describe this photograph? Speaker 2: This is a picture of my husband, Thomas L. McGill, Jr. and the actress and producer, dancer, Debbie Allen and myself. We're at the Afro-American--African American Museum in Philadelphia at 6th and Arch. And Debbie is, she was in town to promote 'Amistad,' the movie. Debbie is a childhood friend from Houston. Her mother and my mother were very active in the black theater movement in the '60's [1960s] in Houston, Texas. Her mother, Vivian Ayres is still a very close friend of my mother's. And Debbie was in town, and we just stopped by and said, hello. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next photograph? Describe this photograph? Speaker 2: This is a picture of the "Daughters of Pain." My grandmother, Mrs. Reffer Lillie, is on the front row, third from the left, and this is just a picture of her with the leaders, the female leaders of the church. And you'll see how they're dressed with their white gloves and those fancy hats. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Do you happen to know what year this is? Speaker 2: I don't. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Just an estimate? Speaker 2: I think it's probably in the early '60's [1960s]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next photograph? Describe this photograph? Speaker 2: This is a picture of me with my baby girl, Alison McGill, and it looks like she's around four in this picture. So this would be around 1990. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next photograph? Describe this photograph? Speaker 2: Okay, this is Charisse Lillie and Mary Mason who's also--Mary Mason is her stage name. She's a radio personality, and that is Mrs. Aretha Marshall, who is an educator from Detroit, Michigan. And we were in the Green Room at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] dinner at 3801 Marcus Street, and this probably would have been in 1999 or 2000. And Mary was the, the Mistress of Ceremonies. And Aretha Marshall is the mother-in-law of [HM Jerome] Jerry Mondesire who is the president of the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] chapter of the NAACP. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next photograph? Describe this photograph? Speaker 2: This is my father and his father, Richard Lillie, Sr., and Richard Lillie, Jr.; not really sure of the year. It's probably early '70's [1970s]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): By the collars. Speaker 2: Right, exactly (laughter). Right. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And the tie? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: Next photograph? And describe this photograph? Speaker 2: Yes, these are my two older children, Thomas Leslie McGill III and Leslie Pina. They're actually my stepchildren, but they're my children. And this was early '70's [1970s]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And next photograph? Speaker 2: Looks like I've met your mother at some point. Speaker 1: I bet you have. If you're in black theater, I'd be very surprised if you haven't come across her. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Describe this photograph? Speaker 1: Okay, this is Dr. Vernell Lillie, Professor at University of Pittsburgh, and this is probably early '70's [1970s]. Speaker 2: You know I was there when they had the conference, African Heritage Studies Association in '79' [1979], and Barbara Sizemore was there-- Speaker 1: Um-hum, she was there. Speaker 2: --and I have an aunt in Pittsburgh. Speaker 1: Oh, you do? Yes, she was definitely there. Speaker 2: (unclear) Jeffrey spoke, John Henrik Clarke. Speaker 1: I'm sure mother was there, yeah. I'm sure she was right in the middle of it. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next photo. Speaker 1: Yes, this is Craig Washington. This is when Craig was in the State Senate in Houston, probably would--I mean in Texas, so he would have been in the State Legislature in Houston, Texas in the late '60's [1960s], early '70's [1970s]. Craig went on to become a U.S. Congressman from Houston, Texas. He replaced [George Thomas] "Mickey" Leland. Craig was replaced by Sheila Jackson Lee, and in the recent press regarding Enron [Corporation], it has come out that [Kenneth] Ken Lay personally financed Sheila Jackson Lee's campaign to unseat Craig because he didn't like some vote that he had done on NAFTA [North American Free Trade Agreement] (laughter). So now he's back in Austin, Texas as a practicing lawyer, primarily focusing on criminal defense work. But he's a general, civil litigator. And he's one of the few African Americans to own real estate in downtown Houston. He was the first. He was actually "the" first (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: I wanna grab you this book. I'm in this Urban League book, and I'll just give you one. I bought a bunch of-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Describe this photograph? Speaker 1: Yes, this is Charisse Lillie and Johnny Cochran in the Year 2000, I believe. I was honored as one of the, with the Whitney Young Award for the Philadelphia Urban League. And they honored five lawyers, and I was one of the five lawyers honored. Johnny Cochran was the keynote speaker, and he presented the award to each of us. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next photograph? And describe this photo? Speaker 1: This is an article in the "Chestnut Hill Local Newspaper" in 1986 regarding a committee that I was on, regarding the bicentennial of the U.S. Constitution. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And next photograph? Speaker 1: I think we only have a couple more here. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Describe this photograph? Speaker 1: This is my grandfather. My grandfather was a great Mason and was very active in the Mason chapter and the Mason movement. And this is my grandfather receiving an award probably in the late '80's [1980s]. Speaker 2: Richard Lillie. Speaker 1: Richard Lillie, yes, Richard Lysander Lillie, Sr. Speaker 2: Otherwise known as Mr. Payne Chapel. Speaker 1: Mr. Payne Chapel. That's right. He was a very active lay member of his church, Payne Chapel African Methodist Episcopal Church. That's right. Speaker 2: And for the last one, if you could do the one with Ruth and my mother. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Describe this photograph? Speaker 2: Yes, this is Dr. Vernell Lillie and Dr. Ruth Simmons at Straight Hall. This is New Orleans, Dillard University in New Orleans [Louisiana] in two--I think it was in the year 2000. Ruth Simmons was the commencement speaker for Dillard University. Ruth was the past president of Smith College. She is currently the president of Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island]. She has been a--she was really like a big sister to me. My mother taught her in high school. She was a speech and drama student, and this is the dorm where my mother stayed as a student at Dillard University and Ruth was there as a student at Dillard University. At the commencement in 2000, Ruth announced that she was endowing a scholarship, the Vernell Lillie Scholarship in my mother's name, and she's grateful because my mother introduced her to Dillard, helped to get her a scholarship to Dillard, and then she went on to get a Ph.D. from Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And now she's first African American president of an Ivy League university in the country. So it's very exciting..