 Story_ID: 68783 Speaker 1: I was born in Springfield, Ohio, and my grandfather was Arthur J. Riggs. He was originally from Cincinnati [Ohio] and he ran on the road. And the BPOE of W [Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks of the World], which was the white Elks, had left all of their secret documents and everything on the train, and he got the documents and took them home and he and another man copied them all by hand, went back and returned it, you know, to the train the following Monday when they went back to work. And after that he formed his own chapter of the BPOE of W, which is the Benevolent Protective Order of Elks. They threatened to kill him, they ran him out of town on a rail and he managed to escape and he went to Springfield, Ohio. And in Springfield Ohio, he formed his own Elks and called it the Independent [sic, Improved] Benevolent Order of Elks. They sued him but the court upheld the right for them to have that order, and he became the first Grand Exalted Ruler of the "IBPOE of W". That's a picture of me being honored me being honored of when I was still alderman, and the person in the middle, of course, is the woman who owned the Soul Queen, Mrs. [Maybell] Anglin, and the person to the right is [HM Illinois Supreme Court] Justice [Charles] Freeman, and they awarded of course you see in my hand and I also had some gorgeous flowers. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, tell us about this? Speaker 1: This was a picture of those of us who participated in the Congressional Challenge, which was brought about by Fannie Lou Hamer. And the theme was to try to unseat the congressman who had never been officially elected because at that time, blacks were never allowed to vote, and we prevailed and ended up in Washington [D.C.]. And the other congressmen would not vote to unseat them, but they said they would vote for the Civil Rights bill that was being introduced by, at that time, in Congress, and they did vote for it. Speaker 2: What part of the city was this picture taken? Speaker 1: Pike County [Illinois]. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: All right. Speaker 1: Cirilo McSween, a business man, was the first black to open up a business in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois], and that was a McDonald's, which was on Wabash Avenue and I was invited, of course, to be there on that occasion. And when I walked in [HM] Jesse Jackson walked up to me and you can see what he did, it was hilarious. And I told him if he ever got elected president, I was going to make him buy it back. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay. Speaker 1: That is a picture of me when I was campaigning in Englewood [Illinois]. [HM] Dick Gregory is to the left and, of course, George O'Hare is to the right and some of the other people who were involved in my campaign. And of course that was the time when we prevailed in 1971. Speaker 2: What's his name, Dick Gregory came and rang my doorbell and asked if he could use my office cause he wanted to run for mayor [of Chicago, Illinois], and he did. And at that time, that office had been a tire and battery place. Of course I don't have to tell you what it looked like. And for his interview in announcing his candidacy, we got some background out of--we fixed it up just enough space for a desk and we could sit behind it and made it look pretty and when the guys were coming, of course, we didn't have all that, but the newsmen were coming in with this heavy equipment, you know, and I was walking in front of them and telling them, only go where I step. I said because the floors are loose, I don't want you to fall in through the floor to the basement. Now wait a minute, who was that-- Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Yeah, Bernadin? Speaker 2: Bernardin, that's the way, but it was--he's not a cardinal, what was he? Speaker 1: He was a bishop-- Speaker 2: Bishop. Speaker 1: --Yeah. Speaker 2: Was he? Speaker 1: Joseph Bernardin, yeah. He was the--yeah, Cardinal. Speaker 2: He's the cardinal, yeah. Speaker 1: He's the cardinal. He was bishop in Cincinnati [Ohio] first then he was the cardinal. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's a picture of him with you know--let me know when you want me to start talking. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: The picture in the upper left-hand is a picture of Jesse Owens and myself. Just before he went over to Germany, that picture was taken at Stagg Field [University of Chicago, Illinois]. And the one in the middle is a picture of him, I don't think you can see that, but you can see the "O" on his shirt and "May I offer you my best sincere wishes. Jesse Owens from Ohio State". That to me is to be forever cherished. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Larry, could you hold up the top right picture? Speaker 1: And that shows him doing the broad jump. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: That's a rather interesting story. You remember Alfreda Duster? The person to the right is her husband. Alfreda Duster, that's her husband. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: When was this? Speaker 1: About 19--it was right after the war started, cause I had been working the Secretary State's Office and the driver's license department, and we moved to Navy Pier, and when we moved down there, I was the only woman down there. I always like to--I always like to tell little funny tales along with my stories. I was down there and I was trying to get the files and things together for people who had to come down and take the test, cause they were all over the city, everybody who had to take the driver's examining test had to come to Navy Pier. And I'm the only woman and I'm just round there just getting all these files and things together. And I picked up a sign, and it said "Soldiers with short guns please stand close to girls." I said what the heck is this? And I looked at it and the guys were just laughing, they were just laughing. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Now we just say with the previous picture. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, the story behind the previous picture. Speaker 1: At that time I was sponsored by [Michael] Mike Sneed. You had to have a--do politics to get a city job then. And I was stationed down at Navy Pier and this was in the early-- Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Mike Sneed is-- Speaker 1: --Yes. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: --The writer, right? Speaker 1: No he was the first black ward committeeman-- Speaker 2: Okay, good. Speaker 1: --And county commissioner. And we were stationed down there and the people were coming down and taking tests. Well, the Navy moved in and took over. And I had already filed a complaint with my sponsor because what they would do is, all of the blacks, they would take them out of line because they knew that they could intimidate em and make em pay to get--you know, to pass the test. And when I complained, I mean I complained so that the tears were rolling down my eyes, I was so angry when somebody said, "I don't want to ride with them anyhow because most of them have lice or flees or something on em," you know. And I all but, you know, screamed at em. I told them, I said, you know, I said, "We're gonna get you for that or something like that," but anyhow, they opened up then--when the Navy moved in, they opened a branch offices and it was one at 44th and Cottage [Grove]. And Mike Sneed put me in charge of that office. So I was handling driver's license examinations at that time. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: What year was that? Speaker 1: In 1941, right after the war broke out. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: So was that photo at the office or at Navy Pier? Speaker 1: That was at the office on 44th and Cottage. Oh, I just brought that, you don't need to know that. That was when I was typing. Registration card that you have? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: It has your name on it. Speaker 2: Right. That's what you're doing? Speaker 1: That's what I was doing. And as I said, I was--they had me actually--I'm back there someplace, way back in the back, I think I have it kind of marked off, but it's marked off with something-- Speaker 2: Oh, there. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --There, there, there it is, right here. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Right, uh-huh. Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I don't want you holding it. Speaker 2: No, I'm going to move my hand and he's getting it now. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Now. Speaker 1: When I graduated from Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois], they were not allowing black graduates to attend the proms. The prom was being held on--at the Trianon Ballroom, and what I did was to have two white students or have some white students get us some bids for two couples. And we took a cab--my aunt made me a beautiful graduation dress. We took a cab and we went out to the Trianon and it was raining, and a young man came out with an umbrella and they had a red carpet all the way up to the cars that pulled up. And when he looked at me he said, "Uh-uh, you can't come in," I said, "Don't even think about it" or something to that effect. And he held that umbrella over me and proceeded to hold it over me until he got to the door. Now at that time, it was Duke Ellington, you know, Count Basie, I don't know if anybody here would remember Jan Garber, but he was the like Wayne King. And I always think about how we fought to get into hear Jan Garber and--for our graduation, but we attended it and set a precedent. But at the same time now they had a roller skating party at White City and we couldn't get in, we could not get in. They wouldn't allow--nobody would even buy bids for us. So later on we picketed and demonstrated at White City, and they finally sold to a person who rented to blacks at the roller rink at 63rd and South Park. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: I think that was my first demonstration story. And they said, "He'll let you in, but he won't let you out." So I said, "Uh-huh they're not gon steal him and they're not gonna poison it." And they didn't. I kept him until he died. Story_ID: 68784 Speaker 1: He's gorgeous. Speaker 2: That's my former husband now deceased, taken in the basement of my home. The first part of the celebration of my winning the election in 1971. Speaker 1: Oh, great. That's wonderful. I can see it looks like they're really trying to get that sound byte. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Is this yours also? Speaker 2: Oh, I had that with Jessie Owens, I just keep them together. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I don't think you need that. Speaker 1: You don't need to keep that? Speaker 2: I don't brag about--I don't want to talk like that though--it's just. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: At the beach? Speaker 2: I don't--look, it's just a picture of me in a bathing suit. You wanted some pictures of me when I was a kid and that's the only one seemingly that I have. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Where did you live then? Speaker 2: In Springfield, Ohio. Speaker 1: Did you do all these already? (unclear) Speaker 2: (Off-camera conversation) Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Now that's--with Gene Ammons, it's a very interesting story, I think. When he was in jail, the owner of the Plugged Nickel [club in Chicago, Illinois], supposedly said that he would help get him out early if he would come and play at the Plugged Nickel when he first, you know, first engagement. He didn't help to get him out, but he did hire him. And the last night that he was there, Gene expected that, you know, that he was gonna be paid and so forth. And he wouldn't pay him. So he called me and said, "Mama, he said I got a problem." I said, "What," he said "[Michael] Pierpaoli isn't going to pay me," and I said "Why not?" and he said, "He doesn't owe me anything." I said, "Okay, I'll be right down." So you know the Plugged Nickel is down around 18th Street, 12th Street or 13th Street, something around in there. So, I had a little friend visit--a little friend visiting me who had lived in Chicago and had moved to Michigan. He looked like a football player. He was a great big guy with big broad shoulders and everything. And I said, "Come on go with me." He said, "I'm not dressed," I said, "You don't have to get dressed, just come on in your blue jeans or whatever it is." So we go down there and I called W.L. Lillard, who at that time had a detective agency, and I said "Lillard, we're gonna have some trouble down at the Plugged Nickel tonight, I wish you'd have some people down there," so he said I'll have somebody there. So when I walked in with this kid, I looked at--and somebody wen--you know like that. These were Lillard's people, you know. So we got it all covered. We're ready for anything, ready for bear (ph). So when--when he said--when Gene finished, and he said "That's right mama, said they ain't gon pay me," I said "Okay. I said you leave here and you get as far away from here as you can get in ten minutes, and whatever you hear or whatever you think is happening, I said, don't you come back." So I went up to the guy. I said, "I understand you're not going to pay Gene Ammons, and why weren't you gonna pay him." "I don't owe him anything." I said, "Why don't you owe him?" "Cause I helped to get him out of prison." I said, "You did not, you had nothing to do with it." "Well, I'm not paying him and that's it." I said, "Well, I think you better pay him or I don't think you'll be-" "Are you threatening me?" I said, "You take it any way you want." He said, "Well, I have a gun and I have a permit to carry it," and with that my kid just (unclear), "Don't threaten my mama." And he was drinking a can--a bottle of Heineken's beer, I shall never forget this, and he started trying to drink the beer, and the beer was running all down his chin. Needless to say, that was the night that the Plugged Nickel was closed. It never opened anymore. We took it to the union the next day, and we closed the Plugged Nickel. And after that, Gene lived right around the corner from me, so we went by his house and was sitting all over the floor and on the bed and everything. Speaker 2: What was he in jail for? Speaker 1: Narcotics. He had a very bad narcotic's problem. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: I don't remember what the occasion was of this next picture, because it was quite some time ago, and obviously, because Senator [Edward] Kennedy and [Governor] Adlai Stevenson [II], that was a long time ago, because Adlai Stevenson has been dead for a long time, and there is no date on it, but I was just grinning like a (unclear). Speaker 2: When I was nine month's old, my father [Arthur J. Riggs, Jr.] who was in his twenties at the time worked at the Victor Rubber Plant in Springfield, Ohio, and there was typhus in the water that he drank, and he died of Typhoid fever, leaving my mother with me, nine months, my sister, a year and a half and my brother, three. She subsequently married my stepfather and when I was eight years old, she died with a combination of childbirth and peritonitis, and died on her way to the hospital. So I went to--I went to live with my grandmother [Minnie Reed] who was very inspirational and-- Speaker 1: This is gorgeous. Speaker 2: Nineteen eleven (1911), yes. Springfield Boys' exposition, he was a kid then, apparently. Now that--at that particular time, they did not allow children of color to participate, even in the exposition, and it was entered by a white friend of his and won first prize. But even then the prejudice was so great that they couldn't even, you know, appreciate the art, Goddess of--what it was. You always have to tell me when. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: What was the occasion and that's about it. Speaker 2: It's just a picture of President [William] and Mrs. [Hillary] Clinton, because I was always contributing to the democratic party, and it's to me in appreciation of my loyalty to the democratic party. And of course I had occasion when Clinton was--when President Clinton was here in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], [HM] Jesse Jackson was handling the whole thing at Englewood High School, and he introduced me as the mother of Englewood and then afterwards about ten people of us were allowed to go back and meet Clinton, personally, and he--on my way back there, a young man ran up to me and said "Mrs.," I said, "I got to-," he said, "Please listen to me," he said "When I was a kid, I was destined to either go to jail for the rest of my life or be killed on the streets of Englewood." He said, "You got a hold of me and turned me every way but loose" and he said, "and I ended up, I'm the principle of a school." I wanted to say, "What school?" and "Jesse Jackson and Clinton is not gonna wait for you, will you get back here, please." And of course I went back and personally met Clinton, and in fact, he held my hand and said he was very happy to meet the mother of Englewood. Speaker 1: This is cute. Speaker 2: I love it. I don't have to tell anybody who that is. I knew him from a boy of fifteen, and was so happy to have been a part of his campaign [for Mayor of Chicago, Illinois] and a part of his success. Speaker 1: Did you live in the same neighborhood? Speaker 2: Same neighborhood. We were the first blacks to move west of (unclear). That's when--just before--right after my son was born. That's Harold Washington, of course. That's another picture of my mother [Alice Riggs]. Speaker 1: Oh, she was pretty. Speaker 2: I said, you always have to tell me when to start talking, cause I don't know what you want me to do. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: That is another picture of my mother. Speaker 1: About how old is she? Speaker 2: Well, she was in her forties when she died, so-- Speaker 1: She was only in her forties? Speaker 2: Yes. Uh-huh, yes. I was eight years old when she died. My mother always was so influential in getting me to appreciate everybody regardless of the race, religion or previous condition of servitude as they say, and she just in the short time that she was with me she was such a great influence. That is a picture of my son, Lawrence W. Langford and his former wife, who's--they were divorced afterwards, but that's Margarite (ph) and those are--Margarite's son is next to her by a previous relationship and the two at the bottom are my two beautiful grandchildren. One other thing, Lawrence is now the assistant to Director [Cortez] Trotter, the 911 Communication Center and is responsible for designing and completely implementing the system that would be put into effect immediately in the event that we were invaded. Speaker 1: Hyde Park? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: In 1935. And the dress was made by my aunt and her dear friend, both of whom are seamstresses. It has ninety-six yards of hand-rolled ruffles. It was gorgeous and it had--when I walked across the floor, it would just, you know, go that way or just go over that way. And I went to the prom with [James] Jimmy Brothers, who at that time was a track star, and he could run, but he couldn't dance. I came home with ruffles in my arm where he stepped all over them. He later became a Tuskegee Airman and was killed in a plane crash right after he got his wings at Tuskegee [University in Tuskegee Alabama]. Speaker 1: Can you focus on the ruffles and then (unclear). Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Ready? Speaker 1: Those are--that is a picture of my two brothers. The one to the left is the one who was born when my mother died in childbirth, and the one to the right is my big brother, Wilbur. Wilbur worked in Springfield in the steel mills for years and years and years and he became ill because of the dust inhalation and--but he was a great piano player. I taught him a few little chords before I left Springfield, and when I came back to visit, he was playing like crazy. He never took a lesson, but he ended up going to New Orleans [Louisiana] where he played in a place called "Easy Eddie's" and people came from everywhere to hear him play. He could play like--he could imitate everybody that'd ever played music, but he had his own style. Liza Minnelli sang with him for three hours one day. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Wow. Speaker 1: This is 44th and Cottage [Grove]. Speaker 2: Oh good, so now we got two. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, that's good. Speaker 2: Let me see who else was on there. Don't start yet. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Do you remember the occasion of this photo? Speaker 2: No, I don't, just one of the other times that I was with him [Chicago Mayor Harold Washington]. I can't remember where that was, but that's [Chicago Mayor] Jane Byrne. Speaker 1: Looks like her. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: I'll hold it like that. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay. Speaker 1: I was tagging for some beneficial concern. I don't remember what it was, but that the former Sheriff, I mean former alderman (unclear). Speaker 2: Fifty-two hundred, fifty-six dollars. Speaker 1: That was being donated to the Pride Community Center which I opened up in Englewood. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was with the Latino delegation. Speaker 2: And mayor is (unclear). Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: With Harold Washington. Speaker 1: I'm on the extreme left. Speaker 2: Yeah. And what was this. Speaker 1: First ran for alderman the first time I won and I demanded a recount and made a challenge and at that time, the Court told me you have a good case, but I'm not gonna rule in your favor. Speaker 2: What year was that? Speaker 1: I ran the first time in 1969 [picture shows 1967]. So that was the first time I ran, and I appealed it all the way to the Supreme Court of Illinois, and they refused to overturn the decision. Tell me when you're through. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay. Speaker 1: That's where I first met Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], was in--with that particular church, because the pastor of that church formed a chapter of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] in Englewood. And Dr. King was very, very active in that church at the time. And I have a favorite I like to tell about Dr. King, if I may. Dr. King and I were very close at the time, and a friend of mine, who at that time was the administrator assistant to Adam Clayton Powell, was Chuck Stone, who was former editor of the Chicago Defender, and I had--I had a bean party for him at my house. I had all kinds of beans. I had bedded red beans and rice and just all kinds of beans. So a friend of Dr. King's came by to see Chuck and she was on her way over to see Dr. King, who lived in the apartment on the West Side at the time. So she called him and he asked, "Where are you," she said, "Oh," and he said, "Well let me speak to her." So I spoke to him and I said, "You know I'm having a bean party for Chuck Stone today," I said, "and I'll bet you like beans and he said, I do, I said, well, why don't you run over here and get some of my beans. I've got all kinds of beans." He said, "Anne, I'd love to," he said, "but right now I'm kind of tired" and I said, "Well, rain check," he said "Rain check." So every time I'd see him after that, Dr. King would say "I haven't got my beans yet," or else I'd say, "you haven't got your beans yet." The day that he was killed [April 4, 1968], I was coming home. I had arms full of groceries and everything, but my son was, my husband rather, was standing on the steps and he said, "Dr. King has been shot," and I thought, "oh my God," I dropped my groceries and I flew into the kitchen, and I had a little, little, little, little TV on the kitchen table and it kept rolling where "Dr. King has been shot, Dr. King has been shot." Story_ID: 68785 Speaker 1: November 4th? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Year 2002. I am Adele Hodge, and I'm doing a HistoryMakers interview with Anna Langford. And our camera person is Matthew Hickey, and we have a guest in this interview, and her name is: Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Nannie Ryan, like Dan Ryan, Nannie, N-A-N-- Speaker 1: Lennie-- Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: --Nannie, N-A-N-N-I-E. Speaker 1: --Oh. Nannie. Okay, Nannie Ryan is our guest in this interview today. Okay, now, would you give us your name and spell it? Speaker 2: Anna R. Langford. Speaker 1: Okay. Full name with the R. Speaker 2: A-N-N-A, R as for Riggs my maiden name, and L-A-N-G-F-O-R-D, Langford. Speaker 1: And Riggs is with two gs, R-I-G-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --R-I-G-G-S? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Okay. And your birth date? Speaker 2: October 27, 1917, and I just celebrated my 85th birthday on jazz cruise. Story_ID: 68786 Speaker 1: And your favorite food? Speaker 2: Anything that has greens and pork and soul food, all kinds of soul food. I love it. Speaker 1: And favorite color? Speaker 2: I like all of the earth tones, greens, browns, yellows, orange, I like all of them, gold. Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, I've just come from my last one. I'm going out--I'm not leaving the continental United States anymore because of the hassle, so I'll probably be going to Las Vegas [Nevada] or Tunica, Mississippi, is one of the favorite places for me to go. I go down there now that they have all of the casinos and they are hiring many, many black people all over the place. The first time I went down to Tunica, they were still building the hotel that we stayed in, and I had occasion to talk with the young black women who was working there as a cashier. She said in three years, she had been unable to find any kind of a job, scrubbing floors, washing dishes or anything. She now was able to get an apartment and said she had her little girl back. I didn't care if I lost whatever, I was so happy that I had had--had found out about the conditions there and how many blacks were now employed. Story_ID: 68787 Speaker 1: And will you give us your parents' name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Alice Riggs, A-L-I-C-E, and Arthur J. Junior, R-I-G-G-S. Speaker 1: Okay, and they were born in? Speaker 2: Springfield, Ohio. Speaker 1: Both of them? Speaker 2: Both of them, yes. Speaker 1: Do you know the year, of course, the birth dates? Speaker 2: For me? Speaker 1: For your parents? Speaker 2: No, I don't remember. My father was nine months' old when I died, so I don't even remember my father. Speaker 1: You were nine months' old when your father died? Speaker 2: I mean, I was nine months' old when my--I mean--I'm sorry, I was nine months' old when my father died. So I don't even remember him. And he was in his twenties at the time. That picture that you saw of his drawing was 1911, and he was in high school then. Speaker 1: Your mother, she died early in your life? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And how old were you when she died? Speaker 2: Eight. Speaker 1: And she was how old? Speaker 2: She apparently was in her early forties. Story_ID: 68788 Speaker 1: Do you remember anything of your grandparents or hearing anything? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, my grandmother [Minnie Reed] reared me after my mother died. She was a great influence in my life. She worked in private family, for five different families, and my grandmother was white. She's married to an Indian. She worked for these five different white families, and she earned a dollar a day. And she would bring food home from table, I read in the little shack that we lived in was eight dollars a month and she would scuffle to get that little eight dollars together, and we would have dimes worth of bologna one night, and dimes worth of, what they called at that time, I think they called it "liver pudding," it's made like a horseshoe, and we had all kinds of beans and cooked beans with potatoes you know to further them. Now I had--one year, I had garden, and I sold seeds for a penny a package, and we got so many--I got so many packages free after I sold so many. And I had a garden and I had all--I raised lettuce, I had tomatoes, I had some of everything, and I was so proud of my garden, and we ate off that garden all year. Speaker 1: What Indian heritage did your grandmother? Speaker 2: I don't know what her husband was cause I never knew him. He died--I know my uncle was, and all of my aunts and--my mother's the only--there were only two who took after her completely. And she looked very, very white and people thought she was white, but my father [Arthur J. Riggs, Jr.], apparently was brown and had some Indian in him, I guess, I mean, not Indian, but he was dark brown, if I remember correctly, as I said, I never saw him, I never knew what he looked like really. Speaker 1: Was your grandmother born in Springfield, Ohio, also? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Where is Springfield located? Speaker 2: I think she was--apparently, she was married twice--I don't know what happened really, it's been so long ago and I was so young that I don't really know what the relationship was or why the coloring, but as I said, my mother [Alice Riggs] just looked white, I guess, and people took her for white. The fact that she had a job one time where she was working in Springfield and when we came to visit her and asked who we were, she said they were her children, and they fired her. That was how prejudice it was in Springfield, even though it was not a southern state. And that prejudice was there up until [Wilbur] Wright Field opened up after the war, Wright Field in Dayton [Ohio]. And a lot of people came to work in Dayton [Ohio] and lived in Springfield. And when they wouldn't let them in the theaters and they wouldn't let them in the restaurants and they'd tear em up, broke down a lot of prejudice in Springfield at the time. Speaker 1: How far is Springfield from Dayton [Ohio]? Speaker 2: About twenty-two miles. Story_ID: 68789 Speaker 1: Your mom [Alice Riggs], what do you remember most about your mom? Speaker 2: I remember my mom telling us that we should never be prejudice against anybody because of their color or whatever, the religion or whatever, that we should take people and treat them all alike unless we had just cause not to. And I remember her making donuts, I remember her trying to give me castor oil and I couldn't stand the taste of it and cod liver oil. And one time I bit her finger when she tried to open my mouth. My mother was a beautiful person. I'm still thinking about--I think my grandmother might have had a little side deal someplace cause most of my aunts and uncles were Indian look with a high cheek bones and the reddish skin, but there was another sister of my mother who was also white and I think maybe she had a little side affair or something, maybe before she was married, but I don't know how it came up, but which was--what the age range was, but I think that she had a little outside affair. When you look at the picture, you could see that she probably didn't have any Indian blood in her. Speaker 1: And when your mom died, what were the circumstances of your mom's death? Speaker 2: We were living in this little town called Leven (ph), Ohio, and she had remarried and my stepfather was brown-skinned, and the story goes that some denied that this happened, but this is what I remember them telling me at the time that at that time they would not operate on pregnant women, so she had appendicitis and she had to, you know, stay there until the baby was born and then go to the hospital. Well the story that I remember, as I said, I don't know if it's true and I don't want to you know put this on Leven (ph), Ohio, if it isn't true. But they said that they took her to a little clinic of some kind that they had there in Leven (ph), and when they were taking her in, they looked up and saw my stepfather and wanted to know who was he, and they said that I'm her husband, and they said, we won't serve you, take her to Cincinnati, and she died in an ambulance on the way to Cin--in a car on the way to Cincinnati, Ohio. And that was one of the things that made me always feel that I had to fight in the field of Civil Rights. But even though some say that that didn't happen, but it had to happen, why would I--why would I have a story like that and why would my mother actually die on the way to Cincinnati. Speaker 1: And your brother was birthed? Speaker 2: That's the one who ended up in the Navy, yes. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And he was in the Philippines and that's was when they would not allow the black guys--the Philippine woman, they would tell em that--that they had tails. And he actually had women--people come up and ask if they could see his tail. You may have heard that story but it actually happened to my brother, prejudice, prejudice, prejudice. "Man's inhumanity to man," I always called it that. Story_ID: 68790 Speaker 1: What do you remember most? What's your favorite story regarding your grandmother [Minnie Reed]? Speaker 2: Just how she would sit there. We used coal oil lamps at the time, sometimes the chimneys would be cracked or the wicks would be, you know, worn down, and the oil would be low. And she would sit there with her newspaper and her little horn-rimmed glasses hanging on her nose and she would tell me, "You keep studying now, you keep studying, you're gonna make something out of your life, you keep studying, and you keep studying, and I'm gonna sit here as long as you want me to." Poor little thing, I'd look over and her little head (nodding). Little head would just be nodding, you know, and she'd sit there with me as long as I would study and long as I was doing my homework is where she could have been, and that's what I remember her, sitting there in that chair, nodding, stay up there with me to do my homework. Speaker 1: Now, your grandmother, of course, took care of you after your mom [Alice Riggs] died? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: And she lived how long, you know? Speaker 2: She died when I--about the second year that I came to Chicago [Illinois], she died, she was working in the white folks house and fell down the steps and broke her hip and she died of pneumonia. Speaker 1: How long did she live? Speaker 2: Not very long-- Speaker 1: I mean, well, how old was she when she died? Speaker 2: --I don't really know. I was thirteen when I came to Chicago [in 1933], and she died shortly after I came to Chicago. Story_ID: 68791 Speaker 1: What do you remember-- what kind of stories did you hear told about your father [Arthur J. Riggs]? Speaker 2: Just that he was an artist and he played piano, and he was a tumbler. Somewhere I have a picture of him in his tumbling--tumbler outfit, I guess you--he's quite muscular, beautifully built up man and I wanted to--I looked so hard to find that picture and I can't find it. I don't know whether my son has it or not. But that's what I remember about him, was the picture that he drew that he painted when he was in school and that part of it. Speaker 1: Did you have an opportunity to know your paternal grandparents at all? Speaker 2: Just my grandmother and my grandfather [Arthur J. Riggs] who was the--the one that started the Elks. Speaker 1: Oh, tell me about that? Speaker 2: He was running on the road and the people, the officials of the BPOE of W [Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks of the World], which is the white Elks at the time left all of their secret papers and something by mistake on the train, and he took all of it home over the weekend and had copied it by hand, he and another person, and brought it back and left it on the train and then he copied all that stuff and started his own BPOE of W in Cincinnati, Ohio. And they practically ran him--they threatened to run him out of town, in fact, they did run him out of town, but they threatened to arrest him. So he went over to Springfield, and in Springfield, Ohio, he started the BPOE of W, but he put independent [sic, Improved] in front of it. IBPOE of W [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks of the World], which is what it is today, and he was their first Grand Exalted Ruler, and in Springfield the Elks Hall is named after him. Speaker 1: What is his full name? Speaker 2: Arthur J. Riggs. Story_ID: 68792 Speaker 1: Life for you after your mom [Alice Riggs] died and before you moved to Chicago [Illinois], what was it like, school, and how did you get over the loss of your mother? Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't easy and really resented my little brother [Joseph Maxberry]. It was a long time before I even wanted to see him. And one day I was on my way to work, at that time the [Illinois] Secretary of State's Office was on the West Side, and all of a sudden it occurred to me that somewhere I had a little brother that I had never seen whose mother gave her life for, and I said "I'm going to go find him." And I went home, and at time I only had enough clothes for one week, so I would wash some clothes and dry them in the oven, caught a Greyhound bus and travelled all night long. And when I got there, my brother and sister, of course, were there, and we rented a car from somebody for about five dollars, drove to Leven (ph) [Ohio], but we didn't even know where he might be. But we went to the house that we had lived in because my stepfather owned the house. And when the car pulled up, this little (unclear) looking boy was skating up and down in front of the house, and I got out and I said--I got out and I said, "What's your name," and he told me, I said, "You're my little brother," and I started to cry all over him and he looked up and he said, "Which one are you, Anna or Helen [Riggs]?" I said, "Oh my gosh, he knows about us," you know, he was thirteen years old. So after that of course every year I'd go get him and take him over to Springfield when I would go visit. And (unclear) history, he was in the navy and he is buried in the Leven (ph), Ohio graveyard with the--the only soldier in the whole graveyard, he's the only soldier who's buried there. He died of cancer. Speaker 1: How old was he when he died? Speaker 2: 'Bout fifty-five. Story_ID: 68793 Speaker 1: Your school years, tell me your elementary and high school? Speaker 2: When I was five years old, my sister [Helen Riggs] was supposed to start school in our neighborhood. It had been--the student body was always integrated, but they had started to--they were going to integrate the faculty and the [Ku Klux] Klan marched. I actually saw the Klan march down the main street of the section of the city that I lived in. I heard--to this day I can hear the clumping of their, you know, clump, clump, clump and they were--they had the hoods with the eyes cut out and everything and they were carrying these, what do you call it, you know, fire--what is it? Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Torches? Speaker 2: --Torches. They were actually carrying torches. And it wasn't until the following year that the school reopened, which meant that my sister and I started in school at the same time, even though she was a year older than I. She always resented the fact that we were in the same grade together. But that was the earliest I--I always wanted to be an honor student. We were the poor little Riggs kids in the alley who would never make anything out of ourselves and I was determined to. One of the things that I remember most is when Oscar [Stanton] De Priest came to visit Springfield [Ohio]. He at that time was the black congressman from Illinois, the first black congressman from Illinois. And we were allowed to walk by him and just talk to him or what--and I remember saying how proud I was and I touched his garment, you know, it was like touching greatness. If you go down to the second floor of the City Hall [Chicago, Illinois], you will see a picture of Oscar De Priest on the second floor, of the first black congressman from Illinois and right under that you will see my picture as the first black woman alderman and one of the first two women to be elected, Oscar De Priest and Anna Langford. And that to me is just so precious that that is there like that when he was such an inspiration to me. I ran for congress. Speaker 1: What year was that? Speaker 2: It was the year that Gus Savage ran and won. After I found out that he was running, I knew that if the both of us stayed on the ballot, that we would not defeat the white person, the congressman at that time. So I withdrew and supported Gus Savage, and he was elected first. Story_ID: 68794 Speaker 1: And so you--any special memories about elementary school? Speaker 2: Just that--oh, there was one thing, I always wanted to be on the honor roll, and I had at the time, I don't remember what it's called, but I had a cyst, it was almost down to my shoulder that grew, and I had to stay home until they were able to lance that and all during that time, I studied, but I was afraid that I would miss some questions because I hadn't been there. So what I did, as I wrote out some answers on a piece of paper or something, and I had it down here at the side and every so often, I would check the answer to see if I had the right one. The teacher in that class was a Mr. Brickman. I will never forget it. Mr. Brickman saw me and I had it in--was with my gym clothes, and he came up and took my paper and looked at it and tore it up and walked back to the class. I have never cheated since. I've never forgotten the humiliation of that. And I had the right answers. Speaker 1: What grade were you in? Speaker 2: Probably about, cause I was in the ninth grade when I came to Chicago [Illinois], it was about eighth grade, about eighth grade. Story_ID: 68795 Speaker 1: What brought you to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Originally, I came--there was a woman that my family knew and she used to, after my mother [Alice Riggs] died, she would let me come over and clean and do things for her and she would buy me little clothes, nice little bloomer dresses. And I always remembered this bloomer dress cause I was in an airplane. Somebody took me up in a plane when I was kid down there. And I remember leaning over the side of this little plane like this and he had to grab me back by my bloomers. That's another story. But anyhow I was determined that I was gonna, you know, to be on the honor roll and everything. And there were times when we didn't even have thread, and I had some of my clothes were pinned up, but I was on the honor roll and determined to stay on it, so that's one of the things that I remember most was that I always wanted to, and of course, as you probably noticed I--at John Marshall [Law School in Chicago, Illinois] I did achieve that for three years, and for three of those years, I had the highest honors. Speaker 1: And you did all of your high school years at Hyde Park [High School]? Speaker 2: No, I started in the ninth grade. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Where-- Speaker 2: That's right when I came to Chicago I was in the ninth grade? Speaker 1: --What school? Speaker 2: Hyde Park. Speaker 1: And the high school years were in Hyde Park? Speaker 2: Yes, I stayed there. I graduated from Hyde Park, yes, uh-huh, one of the very, very few. In fact, there were classes that had only one black in it at the time, and as I said, when I graduated, they would not give us any prom bids. It was still that prejudice over there at the time. Speaker 1: What's your favorite or least favorite high school story? Speaker 2: I was the first black to ever be on a senior assembly committee, on a senior committee. I was on the senior assembly committee, and I was determined, it's gon be one whale of a--(laughing). We were supposed to raise money to give our graduation gift. So I just decided we're gonna put on a show and it's gon be some black folks in it. So we put on a show and I actually sang. There was this song that Ivie Anderson, at that time was a singer with Duke Ellington's band, and of course, as I said, Jan Garber was for them and Duke Ellington and Count Basie for us. And she sang this song and I sang it at the school affair, senior assembly affair. And in my senior book, they called me Miss Ivie Anderson, but we raised--we raised a lot of money, was one of the best shows was ever put on. Story_ID: 68796 Speaker 1: Did you go directly to college out of high school? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no. I finished law school in 19--I came into law school in 1956. It took me eleven years to do my prelaw, because I started and then I got married and then I went back to school, and then I had a baby and then I went back to school and when I finished, my son [Lawrence Langford] was four years old and we had--they had a party for me at my house and I remember the--the little devil, he would not go to sleep. His eyes were just so heavy that he could hardly keep them opened, but he partied all night with us. He's the one who's now the assistant to director of the 911 Communication Center, that's Mr. [Director Cortez] Trotter. Speaker 1: What's your son's name? Speaker 2: It's Lawrence W. Langford, Jr., but he is Larry. Everybody calls him Larry Langford. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was a reporter for WMAQ for twenty years before they went into sports. And he always had people who would tell him something that was going on. He was usually the first person on every occasion of importance. When the flood [Chicago flood of 1992], remember when we had the flood, he was able to determine where it was coming from. The reporter used to stand around with him to see where he was gonna go and then follow him. And he was the first reporter on the scene where the water was coming in. The hotel that was burned, I can't think of it, it was where they had a lot of single--what was the name of that hotel, I can't think of it, he was the first one on the scene, and he was there before the fire department. He actually saw people jumping out of the third and fourth floor to their death right in front of him. It's the only time that I've ever heard him cry, and he actually was trying to describe it and it was like, I don't know if you would even have ever heard it, but I know you wouldn't remember it, cause you wasn't alive then, the Graf Zeppelin? The reporter that tried to describe the Graf Zeppelin and my God and was crying, that's the way he was. And that's one of the most memorable things about him. But he was always right there, first to get stories. Story_ID: 68797 Speaker 1: You went-tell--fill in the college years for me, undergrad years, from Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois], did you go right into college or did you, or did you-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, I worked. I first was a clerk typist in social security. I typed up my own social security card in about 1938. I then--my next job was with the election commissioners where I typed up my own election card, and I then, after that I went to work in the [Illinois] Secretary of State's office. I worked there for a number of years, right up until--I was going to--was working with them when I was pregnant with my son [Lawrence Langford], and I would sneak and eat (unclear) under the desk until everybody knew by then that I was pregnant but that was it. Speaker 1: How old were you when you got married? Speaker 2: It was my second marriage. I was in my 20s. Story_ID: 72442 Speaker 1: Now we were just talking about going back, filling in the years between your graduating from school [Hyde Park High School] and your second marriage. And you say you were married the first time-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --At nineteen? Speaker 2: Nineteen. I was nineteen years old, 1927. Speaker 1: Fill us in on that unfoldment of events from the time you did that? Speaker 2: Well, he was a musician and was one of the first blacks to ever be in the [United States] Navy. He was up at Great Lakes in the Navy up there in ships company, which was really the band. And you know how, at that time, women were after uniforms and he became quite a ladies man. And his mother told me, "Don't divorce him until he gets out of the navy and then you keep getting that little compensation," you know. And sure enough when he got out of the Navy, then I got married--I got divorced. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: He still has some family so I don't know whether I would want to--his name is Tony Fambro. Story_ID: 72443 Speaker 1: So you worked as a clerk typist [for social security]. What made you decide to go to law school? Speaker 2: I always wanted to be a lawyer, even when I was in Springfield, Ohio. Whenever there was a court scene, I was that lawyer pacing up and down in front of that jury. When we finished high school [1930], the year that I graduated, we had to write our autobiography. And at the end we were to tell what our ambitions consisted of, what they were. And I said "My ambition is to be the world's greatest criminal lawyer." Why? (Laughter) I always just wanted to be a lawyer, that's all. And at the time I started practicing law, there were no women in the criminal field at all. The criminal courts building, what women were over there were either probation officers or working in some other field, but they were not lawyers. The first woman that I saw working over there was Willie Whiting, who was Assistant State's Attorney, and she and another person, well, that's [Judge Odas] Nicholson who used to be the Supreme Court--we were all honored the other night by the black women lawyers. But she was the first woman to be over there in a legal capacity, was Willie Whiting. Speaker 1: What year did you start your practice? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-six (1956) I practiced out of my home. At that time they would not rent to lawyers in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois]. There were only two offices in the Loop that had a black law firm in it, and that was on Randolph Street. But they--I couldn't--I could not rent downtown, so I got an office at 71st and South Park [now King Drive] at the time, up over a Chinese restaurant. I was with a blind lawyer too at the time. I did all my own secretarial work and everything. I didn't have any help at all, no secretary, no anybody. Story_ID: 72444 Speaker 1: What's the most-what's the biggest story that sticks out from you when you launched yourself as a lawyer? Speaker 2: Oh, I have lots of em. But probably, probably the best case I won that was impossible to win. This man had thirteen children and he was charged with murder because of the fact that he had shot somebody across the street from him around the Ogden Park in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]. These people had just been bothering him, bothering him, bothering him, teenagers and up to about 19 or 20. And this particular day he had sent one of his kids to get some chicken or something, and they stopped them and took it away from him, and they were only across the street. And he came out and they dared him to come over there. He went back in and got a shotgun and came back, went across the street and shot em, shot somebody. But I was able to win that case by simply changing the inflection of one word. It states in the written statement, it said that the States Attorney said that the man that you shot, just before you shot him, what did he do? And it said, "he reeled, I don't know whether he hit me or not." In the closing arguments, because all through the trial, when I looked up, one of--the man who became the foreman of the jury, I had my best witness on the stand and he was doing like this and said "I am not buying that," one of those things. I said, oh my God. Went back in the office and I took that statement, and I thought, "Okay, I got it--I got an angle." In my closing arguments to the jury, I said, first of all the court reporter does not--it's just words, you don't know what emphasis was put on what word or what, you know, just the words. I said in this particular instance, there were people milling around over there in the park. He didn't say, "I don't know whether he hit me or not," he said, "There were people all around me, somebody hit me, I don't know whether he hit me or not, but somebody hit me, and I fell forward and the gun discharged accidentally and blew the poor guy away." They bought it. They were out for about an hour and twenty-five minutes and came back in with a not guilty. Before that happened, the judge told me, "You better plead him, cause you're gonna lose him," one of those things. And I said, "He doesn't want to plead, he wants a trial." He got his trial and from then on I was Miss Perry Mason. And people say, well how can you defend somebody when you know they're guilty. I said, "They're not guilty until they are proven to be guilty." And I know you've heard this, "Better that ten guilty people should be you know found not guilty than one innocent person be convicted." And Johnny Cochran is a good example of what that means. Story_ID: 72445 Speaker 1: I'm not clear, you have more than one son or just the one son? Speaker 2: One son [Lawrence Langford], two grandchildren. Speaker 1: Your grandchildren, you enjoy them? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: How old are they? Speaker 2: One is 24 the other is 25. Speaker 1: Your son, did he major in engineering? Speaker 2: My son never finished high school. He's a genius. He couldn't--nothing--he couldn't learn anything in high school. I used to buy him a lot of encyclopedias, used to go to a lot of them North Shore rummage sales and I'd bring him back encyclopedias. He'd sit up in bed and read them, and when he was about fourteen, he had a radio station up in his bedroom broadcasting all over Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]. He had his news on every hour on the hour, he had the news, this that and the other, and somebody must have called in because they said, "We don't listen to your station, we listen to so and so, cause they don't have any," you know, whatever it was. Somebody called the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], they came looking for him and they told me afterwards, they said, they knew they could tell, you know, from the signal, what area they would follow this signal, they knew it was--and he said, they could not believe it at first when they listened to it, they said "Uh-uh, gotta be a legitimate station." They checked the call letters and the call letters were issued to the United States Navy. So they said, "Let's got get him." He had on the back of our house, he had all kinds of makeshift antennas that would reach half way to heaven and sometimes I thought they were going to fall through the roof and split the house in two, but he never had to really study, got his G.E.D., that's all he has is a G.E.D. But as I said, if we were attacked tomorrow, the system that would be put into effect right now is his, every bit of it, completely, designed and implemented by him. Story_ID: 72446 Speaker 1: Who--What was it like for you as a woman, married woman, single woman, working mother, what was it like negotiating? Speaker 2: It was rough, It was rough, especially since--I never got much money for cases. I tell people who remember Mae West. Mae West had a colored maid, at that time we were "colored," and she came in one day, this-- Mae came in and she had on a fur coat, new fur coat, so her maid said, "Goodness, Miss Mae, where'd you get that pretty mink coat?" And Mae West says, "Goodness had nothing to do with it, this coat cost a thousand dollars." Her maid said, "Where'd you find a man with a thousand dollars? And Mae West said, I didn't, I found a thousand men with a dollar each." That was my law practice. Speaker 1: That's great. Speaker 2: I would have--I'd go to one court, I was called "the late Mrs. Langford," because after the first court, I was late everywhere I went. And I'd go to this court, sister would put $25 in my pocket, next court--I'd come home after four courts, I wouldn't even have $200, but I got most of my money from referring a case to another lawyer and was able to help, in fact, to build my son's radio station in Michigan, which he still has. Speaker 1: Oh, that wonderful. What part of Michigan? Speaker 2: Cassopolis. Story_ID: 72447 Speaker 1: Now, as you were getting more into your law practice, and your son [Lawrence Langford] is growing up, and the Civil Rights years, tell me what was that like for you? Speaker 2: Tumultuous. It wasn't easy. At the time my [second] husband would cooperate with me and he would come home, take care of everything so I could go to school. And we ended up had some awfully disturbing things happen. He in fact--in spite of the fact that I gave him all kinds of credit for you know helping me get elected, he later went against me and supported a woman from the organization when I was running for as an independent alderman, which was very unfortunate. But he was really very supportive at the time and sometimes I think men resent it when you actually accomplish what you're trying to do, even though they're initially helpful. I hate to say that but I think that's the case, and I think that was this case. Speaker 1: And you're talking about your second husband-- Speaker 2: Second husband-- Speaker 1: --Langford? Speaker 2: --Right, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Did he ever resolve that to your satisfaction? Speaker 2: No, we were divorced. Speaker 1: I mean, but later he came to terms with your own growth beyond-- Speaker 2: No. He moved to Alabama after we divorced, had been divorced some time. He moved to Alabama where his sister died, left him a home down there, so he lived down there until he died. Speaker 1: --The 1960s and early '70s' (1970s), those were really-- Speaker 2: Those were the years I was involved in Civil Rights. And I was in Mississippi in '63' (1963) and '64' (1964). Speaker 1: --Tell me about that? Speaker 2: I don't know if you remember [Michael] Schwerner, [James] Cheney and [Andrew] Goodman, those are the three men who were killed [June 21, 1964]. Ten days after they found their bodies, I was working out of that same community center. The FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] were stationed there. They had agents there for our protection. We had to check out, indicate where we were going, what time we would be back, with the understanding that if we were fifteen minutes late, they'd come looking for us. I'm coming down the steps one day and the FBI agent was there, he said, "Mrs. Langford, you're from Chicago aren't you," and I said, "Yes." He said, "Well, if you knew what we were going through just to keep you alive, you'd go back to Chicago." I said, "Is it really that bad," he said, "Yes." I said, "Well, Baby, do your job." He said, "I give up." And then I was also a part of the Mississippi Challenge. We were--we first interviewed blacks who had been denied the right to vote, some--all the different things that happened to him. And at the time, the Governor Ross--was it Ross Barnett, was he the--was the governor, I think, at that time [Ross Barnett left office in January of 1964, Paul B. Johnson, Jr. succeeded him as Governor of Mississippi]. At one of the hearings we had a little preacher who had been driving the school bus and he had been fired after he registered. So Ross Barnett was sitting here and his lawyers were there and I was on this side of them with our witnesses and so forth. And Ross Barnett decided he wanted to question the man, a little preacher. And he said (unclear) "Well, where were you ordained," he said, "what you mean?" He said, "How did you get to be a lawyer," he said, "I was called." And Barnett, "called by-" "called by God." Speaker 1: His calling. Speaker 2: He said, "All right." He said, "So you're claiming that because you registered to vote that you lost your job," and he said, "Well, yes." He said, "Well, you didn't expect to keep that job forever, did you?" He said, "Well, I didn't expect to get fired because I tried to vote." He said, "Oh, well, all right. Well nothing else happened to you did it?" He said, "Well, they killed my dog." He said, "What you mean?" He said, "Somebody tried to kill my dog." He said, "Well, you don't know who-" "No but I-" "What else?" He said, "Well they burned a cross on my yard." He said, "Well, you-" and finally I said, I leaned over there to his lawyer, I said, "You better try to quit while he's behind." And the next day we went on back to Jackson [Mississippi]. And the next day when they met me, "Anna, you should have been there," he said, Barnett's lawyer came and brought you a whole bouquet of, what was that favorite flower in the south at the time? Speaker 1: Magnolias. Speaker 2: Magnolias. Brought me a--I said, "Oh, I'm so sorry I missed my magnolias" (laughs). But it was quite an experience, quite an experience. Story_ID: 72448 Speaker 1: At one time we went all the way down to the southern-most spot in Mississippi, and there was a little town that had, I think it had about one little school house and everything. And we had been--before that we didn't have any problems because we were, you know, taking depositions from the blacks. This time we were deposing the whites who had refused to allow people to vote. And I was with a lawyer from California, black lawyer, and he had a--we had a black secretary who had come from California with him, and she was a pretty little brown-skinned girl, pretty hair. And when he was--when he started--when I started questioning him, he said "I never-negress" and all that kind of stuff, just real typical. And I said--he said niggers first, he said. I said, "Wait a minute," I said, "Sir, we are here under congressional challenge. You will respect people and not use derogatory terms," I said, "or else you will have to be cited for it," you know. And when I--this woman said--there was one white woman, she said "Oh," as if to say how dare you talk in that tone, it was really very interesting. And I think the word must have got out that there was whatever they want to call us who were doing this, all of this, impudent stuff in there and making all these questions and challenges and so forth. When we came out, there was a sea of white people. Apparently it was time--it was in a little factory area or something, and it was during their lunch hour and they had all--it was just a sea of white people. And at all of our hearings up north, it was a white guy that was there all the time and you just see the hatred in him, you know of what was going on. So when I came out first, because I wanted to take of a picture of this other lawyer and Deena Rae (ph), I think her name was, she said afterwards, she said, she'd never go back to Mississippi, she said her wig had turned grey. So that (laughter)--anyhow, when I got all the way out and when I got there, I was getting ready to get my camera up and here was, look like about six-foot five trooper coming up to me, and this white guy was with him. So when he--I took the camera down, I said, "Hi," and he said, "What you put the camera down for? Just getting ready to go in them (unclear)." I said, "Well I can put it back up." So then I said, "Oh, I remember you," I said, "you were our biggest fan, weren't you, from the very beginning," and he said, "Sho was." And then I said, "Oh, shoot," I said--I looked out and by that time, I said, "I have to go, I have to catch you later," and because the other lawyer is waiting for me. That guy said, "Get out of here as fast as you can before we get lynched" and he took off doing about 80 headed for the airport. That was one of the most exciting things that happened in-- Speaker 2: What prompted you personally to make that choice to go to Mississippi? Speaker 1: --When I heard that the boys [Michael Schwerner, James Cheney and Andrew Goodman] were missing, and all these different stories were coming out. "Oh, they're just hiding someplace trying to get publicity" and so forth and so on. And I remember I got up one morning, I said, "They're dead. I know they're dead. They're dead.=," and the tears were just rolling down my cheeks. I said, I'm going to go down there and work, you know, for a week. And the morning that I left, I had booked into the Sun-n-Sand Motel in Jackson, and Larry [Lawrence Langford] was a little kid then, he said, "Mama," he said, "they just burned a cross in front of your hotel where you're gonna to stay." I said, "Oh, fine, I'll stop and pick up some marshmallows." He said, "Oh, mama" (laughter). And that's the way I left. But that was because me too--and sure enough, they were dead, they were, but I knew they were. Speaker 2: So that-- Speaker 1: Just felt it, I just felt they had killed them. Speaker 2: --That experience changed you tremendously, that trip, that participation? What did it change about you when you got back to Chicago? Speaker 1: Nothing. It's just that I felt good about myself having participated in it. Speaker 2: Was it the first time you had had that kind of experience, that level of prejudice and discrimination? Speaker 1: I had had that all my life (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. So being used to the KKK, riding-- Speaker 1: Yeah, riding. Speaker 2: --Roughshod, okay. Story_ID: 72449 Speaker 1: So after helping out in Mississippi, how did that period flow for you from that point? Speaker 2: Well, after working there, of course, that was when everything started happening here in Chicago [Illinois], and I got involved in the demonstrations and so forth here in Chicago, and I still say, because of those demonstrations, I was usually, always one of the lawyers, sometimes the only lawyer to participate, because I felt there would be arrests. In fact there were arrests on several occasions and I was the only lawyer there. And I remember somebody said "That was you?" Or "How you get such a heavy voice," and I said, "That's was when I was yelling at the people in the demonstrations lines and so forth." I said, I'd be back here and I'd be yelling all the way up the front so they could hear me. I said, "That's how I developed my loud voice," because I have a habit of when I'm someplace and people are making a lot of noise and they're supposed to be--I just yell out "quiet" and they'll hear me all over the place (laughs). Story_ID: 72450 Speaker 1: That's good. What do you remember, in fact, if you could repeat the bean story about [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and any other, you know, significant things you feel are significant about King? Speaker 2: Everything that I--. Just that I was--I walked behind his--flew down to his funeral. Oh, I know what you want. You remember the sanitation people [in Memphis, Tennessee]? They had another demonstration that same day. My son [Lawrence Langford] was about thirteen then and it was so hot, I had a little fan. I notice they have them now, these little fans, and everybody was asking to borrow it, but we walked with the sanitation walkers. And then island hop little planes to get down to the funeral. We got there just after they had brought his casket out. So we walked that four miles behind his casket until we got to the resting place. What was it Meharry [sic, Morehouse College in Atlanta, Georgia], what school was that? I think it was Meharry, one of the black colleges there. But we walked that four miles behind him. Speaker 1: Give me a sense of what was in the atmosphere during that walk? Speaker 2: Tears, tears, very, very sad. Very sad. He was very much loved by the older people. I remember one time when he was here in Chicago, he was speaking at Liberty Baptist [Church] and we were--there was some girls out in the front, some teenagers, and they said, "We don't want to hear that old man" and they were booing, and I walked up and said, "You do not boo Dr. King, you don't boo Dr. King." I said, "You are too young to realize what he means to us now," I said, "but history will prove to you that I was right when I said you don't boo Dr. King." And they said, "Oh, we're sorry." But I mean there was, at that time, the young people had no sense of who he was and what he meant. In fact, some people say, yeah, all the white folks like him cause he keeps us, us, meaning us from killing white folks, you know. They were saying that because he was a pacifist, just the opposite of some of the black leaders at the time, like Malcolm X, you know. Story_ID: 72451 Speaker 1: You ran for the office the first time, did you say 1969? Speaker 2: Uh-huh--sixty-seven (1967). Speaker 1: Sixty-seven (1967). Tell us about that? Speaker 2: Well, there was--we won the election. I had actually won it. But the man who later became the ward committeeman and who would--and actually became the assistant to Jane Byrne when she was the mayor [of Chicago]. His name was [James C.] Jim Taylor, big Jim Taylor from the 16th ward. He was just a precinct captain in the 27th precinct, I'll never forget that. He took all of his everything from the precinct, all of the voting records and the voters and everything, he took it home and voted all of them, actually voted them, showed where all of them voted, dead folks and people in homes, nursing homes and everything. His was the only black precinct that carried over 200 votes, almost 300 votes, and I lost by 27 votes, and those 27 came out of his precinct. That was when Paul Sheridan, Jr. won. And that's when I challenged it all the way to the Supreme Court. And Judge [Harry] Comerford actually admitted that I had a good challenge, but "I'm not gon give it to you. I can't give it to you, I can't." In other words, he was under, you know, "don't let her win," cause I was a militant, you know, too independent. Speaker 1: Then you came back and ran in '69' [1969]? Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971]. Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I had too many votes, they couldn't steal em. And the thing about that is, Marilou Hedlund and I both won. When we counted--when the count was completed in my precinct, we both--I had won. The papers came out, "Marilou Hedlund, First Woman Alderman, Anna Langford claims victory waiting a recount." Honey, I got on the--it's not gonna work. When the poles closed I had won when the poles closed Marilou Hedlund had won, both of us won. I'm not awaiting anything, but being sworn in as an alderman. And that ended that and from then on they gave us credit for both being on. Speaker 1: And you stayed in the city council? Speaker 2: I was there for four years and then--I'm trying to think of--Eloise Barton was elected the next two terms. She served for the eight years, and I went back in with Harold [Washington] in '83' [1983], but I ran each time, but each time they out voted me. Speaker 1: Tell me what it's like on the politician's side. What is it like in a campaign? Speaker 2: I campaigned--the year that I won [1971], I spent $8,000. I had people. I had gang kids who had never done anything but try to kill each other, I had every gang in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] working in my campaign. That's the first time they'd ever been under the same roof together. Lot of people don't realize that. One of the white pastors who supported me, his bodyguard for the day was David Barksdale who was head of the Disciples. There never was another gang war in Englewood after that. It ended the gang war, really. It was the first time that some of them had ever been on the side of any important victory, and it meant a whole lot to them, and a lot of them stayed in my campaign, after that they came and worked in my campaign, and worked in the office for me. Speaker 1: And this was during the [Mayor] Harold [Washington] years? Speaker 2: Seventy-one. Speaker 1: Seventy-one, oh, early? Speaker 2: It was early, yeah. Story_ID: 68808 Speaker 1: So the Council Wars, after the transition took place and all like that, what was it like in the council chambers? Speaker 2: I was the only woman that was with his white group. He had--before every meeting we would meet and decide--he would decide what was important on the agenda and what he would want us to, you know, to really carry it for him and everything, and that was it, I was just--I was one of his chief persons in the council. Speaker 1: Was it as much tension in the city council as it appeared in media-wise? Speaker 2: I guess you say so, but what made it easy for me was I started taking peanuts and candy and they were all lined--they all started coming--if you ever saw Harold chewing (unclear), that was when he was chewing my candy or peanuts and just got so I just kept buying more and all--everybody was nice to me. I had no problems with anybody in the council. Story_ID: 68809 Speaker 1: [Mayor] Harold Washington's first term was a struggle, struggle, struggle-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --And it lessened after the redistricting. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Would you tell me about that? Speaker 2: That's the whole story. Speaker 1: That is? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was very hard for him to get anything through the council because he didn't have enough votes. Lot of--a lot of good legislation was lost. Speaker 1: And that was a factor in his victory for the second-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Term? Were you in the council during his second term? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. I just came out in '91' [1991]. In fact, I'm the one who put [HM Eugene] Gene Sawyer's name in the nomination. Speaker 1: Right, and then that--did anybody expect that schism that happened right after Harold Washington died [1987]? Speaker 2: I don't know. All I know is the alderman who filed the suit from '89' [1989] are the ones responsible for the fifth floor changing [the Mayor's office in Chicago is located on the fifth floor of City Hall]. If they had just allowed Gene Sawyer to stay in office until the next general election, we could still have the fifth floor, because he had told the, what's his name that ran, the kid that--the young fellow that ran against him? Speaker 1: Tim? [Timothy C. Evans] Speaker 2: Tim. That if he would just support him for this--at this election, that he would support Tim Evans for the next election. He wouldn't do it. So Tim ran and both of them lost, and that's how the fifth floor went over. If they had just not called for that election, in '89 [1989]. Dorothy Tillman and what's her name from the West Side that died and several others who are still in office brought that suit, and of course, their votes canceled--each one canceled the other one out and [Richard M.] Daly got in. Speaker 1: Well, was it that Tim Evans segment thought he was the anointed one? Speaker 2: To me it's the biggest farcical thing that ever happened to me in the history of politics in Chicago, it was a farse. He's still, right now, he's chief judge, but it was not--he was not anointed and it was--there was a lot of something that went into that that I don't want to discuss. I'm glad that he has his position. I'm just sorry that the whole thing caused us to lose the fifth floor, it shouldn't have. It could have been worked out in a much more amicable manner. Story_ID: 68810 Speaker 1: The African American community in Chicago [Illinois] lost a lot of political currency after that? Speaker 2: Well, the night of the election, when I got home, my phone--I have four phones in my house, every one of them I had to take off the hook. They called me every kind of dead B-I-T-C-H that you could think of. For two years after that I had two police officers in the City of Chicago assigned to me. And everywhere I went one of them was with me until I went right up the border. They'd go with me to the border when I was going to Michigan and then they'd leave me. The only time they weren't with me is when I was in the bathroom, they'd be standing outside. That was very bitter to me. It's been a very, very--and one of the reasons why I said I'd never go through it again, why I never ran again. It was a--a lot of people now had said they really were blinded to what was going on and really were conned about the whole situation. But that doesn't help what happened, it happened, and as I said, it was a very bitter experience for me. Because the truth of the matter is there is no other person--if he hadn't been elected that night, it was a done deal for--the then head of the Democratic Party [George W.] Dunne had said it would be one of the Polish alderman if they put it over until that following Friday, which is what they kept asking to do. And one, the alderman from the mayor's ward, afterwards, he did not vote. And I asked him "Why didn't you vote," he said, well he had been told not to vote unless it was a tie, and if there was a tie, he was to vote for [HM Eugene] Gene Sawyer, because he would be the easier one to beat in the next election. You heard it from me. You never heard it before, but that was it, that was it. Sorry time for me in the history politics in Chicago. Speaker 1: Do you think Chicago can ever bring up another Harold Washington? Speaker 2: I'll never see it. I won't see a black mayor in Chicago. I see now where the Latinos are really coming together as a political force. Your next mayor might be a Latino. It'll be a Latino before it'll be another black. Story_ID: 68811 Speaker 1: Is it anything else about the political scene in Chicago [Illinois] that I didn't ask you that I should have? Speaker 2: Oh, I can't remember. It's been such--to me as I said it's been such an experience and I had even said that I would never get involved in anything again, and the rest of my years are mine to enjoy and this that and the other, and then I heard Cliff Kelley on this morning's program and I have--I've been working with that group. I'll be out to the Wednesday night meeting out at [HM] Reverend [Albert Richard] Sampson's church. And it was such an interesting thing, when I called in this morning, and talked, one of the young ladies said "I worked with you in the community center when we you were alderman." I said it just does keeps on happening, just keeps on happening. That I'll be work--trying to help her, and she was working with me in my community center. Speaker 1: What was the topic of discussion, tell us for our tape today on Cliff Kelley? Speaker 2: Well, these two women worked for the water reclamation department, one of them for eighteen years and the other one, I think, sometime less than that, but for a long period of time. And they had constantly been met with all kind of harassment, sexual and so forth. They worked there for five years and when they filed a suit, they were dismissed. They had taken their case all the way to the Supreme Court, they have lost, excepting that they were told that they could work, but they would not be given any back pay. They were out of work for years. And when they went back to work, they were not given any back pay at all, but they're on salary. They still are not given any kind of consideration. They're still being harassed so that the women--the men are actually starting a movement for obtaining rights-women's rights, obtaining women's rights. Interesting that after I hung up after calling saying, you know that I would be supportive, not as a lawyer, because they already have a lawyer, but I would be working with them, I received a call from a women who said the same thing had happened to her at Provident Hospital [of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], same kind of situation in Provident Hospital. I received a call from a man who said the same thing was happening in the Streets and Sanitation to the women involved. It apparently, there is a very serious anti-black women situation in Chicago because where these women work there are white women who have had actually no problems whatsoever. So here I go again, retired, I guess not. Speaker 1: How would you characterize your political career in Chicago [Illinois] now that you're so called "retired?" Speaker 2: Pretty hectic, pretty hectic. I was appointed by [HM] Mayor [Eugene] Sawyer. I had one of the best committees, one of the most important committees in the city council when I was there. I was in charge of all the offices who got what and who got which and so forth and had some very unpleasant experiences with one of the other women alderman whose name I will not call, who took over the--took over the office, the big office that was being used by the cable alderman, took it over, went in there and put in about $3,000 worth of equipment, including a direct line to her home, door locked, and at the time I went and got the Sergeant of Arms. I had tried to contact her, went and got the Sergeant of Arms and opened up the door, and there it was, all this equipment in there. Of course it was taken out, the office was turned back over to the cable, and she brought about thirty people from her office to demonstrate against me and I had gone to the South Side office, and she brought em out to my south side office and had the demonstration against me. But we're okay (unclear). I've decided in my time of life, I love everybody. Whatever's happened, if anybody's done anything to me, I forgive em. I'm blessed to have lived as long as I have. I'm the only on in my generation or generation older who's alive. I have no relatives other than my son [Lawrence Langford] and my grandchildren and nieces and nephews of my brothers--my brother and sister, that's it. I said God left me here for something, and I'm gonna try to use it in a positive manner. Speaker 1: Well, you come from good genes, you certainly look terrific. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 68812 Speaker 1: What would you like for your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Just possibly as I have found that I've inspired women to go into law, I've inspired people to not let what happened in their past to keep them from going forward in a positive manner, and I've been an inspiration to my son [Lawrence Langford] and to my grandchildren, that's it. Speaker 1: One question, they have this movement, or they have had, they being state senators and they're trying to get this law where expunge, records could be expunged, what do you think of that? Speaker 2: It depends on the, I think, the seriousness of the crime that was committed. You can still do that for misdemeanors. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Yes. If you have no previous record and previous convictions and you have a misdemeanor, you can have it expunged. But if you have a previous felony convictions of any kind, you can't expunge your record. I think it's fair. I think people have a right to know. I don't think they should actually be forever, you know, put in a category of criminals if they've served their time, they should be given consideration. But there're just some--some crimes that I think people should know about. Speaker 1: Well, you have certainly been very generous in sharing yourself. Is there any area, significant area, that I missed? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: Thank you so much Speaker 2: Thank you. It's been a pleasure. I'm very happy to have been a part of it. Speaker 1: Thank you. I forgot to say that this interview is being conducted at The HistoryMakers' office, 1900 South Michigan in Chicago. Speaker 2: And I'm very flattered to be considered a HistoryMaker. Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 68813 Speaker 1: What do you think of HistoryMakers? Speaker 2: I think it's wonderful. I think it's great. We have lost so much of our history until it's just wonderful that this was even thought of at this late date, you know, to have it to--I just think it's wonderful, I do. I think it's wonderful. Speaker 1: It seems to be everybody's pretty struck by it-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah. Speaker 1: --The dynamics of being made aware of, not only your own history, but the history of others. Speaker 2: There's a book that was put out, Social Science--what is it, Social Science Books, what is it in school? Isn't there a social science? Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Social studies. Speaker 2: Social studies, that's what it is, social studies. Speaker 1: Which is under social science. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And they have a picture of me as an alderman. This was years and years ago when I was first elected and some of my background and--I got calls from people out in California who--they were using the book out there and how some of them had some of the same experience and so forth and so on. That was something that--I don't even know where that book is but it's up in the office someplace probably, cause Alderman [Shirley] Coleman has my office-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --That I used both for my aldermanic and my law office were both--I bought the building and the one where (unclear)--where I completely rehabbed it so. So you know it had the fear of falling through the floor. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Well, it's been a pleasure and I really enjoyed it, and I know she has too. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: I really appreciate you going to-- Speaker 2: You know she and I belong to a travel club and we had been in this travel club for--how many years, a couple of years before--I don't know how it came up but we started talking, her son and my son both belong to a motorcycle club for years (laughs)..