 Story_ID: 638634 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you state your name and spell it for me please? Speaker 2: William Alexander Lawson [HistoryMaker Reverend Bill Lawson]. W-I-L-L-I-A-M, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R, L-A-W-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: June 28th, 1928. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview? Speaker 2: This is my home in Houston [Texas]. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a pastor, retired. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: This is May 11th, 2010. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 638635 Speaker 1: Reverend Lawson [HistoryMaker Reverend Bill Lawson], tell me what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. When my wife [Audrey Hoffman Lawson] and I first met, it was at the end of a long correspondence. She was a student at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], I had just graduated from Tennessee State. One of the girls in the dormitory told her that I had graduated, had been the president of the student council, and that I had--that I was now in seminary [Central Baptist Theological Seminary] in Kansas City [sic. Shawnee, Kansas]. So she said, "Well he's interesting. I, I think I'd like to write to him," and they dared her to. Well she is also a St. Louis [Missouri] girl and you don't dare St. Louis girls. So she wrote me a letter and I wrote back having no way of knowing who this woman was. And she wrote again and I wrote back. This was the beginning of two years of letters. She stopped and, and, and at a point I started again and asked her to start writing and learned that she was from St. Louis. I thought she was from Tennessee. She learned that I was from St. Louis, I thought--she thought I was from Kansas and so I went to St. Louis to visit her. This was after months and months of letters. And the first time I ever saw her she was wearing a bright red corduroy suit. So I nicknamed her Little Red. And since that time, virtually every gift that, that we have given to each other has red somehow involved. This ring has rubies in it. Her rings have rubies in them. So my favorite color is red. Speaker 1: All right. What about your favorite food? Speaker 2: Well I'm a beef man. My doctor doesn't think I should be, but I like steaks. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No I don't. I think that probably I would think of someplace close to us. I, I would like San Antonio [Texas], I would like New Orleans [Louisiana]. I've been to Hawaii and I've been to Mexico, but I really think that my favorite would be close to home and, and where everybody speaks English. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: Probably it would be, it is what it is. Story_ID: 638636 Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about your family. And I wanna start with your mother. Can you tell me your mother's name and where she was born and when she was born if you know? Speaker 2: Her name was Clarisse Riggs Lawson [Clarisse Riggs Cade]. Riggs her maiden name, Lawson her married name. Clarisse, C-L-A-R-I-S-S-E, and Lawson, of course, you know. She was born in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. She was born in 1905. She moved to St. Louis [Missouri] when she was probably twenty or twenty-five years old. And I will know very little about my family. My father [William Lawson] and my mother were divorced when I was two and I had little or no contact with him after that. I was an only child. She was one of two, two children. She, she had a sister [Lucille Riggs] and so there was not a very large family among us anyway. So that tells you something about her. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. She came out of Oklahoma where, where there was still a good deal of racial segregation. And somehow her mother and father thought that if she co- if they could get out of the South then they wouldn't face racial segregation. So they moved from Oklahoma to Missouri, from Oklahoma City to St. Louis and discovered that in St. Louis they would have the same barriers that they had in Oklahoma. My grandfather worked on the railroad, though he stayed in St. Louis being a railroader. My grandmother was a homemaker, she stayed at home and died early of diabetes, she was in her fifties when she died. So much of my life I grew up without either a father or a grandmother. That tells you at least a little bit about me. Speaker 1: Tell me your, your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Her name was Virginia Riggs, R-I-G-G-S. Speaker 1: And what about your grandfather? Speaker 2: His name was Charles Riggs. Speaker 1: Did you spend any time with your grandfather? Speaker 2: Yes, as a matter of fact we lived in the house with him. When my father and my mother divorced, she moved back into the house with our grandfather. And so I grew up in that house. Speaker 1: Tell me about your relationship with your grandfather? Speaker 2: It was a good close relationship. Now you'll need to understand this was back in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] and grandfathers were not very affable at that time, they were stern fellows, and he was like that. He loved us and, and, and we knew that he loved us, but he was not an I love you type or hugging type, but he was a person who, who provided for his family very well. As I say, his wife was a homemaker because he thought that a wife ought to be at home taking care of the children. My mother was grown but I was there and my, my aunt's children were there. So my grandfather was the kind of person who loved you but didn't show it. Speaker 1: I see. And what about your relationship with your grandmother? Speaker 2: I had very little relationship with her. She died when I was quite young and so, so my memories of her are fairly vague. Story_ID: 638637 Speaker 1: Now back to your mother [Clarisse Riggs Cade]. Talk to me about what type of mother she was and your relationship with her and if you think you have any characteristics that you got from her? Speaker 2: My mother was a hugging type and she reared me without a husband until I was twelve, then she married my stepfather when I was twelve. But during those first twelve years she gave me all that you could give a child. These were--these were the years of the Great Depression, so everybody was, was fairly well, you know, poor at that time. But she was a woman who, who loved me, who took good care of me. When she married my stepfather when I was twelve, he had two children, a boy [Walter Cade, Jr.] and a girl [Cathryn Cade Cruitt]. So now I had two siblings and my mother and my father both, both refused to let me call them step. I didn't have a stepbrother or stepsister. We were all brothers and sisters. My mother was a strong family type and she was the kind of person who believed that whatever your family was, that, that they should be part of one community. Speaker 1: What about your mother's education? Speaker 2: She did not have very much education. She did graduate from high school. She worked for an insurance company and she was kind of a stenographer or secretary. But, but she did not have that much education. At that time, once again, you're talking about the years of, of the Great Depression and World War II [WWII]. And at that time, a high school education was just about as much as most black people had. There were a fortunate few who would go on to college and so my mother had, had that high school education. Otherwise, she struggled to make ends meet. Speaker 1: The home that you lived in with your [maternal] grandparents [Virginia Riggs and Charles Riggs], did your grandparents own the home? Speaker 2: Yes they did. Speaker 1: Do you know how they acquired the land? Speaker 2: The only thing that I can say is that probably my grandfather bought it from his, from his work on the railroad and it was a three story house. My aunt [Lucille Riggs] stayed on the second floor with all of her children. My grandparents stayed on the first floor, he remarried, and, and my mother and I stayed on the third floor, which was kind of an attic. Speaker 1: Can you tell me your stepfather's name? Speaker 2: Walter Cade, C-A-D-E, Walter Cade [Walter Cade, Sr.]. Speaker 1: And your grandfather's second wife, what was her first name? Speaker 2: Essie Boyd Riggs [Essie Riggs]. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any knowledge of your great-grandparents? Speaker 2: No, not at all. Speaker 1: Not even their names? Speaker 2: Not even their names. Speaker 1: Okay. And your dad [William Lawson], you said you don't have much information. So you don't know his parents at, at all? Speaker 2: I don't know his parents at all. He was fortunate enough to, to get a college education and he became a teacher. Ultimately, he, he became a principal in Holly Springs, Mississippi, which was his home. But I don't know very much about him other than that. Story_ID: 638638 Speaker 1: Now your childhood, let's, let's use your first twelve years. And at this time you're living in St. Louis [Missouri] at your [maternal] grandparents' [Virginia Riggs and Charles Riggs] house with your, your cousins. Tell me what was it like living in a household with your cousins and your grandparents? Say during the holidays or even everyday life, what was it like? Speaker 2: Well you're asking an old man to, to, to try to remember a lot of things that happened a long time ago. But the family was close. My, my mother [Clarisse Riggs Cade] and my si- and my mother's sister [Lucille Riggs], and my grandparents and her nieces and nephews, they were all very close. We didn't have gala days like homecomings, but we did get together on, on special occasions, not just Thanksgiving, Easter, but perhaps every Sunday or every couple of Sundays. So family closeness was a part of us. There are many things that I can't remember such as, such as the special occasions, but I do remember us getting together to eat. Speaker 1: So the whole family had Sunday dinner? Speaker 2: Not always Sunday dinner. My, my aunt and her children would eat together and my mother and I would eat together, of course my grandfather would eat. But there were, but there were many times, I'd say every three or four weekends that all of us would get together. Speaker 1: Now during that same time, tell me about religion in your household? Speaker 2: Religion was fairly tame when I was growing up. My mother was a nominal Methodist, not a very active Methodist. My grandfather didn't go to church at all. Of course as I've told you, I don't know much about my grandmother. My aunt and her children were Catholic and they were like my mother, nominal Catholics, they went to church sometime. When my mother remarried, she and Walter Cade [Walter Cade, Sr.], she married to a man who was a very strong and very active Baptist, which is how I happen to be a Baptist. And he was a deacon in the Baptist church. So when we moved from St. Louis to Kansas City [Kansas] and she had remarried him, all of us went to church and we went to church several times per Sunday. But starting from nominal relationship with churches, we now became active in the church in Kansas City. Story_ID: 638639 Speaker 1: Your community, I'd like you, and we're still talking about the first twelve years, about the community in which you lived [in St. Louis, Missouri]. Do you remember was this in a city or was it rural, and do you remember any of your neighbors and friends that you played with? Speaker 2: It was--it, it, it was inner city. It was I guess probably in what blacks would call then a middle class neighborhood. We're living with a grandfather [Lawson's maternal grandfather, Charles Riggs] who has a railroad job and that's, that's fairly big business at that time. So we lived in a fairly nice neighborhood for, for the 1930s, and, and, and we lived on a street where virtually everybody knew everybody. So I grew up being loved by, being disciplined by people in the neighborhood. The names have long since escaped me, but I can remember the Steeles [ph.] and the Thompsons [ph.], and, and I can recall that all of the children fairly well went to school together, we played together, and we got in trouble together and we got disciplined together. But, but it was a fairly close neighborhood. Speaker 1: If you could or do you think that you can give me a tour of a square block around your home, were there stores, were the store owners black or white? And do you remember any of the street names? Speaker 2: Well first of all our neighborhood was, as I say, fairly close. We were between Cote Brilliante [Avenue] and Al- and--Aldine [Avenue], between Cora [Avenue] and Taylor [Avenue], that--that's the square block. In that area, there were likewise people who knew each other. And at that time, you didn't have very much contact with, with people in, in the other block. Your block sort- sort of represented a community and so we did get a chance to know each other in that block. As children, of course, we would get around to Cote Brilliante or to, or to Aldine or to Cora or to Taylor and so we had some contacts with them. But most of our contacts were with those families in the block on Garfield [Avenue], that's where I lived, Garfield between Cote Brilliante and Aldine. You asked about store owners. Virtually all of the store owners at that time were white or Jewish. I don't recall a single black store owner in our neighborhood. There probably were, I just don't remember them. Speaker 1: What were--you said your grandfather worked on the railroad. Do you remember any of the other professions of the people who lived on your block, the parents of your friends? Speaker 2: Well, I'm trying to remember what were some of those. Mr. Steele was a teacher. His wife lived at home. Mrs. Thompson worked in houses. She was a housecleaner, maid. Some of the others I cannot remember. My grandfather was what--was the only one that I can recall working on, on the railroad. But all of the men had something. And for the most part, these were whole families. You didn't have very, very many single parent families and this goes back to a time when, when divorce was, was just sort of, sort of the thing that you shouldn't do. So all these families that I knew about were families where, where the daddy was in the home, and where the mother was generally a homemaker. There weren't a whole lot of double jobs. But this fairly well characterized my neighborhood. Story_ID: 638640 Speaker 1: Now let's talk about school, and we're still talking about up to twelve years (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The first twelve years. Speaker 1: --okay, and tell me the name of the school that you attended, elementary school? Speaker 2: I think it was Douglass Elementary School [Frederick Douglass Elementary School, Webster Groves, Missouri], I'm not positive, but I think it was Douglass Elementary School. I went to Northeast Junior High School [Kansas City, Kansas], what we would now call middle school, and I went to Sumner High School [Sumner High School; Sumner Academy of Arts and Science, Kansas City, Kansas]. So those, those are the schools that I can remember. I'm al- I'm almost sure that the elementary school was Douglass. Speaker 1: Do you remember anything about school, maybe a teacher that might have been encouraging to you? Did you--what subjects were your favorite subjects? Speaker 2: We're still, still looking back seventy years. And I saw 'Saturday Night Live' broadcast this past Saturday night and Betty White was the host. Now she's the oldest person ever to host 'Saturday Night Live' and she was most delightful. What encouraged me most was that she was eighty-eight years old, I'm eighty-two. So, so that made a great deal of difference. She may have much better memories then I do, but yes I do know some teachers who did encourage me. In, in elementary school there was a teacher named Juanita Wallace [ph.] and she was a nice little plump lady and she was very jolly, and, and I can't remember exactly what she taught. In, in elementary school I'm not sure that we had subjects so much, but she was, she was a teacher who did encourage me. I was a child without a daddy and very easily felt that I was rejected and she made me feel that I was somebody. That, that made a difference. In middle school or junior high school, there was a biology teacher named Taylor, his first name I don't remember. He was E.A., that's all we ever remember, E.A. Taylor. And, and as a biology teacher he first awakened a sense of research and study in me, 'cause we had to, to deal with the facts and figures about all these animals and, and he was, he was extremely encouraging to me--he stimulated me to want to learn. In high school, I had a number of teachers who encouraged me. There was a geometry teacher whose name I can't remember right now, but she, likewise, would tell me that--that--that if I wanted to be president, I could be president. And, and both of us realized that this was semi-joke, but, but she was serious about it. And I can recall that--that the principal there was a man--a man named Collins and once again you always used initials, he was T.C. Collins [ph.]. He was a stern and yet, yet I thought a loving principal. He knew all the students who were there. So these--some of the people that I can remember. And I go back to, to, to Betty White, I wish I had her quickness of mind. Speaker 1: In elementary school, what type of student were you? Speaker 2: I think I was an average student. I may have--I may have been--I may have been above average. I became a good student when I be- when I ca- when I went to junior high school because of the, the encouragement that some of these teachers gave me. I think I was an excellent student in high school. But something happens to black boys, and maybe it happens to all boys. A time comes when it's not cool to be the valedictorian or be salutatorian. Would it be far better if, if you just--if you just could be--could be, be relaxed and, and kind of be part of the gang. So while I was an excellent student in high school, when I got to college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] I was more average. Speaker 1: Were there any extracurricular activities in elementary school? Speaker 2: There were probably were but I couldn't tell you what they were. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember any of your childhood friends, their names? Speaker 2: Yes I can, I can remember Donald Sutton [ph.]. And I wish that I, I wish that I could come up with, with more names, but I, I can remember Irvin Collins [ph.] and I think I probably can remember mostly my own family, Tommy Banks [ph.], folks like that. But as I go back to the 1930s, the memories are fairly dim. Story_ID: 638641 Speaker 1: You talked about the fact that this was during the Depression [Great Depression] and did you really have a sense about the Depression or did you know that you were poor? Speaker 2: Not really. I was born in 1928 and the--and the, the Depression hit in 1929, so I grew up in it. Not, not understanding what it meant as I moved toward my twelfth year, and as I recall World War II [WWII] broke out just about my twelfth year. And, and at that time, we were comfortable, we were well sheltered, well taken care of, and so the economic woes of the nation were not something that we knew about too much. As I look back on it, it, it, it seems miraculous that people of, of minority and people who were low income could have that, that kind of success. We could own a house, we could own a car. We could not take vacations, but at least go down--go down to Union Station [St. Louis Union Station, St. Louis, Missouri] to watch trains. So, so we had a number of benefits without knowing that, that we were in time of great economic stress. Speaker 1: If you were to think about a sound, a sight or a smell that would take you back to that time, what would they be? Speaker 2: I guess the sound would be trains. We were fairly close to, to a railroad track, and I, I became accustomed to having trains going near the house and hearing them. Sights, maybe what we call lightning bugs and they were--they were summer creatures which I don't see in Texas at all. But I think that--that--that kind of so- that kind of sight I would remember. Smell, I couldn't tell you. Story_ID: 638642 Speaker 1: Let's move on to your junior high or middle school days, and tell me once again the name of the middle school or junior high school? Speaker 2: Northeast Junior High School. Speaker 1: Now this was, was this in Kansas City [Kansas] or in Missouri? Speaker 2: This was in Kansas City. When I came to Kansas City I had just come out of--I just come out of elementary school [Frederick Douglass Elementary School, Webster Groves, Missouri]. Speaker 1: And so--well we'll figure out the year 'cause you'll say, you're not sure of the year, but you were about twelve going to thirteen (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was about twelve, yeah. And this--this probably would've been 1940. Speaker 1: Okay. So tell me about, about this junior high school? Speaker 2: It was maybe between a half mile and a mile away and there was not much, much thing like a school bus and so we walked. And part of our friendships were, were, were established during those long walks to Northeast. I didn't realize at that time that half a mile was not that far. It seemed like a long walk. But I, I can remember going to school and being in those different classes. As I recall we had five classes per day, and this was a new experience for me, moving from room to room, and from teacher to teacher. But I think, likewise, while I was in junior high school I did learn to appreciate the differenta- the differencion- differentiation in, in age. The seventh grade students fairly well hung around with seventh grade students and so on down, eighth and ninth grade students. Speaker 1: Okay. At that time, were there any extracurricular activities, sports maybe? Speaker 2: I played basketball and started learning something about soccer, very little, but started learning something about soccer. But mostly basketball and soccer. I enjoyed going to football games. Northeast Junior High School didn't have much of a football team, so we would go to Sumner [Sumner High School; Sumner Academy of Arts and Science, Kansas City, Kansas] games. But I did enjoy going to football games. I obviously enjoyed going to basketball games. Story_ID: 638643 Speaker 1: And were there any other activities that you enjoyed with your friends in this, this new neighborhood? Maybe explain to me about the neighborhood, what this neighborhood looked like in comparison to the one that you previously lived in? Speaker 2: The neighborhood where the school was? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. No, where you lived in Kansas City [Kansas], the neighborhood in which you lived? Speaker 2: Oh in Kansas City. It was not--it was a little bit lower than middle class. My stepfather [Walter Cade, Sr.] was, was a poor man. Not poor in the sense of being threadbare, but ha- he was a low income man. He worked as a servant in a house. He was chauffeur and cook, and he maintained the office so that's, that's pretty much what he was. He, like my [maternal] grandfather [Charles Riggs], believed that the wife needed to stay at home and rear children. So my mother [Clarisse Riggs Cade] was no longer a secretary or a stenographer. She was home with us. And now she had these three children. So that neighborhood was, was a less affluent neighborhood if, if you can put it that way. But there were many people who were renters. As I recall my dad was a renter. I, I don't think we owned the house in which we lived. Speaker 1: Now you have a new experience going from--well even though you had your cousins in your grandfather's home [in St. Louis, Missouri], you seemed to have separate living quarters so you were separated. Now you're living with two siblings, tell me about the experience for you now having a brother [Walter Cade, Jr.] and a sister [Cathryn Cade Cruitt]? Speaker 2: We had to adjust. They were Cades and I was a Lawson, and when we first got together there was a separation in the family. My mother and my dad forced a, a unity and, and, and, and, and they simply--they simply would not allow me to be a Lawson and for the other children to be Cades, we were now all together. I can keep my name and, and, and they could keep their names, but we were siblings. So I think that--that one of the greatest things in my life was that--was that my mother and father, mother and stepfather--my mother and father were family types and, and they wanted to see to it that--that as a family we, we were a close community. Story_ID: 638644 Speaker 1: Tell me the names of your brothers and sister--brother and sister? Speaker 2: My brother was Walter [Walter Cade, Jr.]. At the time that I was twelve, he was nine. And my sister was Cathryn [Cathryn Cade Cruitt], C-A-T-H-R-Y-N, Cathryn, and she was seven. Speaker 1: So you were the big brother? Speaker 2: I was the big brother. Speaker 1: So besides the fact your mother [Clarisse Riggs Cade] and father [Lawson's stepfather, Walter Cade, Sr.] really wanted a family unit, how did you get along with them and since you were the big brother, did they look up to you and were you a role model for them? Speaker 2: Originally no. I was simply a, a kind of addition to their family and--and they were kind of an, an addition to mine. I had been an only child and didn't realize that I had privileges that most multi-family groups didn't have or most multi-sibling families didn't have. So now I had to be able to share with this brother and sister. So our initial contact was more tense. But once again because of motherly and fatherly pressure, we did get a chance to get together. We had to eat together, but we had to go to school together even though they went to one school and I went to another. We had to, to play together and so ultimately I did become part of the family and probably, probably they did look up to me. I didn't think of it that way then. Story_ID: 638645 Speaker 1: Now there was a, a change you alluded to earlier in being a moderate Methodist to now going to church full time, all the time. Talk to me about that religious experience once you got to Kansas City [Kansas]? Speaker 2: I'm twelve years old living in Kansas City and going with my dad [Lawson's stepfather, Walter Cade, Sr.] to church constantly and my mother [Clarisse Riggs Cade] going likewise so that she could no longer be a nominal Methodist. In going to church I heard so much about the love of God and about the, the redeeming action of Jesus Christ, so, so by the time I was thirteen I was converted and baptized. And now I became not just a nominal Baptist, I was a real Baptist. Speaker 1: And, and can you explain the experience of wanting to be baptized or was this something that was expected, or was this something that your inner self desired? Speaker 2: Let me answer that in two ways. It, it was not a psychic experience. I didn't have visions or things of that sort. But, but it was a real experience. I really felt as though this God loved me. The God of the Methodist and the Catholic church was just--was just part of a ceremony and I didn't see him as personal. In this Baptist church because of the preaching of the preacher and because of the teaching of Sunday school teachers and, and, and because of the faith of my father, I, I really felt pretty much the same way I felt in St. Louis [Missouri] with those teachers who would encourage me. I felt as though I could be somebody and, and all I needed to do was to surrender to this God and let him direct my life, and I'm thirteen years old, fourteen years old. And so, these are very real experiences, but not charismatic experiences. Speaker 1: Now this is a Baptist church, is it Southern Baptist, Missionary Baptist or it's just Baptist? What was the philosophy of this church if you know? Speaker 2: It probably would have been called Missionary Baptist. It was not Southern Baptist at that time--that time with the racial separation you could not be Southern Baptist. But we were part of the National Baptist Convention, Incorporated [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.]. Now you know that there are three--there are three national Baptist conventions, we were part of the largest one. And so I guess we could've been called Missionary Baptist, but our church was not called Missionary Baptist, it was simply called Eighth Street Baptist Church [Kansas City, Kansas]. Story_ID: 638646 Speaker 1: And tell me the philosophy of the church, what does that mean to be Baptist? Speaker 2: Among other things, it means that you're congregationally independent. The Methodist church has bishops. The Catholic church has bishops, cardinals, a pope-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: So in, in the Baptist church each, each congregation is, is, is it's own government. And the pastor depending on his, his power and, and his sense of, of, of emperorship, and there's a lot of that--but the pastor became the director of the congregation. But the congregational vote could call him or could fire him. And once he was there, he fairly well dir- he fairly well directed the church's decisions. But the Baptist theology generally is that this is a congregationally governed church. Speaker 1: I see. Now you talked about there are three national conventions, can you tell me the other two? Speaker 2: The oth- the other is the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention of America, Incorporated] and this is not incorporated [sic.]. The third is called the Progressive Baptist Convention [Progressive National Baptist Convention, Inc.] and--and it was an outgrowth of the National Baptist Convention back in the days of civil rights beginning with, with Rosa Parks and then ultimately moving on through Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. There, there was a division of churches. There were many Baptist churches that did not accept Dr. King. J. Edgar Hoover had said that he was a communist and there were many Baptists who believed that. J.H. Jackson [Joseph H. Jackson] who was the president of the National Baptist Convention, Incorporated [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.], where my dad [Lawson's stepfather, Walter Cade, Sr.] belonged, was a fairly close friend of Hoover. So he believed that--that King was a Communist; therefore, he was--he was persona non grata among many of the Baptist, if not most of the Baptist. So there were--there were a number of supporters of King and of the nonviolent protest movement. And they could not accept the National Baptist barrier against the Civil Rights Movement and King. They broke off and they formed the Progressive Baptist Convention. Speaker 1: Now going to church, what el- what other activities in church did you belong to, if any? Speaker 2: I was the young person, so belonged to, to the youth movements in the church. I was part of some choirs. I had got a job as a church janitor. So my activities in the church were partly organizational like singing in the choir and partly employer-employee relationship as janitor. Story_ID: 638647 Speaker 1: Now you're in junior high school [Northeast Junior High School, Kansas City, Kansas] and you played basketball. Are there any other organizations that you belonged to outside of the church, like maybe the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] or anything of that nature? Speaker 2: That's an interesting question. In 1942, '43 [1943], when I was in junior high school I had wanted to join the Boy Scouts. There were Boy Scout troops in the white churches. And they wore uniforms and they went to camp, and I wanted very much to be a Boy Scout. I couldn't be a Boy Scout for obvious reasons. And so I, I didn't get to be a Boy Scout. Then when we established Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church [Houston, Texas] in 1962, I was determined that we would have a Boy Scout troop. Now the Boy Scout troop at Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church is the largest in the city. It has produced almost two hundred Eagle Scouts and so from a time when I couldn't be a scout to a time when now we got a premier scout troop may be a, a journey, but the reason for the premier scout troop here is because I couldn't be a Boy Scout when I was in junior high school. I was a part of, of some of the neighborhood youth groups and obviously a part of the--of the church youth groups. But the neighborhood youth groups were usually little clubs and we would get together and do things at Halloween or Christmas or some such thing as that. We didn't even meet regularly, it wasn't a weekly meeting, but we would get together from time to time and we would simply have a party and decorate for the party. And then--and then we'd get together for the next holiday or for the next important thing. Speaker 1: And how were your grades now in junior high school, you're getting ready to go to high school [Sumner High School; Sumner Academy of Arts and Science, Kansas City, Kansas]? Speaker 2: My grades were well above average in junior high school. I'm coming from, from a school system in St. Louis [Missouri] to a school system in Kansas City [Kansas], so I have to make some adjustment. I'm likewise coming from elementary school [Frederick Douglass Elementary School, Webster Groves, Missouri] to middle school or junior high school, so there's that adjustment. But I adjusted fairly quickly and was roughly a B student. I would've been an A student in high school, then I had to be cool. Speaker 1: The school systems, was there--well you talked about you, you went from a one room school to changing classes. But as far as the materials in a black school, did you see any difference as far as books and resources? Speaker 2: I see in retrospect that we were--that we were given inferior equipment and supplies. At that time, I thought that we were in good shape. We had English books, we had mathematics books and it just never occurred to me at that time that they were inferior or hand me downs. This is part of wha- what I'm saying about the black family during the Depression [Great Depression] or the war years. It was fairly close, it was close to the neighborhood and the children were always encouraged. We, we were--we were never let down because somebody said there's a depression ongoing or there's a war [World War II, WWII] going on. We simply lived in a place wh- where we were constantly encouraged, and that probably goes back to slavery. Story_ID: 638648 Speaker 1: So now moving onto high school, tell me once again the name of the high school? Speaker 2: Sumner, S-U-M-N-E-R. Speaker 1: And tell me about your experiences there? Speaker 2: At Sumner, as I say, I was--I was a very good student. I was never very much of a social student, I was a fairly private student. I was, I was a cartoonist, and I enjoyed just, just drawing pictures and sometimes they were made available to the school, most often they, they were just my pictures. I've got a--I've got a fairly unique signature that comes from the time when I was a cartoonist like Walt Disney. So I think that in a real sense much of what I did was not part of the social structure of Sumner High School [Sumner Academy of Arts and Science, Kansas City, Kansas]. But I was fairly active in--in the high school. I didn't play championship basketball, but I enjoyed playing basketball. There was a soccer team that was just getting started, but this was not at Sumner. This was at the school that, that my wife [Audrey Hoffman Lawson] went to and I can't remember the name of that. But I enjoyed sports. I enjoyed being in some of the--some of the acting things that they had, drama. But most of all I pretty well stayed at home and drew. Speaker 1: What about student government? Were you active at all or was there a school newspaper or yearbook? Speaker 2: I don't recall that there was student government and I don't recall that there was student newspaper, but yes there was a student yearbook. I think that probably at that time students, students were not very active in leadership. We were supposed to be students and so there were not strong student organizations or student activities. And if, if there was drama, then it was put together by teachers and we simply recited the parts. Or if there was some, some kind of student publication that was put together by teachers so there was not a student newspaper. Speaker 1: Well what was your favorite subject then in high school? Speaker 2: Biology. Speaker 1: Why was that? Speaker 2: Because that was the subject that first taught me research. I think that--that if--if there was any time when I became hungry for knowledge that would've been because of E.A. Taylor teaching biology at Sumner. Speaker 1: In your high school years, did you have any dreams or desires or what did you think you would become? Speaker 2: I was going to be a cartoonist. There was a man who drew for Esquire magazine, a black man. His name was E. Simms Campbell. If you didn't know he was black you couldn't tell by his drawings. But he knew my mother and he said, "Clarisse [Clarisse Riggs Cade] when Billy [HistoryMaker Reverend Bill Lawson] graduates from high school send him to, to New York [New York] and, and I'll get him--I'll get him a job drawing." So my dream in high school was to--was to draw for Esquire with E. Simms Campbell. And then when I was sixteen I began to feel the call to the ministry. I didn't understand it because I didn't have any preachers in my background. But when it finally came through to me, it was obvious that God was not going to let me be a cartoonist, that I was going to have to be a minister. I have retained from that time to this a love of art, so I still do a lot of drawing, make all the church's logos [for Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church, Houston, Texas], do a lot of things for, for, for other organizations. But, but I am primarily a minister of the gospel. Speaker 1: Did you go to your high school prom? Speaker 2: Did I go where? Speaker 1: To your high school prom, was there a prom? Speaker 2: There was a prom and no I didn't go because I didn't have a girlfriend. Story_ID: 638649 Speaker 1: Preparing to go on, did you know that you would go to college automatically or was this something that you and your family had to discuss? Speaker 2: I didn't know that I was going to college. My mother [Clarisse Riggs Cade] was, was determined that I would go. So she pushed my dad [Lawson's stepfather, Walter Cade, Sr.] to save up the money to get me to go to college. I wanted to go to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], but at Fisk you had to pay a fairly good sized tuition. And in Nashville [Tennessee] there was a school that was called Tennessee A and I State University [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College]. It isn't called that anymore. A and I meant agricultural and industrial. Right now it is simply Tennessee State University [Nashville, Tennessee]. But since I couldn't go to Fisk and, and Tennessee State provided student assistance that was--that was the college I went to and I think largely because, because my mother was determined that I would go. But I had no real aspirations when I was in high school [Sumner High School; Sumner Academy of Arts and Science, Kansas City, Kansas] to go to college. Speaker 1: So there were no teachers that tried to steer you in that direction? Speaker 2: Yes there were (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh there were? Speaker 2: There were teachers who tried to push me-- Speaker 1: Tell me--tell me--tell me about the teachers who wa- encouraged you to, to go to college? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: These are teachers you're asking me about? Speaker 2: Yes or--or anyone whether counselors or someone in your community, your pastor at your church [Eighth Street Baptist Church, Kansas City, Kansas], who were the people who encouraged you to go to college besides your mother? Speaker 1: I mentioned to you a woman named Juanita Wallace [ph.] who was my teacher in elementary school. She lived on our block. She was one who helped my mother to push me to go to college. My pastor did not have a college education so far as he was concerned whether I went to college was not so much a matter. I don't know of, of anyone in my family who would've pushed me--who would've pushed me to go to college except my mother. She was very interested in my going to college. But my father was not a lot of encouragement around me. I had--I had been told that my real father [William Lawson] had gone to college, and he was now a teacher and so this is at least part of--part of the reason why I think I wanted my mother wanted me to go, she had only gone to high school. She wanted me--to me--she wanted me to achieve as least as much as, as my father had. Story_ID: 638650 Speaker 1: And at Tennessee [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] what subject--what was your major? Speaker 2: Sociology. Speaker 1: And why was sociology your major? Speaker 2: Because I was interested in people and because I think that--that the idea of the building and the--and the nourishing of, of society was, was of great interest to me. So I'm almost sure that's how I got into sociology rather than English or math or science. Speaker 1: And at that time with your call to the ministry, did you know that eventually you would go to seminary? Speaker 2: Now that I did know. Speaker 1: You did? Speaker 2: Yes I did. I knew that if and when I graduated from college and there was never a guarantee that I could graduate, but if and when I did graduate from college, I wanted to go further than my pastor had gone and he likewise encouraged me, go on to seminary. There happened to be a seminary in Kansas City [sic. Shawnee, Kansas], so I went to Central Baptist Seminary [Central Baptist Theological Seminary] in Kansas City. Got the bachelor of divinity and the master of theology, but I think that--but I think that the reason for that was that I did want to be a good preacher rather than just a preacher. Speaker 1: Before we go on to seminary, I wanna talk more about Tennessee (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) College. Speaker 1: Um-hm. So you would be the first in your family to go to college? Speaker 2: First to go to college. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean of course your father [Lawson's biological father, William Lawson] went, but you would be the first one to graduate from college. Now talk to me about your experience at Tennessee State. Was this the first time that you're away from home? Speaker 2: First time I was away from home. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about that experience? Speaker 2: Well I think that in the first place Tennessee State taught me to rise above being cool and to love learning. And at Tennessee State I was an above average student. I was not a valedictorian type, but I was above average. I became active in, in student affairs at Tennessee State. I was part of the student council which was the student government there and ultimately became president of the student council. This is how Audrey [Lawson's wife, Audrey Hoffman Lawson] first learned about me. I'd been to Tennessee State and I had risen to be president of the student council. I was fairly active in a Greek led organization, Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], and so in college I think I blossomed. Speaker 1: What about your social, any social activities besides the so- the fraternity? Speaker 2: Fraternity. Very little. There are some factors here. One is that when I went to college I was a preacher and I was known to be a preacher. And preachers didn't dance and preachers didn't drink, and preachers didn't smoke, and et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So when I was in college I never had a girlfriend. I had dates, but never had a girlfriend and was never very close to any girl that I dated. I think there were three girls during that four years that I dated. And it was so well known that I was a preacher that I was actually protected from some things that otherwise I would've had to deal with. I was--I was a member of a fraternity and, and that was during the era of the paddle. And the brothers could very well paddle the, we were called Sphinxmen and, and we could be paddled by the brothers. But they would say, "Don't paddle Lawson [HistoryMaker Reverend Bill Lawson]. He's a preacher and don't make him drink. He's a preacher." So I think part of what happened at Tennessee State was that I was sort of set apart because I was a preacher, but also because I was going to remain virtuous. If you were a preacher you had to remain virtuous. So I didn't sneak a drink and I didn't sneak a liaison with a girl. I, I really tried to remain the clean preacher. And sometimes I was fairly frustrated by that. Why don't you beat me like you beat the other Sphinxmen? Story_ID: 638651 Speaker 1: Now you talk about the fact that you were a preacher, had you actually preached a sermon before this time? Speaker 2: Yes, but they were like junior sermons. A high school stude- student or a college student didn't, didn't get called into the pulpit to preach a full blown sermon. But there were times when they would set a little pedestal down on the floor and I could preach from, from that little pedestal. So yes I had preached, but these, these would be called junior sermons. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the first times that you were called to actually go before the congregation and do a junior sermon? Speaker 2: I had been called when I was sixteen. I graduated from high school [Sumner High School; Sumner Academy of Arts and Science, Kansas City, Kansas] when I was seventeen. So the senior year in high school I was--I was in Kansas City [Kansas] and it was known that I was a preacher. So probably the first time would've been sometime, sometime during my senior year in high school. Speaker 1: I--I'm gonna ask you, but you probably don't remember, do you remember what your first sermon was about? Speaker 2: Oh no (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I, I can--I can hardly remember what my last sermon was about. Story_ID: 638652 Speaker 1: Now you, you told me already I think about your meeting your wife, but is there more to the love story of how you met and got married? Speaker 2: There are three volumes of letters and they are in the, the den right now. And people often open those to read them. What did she write to me and what did I write to her. And I think that our--that our chief romance was those letters. I only saw her I believe three or four times before we actually got married and the fourth time would've been the wedding day. So, so our romance--our romance was almost entirely through, through correspondence. We didn't use telephones in those days. So the stamps which were three cents, five cents, seven cents, that was it. Speaker 1: So you had graduated from Tennessee [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] when you were twenty-one. That was in 1950? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And from 19--well right after Tennessee what happened then, I mean because you didn't get married until '54 [1954], so tell me what happened between 1950 and did you go right to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And 1954. Speaker 1: Yeah, did you-- Speaker 2: I went right from college to seminary (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seminary? Speaker 2: And, and I was in seminary when Audrey [Lawson's wife, Audrey Hoffman Lawson] started writing to me. Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me about Central Baptist Theological Cemetery--Seminary [Central Baptist Theological Seminary, Shawnee, Kansas], (laughter) sorry. Speaker 2: That was-- Speaker 1: That was in Kansas City [Kansas], right? Speaker 2: That was in Kansas City [sic.]. It was an American Baptist seminary [American Baptist Churches USA]--well let me back up. It was both American and Southern, they had joined together to build this seminary. Then roughly when the Civil Rights Movement began, Southern Baptist [Southern Baptist Convention] and American Baptist began to--began to experience conflict. And so the, the Southern Baptist pulled out of Central Baptist Seminary and they established over in Kansas City, Missouri another seminary which is still there called Midwestern Baptist Seminary [Midwestern Baptist Theological Seminary]. But in the seminary, I had my first contact with, with white ministers. Most of--most of the students there were white and there may have been four, five, six of us--six of us. And so my contact with Baptist at that point expanded considerably beyond what I had known as a member of the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.] and as a part of Eighth Street Baptist Church [Kansas City, Kansas]. I know--now had a much more global picture of what Baptists were. Here were foreign nations and they were in Africa and China and South America and all kinds of places. And so, so my, my first picture of a much larger Baptist world came at Central Baptist Seminary. Speaker 1: And, and I want you to expound more on what it was you were learning there, what was it preparing you for. I mean just give me some more insight on what actually goes on and what you're taught at seminary, at a Baptist seminary I would say. Speaker 2: Seminary does not necessarily prepare you for, for the pastorate. Its primary thesis or function, its goal is, is to teach you religion, the Bible, theology, homiletics, which is the structure of sermons. But most of all it, it teaches you how, how to know and, and how to interpret the Bible. As much as anything, it probably is, is preparing you to teach, rather than to preach. Most seminaries now do prepare you to be a pastor and, and they teach you sermon structure, but at Central most of what I learned was Bible. Story_ID: 638653 Speaker 1: So when I came out and came to Texas I came as a bible teacher and student chaplain. Now the pastorate was something that I wouldn't have dreamed of. When I came out of Central, I was interested in doing something religious, but I didn't know what. When I got the call to come Houston [Texas] that was my first--that was my first religious employment. Let me back up a little bit. The last two years that I was in seminary I was asked to take the pastorate of a tiny church in a tiny town, Pittsburg, Kansas. So I went down there and was there and we had forty, fifty members. And most of what I did was to come in on weekends, I'm in school all week. Come in on weekends and preach a sermon and then go back. And little by little I began to fall in love with, with that congregation, tiny congregation, mostly families all living fairly, fairly close to the church. And I wanted to do more than just preach the sermon. So after Audrey [Lawson's wife, Audrey Hoffman Lawson] and I met and I went--and I went to Pittsburg, when I left Central Baptist Seminary [Central Baptist Theological Seminary, Shawnee, Kansas], we moved to Pittsburg and lived there. So that--that was my fir- first real experience at doing something religious. Then when I came to Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] and I was asked to be student chaplain, now I've got a full time job with a salary doing something religious. Story_ID: 638654 Speaker 1: So what year do you finish your master's and bachelor of divinity? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five [1955]. At this time Audrey [Audrey Hoffman Lawson] and I are married and we live in the seminary dormitory [at Central Baptist Theological Seminary, Shawnee, Kansas] for that first year. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Now 1955, civil rights is starting to heat up a little bit, things are going on. Claudette Colvin and the bus rides and Rosa Parks comes right behind that, what's going on? You, your, you live in Pittsburg [Kansas] until, until what--until '55 [1955]? Speaker 1: Until '55 [1955]. Speaker 2: And then you move where? Speaker 1: (Cough) Move to Houston [Texas]-- Speaker 2: Houston, okay. Speaker 1: --and came to Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 2: Tell me about the civil rights time in Houston at that time. Were you involved at all? Speaker 1: Not originally. I was Baptist and fairly well Southern Baptist [Southern Baptist Convention] more than I was National Baptist [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.]. I was National Baptist, but was pretty well Southern Baptist and we simply did not get involved in stuff like that. But I'm called now to Houston and came to Houston on August 28th, 1955. And the reason that I can remember that so well was that--that--that was the day when a young fellow, Emmett Till, was killed in Mississippi. And that probably was the real beginning of the Civil Rights Movement, not Rosa Parks so much, but the killing of Emmett Till which raised the level of anger in our community. And so Rosa Parks made her first bus ride in 1955, December 1955. So I'm here when all that is going on, but I'm fairly well insulated from that by, by the notion that Baptist remain religious and did not get involved in civil unrest. But I'm a student chaplain on the campus of Texas Southern University and the unrest of the--of the Civil Rights Movement is growing among students. And, and I can remember that one night a group of students came by the Baptist Student Center which is where we worked and lived, and they said, "Reverend Lawson [HistoryMaker Reverend Bill Lawson], we would like to go down and, and protest and sit-in at a lunch counter. Can you direct us." And that threw me for a loop and I tried to tell them, "Now your mother sent you to college so that you can get an education. You don't need to get beaten up and be thrown in jail behind the Civil Rights Movement." And, and so while I'm trying to argue with them about that. They're saying to me flatfooted, "If you won't give us direction then, then we'll find somebody else who will." They walked out of the Baptist Student Center and left me standing there. In the next hour, they were down at a local supermarket that had some lunch counters. They sat in at these lunch counters and they were thrown in jail. I believe that there were seven seats and the students went in seven at a time knowing that they were going to be jailed. And then when the first seven were taken away, then the next seven went in. And Audrey and I were introduced to the Civil Rights Movement, first of all by our--by our bewilderment by the determination of these students, and secondly by the fact that somebody had to get them out of jail. And she and a couple of neighbors on that street and I went out raising money to bail these kids out. That was how we began our involvement in civil rights. After that we did become involved in civil rights, but it started then. Story_ID: 638655 Speaker 1: Well tell me, we're, we're gonna talk about the years from '55 [1955] until '62 [1962] when you find Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church [Houston, Texas]. So tell me more about your involvement in civil rights? You, you talked about--a little bit about some of the Baptists were behind King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], some were not. What was your stand as far as King was concerned? Speaker 2: Well I was very definitely with him. I'm a sociology major in college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], I'm a theology major [at Central Baptist Theological Seminary, Shawnee, Kansas] where I'm learning what the Bible says about people, that you should love God and that you should love your neighbor. The Bible preaches justice, that's what all the prophets talked about, and so I was very much interested in fairness, in love of people and in justice, and King sounded like that. I know that he was partly coming from, from Gandhi's [Mahatma Gandhi] philosophy, but what he said as a Baptist preacher sound- sounded very much like what I believed. So, so I did become--I did become a supporter of King probably around '56 [1956] or '57 [1957]. At that point, I became somebody who was kind of alien to the Baptist community here. But I think that, that the most important thing for me was the Jesus statement that you were supposed to love God with all your heart and, and that you were supposed to love your neighbor, meant that I was to be concerned about what was happening to black people and I should; therefore, face, face the white community with, with a sense of justice. So I had to be confrontational, just as King was confrontational but, but in a nonviolent fashion. That's fairly well how I got involved and I think that that the next thing that happened to us was that a civil rights bill had been signed in 1964 [Civil Rights Act of 1964], I think it was '64 [1964], and that by--was it '64 [1964], yeah I'm pretty sure it was '64 [1964]. And by '65 [1965], the public schools in Houston [Texas] were still tightly segregated. And then when there was some pressure put on them by the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], then they decided that--that they would desegregate one grade at a time beginning, beginning at kindergarten. And we felt that this was far too tame. So there were a number of us who joined the NAACP in their efforts to, to desegregate the school, and, and we wanted to at least help. As a college chaplain [at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], my job in this whole thing was, was to pull together high school students, high school and college students to be part of a march to the school board. There were other people, Barbara Jordan was one of them, and their job was to pull together black professionals and black preachers. And when the day came for the march, we all gathered at the local YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and there were hordes of students, but there were not very many black businesspeople or black preachers. And so we raised the question, shall we still go on with the march and my feeling was let's go on with the march. Two or three years ago students tried to sit in at a lunch counter and they were thrown in jail, so let's, let's go and take a chance of being thrown in jail, we'll march. So my leadership of that march, which would have been '65 [1965], was, was probably the first time that I became a civil rights leader. And, and I think that this also had a good deal to do with, with my own theology, the nature of Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church became partly religious and partly civil for that very reason. So, so when you ask about my involvement in civil rights that was part of it. Story_ID: 638656 Speaker 1: Let me add one thing, Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to Houston [Texas] and he came to Houston to raise money for SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. He brought with him [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte and Aretha Franklin, [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young, Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], the number of celebrity types that he brought with him, and they were going to have a concert in Houston to raise funds for SCLC. And this was my first time to see how black Baptist preachers treated Dr. King. I had--hadn't really known about it except having heard about it. But that term persona non grata fitted him. There was virtually not a Baptist preacher in Houston who would let him into their pulpit. So, so we invited him into the Wheeler Avenue [Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church, Houston, Texas] pulpit. There was another Baptist preacher and there was a Methodist preacher--two other Baptist preachers and a Methodist preacher and I who did accept King, and we felt all alone. But we went with him down to the coliseum [Sam Houston Coliseum, Houston, Texas] which is where the concert was to have been held and there were far too few of us down there. And then somebody put a smoke bomb in the air conditioning system and, and many of the people were driven out. King then asked me if I would come to Atlanta [Georgia] to work with him. Our church was then two or three years old, excuse me, so I couldn't very well go to Atlanta and I told him that I'd have to stay here. I had an infant church which would probably die if I just left. And so he said, "Well then, well then will you let Wheeler Avenue be the SCLC chapter in Houston?" And I said, "We can do that." So here I am now as a person who is leading a march against school segregation and now have become the--the leader of an SCLC chapter in Houston. And ultimately when, when King was assassinated in 1968, virtually, virtually everybody idolized him, even the people who, who hadn't liked him began to sing his praises. And now there's probably not a city in the United States that doesn't have a school or a hospital or a street or something named after him. We eulogized him after his death, but he was very definitely ostracized during his life. Story_ID: 638657 Speaker 1: Now in 1962 is when you found Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church [Houston, Texas]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and you talked about the theology. Talk more about the theology and what you hope to have accomplished through the church and in the church? Speaker 2: We were in an inner city. We were right between two universities, Texas Southern University of Houston [Texas]. We were in places where, where we could see racial injustice up close and we could likewise be in the climate of a civil rights movement. Now all that was 1962. There were a number of people who came to me saying Texas Southern University is a young university, it was founded in 1947 [sic. 1927], so, so it wasn't yet twenty years old. And, and they were saying that--that this neighborhood, which had been a Jewish neighborhood, the Jews moved out and blacks moved in. Jews had to move out. Now see you got a Star of David, they have to be close to their--to, to their synagogue. And when they moved out, as blacks moved in, they were moving out because the synagogues went to another neighborhood and so they followed the synagogues. But if they move in they created a church in this black neighborhood and it was for that reason that people from the neighborhood came to me and said, "You're, you're a student chaplain and so you're a preacher, will you help us to establish a church?" And once again, as with--was the case with the students who wanted me to give them direction for civil rights, my feeling was that--that I was there to be a student chaplain, that I was not a pastor, except for this tiny church in Pittsburg [Kansas] I'd never been a pastor. And so I--I'd be glad to help them to find somebody who would be pastor of a church. So when you think about the foundation of Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church, you're thinking about a church that was started almost, almost under duress, people feeling that we shouldn't have this many students in this neighborhood and no church. And we got many people who are residents in this neighborhood and no church. And so I said to them, "I'll help you to find a pastor." And we did find a pastor, a very brilliant young fella who had gone to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and, and who I had taught. And I asked him, "If we--if we establish a church would you be pastor?" He said, "Yeah I'll be pastor." So we called the church, we named him as pastor and at that time the church was called Riverside [Riverside Baptist Church], that was the name of the neighborhood [Riverside Terrace, Houston, Texas]. We found a little white building on Wheeler and that's, that's when the name of the church became Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church, and the young fella's name was Prentice Moore, became the pastor. And I would--and I would just kind of advise him. Then six months after he became pastor he got a call from a seminary in--in the East and they said that they'd give him a scholarship to come back to seminary. He came to me to ask me what he ought to do. And I said, "Well if there's somebody who's gonna pay your way to go to seminary, go to seminary and I'll hold the church until you got back." He never got back, so I remained as pastor of Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church for some forty-two years. And my concept of its theology was that if you follow Jesus' directive that said you have to love God and love your neighbor would suggest that you had to have a, a vertical view between you and heaven, but you also had to have a horizontal view, view between you and your--and your fellow man. That was the theology, and still is, the theology of Wheeler. So while it did have to have a strong bond with God, it also had to reach out to work with people who were poor, who were segregated, who were undereducated and so for that reason, Wheeler has always had a strong social outreach, and my background in sociology didn't hurt. Story_ID: 638658 Speaker 1: So what were some of the other things that you did in the community through the church [Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church, Houston, Texas], what pro- did you develop some programs that were in the community through the church? Speaker 2: I've mentioned the Boy Scout troop that was like a--likewise a strong Girl Scout troop. We had a church that had Christian education. That was not common in Houston [Texas]. There was Sunday school and that was about the end of it. We established Christian education where grade school and elementary school and middle school, and high school students could be learning some of the values of the Christian faith. We established a number of things for boys, particularly. One of the things my wife [Audrey Hoffman Lawson] has always been concerned about is what is happening to the black male. They over populate the jails, and they are the ones most likely to be arrested for gang activity and drugs. And so she wanted to know what can be done to improve the status of a black male. And the Boy Scout troop was one of it--one of them. What we call the Boys Rites of Passage taken from the African tradition was another. And we now have a nonprofit called WALIPP, William A. Lawson Institute for Peace and Prosperity [Houston, Texas]. A long unnecessary name, I've forgotten who gave it that name, and we simply reduced it to the acronym WALIPP. And one of the first of its programs was a--was a middle school for boys [WALIPP Academy; The Lawson Academy, Houston, Texas]. So when you think about what I was doing other than the church, it was all kinds of stuff like that. I worked with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I wor- I worked with the Urban League [Houston Area Urban League, Houston, Texas]. I worked with the Houston interfaith, interreligious council [Interfaith Ministries for Greater Houston, Houston, Texas]. We had a strong bond with Jews in Houston, still do. So, so I've been active in the community, as well as active as a pastor. And yet people to this day, just as in college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], think of me as a preacher. They don't think of me as a city councilman or as a mayor or as, you know, some kind of political leader, they know that I'm going to remain a preacher. I'm too old to be anything else now. Story_ID: 638659 Speaker 1: Talk about some of the, the bonds. You talked about a strong bond with Jews and what is--the types of things that--have you done things together or what is that relationship like? Speaker 2: Well the first thing that we've done is to have pulpit exchanges. We would bring a rabbi to our church [Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church, Houston, Texas] and we would go to the synagogue. The second thing that we've done is every Passover season we'll send out baskets of kosher foods to our Jewish friends, and there are about twenty of those. It started out being rabbis and we began to add cantors and now it's just Jewish friends. Then thirdly, we have-we have done a number of things together. There is something in--in Houston [Texas] called the interfaith center [Interfaith Ministries for Greater Houston] and it is headed by, by a Jew. And, and its primary purpose is to bring the various religious groups together, Jewish, Christian, Hindu, Muslim, that's, that's the first contact that we've had. Second contact reaches in--in a whole different--in a whole different direction. The Malcolm X/Minister Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] direction. We have a lot of contacts with the Nation of Islam and likewise part of that pulpit exchange. We've had imams to come over to the church and we've gone in--into the Nation of Islam. As I recall, there're only two Muslim places in Houston. We've gone to both of them and they've come to us. And when there are movements of any sort, they will be with us. Story_ID: 638660 Speaker 1: Right now for instance there is a movement to get a public defender in Houston [Texas]. Now you may not be interested in all of this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's fine. Speaker 1: --but the pattern in Harris County [Texas] is different from the pattern in any metropolitan city in the nation. Virtually every other metropolitan city in the nation has what is called a public defender. Now let me explain what all that means. When a person of low income is arrested and he or she cannot afford a lawyer, then there needs to be a lawyer provided for them by the county in which they live. And in Houston, the way of doing it is to let the judges appoint a, a lawyer. Now what the judges do is to appoint their favorites, their brother, their cousin, a donor, and this person makes money off of these persons who are--who are being defended. And they will take a caseload, not a fifty or sixty, but of two hundred fifty or three hundred. There's no way that they can possibly represent them. So they simply get them to plea bargain and then they send them to jail. That's at least part of the reason why there's so many blacks and Hispanics in jail. So our concern is, if that Los Angeles [California] and New York [New York], and Washington, D.C. and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] can have public defenders, why doesn't Houston have, have a public defender? This is--this is a totally different concept, it's not a court appointed attorney. This is someone who has an organization and that organization is funded by the state and they can then bring in--bring in lawyers in rotation from the best to the medial and to the worst. And so they will bring in somebody to defend these persons, and rather than simply be thrown in jail and Texas build more and more prisons, there will be at least some way by which they can be--they can be rehabilitated, 'cause many of them actually have mental problems. They're not all hardened criminals. And so we've been fighting to get a public defender in Harris County. That's, that's part of what we do right now. I could go on further, but basically our concern is that--that--that we can do for people who can't do for themselves. And this organization, WALIPP [William A. Lawson Institute for Peace and Prosperity, Houston, Texas], has as its theme, confronting the powerful on behalf of the powerless. Now I've been privileged to know and have fairly close contact with mayors and with district attorneys, with, with governors and people of that sort. So I got contact with some of the people of power, and those are the people before whom I can go and argue on behalf of the people who don't have any power. So it's better for me to be a preacher doing that, than it is for me to take a political office being city councilman or state legislator. And that's what I do as a church, and that's what we do as WALIPP, and that's been our own passion. Story_ID: 638661 Speaker 1: Are there any other programs that WALIPP [William A. Lawson Institute for Peace and Prosperity, Houston, Texas] supports that you wanna talk about? Speaker 2: We have--we have the low income senior residents. We are right now in the process of working on behalf of, of food workers in the school district. We have a new superintendent who came in and faced a major deficit. So somehow he had to, to cut off some of the costs of, of the school. And what he chose to do was to cut out or to cut down many of the people who were at the lowest level, cafeteria workers, bus drivers. And so, so that meant that somebody had to--had to--had to work for them. So about five of us went to talk to, to the superintendent of schools, and he has been adamant so far. So we'll probably pull together the unions of the cafeteria workers and, and of the teachers, and we'll confront the school district and school board. That's something that is under the WALIPP banner, but it involves other groups as well. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Now since you've retired [from Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church, Houston, Texas], you work basically with this group, is that right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you have some writings that have been published, did that happen after you retired? Speaker 2: It did. It was happening during the last year of my pastorate, but it, it is true. When I was pastor, every Sunday in the bulletin I would write a meditation. The current pastor does not do that. But those meditations probably numbered in the high hundreds, maybe even more than a thousand, I'm not sure how many there were. But you're talking about fifty-two Sundays per year for over forty years. So that--that's quite a number of Sundays. And some of the members of our church felt that those meditations should be--should be compiled. They took 366 of them and they put them into a book and it's called 'Lawson's Leaves of Love' ['Lawson's Leaves of Love: Daily Meditations,' William A. Lawson]. And so that's, that's the closest thing to a book I've ever written. Speaker 1: Do you plan on writing a book? Speaker 2: I've thought very seriously about writing one, and, and my wife [Audrey Hoffman Lawson] stays on my case about writing one. And I guess that I've spent so much time as an activist that I haven't spent very much time as an author. And there's no reason why you can't be both. I'm just trifling. Speaker 1: What about a lecturer? Would that be something you'd consider? Speaker 2: I do that from time to time. I was asked to be professor at Rice [Rice University, Houston, Texas] for one semester. And I went out there. I'm right now teaching at the University of Houston [Houston, Texas], and I'm called--they have an inflated name, distinguished visiting professor. So, so I guess--I guess you could say yes I've, I've thought about lecturing. I've spoken to other groups. Story_ID: 638662 Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you wanted to talk about that we might have missed regarding your life? Speaker 2: Well nothing that you've missed. My hope is that in this age when we're become more and more self-centered, that we can develop a much greater sensitivity to community problems. And I know that, that in the '80s [1980s] and the '90s [1990s] we did become pretty much oriented on me. I wanna move to the suburbs, I wanna have a big house, wanna have a, a late model car, I wanna belong to the right clubs and organizations, I wanna cross the line, eat at the best restaurants and be part of the most social functions. And in some sense, we have left behind the people who still live in, in the ghetto and the barrios. We've left behind people who are low income and will probably be low income, kind of a permanent poverty class. And, and while we have elevated ourselves, we haven't done, done very much for them and I blame the churches in very much the same way. Churches have welcomed the well dressed and, and the prominent, and, and they have not welcomed the person who comes with a poor cotton dress and a big hat, but, but who really feels like she is somebody when she comes to church. And she's left--she's left out in the cold. Her child gets arrested and goes to jail, and she mourns about it. She can't hire a lawyer, and here are church people who could very well build up organizations that could help. So my concern is that black people in particularly, but minorities in general, would have a greater sense of sensitivity and concern. So the kinds of things that I won't be able to do very, very much longer, I would hope that somebody would pick up and would carry on. Story_ID: 638663 Speaker 1: As you look back over your life, is there anything that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Yes. I would have been much more active in school, junior high [Northeast Junior High School, Kansas City, Kansas] and high school [Sumner High School; Sumner Academy of Arts and Science, Kansas City, Kansas]. I think that I would have been much more social and not so much a recluse. I think that I--there's some things that I definitely would not change. I had these three or four dates when I was in college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]. I finally ended up marrying somebody [Audrey Hoffman Lawson] who I'd never dated; I wouldn't change that for anything in the world. I think that, that I would spend more time with my children [Melanie Lawson, Cheryl Lawson, Eric Lawson and Roxanne Lawson]. Our first child was born in 1955, last child was born in 1962, and during those years I was involved in either civil rights or in the establishment of a church [Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church, Houston, Texas] and spent far too little time with my own children. I would do that differently. And there are a number of things like that that I would do differently. Story_ID: 638664 Speaker 1: Okay so tell me your children's names and tell me about them today (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We have, we have four children. The oldest being Melanie [Melanie Lawson], M-E-L-N-I-E, M-E-L-A-N-I-E. She is--she's a television anchor and was interested in journalism and law. So she went to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]. She studied--she studied journalism at Princeton. She took a double major in, in journalism and law at Columbia. And she practiced law for a little while in New York [New York], but her first love has always been journalism. So she came back to Houston [Texas], got a job with ABC television [KTRK-TV, Houston, Texas]. And from that time until this, and that was probably in the early '70s [1970s] until now, she has been at Channel 13, ABC News. Our second child is Cheryl [Cheryl Lawson], C-H-E-R-Y-L. Cheryl when to Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. You mentioned you had a grant from Carnegie Mellon. She went to Carnegie Mellon and she majored in business administration, and planned to go into finances, banking and finances. She came back to Houston and get--began to work with, with an investment company, and she worked for them for fifteen years or so. And then when WALLIP [William A. Lawson Institute for Peace and Prosperity, Houston, Texas] was formed, we struggled along trying to get this thing of, of confronting people who were powerful for people who had no power, and she was very much interested in that. So she is currently the executive director of WALIPP. She's paid by the investment company for whom she works. And so she has these two jobs at the same time. She works pro bono for, for WALIPP. My third child is Eric [Eric Lawson], a son. And Eric went to Howard University [Washington D.C.]. I'm not sure that I can recall what his major was. I think it was education, but I'm not sure. He came back to Houston, he had not yet graduated from Howard so he went back to Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas]--I'm sorry to Prairie View University [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], fairly close to Texas Southern. Went to Prairie View University and there he did get a master's of education. He is right now a teacher in one of the school districts close to us in North Forest School District [North Forest Independent School District], and his emphasis is special education. And I really think that Cheryl's involvement in, in the boys school [WALIPP Academy; The Lawson Academy, Houston, Texas] and Eric's involvement with, with special education students is part of an outgrowth of our concern for, for people who are powerless. My baby daughter, Roxanne [Roxanne Lawson], who lives here with us, has two daughters of her own. And she is working for the City of Houston in the housing department [Housing and Community Development Department]. And likewise, the housing department which is the local chapter of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] is, is concerned about housing for, for low income people. So you can see something of the, the principles passing on down. All four of these have gone to college, have come back, are now productive and, and independent and we're very proud of them. My daughter has two daughters. One wanted to be an--a singer, one wanted to be an actor. So the one who wanted to be a singer went to SCU [sic. University of Southern California] in Los Angeles [California], which is a good place if, if you wanna be a singer and--an entertainer. And she is right now working as a singer and she's just about to finish her first album. Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Her name is Robyn [Robyn Troup], R-O-B-Y-N. The other daughter is Raven [Raven Troup]. She's home for the summer right now. Raven wanted to be an actor. So she chose to go to New York University [New York, New York] one of the better school in theater in the country. And she is living right near Broadway. And she is right now a junior in college. And she hopes that when she gets out she can be an actor someplace. She would like to be on Broadway, but that's, that's what they are doing. So we, likewise, proud of our grandchildren. They have been free of drugs and free of some of the things that normally college kids can, can get into, and both are pretty well focused on, on their own ambitions. Those are the four children and the two grandchildren. Story_ID: 638665 Speaker 1: I'd like to go back and talk about--just get a little more clarification and your thoughts on a couple of things that we talked about earlier, and one was King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Can you give me more insight into your analysis of, of what you said about King? Speaker 2: Martin Luther King came along during the Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] years. And the nation was, was fairly conservative at that time. The nation was also unaware that there was a great deal of anger. Because when the veterans came back from World War II [WWII], the black veterans and perhaps this is true also of, of Hispanic, but the veterans when they came back were thrown back in--into the same economic situation that they left. They had risked their lives for their country, but there were no new jobs opening up for them, no new income levels opening up for them. And so they felt raped. They felt that their lives had been risked and, and the country did not appreciate them very much, so there was a good deal of, of anger, there was a climate of anger in the late '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s]. Then when Emmett Till was killed that simply led, led to the explosion. Now Martin King came into--came into the mix almost accidentally. This woman, Rosa Parks, sat in in Montgomery, Alabama. King was from Atlanta, Georgia but he'd just been called to a church in, in Montgomery to, to the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church [Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church] in Montgomery. It was in Montgomery's inner city close to downtown, and, and Rosa Parks got on this bus close to downtown. She had literally been, been programmed to be put on the bus by the--by the Montgomery NAACP [Metro Montgomery Branch of the NAACP, Montgomery, Alabama]. So just as soon as, as she was arrested, then--then--then the NAACP was mobilized to start a movement. And they would boycott the buses in Montgomery. She was released, but black people refused to ride the bus and the, the transit company just folded because the blacks boycotted them. Now when she refused to, to get up from her seat and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] now had to be mobilized, they needed to have--to have a place to meet. And so--and so it was decided that they would meet at the nearby Dexter Avenue Baptist Church. Most of the other preachers accepted J.H. Jackson's [Joseph H. Jackson] view that Martin Luther King was a radical, that he, he was a Communist. And so most of the other preachers backed off and said that they didn't wanna be involved with Parks and with the NAACP. Because King was the pastor at Dexter Avenue Baptist Church. And while he had no desire to be a civil rights leader, he was stuck having to stay at the church, he couldn't leave the church. And now the NAACP was, was beginning to hold its meetings there. And his first speeches--fiery eloquent speeches were based on his theology and his theology was that--that your love for God should be--should be complemented by your love for man, and you should not watch people suffer and, and do nothing about it. That was his theology. Part of it came from a Christian background and quite frankly part of it came from a Hindu background. He, he had been a disciple of Mahatma Gandhi. So when you put together the view of King and, and the refusal of, of ministers to support him and the fact that he was supported by, by the black grassroots by the hundreds of thousands, whatever their, their pastors may have thought, they backed him. Then you realize that one of the greatest--one of the greatest good things that could happen to us was that--was that Dr. Martin Luther King became the leader of the Civil Rights Movement. He had a clear theology, had a clear philosophy. There was no question that he was not just a fighter, that he was somebody who was--who was teaching principles and values, and I think that that had--I think that that had a great deal to do, first of all with, with his rise as a civil rights leader, leader and then second of all his being treated by other ministers as somebody who was alien, somebody who was foreign. And I think that that followed him during, during much of his career. He accepted it. He never complained about it. He simply kept on going with that movement, which while he didn't plan to lead it, he was leading it. And when he died, then the movement sort of collapsed. Story_ID: 638666 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Well wasn't that a difficult decision for you to make? I mean what--when you made the decision to invite them to come to the pulpit, and the other ministers did too. You were kind of--wasn't that sticking your neck out, weren't you kind of a minority? Speaker 2: Of course. Absolutely. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you talk a little bit about what, what led to that decision and what the climate was, and what, what the reaction was in the community? Speaker 2: I keep coming back to Jesus philosophy. That, that Jesus believed that our love for God had to be complemented by our love for neighbor. I keep coming back to the principle, 'cause that's central. And it is not Christian, it's Jewish, it's Muslim. Almost everywhere what you feel is that whoever your deity is, that your devotion to that deity ought to be complemented by, by your concern for your neighbor. So yes, yes you do know that--that you stick--that you're sticking your neck out. Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi] did, Mandela [Nelson Mandela] did, King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] did. And so, so you do stick, stick your neck out on behalf of the have nots if, if you understand what is a proper philosophy of your faith. Speaker 1: Now I guess that too ties into what you feel the benefits are of this pulpit sharing with Jews and Muslims. Is that right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No one group has all truth, and I believe had there not been Judaism then--then--then--then there would--there would never have been Christianity. And so I think that it's extremely important that Christians and Jews understand each other. That they're not simply--are in conflict with each other. Muslims were born much after both Judaism and Christianity, but they bring a much greater--a much greater sense of concern for the grassroots. They are far more involved in services to people than, than either Jews or Christians. And so I think that, that we can learn from both of them. And if we remain closeted in our own faith and don't realize the contributions that can be made by other faiths, then we become poorer. So, so it has been important for me to know Judaism with its prophesy and Islam with its activism. Story_ID: 638667 Speaker 1: And because you were called to ministry at such a young age, at age sixteen, talk about the, the difference of coming into that at a young age and then what you called a older man's faith. Speaker 2: Well, part of that I will have no, no easy answer for. I've said that when I was sixteen I was called in the ministry, was probably more like fifteen and I think that I actually accepted when I was sixteen. When I was first called, I did not understand what was happening. I would have the usual boyis- boyish aspirations, I'm going to be a professional athlete, I'm going to be a professional artist, I'm going to be a professional musician and then somewhere in those dreams I'm gonna be a preacher. I said wait a minute, I didn't dream that. So I--so I would just put that out of my mind, and I'm fifteen years old now and I'm in high school [Sumner High School; Sumner Academy of Arts and Science, Kansas City, Kansas]. So I'm having the usual contacts that high school kids had. There were no preachers around me. But once again the urge would come to be a preacher and I didn't know where it was coming from. No angels, no voices, no bright lights, just kind of an inner urge. And so I can remember when I was roughly sixteen, early sixteen, I said if this is God I don't want any part of this. I'm going to be a professional whatever I'm going to be. And so once again, no angels, no voices, no, no kind of a heavenly response, but all of a sudden a number of accidents. And I had--I stuck a hairpin into a--an outlet, have no idea why I did such a stupid thing. But the electricity jumped out and shocked me very badly and burned my hand. And then I was riding a bicycle and grabbed onto the back of a truck so I could kind of be, be moving with the truck. And the truck turned the corner and I fell off and I--and I--and I fell on my, my arm and almost broke my arm. And there were two or three things like that. And then I began to realize everything that has happened to me is happening to my right hand, and if I'm going to be an artist I gotta have a right hand. So it was obvious to me that something was saying if you won't be a preacher, I'll, I'll take that arm away from you. So I said okay Lord I, I can now get the message, I'll do it. My mother [Clarisse Riggs Cade] had married my stepfather [Walter Cade, Sr.] and we had come to Kansas City [Kansas] and I had become an active Baptist. And so now I understood what faith was all about. God called me after that. So here I am at sixteen knowing that I'm going to be a preacher and not knowing how I was going to prepare for that. Going to college was, was not a guaranteed thing, but I knew I was going to college. And so once I got to college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] I was determined to go into seminary. I was going to be a preacher. Story_ID: 638668 Speaker 1: How does a young preacher feel as over against an old preacher? Well the young preacher most often reflects whatever his own--whatever his own religious experience is. And, and my religious experiences were, were limited to the little church in Kansas City, Kansas, the Eighth Street Baptist Church, that's what I knew. And I knew that churches preached and sang, and taught Sunday school. I didn't know of anything else that they did. So my being a preacher as a young man said that I was going to, to pick up and carry on the, the traditions of my church. As an older man--as an older adult man, part of the Civil Rights Movement, then I re- then I realized that somehow I had to, to harmonize my theology with the whole civil rights picture. How could I defend supporting civil rights while still at the same time preaching Jesus Christ. As I got older, then I started realizing this has to be institutionalized. That you can't simply be a civil rights activist and deal in protests and marches, that there has to be something that is made more permanent. There have been a number of civil rights organizations and I--and I knew that by the time I was forty. There'd been a number of, of civil rights organizations and they've done a whole lot during their time. There was SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], with the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party], there was CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], there were a number of these civil rights activists groups. They are all dead, every one of them. There's still an SCLC, but all those things are dead. There was the Urban League [National Urban League] and there was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. They are still here because they're institutions, not just movements. So when WALIPP [William A. Lawson Institute for Peace and Prosperity, Houston, Texas] was born, then we were determined that we would have an institutional way of handling all this. So our current movements--our movements under the WALIPP banner. So when I think about the younger preacher who simply reflects on his own experiences in the church he knows and the older preacher who follows a theology that is based on his biblical understanding and not on what churches have done, then I can see a very definite movement from an immature vision of the ministry to a more mature vision of the ministry. And the last thing that I just said to you was that I hope that--that--that future generations would get away from the self-centeredness and would begin to realize that outreach is far more important than accumulation. So, so when you ask that, that's basically what I'm talking about. Speaker 2: Okay. Thank you for that clarification. Story_ID: 638669 Speaker 1: Is there anything in your life that you have not done that you would like to do? Speaker 2: I haven't written a book. I haven't done the kind of traveling I would like to do. There was a movie with Jack Nicholson and Morgan Freeman called 'The Bucket List,' and it was two older men who both had some disease which was chronic and from which they were going to die and they were friends. Somehow they, they got to be friends. And so they decided that since we only have a limited time to live lets go on and do some of the things that--that we've never done. So they traveled and they did a whole--they went to other country--they even skydived. They did all kinds of things. And then finally Jack Nicholson died and ultimately Morgan Freeman did. But the bucket list was a list of things that--that--that--that they would like to have done that--that they nev- that they never got a chance to do. So writing a book is one thing that I--that I wish I had done. Traveling is something that I wish I had done. Maybe teaching more. Rice University of Houston [Texas] was a beginning, but I wish that I had done more teaching. So tho- those are some of the things that I wish I had done. Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I guess this sounds redundant, but it goes back to that theme of Jesus. That's what I would like for my legacy to be. That I loved God and I tried to help my, my neighbor. Story_ID: 638670 Speaker 1: And do you have a, a last message that you would like to send to the future generations? Speaker 2: Yes. That people who are underclasses are not underclasses because they are minority. They are underclasses because they're poor. And if there can be some concern of those who have achieved for those who cannot achieve, that is what I would like to pass on to future generations. It doesn't matter where your house is or how much it costs, it doesn't matter what you drive or how you can travel or, or how many vehicles you've got. It, it matters most of all what have you done for somebody else. And if there's something I can leave behind it, it would be that--that we be less concerned about merchandise and more concerned about people. Speaker 1: Well I'd like to thank you for taking the time to share your story. Is there anything we have not talked about, anything else, any last comment? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Okay. Speaker 1: I think you got it. Speaker 2: (Laughter) All right. Well I wanna thank you so much for tak- for sharing your story with us here at The HistoryMakers. Speaker 1: I thank you very much. Story_ID: 638671 Speaker 1: Okay tell us about this picture. Speaker 2: All right, that's our wedding day again probably the third time we'd seen each other. Speaker 1: What, what date was it? Speaker 2: It was January 30th, 1955, is that right, 1954. January 30th, 1954. The day we got married. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That is a time when-- Speaker 1: Tell me who's in the picture. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones and I think that he--I don't remember the, the exact occasion. He was coming here with--what was the name of the group that he was with. He, he was with a group, he was then composing and directing music. And, and whoever the group was they were all here to raise money for the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, but they had gotten in trouble at the church [Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church, Houston, Texas], remember that? Speaker 2: Oh. (AUDREY HOFFMAN LAWSON): And he came to try to clear that up. They'd broken something at the church. Speaker 1: No, no I can tell you what it was. And thank you for reminding me. They came here to do a concert at what was then Houston's largest auditorium--coliseum [Sam Houston Coliseum, Houston, Texas]. And when they got there, they learned that, that a Texas tradition was that blacks had to come in the side door and sit, sit in the balcony. This was a very popular group and I wish that I could remember their name. Very, very popular at that time. And so, so they said, "Well if, if this is going to happen to blacks then we aren't going to perform," and they left the coliseum, came to our church, if this is even our church. What is that? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, it's a church. Speaker 1: Okay, came to the church and, and they boycotted that concert. That's what that was. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay this would've been around 1967, and King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had come to raise funds. There--there're a couple of pictures that would show that King, King to raise funds for SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. And this was at the time when--when at least one of the media that would hear him with a black radio station, and this guy (points to picture) what's his name. Speaker 2: Which one? Speaker 1: (AUDREY HOFFMAN LAWSON): Standing behind. I don't remember his name. Speaker 2: Anyway, he, he was manager of the local black station, so all of us were there because of raising money for SCLC. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: The year was 1967, just a few months before he was assassinated in 1968 and he was moving around from city to city raising money for SCLC. He came to Houston [Texas] for that. Speaker 1: Those are among the only ministers who would allow him in their churches. On the left is Manson John- that's not Manson Johnson [Manson B. Johnson II], he's the guy who was p- his name is Douglass [ph.]. But this is a Reverend Douglass, this is me, that's Dr. King, this is a Reverend Lott [Edward L. Lott] and this is Reverend Felder [L.B. Felder]. Three of us are Baptist preachers or you can say four if you include King. One is a Methodist preacher. All of them are dead except me. Is that right? Mercy. Speaker 2: Okay, now you know who that is. Speaker 1: Nope, you gotta tell us. Speaker 2: All right that is Bill [HistoryMaker Reverend Bill Lawson] and Audrey Lawson [Audrey Hoffman Lawson] and I can't tell you what year that is, but both of us had black hair so it had to be a long time ago (laughter). Speaker 1: Here you are again. Speaker 2: (AUDREY HOFFMAN LAWSON): I was pregnant there and the hair was-- Speaker 1: Hair was beginning to turn (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is Bill and Audrey Lawson and she's probably pregnant with our baby child [Roxanne Lawson]. Speaker 2: You had asked about the, the relationship between me and other religions. To the far left is Dominique de Menil a multimillionaire art lover who brought us together at a place that she had built. And names are slipping me, but on the left next to her is Rabbi Sam Karff [Samuel Karff], then there's me. This is a--that is a Muslim imam he was at that time the chief Muslim in Houston, and then to the far right is a Catholic priest whose name I can't remember, but that at least gives you a picture of the kind of interfaith relationships we've had. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay that is my father and my mother and his pastor and his wife, and me in the middle. Walter [Lawson's stepfather, Walter Cade, Sr.] and Clarisse Cade [Clarisse Riggs Cade], and I. H. [I.H. Henderson] and Eleanor Henderson [sic. Pearl Powell Henderson]. Story_ID: 638672 Speaker 1: That's Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison. When Audrey [Audrey Hoffman Lawson] had conceived of this boy school. I told you that her concern has been about black males all the time. And so when she conceived of this black school and we started getting it together and organizing it, and then we discovered that--that a single gender school was, was illegal in the United States. Because back in the '70s [1970s] the women's movement had had passed a congressional bill against single gender schools. So we went to two Senators, Kay Bailey Hutchison from Texas and Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] from New York and asked if we could do something about that law. They reversed the law and made it possible for us to have an all-boys school. So the WALIPP boys school [WALIPP Academy; The Lawson Academy, Houston, Texas] is the first in the nation. Speaker 2: Okay, that would've been probably late '70s [1970s] or early '80s [1980s]. It was--it was Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church [Houston, Texas] and the men behind me are deacons. Speaker 1: Once again I can't tell you the year, but that would've been early to mid-'70s [1970s]. And the man to my right is Reverend E. Stanley Branch [Elridge Stanley Branch] who at that time was the--he was the, you know, say director, but he was the head of the Independent Missionary Baptist Association [Independent Missionary Baptist General Association] that involved all of the Baptist churches in Houston [Texas]. And Wheeler Avenue when it was--when it was--but, but he was with us for the certification of the church as a Baptist church in Houston. Speaker 2: This is Bill [HistoryMaker Reverend Bill Lawson] and Audrey Lawson and our four children. No, that's three of them. Roxanne [Roxanne Lawson] has not been born. Roxanne has not been born, she was born in '62 [1962] and Eric [Eric Lawson] looks like he's perhaps two years old, so this, this was early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: This was breaking ground for the sanctuary which you see in the top for Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church. In 1986 we built the current sanctuary. And this was groundbreaking for that current sanctuary. Speaker 2: I had mentioned that I had come to Houston as a Baptist chaplain. Those were the students, some of the students. Those were some of the students in the Baptist Student Union. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: It was one of the retreats-- Speaker 1: (AUDREY HOFFMAN LAWSON): I don't think so. I think that's when, you know, we were starting the building. Speaker 2: Okay maybe--. Okay this is probably on the day of the groundbreaking. Speaker 1: As you can see that's our fiftieth anniversary--my fiftieth anniversary in the pastorate or in the ministry, I was called in 1946. Speaker 2: That's just me. I was young at least. Speaker 1: (AUDREY HOFFMAN LAWSON): At some point of your life. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's me in the earliest years of Houston, probably our first year in Houston. As you can see I was much skinnier. Speaker 2: Much skinnier. Speaker 1: Much skinnier. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is the wedding day of Audrey and me. That would've been January 30th, 1954. And we were getting married in her church. This would've been--is that right--this would've been McPheeters Presbyterian [ph.]--Audrey? Oh she's gone, but I, I think that's what that was. I know what it was, I'm trying to figure out where it was. Speaker 1: All right. That is [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones and me. Jones had come with a very popular singing group whose name I couldn't remember. And they were contracted to sing at Houston's largest auditorium [Sam Houston Coliseum, Houston, Texas]. But when they got to Houston they discovered that the concert would have to be segregated. And so they refused to go to the concert. They lost a good deal of money in breaking the contract, but they wouldn't go to the concert. And they ended up coming to our church and just kind of having some fellowship there. They played the piano and sang songs, and then caught the plane and went back..