 Story_ID: 10234 Speaker 1: My name is Jodi Merriday and I'm the interviewer for today. Scott Stearns is the videographer and there are no observers. Speaker 2: (Off-camera discussion). Speaker 1: Okay. I'd like for you to state and spell your name including your middle name. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. I'm Evelyn Gibson Lowery, E-V-E-L-Y-N G-I-B-S-O-N L-O-W-E-R-Y. Speaker 1: Could you state your date of birth and location of birth? Speaker 2: 02/16/27 [February 16, 1927], in Wichita, Kansas. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is September the 21st, 2004. Speaker 1: And the current location of this interview, including the address? Speaker 2: At the SCL--the interview is taking place at the SCLC/WOMEN, Inc. [Southern Christian Leadership Conference/Women's Organizational Movement for Equality Now] building, 328 Auburn Avenue, Atlanta [Georgia], 30303. Speaker 1: Could you tell us what your occupation is? Speaker 2: Well I am the--actually a full time volunteer, founder-Chair of SCLC/WOMEN, Inc., since 1979. Story_ID: 10235 Speaker 1: Can you tell us what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: Oh that's difficult. I'm not sure I can single out one. Speaker 1: Okay. What about your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I think spring is my favorite time of year. Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite color? Speaker 2: That's a hard one too. Speaker 1: Okay. What about you favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I like the, the [Caribbean] Islands. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No, it varies from different situations. Story_ID: 10236 Speaker 1: We're going to begin by exploring your family background. Could you tell me the name of your mother? Speaker 2: Evelyn Gibson, she was Evelyn Stanley Gibson [Redmond]. Speaker 1: Okay. And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Wichita, Kansas. Speaker 1: And did she grow up there? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what do you know about her background and her growing up? Speaker 2: Not a whole lot. She really was raised by her grandmother for the most part and I knew her very well, my great-grandmother better than my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh she--my mother just passed in April of this year. She was one hundred and one years old and she was the most loving yet strong woman. She was, I guess you would say she was the mother of the family, the whole family. Everybody loved her and sought advice from her. Speaker 1: Did she share any stories with you growing up that you remember? Speaker 2: Nothing that I can recall that's of significance. Speaker 1: Any fables or sayings that you can recall that she shared? Did she have a favorite saying or something that she really liked? Speaker 2: I just can't think of anything in particular right now that she would say that was, that I could say to you would be significant of hers. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your father's name? Speaker 2: Harry Brown Gibson, Sr. Speaker 1: Where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Greensboro, North Carolina. Speaker 1: And where did he grow up? Speaker 2: Well he grew up in Oklahoma. His father [Henry Gibson] was a minister and he actually died when my father was twelve years old and his mother [Laura Frances Gibson] was a teacher. And they moved--her back--her roots were in Oklahoma and she moved back to Oklahoma and that's where he grew up. Speaker 1: How would you describe your father? Speaker 2: Very strong, very--with leadership ability and a dynamic minister. Speaker 1: Did he share any stories with you when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Oh I imagine, I'm sure he did. However, you know I think the little stories that I can remember them sharing was stories that their mother and his mother shared telling little funny things about then when she was growing, rearing her boys. She had four boys. My dad was the oldest and she talked about she had to leave them alone sometimes and she'd come back and find them in mischief and all those kinds of things--they're not bad things, but she often talked about those kinds of things. Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestors? Speaker 2: Oh I really can't trace them back too far behind great-grandmother. Speaker 1: And so as far as you know what was the origin of your family? Speaker 2: Well the Gibson family was--oh my great--my great-grandmother's mother was a slave and she lived in the big house and seemingly, and I--she might have been fathered by him (pauses) the, the owner of the house. And I understand from my father's side that he supposed to have had some Irish uncles and of course African American background and Indian in my mother's background. So that's about it. Speaker 1: Okay. And what were your grandparent's names on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Mrs. Etta Stanley. Speaker 1: And your grandfather on your mother's side? Speaker 2: That I--he was dead long before I was on the scene. I didn't get to know him. Speaker 1: And on your father's side? Speaker 2: He was a Tucker but I, I didn't get to know him. I was just too little. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And what about your grandparents on the paternal side of your family? Did you know their names? Speaker 2: Yes, his name was Henry Gibson. He was a Presbyterian minister. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he's the one who died when my father was twelve years old. Speaker 1: So did you have an opportunity at all to hear any stories or anything about him growing up? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 10237 Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: Well I think probably I, though I was born in Wichita, Kansas my father [Harry Brown Gibson, Sr.] was a minister and they moved to Oklahoma. And I remember growing up--Oklahoma was still a young state and as a minister he traveled around, pastured churches and he took us with him. He was made district superintendent of the whole state of Oklahoma and he would take us with him in the summers. But I remember as a little girl in, in Okmulgee, Oklahoma is where my grandmother lived and grew up. My, my father grew up in Okmulgee, Oklahoma. And I remember as a little girl the Indians in the city who would sit on the street just like this with big, those big blankets over them. And I remember that stuck in my mind. Of course everything has changed now. But that was the practice at that time because they dominated Oklahoma to a great extent, Indians, that was their territory and, and I just recall that. Speaker 1: Could you share any other memories with us? Can you describe maybe what your family life was like when you were younger, holidays or special events, daily life? Speaker 2: Well we were a very close family and my father--we always took vacations and trips and special days together and we would go in the car and visit my grandmother and various places but we were always together on holidays. We were a very close-knit family. Speaker 1: And could you give your siblings' names in their birth order including yourself? Speaker 2: Yvon-, my siblings. Okay, my brother Harry, Reverend Harry B. Gibson, Jr. is, was a minister and then I came next and then my brother, Reverend Oliver Gibson who has passed and, and then my sister Geraldine Gibson Bynum. She's married in Memphis, Tennessee. Speaker 1: When you all were growing up what street did you live on? Speaker 2: Well I lived of lots of streets. My father was a Methodist minister and we moved from place to place in lots of different cities. In Oklahoma I lived in Muskogee, I lived in Oklahoma City, I lived in Tulsa so we moved. And we moved to Tennessee, lived in Memphis, Tennessee. We were--moved to Chicago [Illinois] and then we moved to Youngstown, Ohio then he moved back to Birmingham [Alabama]. So you can see that I grew up in a number of cities. Story_ID: 10238 Speaker 1: Perhaps if you were reflecting one of those neighborhoods or one of those blocks, can you describe to me what the community was like there or maybe even what the community was like in the church, church communities that you were living in as you were moving? Speaker 2: Those were the early years and the years in Oklahoma were--are, are still a bit vague. But I just recall that in Muskogee, Oklahoma you could--where the church was and the parsonage next door you could walk just about to the other side of town. Quite often my brother [Harry Brown Gibson, Jr.] and I on a Sunday afternoon would walk over to visit friends you know on the other side of the city. But Memphis, Tennessee we moved there and that is a part of, of my life that started taking on a, a flavor, for my father [Harry Brown Gibson, Sr.] became very actively involved in civil rights. And this was a time when it was very dangerous, very dangerous and those are impressive years in my life. Speaker 1: What types of things were happening? Speaker 2: Well as you know the segregated pattern, very segregated pattern at that time. And my father became the president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Memphis and naturally he was out with leadership and, and leading causes--discrimination and, and all kinds of things to bring down barriers. He went up I recall to Stanton, Tennessee which was not far from there, about thirty five or forty miles to investigate something that had taken place. An NAACP president had been thrown in the river and drowned. And they couldn't find the cause of it or anything about it but they knew it was something that was done, you know, mysteriously and violently. So he and my brother drove up there to do this to, to--they slipped into town. My brother let him out and he went in and, and talked with them and investigated it and got in the car, they came back. It became very intense. They saw them and they really pursued and tried to follow them and they found out where we were. My father pastored Centenary [United] Methodist Church [Memphis, Tennessee] at that same time. And there was a service station across the street from us that our members owned and those men, they knew that they were coming, looking trying to see a time when they could--I don't know what they wanted to do. But we had to have members of our church guarding our house night and day. It was a very, very tense time. My--our--his church, Centenary Church was a very popular church, and mass meetings were held there also which made it even more you know intense. And you could see the police driving around. They were disturbed--they didn't--trying to frighten you or trying to see what was going on. So that was a very dramatic time in my life. The [Edward Hull 'Boss'] Crump administration was what was in charge at that time. It was very despotic and so that's a period that, that I lived through that was very, very intense. Speaker 1: And what was the approximate time of this period? Speaker 2: This was '40 [1940], like '39 [1939] and '40 [1940]. Story_ID: 10239 Speaker 1: Are there any sights, sounds or smells that come to mind when you think of your earlier years? Speaker 2: Sights, sounds and smells? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Or smells, things that would remind you of you growing up or neighborhoods or communities that you lived in? It could be a building, it could be a center, it could be a particular church. Speaker 2: Well my life has been very church-centered. As a matter of fact in those days the parsonage was next door to the church so it was very colored by the church you know. And people would come to meetings then they'd come to our house. So it was a, you know our home was always a welcomed place for people in the church to come and their children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: What about sounds or smells, things that remind you of the early, of your earlier years? Speaker 2: Well my mother [Evelyn Stanley Gibson Redmond] was a good cook. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So anything that was pleasing would remind me of my mother and the smells that would emanate from our kitchen. In terms of sound I can't think of anything that, that is significant. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was your favorite thing that your mom cooked? Speaker 2: Oh that would be difficult. Speaker 1: That's a difficult one? Speaker 2: Yes, that would be very difficult. She loved to make pies and my father [Harry Brown Gibson, Sr.] loved for her to make fruit pies. And so she, she made them all the time. Story_ID: 10240 Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend? Speaker 2: As, as I said I lived in several cities so I attended several schools. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: In all those cities. Speaker 1: And perhaps if you could share the name of one of the schools, the earlier elementary schools? Speaker 2: I went to, and I'm trying to--it's strange that you would just think of the name of a school. But in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], I think I must have been in the first grade and I think that was Paul, Paul Laurence Dunbar School. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that influenced you or any teachers that you think of at any of the other earlier elementary schools that were impacting you? Speaker 2: Well I was young at the time and what, I don't know whether they impacted me at the time but probably since. One teacher when we lived in Muskogee, Oklahoma got married, my teacher and she had me as a flower girl in the wedding. I remember that. I remember in Oklahoma City I don't recall a teacher at the school, that's just vague--that, that impacted me. When we--when my father [Harry Brown Gibson, Sr.] pastored in the church, Quayle [United] Methodist Church in Oklahoma City, the Langston University was not too very far from there. And the president and his wife, Dr. [Isaac William] and Mrs. Young belonged to our church and they would often take me--I was a little girl and they liked me and they would take me, drive me out to the campus I recall that, to be with them. Speaker 1: What kind of student were you? Speaker 2: Good student. Speaker 1: And what kind of child were you? Were you well-mannered or rambunctious or--? Speaker 2: Well I was well-mannered. I, I grew up between two brothers [Harry Brown Gibson, Jr. and Oliver Gibson] and at first I was what you'd call a tomboy. And I wore my little overalls and climbed the fences just like they did. And my mother [Evelyn Stanley Gibson Redmond] often said, "I didn't have any idea you'd settle down so completely," you know in not too long after that. But, but I had you know enjoyed my family and--. Speaker 1: Did you have dreams and aspirations as you were growing up, something you wanted to become or--? Speaker 2: I was interested in social work. I was interested in working with people and perhaps that's an outgrowth of being in the church and working with people in the church. Speaker 1: So in the churches that you attended with your family, could you describe some of your experiences there? Speaker 2: I think I just did. In Memphis the church there [Centenary United Methodist Church] was very much rooted in civil rights and the mass meetings were held them. My father was like a leader in every city he lived. He, he became involved and so he did pastor churches so they became involved. And that's just about all I can say, you know. Speaker 1: Where did you go to junior high school? Speaker 2: Junior high school was in Memphis, Tennessee--in fact I didn't go to junior high school. They went from elementary to high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And what was that experience like? Speaker 2: I can recall friends and singing. I had a little, we had a little trio and, and we would sing and then we went to high school. That became a little different atmosphere--you mentioned teachers. Now I recall in Memphis a teacher that had a great effect on me was one which was supposed to have been very strict--two, Mrs. Porter and Lucy Campbell. Now you probably haven't heard of Lucy Campbell but Lucy Campbell wrote a song that you might have heard, 'Something Within Me I Cannot Explain'. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: That's a very popular religious song and she, she, she was very as I say seemingly strict but she--you were really being shaped and, by her principles and she was very, very sure that--of what she was doing. She knew that she--that young people needed guidance and you don't always get it at home. You get it at home but you forget it sometimes when you get out. And she was another mother at, at school. Speaker 1: Okay. And where did you go to high school? Did you just continue just from that--? Speaker 2: I went to Porter--. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Elementary School through the eighth grade, then went to Booker [T.] Washington High School and that's the one I just described to you--, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. Speaker 2: --in Memphis. Speaker 1: In Memphis. Okay, and how are you spending your time when you were in high school? Were you involved in any extracurricular activities or organizations? Speaker 2: Yeah I played in the drum and bugle corps. Speaker 1: Okay. What about were there any particular books that you read when you were in high school that impacted or influenced you? Speaker 2: Not necessarily, except to look back over the period of time now in comparing the books and, and their curriculum actually because at that time we did three years of Latin, three years of Latin and one of Caesar and we did Literature. We had to learn verses and verses and verses of literature and we studied 'Macbeth' [by William Shakespeare] and, and all of those things. And I'm not sure they do it now. They may but I just know that those impacted me you know, 'The Canterbury Tales' [by Geoffrey Chaucer] and all the, the different things we had to learn and repeat. Story_ID: 10241 Speaker 1: And at that time what were you thinking that you wanted to be? Did you know where you wanted to go to college? Were you thinking ahead for that? Speaker 2: Not necessarily so. I knew I wanted to go to college, but we moved around so much I knew that my father [Harry Brown Gibson, Sr.] was going to send me to a Methodist school. And so that when we moved to Youngstown, Ohio from Chicago [Illinois], that's where I finished high school, the Rayen School and finished in three and a half years--early. So I was going to go to Bennett, that's a Methodist School but Bennett was full, couldn't go. So I didn't go and, and I went to Clark [University, later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. He sent me to Clark the next year. Speaker 1: The college? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. I, I finished Clark. Speaker 1: And when did you, what year did you enter Clark? Speaker 2: Oh I really went to Youngstown [State] University [Youngtown, Ohio] the two years before and I was at Clark two and a half years. Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like? You were in the AUC [Atlanta University Center] during a very different time? Speaker 2: Yes. It was a time that the war [World War II] was going on and there were a few young men. They had several dormitories. I think maybe one, one half of a dormitory was for young men. And then of course there was Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] across the street. So there was a steady stream from the other schools because Clark did not have that many young men there. But I was in the Buckeye Club. We had a club from Ohio. We had different clubs from different states. I was living in Youngstown and came to Clark. And enjoyed it. Speaker 1: Were there many protests on campus at that time? Speaker 2: No, not really. Um-um, um-mm. Speaker 1: So for the most part how were people responding to the war? Speaker 2: You know one of the things about college campuses is that you're in another little world. You're in a world of your own. Now it may be now that it's a little different because so many young people live in apartments and go back. But there's, there was a definite--two, two different students, those that live in city and those who lived on campus. And those who lived on campus were like a family. You knew each other, we ate together and had, were in sororities and fraternities together and that type, type thing so we really got to know each other much better. My brother [Harry Brown Gibson, Jr.] was in the city at the same time going to Gammon [Theological Seminary, Atlanta, Georgia] and I was at Clark. Uh-huh, so it made it nice that I was not just in the city by myself. Speaker 1: And did you continue any of your extracurricular activity participation in college? Were you continuing to play any instruments or--? Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no, no, no. That was a one-time high school thing. (laughs) Story_ID: 10242 Speaker 1: And so as you were transitioning from college [Clark University, later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] into the work force, what were you doing next? You graduated in--? Speaker 2: And then I, I had a double minor in education, secondary education and business education and I became a registrar at Miles College in, in Birmingham [Alabama]. My father [Harry Brown Gibson, Sr.] had moved to Birmingham before I fin--by the time I finished Clark. So that's where we moved and then that's where I met my husband [Rev. Joseph E. Lowery] in Birmingham. Speaker 1: And at that point what was your vision for your future? You just graduated from college? Where are you thinking you are going next? Speaker 2: I wasn't sure. You know you come into yourself and as I said I was at Miles College working, and also working in other organizations of the community--in the church. And actually I met him right away and it wasn't long before I--you know, we developed a relationship. (laughs) Speaker 1: And that relationship commenced into a marriage--. Speaker 2: That's correct, um-hmm. Speaker 1: --which occurred in what year? Speaker 2: In, oh I have to stop and think (laughs), '47 [1947]. Speaker 1: 1947. And was it a unification of, of thoughts in activism? Speaker 2: Well he was actually editor of a newspaper and also a manager of an insurance company. But he belonged to my father's church so that was the tie in that I, I got to know him. Story_ID: 10243 Speaker 1: In continuing I just wanted to follow up and ask if you'd like to remark on some of the places that you lived as you were growing up? Speaker 2: Remark on, not necessarily. I can try to name some of them if that's what you'd like for me to do. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Boley, Oklahoma; Muskogee, Oklahoma; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Okmulgee, Oklahoma, where my father [Harry Brown Gibson, Sr.] grew up and he became district superintendent of that whole state so we stayed there in Okmulgee. And then we moved to Tulsa, Oklahoma and then to Memphis, Tennessee and from Memphis to Chicago [Illinois] where he pastored Gammon [United Methodist] Church and then were moved to Youngstown, Ohio and then to Birmingham [Alabama]. And he stayed there about nine years and then he, he passed in Birmingham. In fact he was living in Birmingham but he had gone to deliver the baccalaureate sermon at Rust College in Holly Springs, Mississippi and became ill after delivering that sermon. And they took him to Memphis and that's where he died really in Memphis. Having pastored there and my mother [Evelyn Stanley Gibson Redmond] liked it so well she moved back to Memphis and that's where she was until two years ago when I went and got her and brought her to Atlanta [Georgia] and she stayed here until she passed [April 12, 2004]. Story_ID: 10244 Speaker 1: You were beginning to discuss your marriage. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: So you met your husband [Rev. Joseph E. Lowery] in your father's [Harry Brown Gibson, Sr.] church--, Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: --and he was working at that time. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My sister [Geraldine Gibson Bynum] arranged this. Yes, and she was the, she was the little cupid and that's how I met him. She--. Speaker 1: How did she arrange it? She--? Speaker 2: Well she said, "Oh, my sister's coming home and I want you to meet her," you know, that type thing. And she set it up. We had a, a blind date and that from there. Speaker 1: And so you began dating and--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yes. Speaker 1: --later married. And at that time where were you all living? Speaker 2: In Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: In Birmingham. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And how long were you there and what kinds of things were you involved in? Speaker 2: Well we, we lived in Birmingham for quite some time. My father as I said was the pastor there a long time, St. Paul [United Methodist Church] Church down, just right on the other end of the block of 16th Street [Baptist] Church and the museum [Birmingham Civil Rights Institute], the tall church on the other end of the block. And he built that church and then he passed before it got finished on the inside permanently. So we ended up coming there and my husband finished the inside of the church. That, that, that was after we married. We moved--his first church was a little church in Birmingham and then we moved to Alexander City, Alabama, there for about two or three years and then to Mobile [Alabama]. And Mobile we were there nine years. Mobile was a place where he was, he, he had met Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and we became very heavily involved with the [Civil Rights] Movement. He headed the movement in Mobile and we went through an awful lot in those nine years. That's the time when Dr. King was in Montgomery [Alabama] and [Rev.] Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy and we were in Mobile and [Rev. Fred] Shuttlesworth was in Birmingham. And these ministers all sort of worked together. After the Montgomery bus boycott started these ministers came to support, go to Montgomery and support Dr. King, financially and otherwise, morally. And so after the boycott was over they decided that they, they had strength and power and--being together. And they said, "We should stay together." And C. K. [Charles Kenzie] Steele was in Florida and Tallahassee. So these ministers came together and formed the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. It was after that, that they formed the SCLC. Speaker 1: And at that time what was your involvement like in the SCLC? What types of things were the women doing? Speaker 2: Well actually in SCL--the involvement became before SCLC. As I said he pastored in Mobile and headed the Movement there. Dr. King and Abernathy were in Montgomery so they had a movement there. So I was involved with the Movement in Mobile and we would talk--we were desegregating buses and getting black policemen and that type thing at the same time they were in Montgomery. But it wasn't felt as strongly. The resistance was not as great. Mobile has a strong Catholic-dominated community and it's a little more liberal, just a little more liberal, enough not to raise a real ruckus. They give you a little bit, enough to, to quiet you a little and then you move on you know from that to get some more. But it's not like a solid resistance like Montgomery and they just, everything just broke loose. So we were doing all kinds of things, we were getting bomb threats in Mobile at our home. And it was, it was very tough in Mobile. We had a minister, a, a--who was at a college, Caucasian who was a friend of the Movement, and there have been many Caucasian people who have been friends of the Movement. Had they not been for them we'd have, we would have not been as well received as possible. And he would call--my husband was gone a lot with Dr. King. He'd be going on different things or be in Montgomery and I was home with the children. And this minister would call me and he, he was real close to us and he would say--and I can't call his name, I don't have permission to do that. And I often wondered if he would mind but I haven't pursued it. But he would call and tell me, "Evelyn, get to the back of the house because they're planning to bomb your house tonight." And--because he would send some of the students to the [Ku Klux] Klan meetings and they'd come back and tell him and then he would call and let us know. And it was very--often the members of the church would want me to move and come and stay with them. I think I did it one night but I said, "I can't do this. I cannot leave home, pack up my three little kids [Yvonne, Karen and Cheryl Lowery] and go running every time there's a threat." And so I decided to stay there and we would be in the back of the house--it so happened that the bedrooms were. But we knew each time. But there was a saving grace. There was an all-night restaurant, all-day, all-night restaurant that was called the Big Mamma's Café, and that restaurant was booming with the juke box loud and going all the time. And we would get tired of the music but that was our salvation possibly because there was never a time hardly that they would have an opportunity to come by our house and somebody was not walking along there. And so they came over and told us, "Reverend, y'all just go to sleep. We're watching out for you. Nothing's gonna happen." So this, there was a green truck that was supposed to be the one that would come around and they said they would, they had, they had, had seen the green truck but they would not stop to do anything because they saw them watching out for us, somebody at that Big Mamma's Café. Speaker 1: And was Big Mamma's Café a predominantly African American café? Speaker 2: Completely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. This was a, an African American community. We were just a half a block from a very noted street, Davis Avenue which was a predominantly black street like Auburn Avenue. And so people just streamed back and forth from there. Speaker 1: So you took the stance early that--, Speaker 2: Oh I had to. Speaker 1: --you would not--. Speaker 2: Definitely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Would not run. Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay, and so I didn't ask what year was your first child born? Speaker 2: She was born in '48 [1948]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And you married in what year? Speaker 2: '47 [1947]. Speaker 1: '47 [1947]. And the child was born a year after. So--. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: So you were really propelled. Speaker 2: Right, right, yes. And it so happened that my mother [Evelyn Stanley Gibson Redmond] when we, when I wanted to go on marches would come and keep them for me and so that I could go. She appreciated the fact that I wanted to be involved. Story_ID: 10245 Speaker 1: And what is the one of the more memorable marches that you participated--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well of course the Selma to Montgomery March in '65 [1965] and that, that of course is the, the most outstanding one. And we were living in Birmingham [Alabama] then. We had moved to--back to Birmingham. We left Mobile [Alabama] after nine years, then we go back and then moved to Nashville [Tennessee] for three years and then to, back to Birmingham. And that's when he [husband, Rev. Joseph E. Lowery] finished the church and the Selma to Montgomery march was there, the 16th Street [Baptist] Church had been bombed just before we moved there. But at that Selma to Montgomery march the purpose of the march was to take a petition to Governor [George C.] Wallace for the right to vote, signed names all everywhere. So when we marched into the city after all night at St. Jude [Catholic Church, Montgomery, Alabama] where the entertainers from all over the country came and, and entertained, Sammy Davis, Jr. , Peter Paul and Mary--all kinds of entertainers came, Lena Horne. And had a long--that long march and then along the campus of the [Alabama state] capitol, and by then had gotten very late in the evening, dusk-dark. So Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] appointed a committee to take this petition to Governor Wallace who was up there in the capitol listening to us. (laughs) And so everybody had gone, it was getting dark and, and he then appointed a nineteen member committee. He, he appointed my husband chair of that committee. And so they proceeded to march to the steps of the capitol--I was standing across the street taking pictures with my little camera in half dark and they attempted to go up the steps but they were stopped by the state troopers. They wouldn't let them go up the steps. And as soon as they did that the [Alabama] National Guard came up with their bayonets or whatever they have and the state troopers parted just like that. In other words they said, "You have to let them go up." And they went up the steps to see Governor Wallace but he wouldn't come down to see them. He sent a messenger or an assistant or somebody and they said, "We have not marched this long and this far and this hard to give this petition to an assistant." So they did not give it. But it was late by then. This, this took a good while for all these little things to happen, this sequence to happen. So it was very late when we left, black-dark. And when we got back to Birmingham the telephone rang and I answered the phone and it was Richard Valeriani. I don't know if you heard of him. He was a news correspondent, very famous at that time, calling. He said, "I know that you were about the last ones there. We heard of something we believe so dark happened on the highway but we don't know what it was, wondered if you had seen or heard or anything?" So we said, "No we didn't. We had the radio on but we didn't hear of anything." So the next morning the whole world knew that Viola Liuzzo had been killed, that was the incident they were talking about. She was taking workers back and forth from Selma to Montgomery and supplies and on that dark highway they couldn't tell what had happened on Highway 80, but these Ku Klux Klanners [Collie Wilkins, Gary Rowe, William Eaton and Eugene Thomas] in their car had come by and they shot and killed her. And a young man [Leroy Moton] was in the car with her. I gave him an award a couple of years ago. And he was thrown out of the car and they came back and looked. They were going to kill him. They thought he was dead. He played dead and they came back and looked and he just played dead but he, he didn't, he wasn't dead. He found his way back. And, but this is why when I founded SCLC/WOMEN [Southern Christian Leadership Conference/Women's Organizational Movement for Equality Now, Inc.], that was one of the first things I wanted to do. I never forgot that experience and I wanted to go back and put a monument up on the highway in memory of Viola Liuzzo. She left her family, her children and came and gave her life for the right to vote. And so the monument reads, "To our sister in the struggle." Story_ID: 10246 Speaker 1: And in what year did you found SCLC/WOMEN [Southern Christian Leadership Conference/Women's Organizational Movement for Equality Now, Inc.]? Speaker 2: 1979. Speaker 1: And this is quite a feat for women in the civil rights movement. Speaker 2: Um-hmm, yes. Well before that my husband [Rev. Joseph E. Lowery] was President from '77 [1977] on. This didn't happen 'til '79 [1979]. And actively involved in all the marches and lots of things that were going on then before SCLC/WOMEN was founded, we had this peaceful demonstration in Decatur, Alabama. In defense of Tommy Lee Hines a retarded young man who was accused of raping these two women. And he couldn't even coordinate riding a bicycle. So we were, we, we went there in his defense and we were met by people with their guns and waving--they knew we were coming for the demonstration. And we called the state troopers, state--they did called the state patrol to let them know that but they ignored it. And we went to the church and made sure everybody was disarmed. That's the way they always did in marches and decided that we could not let the [Ku Klux] Klan keep us from marching. So we set out to march. Normally I marched with my husband. But this time he said, he felt the danger involved and he said, "You'd better drive the car," 'cause he knew I was going to go. And I drove the car by myself. No one was in with me. So as we rounded the corner going down the street downtown Decatur we saw this mob. And we were within the block where they were and they started shooting. And they immediately rushed to my husband and the front line and took them away. A couple of kids were struck but not seriously. And then they ran back to my car. They knew the car and--because they had seen us when we came in. They ran back to the car, the whole mob, and shot in the car. The first bullet hit right here, this little side panel by my head. And then the, I, I, I was, I went down to the seat of the car, went down because I felt that that was it, they were going to, you know. So the next bullet did come right over the steering wheel and glass and everything flew all over me. And I, I had my foot on the brake and I didn't know what to do really. But I said, "Well--," and I could hear them hollering at each other, "Don't do that, Sam!" So and so and so and just, you know, just talking to each other. And so I thought the next moment they were just going to come and shoot me in the car. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But a few moments elapsed and I said, "I've got to do something. I can't just sit here forever." And I said, "I will look up and see if anything is in front of me. If not I'll just shoot off." And that's exactly what I did. I decided all of a sudden look up and there was nobody in front of me and I just shot off and found my way back to the church--little church where they had gathered. My husband by then was on his way back down there to try to look and see what was going on with me. But, but that's the way that ended. That was a terror--I think that's as close to death as I will ever come. And that was quite an experience I had to live through. Speaker 1: So when you looked up and you realized that there was no one in your view, were there still people around the car? Speaker 2: They were all on the side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh they were all on the side still. Speaker 1: And you could hear them? Speaker 2: Oh I could hear them talking, calling each other by their first name. Incidentally, after that time the law and poverty--Civil Rights Poverty Association [sic, Southern Law Poverty Center] in Birmingham--not, I mean Montgomery [Alabama] volunteered lawyers and they actually arrested some of the, three or four of the Klanmen, Klansmen. And I don't--they gave them the option of either going to jail for a few weeks probably or going to a class, a civil class taught by my husband. So--. Speaker 1: What was the title of that class? Speaker 2: I don't know what you--if it had a title but it was a, it, it was, it was punishment to them. And three, two or three of them I think did go to jail rather than to do it. And then I think there were about three that came to the class. I came to the class. I was there. And they actually apologized. They, they said that they were sorry that they did it. And I, I'm not to judge. We weren't to judge but that was what they--after the class that my husband taught them that, that was their response. So hopefully--. Speaker 1: How were you feeling at that time? Speaker 2: I you know, I think I was still in shock just a little bit and I just sat there and, and listened and they looked at me because they knew that somebody in their crowd had shot in my car twice. But it's the kind of thing you have to let go or it will have devastating affects on you. Story_ID: 10247 Speaker 1: And so I prayed over it and that was in May of '79 [1979] and the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] convention met in, guess it must have been that fall in Virginia. And I had started supporting them because my husband [Rev. Joseph E. Lowery] was chairman of the board before he was president and I had started raising money. We've always needed money. I, among my friends I started raising two or three thousand dollars every year just to give it to them. And after this happened in May of '79 [1979], and at the convention they said, "Why don't you get some other lady--why don't you involve some other women?" They didn't say how or what or anything, just mentioned it. So I went and thought about it and prayed over it and after about four months I called a group of women into my home and--on Cascade [Ave., Atlanta, Georgia] and we talked about it and they were interested in it. And so we had another meeting and we got the name, SCLC/WOMEN [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]--we wanted WOMEN to mean something, Women's Organizational Movement for Equality Now [Inc.], that's what we are. And so we did that and then we started meeting in my basement and working for the organization in my basement until my husband said, "You know, you need to be down at the office down here." So we moved down here and then started functioning and growing and getting involved, because I, I let them know we were not going to be a little auxiliary to eat cookies and drink milk but to actually function and help make conditions better. Speaker 2: That means a lot because at that time there were many organizations that you could belong to. Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: In the establishing of SCLC/WOMEN, what was the larger vision? Speaker 1: The larger vision was for women to help empower women and to work to strengthen families. In Atlanta we had gone through the missing and murdered children. The children had--were frightened, many of them. And our, one of the first projects I started was I--and since the children were very upset and the mayor had appointed me as a five, one of the five members on that committee to help take care of those when they--you had a death from the murdered and missing children--go and visit the families and see if they needed any clothing and help them like that. So after that we--I felt the need to still do something else for the children of Atlanta. They were so sad. When is the next one going to happen? You know it was just a shocking thing. So I went to mayor--Shirley Franklin was then the head of the community affairs and, and Mayor [Maynard] Jackson was the mayor. So I, I called her up 'cause we--I said, "Let's have a Christmas party for the children," and we realized we couldn't do that for all the children of Atlanta ourselves and that's when I called Shirley Franklin and she says, "Well, you know, let me talk with the mayor because he's been thinking, wanting to do something for the children but no one has ever done it. So why don't we cosponsor it." So in other words '79 [1979] we started cosponsoring this huge Christmas party for the children of Atlanta and it has lasted until now, twenty-five years. Then we started the next year doing a--sponsoring a party for senior citizens and it has grown and grown and grown a beautiful dinner every year for them. We had about six or seven hundred last year. And to strengthen the family, then I wanted to do something to--we, we are in this Auburn Avenue area, do something to, to help those who want to help themselves. We went and got a--we finally were able to get a, a grant from [W. K.] Kellogg [Foundation] and we started an empowerment training center teaching computer training and, and particularly to single mothers and women who needed to embellish their professions and uplift them, help them to get a job actually. And then we developed an AIDS [acquired immune deficiency syndrome] program, got a five-year grant from CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention]--finally. We had two different, two years of just volunteering things, the AIDS information. We had two conferences, one here to just wonder what's going on. We've been hearing about this. And then we said if it didn't get any better with the next year we'll have another one and surely enough it didn't get better. We had one at Howard University in Washington [D.C.] and then we got the grant. And so we've developed an AIDS education program in churches around the country in five cities and we're administering that. So we've been involved in, in a number of projects. We, we did oratorical contests for many years. I think you know about that and given scholarships, over three hundred and fifty thousand dollars in scholarships for high school graduates going to college and we're still are on the move. Story_ID: 10248 Speaker 1: What do you think has been the greatest accomplishment of SCLC/WOMEN [Southern Christian Leadership Conference/Women's Organizational Movement for Equality Now, Inc.]? You'll be celebrating or you just celebrated the twenty-fifth year? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We celebrated--this was the twenty-fifth year. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: This is the twenty-fifth year. I, when I walk down the street and, and a young person or a young woman says, "Oh Mrs. Lowery I went to your learning school and now I'm employed over at Wheat Street [Baptist] Church [Atlanta, Georgia]," that makes me feel good. Most everything that we have done to help someone to me is an accomplishment. We with the school board have sponsored seminar--conferences and they have let us come in for several years and they've provided about two thousand students who needed it to, to talk about child abuse, talk about the male child, to talk about drugs, to talk about HIV/AIDS, talk about teen pregnancy. And those type self-esteem. So we've done that through the years and with the school system. And those, every little thing that you can do hopefully will drop on, on, on, on good ears and something will become of it. And I just feel that all of the things that we've done, whatever we've done hopefully it has helped someone. And that's to me--I often tell them, "Let's not think of ourselves," let's remind them that let's not think of ourselves but think of the least of these and that's who we want to always think about. Speaker 1: Are there any other organizations that you belong to or that you're affiliated with that you--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Ever since college days [at Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] I've been a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's one of the things my moving around from place to place you--there's something that you can tie into and that has helped me. I belonged in Mobile [Alabama] to the chapter, I belonged in Nashville [Tennessee], in Birmingham [Alabama] and then in Atlanta. Speaker 1: And you've been able to mobilize many women toward the causes that the SCLC/WOMEN (unclear)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm, yes. We work in task forces. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's on purpose so that all can participate. We have a health and welfare task force and we have a youth task force and, and many others that we can involve our young, our women. Story_ID: 10249 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you'd like to add to this interview perhaps that we haven't asked already? Speaker 2: Well there are two things I--well one, one of the things is the mentoring program that we [Southern Christian Leadership Conference/Women's Organizational Movement for Equality Now, Inc.] have is one of my pet projects and there are so many young girls who are deserving our support. And we, we do have thirty five young ladies that we work with and that's a gratifying project that we do. We also developed a quilt, a 'Stop the Killing Quilt' and we have taken this quilt around. We've taken it to Washington, D.C. twice with the [James and Sarah] Bradys. It depicts young people who have been killed violently through the years and we've taken it to schools and many of the young people can point out people that they know on the quilt and it has impacted them quite a bit in an effort to, to get them to think, thinking about stopping the killing and violence. But the other thing in 1987 after coming here from Alabama to Georgia, I realized that not too many people were familiar with the--what happened in Alabama. They--they'd seen a little bit of it on 'Eyes on the Prize' and a little bit in the media but it was very vague. And so I started a heritage tour, Civil Rights Heritage Tour, taking a two-day tour to, to Alabama and that is something that I've continued. It's now named the Evelyn Gibson Lowery Civil Rights Heritage Tour. And it's been gratifying to take thousands and thousands of young people and adults back over that period of time to Birmingham, to Marion, Alabama, to Selma, Alabama where we spend the night and then get up and march over the Edmund Pettis Bridge and, and then on out over 80--Highway 80 to Montgomery [Alabama] and then to Tuskegee [Alabama] and here. And when--and I write litanies. I've written litanies for those young people to be, to read and they've become a part of that. And as I mentioned to you the monuments have been set up in those cities and we explain all of that to, to them and we let them participate in that process and they really become a part of it and they really are changed. I often stop for instance at the--one of the graves and say, "What has this trip meant to you?" And they become very emotional because they said, "We've heard about it, we've read about it, but there's nothing like experiencing it and seeing the sights, the places and meeting the people." I was involved of course at that time. So when I go through I call the people ahead--of the Movement and have them come out and meet and talk with the young people and it has made quite a difference. I was at a national conference this summer in the North and a little Caucasian girl came to me, "Oh, Mrs. Lowery I went on your tour. I'll never forget it." That just impacted me you know I was so shocked. But it's, it's something that gets them to thinking about it. I think as they grow and mature they will understand the importance of the right to vote for instance. And this year in as much as the election has not taken place, that's what I'm calling it the get out--the tour, we're taking the tour October 2nd and 3rd, that's next week and, and we call it the 'Get Out The Vote Tour' because so many people on this tour have really fought and given their lives for the movement for the right to vote. And so we are having press conferences, setting up press conferences in Birmingham and asking organizations to join us to just tell people to get out and vote and show the importance of voting. So we're going to do that in Montgomery and all along the way. Speaker 1: What other kinds of organizational affiliations or activities, awards have you been involved in or received most recently? Speaker 2: Well most recent, the most recent one is the one last week the National Park Service gave, the inaugural induction and the International Civil Rights Walk of Fame and the footprints. That was quite an emotional and spiritual thing to me to, to see those footprints. I never dreamed that I would. I've heard Alfred Lord Tennyson [poet] saying, talking about, "Footprints in the sands of time." I never dreamed that my footprints would have been there. But that was quite an honor. The Atlanta [Georgia] Business League has--I've gotten awards every year, hundred most important women in the city [sic, Atlanta's Top 100 Black Women of Influence] but then inducted into their Hall of Fame. And Alpha Kappa Alpha [Sorority, Inc.] boule, Septima Clark was quite a woman in the Movement years ago so they gave me that award at the boule and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] several years ago gave me the Rosa Parks Award. Those are just a few of the awards. Story_ID: 10250 Speaker 1: And how do you feel about the way that you've lived your life and what is important to you? Speaker 2: The way I've lived my life I think if I had it to do over I would do it the same way, helping people and making a--bringing about change for the better is something that I have, I feel in my heart and whether I give credit for it or not I think that's the thing that because as I mentioned to you before I'm a volunteer. I've never gotten paid and I'm not paid right now. So it's just something that, that's in my heart to do. Speaker 1: What would you still like to do that you haven't done as of yet? Speaker 2: I used to say travel but I've traveled so much and things have changed so differently now. We traveled to--on peace-making trips, one of the things I didn't say to Nicaragua, to the Middle East, to East Berlin [Germany], to South Africa. I've been arrested three times, two times over apartheid at the South African Embassy in Washington [D.C.] and in Atlanta [Georgia] when Winn-Dixie [grocery store chain] was selling products made by South--made in South Africa we went to jail for that. And then I went to jail in Henderson, North Carolina on--they were dumping toxic waste in black and poor neighborhoods so I went to jail for that. So I just think the cause of freedom has been something that I've felt very strong about dedicating my life to and I can think of nothing better that I would want to do. Story_ID: 10251 Speaker 1: And what are your hopes and concerns for the African American community? Speaker 2: Well I hope that we can do away with so much of the violence, so much of the, the drugs and so, so much of what would keep us back and try to support our young people and develop leadership and move forward, pull together and strengthen our communities and, and just make this a better world, a peaceful world. Story_ID: 10252 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a servant of the people. Speaker 1: And what do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: I really haven't thought about it. They probably said a lot of things about me but I hope that, that, that it could be something kind. Speaker 1: Is there a message or lesson that you have for children in the world? Speaker 2: Well I hope that they will take life seriously and become focused on some of the things of value in life early on and, and be able to, to follow through and accomplish some of the things. They're so bright. Young people are so bright. My grandkids are so bright that they, they, they can show me things about the computer you know that I don't know. And, and I just hope that they'll make the best of it and just flourish. Speaker 1: And what do you want for your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I just want it to be, I would say, just like I just finished saying that I tried to help--the song says, "If I can help somebody along the way," I hope that I have been able to do that through the years. And I do know that the people who come to this place in our learning center daily, nine to five, are grateful for the opportunity, it's absolutely free and it helps them to get a hold on life. One young lady came and lived in a homeless shelter for women at night and spent the days here learning to use the computer. And as a result of that she learned to make t-shirts and all kinds of things. And I went to Memphis, Tennessee to visit my mother [Evelyn Stanley Gibson Redmond] about three years ago and I went to a function on the grounds. My little nephew calls himself a singer and they had invited him there. He had me to come. And who but this same person, Joy Scott, who was here living in the shelter and, and coming here learning how to use the computer was there emceeing that program. And she just had a fit when she saw me. She, you know, she calls me her mentor. But she now is in Memphis on a radio station with her own show. So these are the gratifying things that you look at and say, "Well I had a little part in that.".