 Story_ID: 18776 Speaker 1: I need you to state your name and spell it. Speaker 2: Okay. Right now? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Peggy A. Montes P-E-G-G-Y, middle initial A-- Speaker 1: For what? Speaker 2: Ann A-N-N, Montes M-O-N-T-E-S. Speaker 1: What is your maiden name? Speaker 2: Ann--Oh no Booker. (laughs). Speaker 1: (laughs). Speaker 2: Nobody's asked me that in a long time. What is my maiden name? Booker. Speaker 1: Okay. And I'd like to have your date of birth. Speaker 2: My date of birth is October 17, 1936 Speaker 1: Okay. And I'd like to have your--you know, today's date. Speaker 2: Today's date is Friday August 10, 2001. Speaker 1: (Unclear) we're at--We're at-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) 1900-- Speaker 1: (unclear) Okay. Speaker 2: We are at 1900 S. Michigan Avenue, 3rd Floor. Speaker 1: It's the offices of The HistoryMakers. And the other thing I'd like to have is your profession. Speaker 2: I am an educator and a professional volunteer. Story_ID: 18777 Speaker 1: What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: (Pauses) Orange. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Autumn. Speaker 1: Favorite food? Speaker 2: (Pauses) Fish. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Walt Disney World [Orlando, Florida]. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "It's been real." Story_ID: 18778 Speaker 1: I like usually to start out by asking people about their background. And I'd like to first talk about your mother, (unclear). And I'd like to have her name but also her maiden name. And what you know, you know, about where she was from and her growing up. Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Myrtle Thomas. She grew up in Chicago [Illinois]. My mother was a very special person. I guess all mothers are. But she was a homemaker as well as a volunteer and a very active community person. Speaker 1: And can you go into--Well Did--First of all what--did she share any stories about growing up? Speaker 2: She didn't share too many stories about growing up in Chicago. Perhaps because we knew most of the friends she grew up with. And my mother was not that talkative. So we really never got to hear stories about growing up here. But like I said we had an opportunity to meet a lot of her friends who would share their experiences and stories with us. Speaker 1: Was she--'Cause she was born in St. Louis [Missouri] right? Speaker 2: yes. Speaker 1: Okay. But she moved very quickly here afterwards? Speaker 2: yes. My grandparents came to Chicago I guess during the first great migration in the early 1900s. So my mother came along as well as my aunt. And they resided in Chicago. Speaker 1: Now your father. What about him? His name and what you know about him and his background. Speaker 2: Thomas Booker. He was from Cairo, Illinois. He held several different jobs. He worked on the railroad and then he also worked in a foundry. My father was a very quiet person. Not very active in community events or political events. But he was a very warm person and a very good provider. Story_ID: 18779 Speaker 1: Can you share with us some of your early memories or your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. One of my favorite ones is the fact that we--Early in my life we lived across the street from a school. And I would watch the children as they went to school in the morning when the bell first rang. And it always intrigued me in terms of what they would be doing during the day. And then at the end of the day the bell would ring. And then everybody would pour out of school. And it just sort of like whetted my appetite to really want to go to school. And I can remember looking out the window. So I must have been maybe like three or four years old. So when it became my turn to go to school, I was so excited that I excelled in school. Because to me, school was very important. Speaker 1: Why do you think it was important at that time? Speaker 2: Because it was a way of bringing the world to me. Not only that. But making it possible for me to learn about so many things. And I tend to be a very inquisitive person. So school was just my answer to everything. Speaker 1: Did you--What other memories--Oh you know what I--I want to go over your siblings. And what their names are and where you fit in the hierarchy. Speaker 2: Okay. There were five of us. My brother Thomas who was the oldest. He is now deceased. I am second, and then my sister Myrtle. She is still living. A baby brother Terrance or 'Terry' is deceased and I have a younger sister Arlene who is still living. Speaker 1: So tell me about family life. What was it like? (unclear) born? I mean where was your family living here in Chicago? And-- Speaker 2: We lived in--born here in Chicago [Illinois]. So we lived in different parts of Chicago. When I was first born we lived in the Bronzeville area at 3131 S. Calumet. Then we moved to the near west side on 14th place. Then we moved from there to Robbins, Illinois. And then we moved from there back to Chicago. I had an extremely happy childhood. It was one of exploration, of excitement, of doing many things, of being very active. And being exposed to many things. And so to me it was just an ideal childhood. We were always--Even though there were five of us, we were very well provided for. Like I said my father [Thomas Booker] was a very good provider. And we received different exposures. Piano, we took art lessons, so we did many things. And Chicago was really like to world to me. 'Cause we had the opportunity to explore. Especially to go to the museums. And so we had that kind of enriched life. Story_ID: 18780 Speaker 1: What smells and sounds do you associate with growing up with your youth? Speaker 2: (Pauses) What smells and sounds. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I associate the smells of Halsted Street [Chicago, Illinois]. The different smells of Halsted Street. Because when I grew up Halsted Street between 14th Street and over to Van Buren [Street] was a very mixed neighborhood. A neighborhood of very--different kids of ethnic groups. And so as you walked down Halsted Street, all these wonderful smells would come up. And smells of meats, smells of different vegetables, smells of different foods that the people cooked. And so those to me were just marvelous smells. Story_ID: 18781 Speaker 1: I would like to have some of your favorite sounds. Speaker 2: Some of my favorite sounds--? Speaker 1: Or--. Speaker 2: People laughing, music and the stillness of the night (laughs). Those are really--Oh and the waves. The sound that the waves make. Speaker 1: Now what kind of music do you remember? Speaker 2: I remember classical music and especially early jazz. My father collected jazz records. So growing up we were surrounded with Louis Armstrong, Billie Holliday, Cab Calloway all of the early musicians. And so that's what I always heard. Which to me was beautiful music. So I guess I grew up appreciating jazz. And also in terms of classical music, my mother [Myrtle Thomas Booker] enjoyed classical music. So we usually were bombarded with especially [Ludwig van] Beethoven and [Claude] Debussy. For some reason she loved 'Claire de Lune'. So that's (laughs) that's what we heard a lot of. And so those were the musical experiences that we had in our home. Speaker 1: Now what I find interesting your mother. Was she an exposed person? Because how would she know to expose you? And why was that her motivation? Speaker 2: Well I--It probably extends from my--the exposure that she got from her mother. My grandmother [Clara Jones], we called her 'Mama'. Mama was a very I would say learned person. She was the first to go off to college. Well she being reared in Mississippi she went to--And I can't think of the name of it. Alcorn College [later Alcorn State University, Alcorn State, Mississippi]. That's where she went. And so I guess because of the exposure that she received that she passed it on to my mother and her sister. And so those were the things that always took place in our home in terms of nice music and books. We had--We read a lot of books. And so I--Like I said I guess that came from my great--my grandmother. Story_ID: 18782 Speaker 1: You were talking about rowing up on West 14th Place [Chicago, Illinois] and what that was like. And you know what strikes me is (unclear). Was there mixture between these, you know, these different (unclear)? And I'm wondering, you know, what--You know, what actually was hap--Was there a melting pot or were people in their different (unclear)? Speaker 2: No there actually was a melting pot. Like I was telling you that growing up on 14th Place there were the Lithuanians on one side of the street. Down we had--and I'm trying to think of this religious sect of people. They--There're not--They weren't Quakers but it was a sect of the Quaker religion. And so they lived on the block also. And then further down going towards Ashland Avenue you still had a mixture of African Americans as well as whites who lived on the block. And so we played together. The children played together. And we went to school. Most of the white kids though went to the Catholic schools. And we went to the public school. Speaker 1: The Mennonites? Speaker 2: The Mennonites. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: That's who they were Mennonites. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: The Mennonites. That's right. Story_ID: 18783 Speaker 1: What was home life like? Speaker 2: Home life was-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) 'Cause you're the oldest daughter. Speaker 2: I'm the oldest daughter. Home life was a fun kind of environment. Where we received a lot of security. We felt good about ourselves within our environment. And it was a happy environment being one amongst four. Well my--one among five. We fought and had fun together. And we were able to amuse ourselves to the extent that we were very independent. Because we didn't need outside people. Although we were very sociable outside of our family. But the family unit was just very important. And like I said we were a very happy group of five individuals. And when I say individuals we were definitely all individuals. Speaker 1: All of you were different from each other. Speaker 2: Yes (laughs). Quite different. Speaker 1: So did you--Was there a lot--Was there anything that family life was centered around? Was it centered around the dinner table? Was it centered around I mean church? Was it centered around something else? Speaker 2: It centered around church and also the dinner table. Because we always ate together. I never knew until I became older that people did not sit around their table. Everybody in the family didn't sit around their table and eat dinner. Because that's exactly what we did. Being a part of church was very important. We attended Sunday school. We sang in the choir. We attended BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union], which was an evening kind of service for the youngsters. And so it was just--Like I said just a very encouraging, secure environment. And we had a lot of fun. Speaker 1: Now you were Baptist then right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay, oh so fire and brimstone then. Speaker 2: That's right (laughs). Speaker 1: So what church were you going to? Did you have a church-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. Zion Hill, which was on Ashland Avenue [Chicago, Illinois]. And that experience to me has always been a part of my memory. Because going to Zion Hill we had a very progressive choir director. And she exposed us to beautiful songs. We not only sang gospel songs. But we sang anthems, which were just beautiful sacred musical songs. So it was always a pleasure to go to choir rehearsal. 'Cause you didn't know which new beautiful song you would have to rehearse and be able to sing on Sunday morning, or in a recital. Story_ID: 18784 Speaker 1: Tell me what the young--what, what the young Peggy Montes was--or at that point Peggy Booker. What was she like? Was she quiet? Was she well behaved? Was she, you know, mischievous? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) (laughs) She--A very simple complex person. Very well behaved but very mischievous. Could be very good, but could be very bad. Very smart, comical. I liked to joke a lot and I liked to play a lot of tricks on people. And I also enjoyed reading. And I didn't really have to study that hard. And I--The only thing about that was since I really didn't have to push myself, I didn't push myself. But the young Peggy enjoyed her community. Explored the community. Because I would take--Many times I would go off by myself. You could ride the streetcar. And I was curious in terms of what was beyond my community. And I would take streetcar rides and I would ride all over Chicago [Illinois]. I would go--take a streetcar ride to the North Side, to the South Side (laughs), over to the lake. Go down town and come back all by myself. Speaker 1: So do you think you were a loner in some respects? Were you-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. I am a loner in some respects. Because I enjoy being with me. And I don't need company. I don't need people to enhance who I am or how I feel or what I see. And in that respect I enjoy being alone. But I'm a gregarious person also. Because I'm always involved with people. But then like I said, there's the other side of me which is, "I don't wanna be bother with anybody but me." Speaker 1: And when you are on these sort of exploratory trips around and I don't know your age. I want to establish-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Probably about (laughs). Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: About nine or ten years old. (laughs). Speaker 1: Nine or ten years old! (laughs) Excuse me. Speaker 2: You were taking these trips and exploring--Nine or ten years old! My goodness. So what--What was going on in your head in many ways? You know this--I believe you're thinking certainly. So there are--you know, a mind is never really quiet. So what was going on as you're sort of riding and looking and seeing? Speaker 1: Well it was interesting to see people. The neighborhoods where they lived and how they lived. How well they kept their neighborhoods. The cars that I would see, the children playing. And then imagining perhaps what they--what their day might be like. And just enjoying what I was seeing. Just taking it all in. You can't believe that. (laughs) Speaker 2: I know. And now people would be frightened. And I-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well see that's the whole thing. Then I guess I didn't have any fear. And also my mother [Myrtle Thomas Booker] didn't have any fear. We would go--We would shop downtown. My brother [Thomas Booker] and I would go shopping on Saturdays. And nobody would think in terms of would we return or we wouldn't return--would somebody kidnap us or would somebody rob us. That was really unheard of. And like I said before, it was just the freedom. So you had freedom to roam. You had freedom to do things without worrying about somebody snatching you or killing you or doing anything like that to you. So I just simply--I never thought about something happening to me. I just simply thought about, "I'm gonna get out and see and do." Story_ID: 18785 Speaker 1: I know you were very excited to go to school. Are there teachers that, you know, you remember from, you know, that--at Medill [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], you know, that influenced you or had an impact on you? Speaker 2: Yes. One teacher in particular. Mrs. Emery. She was a real cute teacher. And she was at that time what they called adjustment teachers. And an adjustment teacher is really a counselor. And I guess I really admired her. And she took an interest in me because I would do errands for her. I would come in to her office. I could watch her grade the test. So I found out--I learned at a very early age about intelligence tests. About reading tests and things like that. Because I worked at her office. And I always had a secret desire to become an adjustment teacher. And I did (laughs). I actually became an adjustment teacher and a counselor. And I will always remember her. Because like I said, she left a very good impression. She made a very good impression on me as a young girl growing up. She was a very proper and prim person. Everything in its proper place. And like I said, I just admired her. I never saw her with her hair out of--not a strand of her hair out of place. She was just so meticulous. And the other thing that I admired about her, she was a very smart woman. And I figured if she could be a smart woman, I could also be a smart woman. And she explained to me the importance of reading and doing well. And that's what I did. Speaker 1: Now when you--you went from Medill now was the move from Medill (unclear) by your family's move to--At that time you went to--you moved to the west side. Right? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hmm. Speaker 1: And how old were you when you moved to the West Side? Speaker 2: Probably like really about five years old. Six years old. So that was the early part of my life. Speaker 1: Okay. When you moved to the West Side? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh the west side. That's where you went to Medill. Speaker 2: Medill is over on the West Side. Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. So then-- Speaker 2: When I went to DuSable? Speaker 1: Well Dusab--But what happened when you went--you lived out in-- Speaker 2: Well when we moved to Robbins it was at a later age. A later stage in my life. When I was in high school and even though--Even though my family had moved to Robbins, Illinois, I commuted to high school to DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Because I didn't want to go to Blue Island High School. (laughs) My sisters [Myrtle and Arlene Booker] and brother [Thomas Booker] did go to Blue Island High School. But I didn't like Blue Island High School. And so I just decided to commute. So I would at the age of fourteen, fifteen I was riding the train or the bus coming from Robbins to DuSable High School. Speaker 1: Now how long did it take you? Speaker 2: Maybe about an hour, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) An hour (unclear) Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Each way. Speaker 1: So now-- Speaker 2: That's why I said after I grew up I would never live in the suburbs. Speaker 1: I can understand that. Speaker 2: But it--Even though it took about an hour I always made that hour count. Because I read. Speaker 1: Now when you--So you went to DuSable High School when you were in ninth grade? Speaker 2: No when I was in tenth grade. Speaker 1: And you're in an older period--Well I mean you're, you know, a young adult at that point. What's happening inside of you? You know, what things are influencing you at that point? Speaker 2: Maybe to do well in school. There again I was very fortunate to have a very good division teacher. Her name was Mary Herrick. And Mary Herrick was a person committed to making certain that all of her students were the best students in the school. And also making certain that we understood the importance of getting an education. And even though she never had any children, she became like a surrogate mother and I guess we all respected Mrs--Miss Herrick. And we all wanted to do well and we did. Speaker 1: And are there any subjects that you gravitated to at this point? Were you better at English or math or (unclear) or science? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Social studies and history and geography. Simply because to me those subjects are subjects that expose you to different people, places, events. And to me they should also--To me they were also learning experiences. Geography because it opened up the world to me. I never could look at myself as just being here in Chicago [Illinois]. But I knew about Chicago as well as Illinois. Because we traveled from Chicago down to Cairo [Illinois], just about every summer to my father's [Thomas Booker] mother's--my grandmother's [Amelia Booker] home in Cairo. So I knew outside of Chicago. I knew about St. Louis [Missouri]. I knew about other places. And that simply wetted my appetite in terms of knowing about people of the world. And that's why I enjoyed geography. History I always loved because it's a story of people. And it's a learning story of people. Because you understand that basically human nature doesn't change. Environments can change. But basically human beings don't change. So they tend to make the same kinds of mistakes over and over again. Because they don't learn. They don't learn from their past experiences. Story_ID: 18786 Speaker 1: What were the things influencing you? You know, in your, you know. You know, around--and while you're at DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois]. Because this is a high school that a lot of people come through. Speaker 2: Well I think at DuSable we had the freedom in terms of being accepted for who we were and what we could do. And as I said before Marry Herrick--Margaret Burroughs was there also and she became somebody I admired. Simply because of the way that she carried herself. But not only that. The fact that she wore a natural. And I thought that was fantastic. I said, "My God! Here's an individual who really doesn't care what anybody else says. She's wearing her hair the way that she wants to wear her hair." And so many days I would go by the art--her art class and peep in and take a look at her. And I just--I don't know. I just admired her. I said, "That's wonderful. Because she is really wearing her hair the way that it should be worn. And that's naturally (laughs)." And so Margaret was a very good influence, Mary Herrick and then I had a chemistry teacher Mr. Woodard. He was also very influential in terms of my life. Even though I was not a good chemistry student I did very well in his class. Because of the way that he taught. He made chemistry simple. And he brought it down in terms of the things that we use every day. How chemistry plays a very important part in our lives every day. I enjoyed being with him. Also my cousin played in the band. He was a bassist. And so I got a chance to know Captain Walter Dyett (laughs). A very dynamic great person. And so I would go with--I would slip into the band room just to hear them play. And my cousin he enjoyed his bass. And I got a chance to meet the broth--the guys who became the future musicians. And I enjoyed that. Speaker 1: Like what guys? Speaker 2: Well you had--I'm trying to think of some of the early Chicago people. I'm not gonna say Sun Ra. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Oh okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause Sun Ra wasn't at DuSable. But--[thinking] Who were those guys? Anyway they played like on 47th Street at some of the local jazz places. There was one--[thinking] What are those guys' names? Beach. Now you're asking me to recall things I haven't thought about in over 40 or 50 years. Speaker 1: That's good. That's the purpose. Now the other thing though is that--Now were you a good student? Speaker 2: I was a good student. Speaker 1: But it's gonna go down don't you think? But anyway. Okay. Now was there any thought about whether you'd go on to school on to college? Speaker 2: Yes. I was--It was really understood that that's exactly what I would do. And that's what I did. So--And I looked forward to going to college. I wanted to do something in the field of education. And so that's what I ended up doing. I think pretty much all the things that I ever wanted to do; I have been able to do it. Because I have--It's like you have a singleness of purpose. You have a goal. And that's what you strive towards. And you don't let things discourage you. Because you know that if you persevere, you will be able to achieve your goals. And really that's what I've been able to do all my life. Story_ID: 18787 Speaker 1: Was there a decision about where you would go? You went to the Chicago Teacher's College, which is Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: State. It was Chicago State. But I first--I spent two years at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. Because I wanted to go to Howard. And then I came back to Chicago Teachers College because I realized also that since I was going to go into education, many of the students who graduated from Howard, when they came back to go to--to teach, then they had to do additional work in order to pass the exam to teach in Chicago. Or they didn't have enough subjects or whatever. So I just decided. I said, "Well since I know I'm going to teach, then I'll just transfer back to Chicago Teacher's College and be prepared. So that I would be able to pass the exam." Which I did. And then get a job as a regular schoolteacher. Speaker 1: Now how was that experience at Howard? Because it's your first time away except maybe going to Cairo [Illinois] unless I missed something in your story. It's your first time really away from home. Even with your adventures and such in a different environment. Distinctly different. So I'm wondering how you found Howard? The Howard experience? Speaker 2: Oh I--It was a very good experience. I think it had a lot to do with the people that I met. Some of them are still my friends today. And quite naturally it was different. But there again being in the city of Washington D.C. and the culture that it offered, to me it was quite an exciting city. Because I could go to the art museum. I could go to the different museums (laughs). So not only did I look at having, you know, making friends or going to classes. But I also looked at the fact that it provided me with the exposure that I enjoy. And that's why-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: D.C. to me then is like it is today. In a sense D.C. is like a second home to me. Because when I go there I still have a lot of friends there. And I simply rent a car. And I can just drive around and go to the museums and just amerce myself in the beauty of everything that's there that it has to offer. Speaker 1: Did you--do you think other things happened to you during the D.C. experience in terms of your maturation as a person? Or even how the Howard experience you think affect--you know, affected you in a way? And I'm talking about Howard as a historically black college (unclear) had? Speaker 2: Well, I think the idea of being there because of the history of the university. But I think that the thing that amazed me were the people that I met. From the different backgrounds, from the different parts of the United States. From the West Indies, from Africa. And to me that was such a valid experience. Because I met people my age but they came from different parts of the world. So it became a learning experience to find out about their growing up. What they did. How their culture, their traditions. And that had a very great impact on my life. Because I guess it's my curiosity in terms of people. And it fascinated me to be able to be exposed to so many people from so many different backgrounds and cultures. Speaker 1: Okay. And you came back because you wanted to be a teacher? You said? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So was there any like, "I'm sorry that you're leaving?" (unclear) Or was it just--"You know, this is the time for me to come back. I wanna (unclear)." Speaker 2: There really wasn't any boo-hooing. Because I knew I would see those people who were my friends again. But it was like you grow up and you move on. And once you make a decision in terms (laughs) of what you want to do, then that's--you know that's exactly what you are going to do. So you go ahead and you do it. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're back in Chicago. And you go immediately to Chicago Teacher's College? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so what was--so this--You've been dreaming about being a teacher. So what is--Or you know, what do you learn in that experience? Speaker 2: Well at that time I think you learn about racism. Because leaving an all-black institution and coming to a predominantly white institution--At that time Chicago Teacher's College was a predominantly white institution. And you--you learn how to understand how to play the game with the (laughs) people--with your professors. Because you hate to say it. But they--many of them are racist. They bring to their situation this difference between the white students and the black students. And it seems that no matter how hard you would try, most of the black students weren't gonna get the A's. Some of the dumbest white students would get the A's. And so you--I mean there's a realization in terms of how do you get through that particular experience? And get out of it what you need, or what you have to have. And so you learn how to play the game. And that's what I did. And you also don't let it have an impact on you psychologically and emotionally. Because going to school in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s] that's simply the way that it was. And like I said, there again, I had a goal. So you learned how to deal with the racist attitudes of people. Especially of your professors who are responsible for your passing or failing. Story_ID: 18788 Speaker 1: Did you have an idea of what you wanted to teach and who you wanted--I mean the teaching profession has changed a lot. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Since you, you know, went to school. But it was in our community, as you know, at the time it was a very esteemed position to have. So I'm wondering was there, you know. Did you have any ideas about what you wanted to teach or what age group? Or all of that? Speaker 2: Well I knew that I did not want to--I wanted to teach intermediate grades. The grades four, five and six. I also knew that I wanted to be able to impart to the children all of my experiences. I wanted to be there an as encouragement to them. And more--Better than that, I wanted them to succeed. I wanted them to have a positive learning experience. Therefore I made learning in my classroom a different kind of exposure and experience that they would not encounter anywhere else. Speaker 1: Hmm. And so what was your first assignment? Speaker 2: My first assignment was out at Carver Elementary School out in the gardens, in Altgeld Gardens [public housing project]. Out in the gardens. Speaker 1: So this is what year? Speaker 2: In 1960. Speaker 1: 1962. '60 [1960] or '60-- Speaker 2: Sixty [1960]. Speaker 1: '60, 1960. Okay. So what was this--This was public housing when it was newer. Newer right? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Was it tot--It wasn't totally new. Speaker 2: No it wasn't totally new. Because the [Altgeld] Gardens--They built the Gardens back like during World War II. In the late '40s [1940s], the middle '40s [1940s]. So in 1960 it was old. And that was really--In the '60s [1960s] started the gangs, started the deterioration of the environment of Altgeld Gardens. Speaker 1: And so you've been assigned to a (unclear) area of sorts. In a way. Right? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: So--And you're teaching what? Are you teaching those (unclear)? Speaker 2: No. I taught third grade. Speaker 1: Third. So what--recount your first experience in the classroom. Speaker 2: Oh it was a very positive experience. I tend to be a disciplinarian. So I'd go in setting the rules for the students to follow. And we'd get that out of the--since we're on that understanding level in the beginning, then teaching is fun. Speaker 1: So--but even as a young teacher were there things--lessons you learned? You remember any, you know, sort of embarrassing moments or things where you may--you know, when you look back at it, you were naive? Or-- Speaker 2: Not exactly embarrassing, embarrassing. The things that happened out there in the gardens was the fact that the children didn't want to go home. And I remember one incident in particular. A student had hid in this classroom, hid in the closet and I didn't know it. And I usually stayed late after school so I can plan for the next day. And so the principal came to my classroom. And he said that this little boy's mother was looking for him. And I said, "Well I don't understand because everybody has been let out of the classroom and they should be home by now." And the mother came. And she said, "But he never--he didn't return. He didn't return." I said, "Well I don't understand what could have possibly happened to him." And so they said well, "Well let's try to retrace his steps." And I said, "Well I took everybody to the door, opened the door and then took them out to--. Story_ID: 18789 Speaker 1: You hear a lot of experiences about CPS, Chicago Public Schools, 'cause you were in the system right? About teachers being assigned to substitute positions. Was this prior to your time NPC? Speaker 2: What do you mean (unclear)? Speaker 1: There were--Some teachers were assigned permanently to be substitutes. So they never were able to get on permanent status. Speaker 2: Oh because they didn't take the exam. They didn't take the examination. If you take examination (laughs) and you pass the examination, you pass the written and the oral then you became a regular teacher. If you did not take the examination then you remained in a sense a permanent substitute teacher. And so that was the situation until the union came in. And there was--I forgot what year it happened. That they decided--they worked out something with the Board of Education to the tune of those teachers who had had so many years experience would be--they would become regular teachers. But they were not certified teachers. Some kind of terminology that they used for them. So then you had a lot of people who had been working with the Board who became regular teachers. But they were not certified. Because they put them in their records. They had different markings for their--on their record. But if you took the exam and you passed the exam, then you were a regular certified teacher. Speaker 1: Now did you find--what--so you really just fit right very easily into this classroom, it sounds like. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And so had you always taught elementary? Was that your sort of-- Speaker 2: I not always taught elementary. I taught elementary and then when my Principal Edward Oliver, when I was at Ryder School, when he got Percy Julian High School, and he asked me to come along to open up the counseling department, the Counseling and Guidance Department. And I left elementary school and went to high school. And that's what I did at high school--in high school but I didn't like high school. Because when I was in elementary school as the adjustment teacher counselor, one of my responsibilities was to place the students in high school. And I always felt that once they left us--left elementary school, that they would go on to high school. And high school would be the answer to their problems. They would go on and achieve. But when I got in high school, I realized that this wasn't the truth. That so many of the students--they did not do well in high school. And, in fact, every semester we were responsible for dropping out at least 100, maybe 200 students because of truant problems. And also because of the fact that they had reached the age of sixteen. So high school (laughs) became a totally different experience for me. And I never really liked high school. Speaker 1: And how long did you do that? Speaker 2: Probably about two years. Speaker 1: And that was during what year? Speaker 2: '74 [1974], '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: Oh so that's after you've been teaching for a long time. Speaker 2: A long time. And then I--After that I left the school system. (laughs) Speaker 1: Oh you--that was it. Now I wanna ask--Tell me the schools you taught at. Let's see you started--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I taught at [George Washington] Carver Elementary School, [James R.] Doolittle Elementary School, Beethoven Elementary School, [William H.] Ryder Elementary School, and Percy Julian High School. Speaker 1: And those schools are located at different part of the--, Speaker 2: South Side. Speaker 1: Mainly on--Okay. Speaker 2: On the South Side. Speaker 1: Were there different experiences based on the schools that, you know. In any different memories. Or does it sort of all sort of flow together? Were there--Where do you feel you were at your highest moment? Speaker 2: At Beethoven in Robert Taylor Homes [public housing project], teaching those students. And some of them I see today and they remember me. To me it was a very gratifying experience. They were a different group of children at that time. Many of them were from homes where the parents really valued education, really wanted to see them do better. Wanted them to make something of their lives. And so they came to you very eager to learn. That's not the case (laughs). That's not the case after the '60s [1960s]. But at that time it was really a great place to teach. Beethoven Elementary. Story_ID: 18790 Speaker 1: Now were there other teachers that you admired or you wanted to model yourself after? Or, you know. Or people within the [Chicago Public School] system that, you know, you admired? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. (laughs) Speaker 2: (Laughs). Speaker 1: But was that--. Speaker 2: Teaching--you know, teaching to me became--Once I got into the system, I think I always had a very high regard for teachers. I held them on a--put them on a pedal--a pedestal. And at Doolittle I came to understand the reality of the diversity of human beings as teachers. And there were some people who were teaching that I felt were really lower class people. In terms of their behavior, as well as what they did after school (laughs). I mean I guess it's their business what they do after school. But I always felt that a teacher should be a person of high moral standards. A teacher should be a person who sets an example for others to follow, should be a model, a role model, "role model". And when I got there I ran into teachers who were not like that. And so my little naive self had to face a reality check. In terms of the fact that people no matter what the profession, they are humans. Human beings with weaknesses, strong points and they are who they are. And they are in all of the professions. Speaker 1: So did that turn you off to teaching though? Speaker 2: No. That's their problem. Speaker 1: What do you think makes a good teacher then? Speaker 2: I think a good teacher is a person who is sincerely interested in the children and in what she teaches. What that person teaches. The experiences that that person is willing to share with those children. That is willing to demand that they excel. To me a person who has high expectation, and you demand that they come up to that level that you know that they can reach. And that's what I call a good teacher. Speaker 1: Now you get--So once--In '74 [1974] is when you (unclear)? Speaker 2: '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: '76 [1976] that's right. And what does this repre--I mean 'cause at that point (unclear) teaching for 16 years. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And did you assume that when you started in this school system that, that's where you'd retire from? Speaker 2: I thought I would. Speaker 1: Was there any defining moment? Or was it just that experience in the high school that was the defining moment? Speaker 2: The experience. The fact that the children--Like I said, once they got to high school, they were not understanding the importance of reaching their potential. They really didn't care. And to me it became like school was something that they dreaded to come to. The experiences that I would encounter every morning. I would park my car on Elizabeth Street. And right at the corner of Elizabeth and 103rd, there was a school store. And also somebody was selling dope. And so every morning I would park my car, walk down Elizabeth Street. I never walked on the sidewalk. Because I didn't want to look at the students. And it always bothered me. I said, "Why is it that they feel it's so important that they need to be high to go to school so early in the morning?" Because I'm talking at like 7:30 in the morning. And then the other thing, the fact that that time, the girls were also into dope. And I--and then also they were getting pregnant. This was the starting of the era of teenage pregnancy. And it just--It concerned me. That they didn't want to do more with their lives. So to me high school became like a wasteland for me. I also understood that those students who were good students who really wanted to do something with their lives would do it, regardless as to whether or not I would be present. And so that was not a difficult decision to make in terms of just leaving the school system. Story_ID: 18791 Speaker 1: You have been married at this point for some time. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You got married in what year? Speaker 2: 1960. Speaker 1: Oh 1960! So you got--Oh!! Okay. And tell me how you met your husband [Paul J. Montes]? Speaker 2: I met my husband at my locker in college (laughs). And he was a night student. And he wanted--he was looking to share a locker. And so I--He came and he said, "I'm looking to share a locker." So I said, "Okay, you can share my locker." And he looked at me like I was crazy. He said, "But you don't know me." I said, "But what can you do to the locker. If you need a locker, you go to school at night (laughs), I go to day school. Then by all means use my locker." And I had other people sharing the locker. So it didn't make any difference. And from then on we became friends. And then eventually we married. But that's how we met (laughs). He said, "You trust me.' I said, "What can you take out of my locker?" I said, "It's just a locker." He said, "But other people wouldn't--" I said, "I don't use the locker. Bring your lock and use the locker." Speaker 1: So how long did you know him before you got married to him? Speaker 2: I met him in 1958. And see we got married in 1960. Speaker 1: And now is he Haitian? Speaker 2: Yes he's Haitian. Speaker 1: So was he first generation or new? Newly arrived? Speaker 2: Newly arrived. Speaker 1: Okay. So how--What about that culture and that, you know. Was there any issues with the families or anything like that? Speaker 2: No. His family accepted me and liked me. Because they would always say, "Well she's not like the other black people." (laughs) The only--To me the only barrier was that in terms of language. Because they spoke Creole as well as French. And many times when I would--well all the time that I would go around them, they would speak Creole or they would speak French. And I didn't know what they were saying. And all I could do, I would just sit and smile at them (laughs), until they started speaking English. But I liked his family. I still like his family. My family was just a little different. Because they did not want me with a foreigner and that's what they called him. They called him a foreigner. And so we had to get past that point with my family. But they accepted him. Story_ID: 18792 Speaker 1: Your husband [Paul J. Montes]--you're exposed to Haitian culture, so what about that did you learn in terms of interacting with a different culture as a black person? Speaker 2: Well I learned that they had their own preconceived notions about African Americans. I also learned about their way--their foods that they would eat, their music and their culture. Because being Haitian in their culture basically is that of French, which is a very genteel kind of society. And so I began to read more about the Haitian culture. About some of the--their artists, their famous people. I began to learn the history of Haiti and why they are such a proud people. Simply because of what happened in terms of their getting their independence from France. Being the first black country in this hemisphere to have its independence. And so as I learned more about their culture, their traditions, then I really came to respect them. And to admire their accomplishments. And so it's been a fun kind of thing to have a bicultural kind of relationship. Especially for our children. Because our children growing up, especially our son [Paul] became very fluent in languages. Just like my husband. He's very fluent in languages. When we go--When we went to France, he could speak the French. When we went to--We went to South America, he could speak Portuguese, he could speak Spanish. So he's very multilingual (laughs). And so it is that our son was able to pick this up. So Paul speaks two or three different languages also. And I guess it's just their expectations. The Haitians in terms of their expectations. They tend to be very scholarly people. They believe in the importance of education. So coupled with a person like that and also with the fact that I valued and respect education, then our children did pretty well in school. Because they knew they were supposed to do well. Speaker 1: And how many children? Speaker 2: Just two. Speaker 1: Two. A boy-- Speaker 2: A boy and a girl [Paul and Pia Montes]. Speaker 1: A girl. Actually perfect. (laughs) Speaker 2: That's all. One of each kind. (laughs) Speaker 1: So okay. So you get--When did you have your first child? Speaker 2: In 1964. Story_ID: 18793 Speaker 1: Now was anything else happening between '60 [1960] and '76 [1976] when you retired, I mean, were you active in the community at different points? Or were you more--You know, were you working and raising a family during that time period? Speaker 2: Well a combination of things as I've always done. Not only just working and rearing the children. But also being active. During the early part of the '60s [1960s] I became very active in Planned Parenthood. Because I always believed that a woman should have control of her body. And should be the one (laughs) deciding whether or not she wanted to have children. And I became involved with Planned Parenthood to the extent that we--I co-fou--I founded an auxiliary, a Southside auxiliary of--We call it the Civic Auxiliary of Planned Parenthood. But it was having the ability to spread to other women the fact that if they didn't want a baby, they didn't have to have one. And I just think that's very important that a woman knows that having sex doesn't mean she ends up being pregnant. And I guess coming through the '70s [1970s] I became very disturbed. Because the little girls--people were just getting pregnant. I'm saying like, "You don't have to do that. You do have options.' And so Planned Parenthood was really like my primary volunteer working during the '60s [1960s]. And then also at that time doing volunteer work at the DuSable Museum [of African American History]. I went over as a volunteer. I founded the historical walkathon. As well as became a member of its board of trustees. And also at that time on Provident Hospital's board because I've always been interested in health issues. And (laughs) also with our children at their school. The University of Chicago's Laboratory School. I became very active in their schooling. And was appointed to--they created a board. And so I was appointed to the first board that they had at the Lab school. And so I led a very busy life. Speaker 1: That's what-- Speaker 2: During the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s]. Story_ID: 18794 Speaker 1: Do you think this was indicative of the environment you had come out of? But--I mean I'm just--that's a lot--that's like an--that's an '80s [1980s]--what I consider an '80s [1980s] woman. Well, I shouldn't say that, but I know--but you're working; you're raising your family and your very actively involved civically. Was your mother [Myrtle Thomas Booker] as actively involved civically? Speaker 2: My mother was. That's what I was saying. She--I learned from my mother and her sister the value of doing volunteer work. Because that's what they did. They organized the different groups within the community. My aunt was the founder and the president of the first PTA [Parent Teacher Association] group at Medill Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois]. And so I had the opportunity to see my mother and her aunt go out and be a part of these groups. And help people. I think that's the other thing. They were not contented with just taking care of their family. But they wanted to make life better for other people. And that's a part of me. To help make life better for other people. So it's just like it's natural. I'm like that with my other sisters [Myrtle and Arlene Booker] and brothers [Thomas and Terrance Booker]. Like I said we're all just different. And I think I take more after my mother and my aunt than anybody else in my family. But no. I have always I guess--especially during the '60s [1960s]. Like I look at the options that women have today in the year 2001, and I just think these options are fantastic. You can--like I said to me the most important thing is bringing a life into the world. I feel that you must be prepared and committed to the responsibility that it entails. Because once you bring that life into the world, your life is never the same. And you have responsibilities and obligations to that individual that you brought into the world. And I think that this is where a lot of the parents fall down today. They think that they can have a child and not have the responsibilities that go along with it. You have a responsibility to provide the proper guidance and the nurturing and the structuring for that child, to turn out to be a productive citizen of our society. Speaker 1: So was there--that's very true. Was there--So in 1976 when you leave. Do you get more actively involved with things? Okay. So you are--you're retired for all intents and purposes? Speaker 2: Yes. (laughs) Speaker 1: And how did you end up getting involved with DuSable [Museum of African American History]? Why did that become a--I know you were volunteering. But why has that--Why were you even attracted to that institution in the first place? Speaker 2: What would happen on the way--taking the children to school, I would pass DuSable Museum. And I would hear people talking about "That lady." [ref. to Dr. Margaret Burroughs] And I would say, "Well I know that lady." And so I said, "Well let me go over and see how I can be of help to assist her in what she is doing." Story_ID: 18795 Speaker 1: You had decided you were going to leave teaching and you were getting involved more philanthropically because you were talking about how that was a tradition in your family, you know and so I want to start, you know at that point. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And talk about what you did--you know what you decided to do in this sort of 'second life'. Speaker 2: Alright. Getting involved in terms of--wait, my eyes just went up like that. I decided at this particular--. Speaker 1: I see--okay. I decided at this particular point in my life that I really wanted to do more volunteer work within the--our community. So I became very involved as a volunteer with the DuSable Museum [of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]. The Museum had just recently moved to the Washington Park location and they needed a lot of help. So I went in as a volunteer and being a volunteer, I would go there at least maybe three or four times a week, do clerical work and while I was at the DuSable Museum and--and really working along with Dr. [Margaret] Burroughs, I came up with the idea to start the Walk-a-Thon in--as it being a means of involving all levels of people in terms of what DuSable was trying to do. So I founded the first historical Walk-a-Thon and this was in 1979 and it was a fantastic event because we brought together all people and all they had to do was to walk and that way they could earn money for DuSable. I also was co-founder of the Women's Board along with Velma Wilson, and I was able to stay with DuSable being able to get on the Board of Trustees first as Secretary and then Vice Chair--a Vice Chairman and eventually became Chairman of the Board of Trustees at DuSable and that was the first time in the history of DuSable they had had a female chairman and also at the same time wanting to carry out the dream of Dr. Burroughs in terms of an expansion--I also chaired the Building Committee and I not only shepherd, but I was also responsible for the building of the Harold Washington wing, because everybody who was there always--they wanted it to happen but they didn't know how to make it happen and I was able to come along and make that happen. Now, at the same time I was also involved with Provident Hospital and I was a member of the Professional Women's Auxiliary as well as I became a Trustee of the Board of Provident Hospital and I was there when we decided to do the expansion--building the new hospital. Also, at the same time my--our children went to the University of Chicago's Laboratory Schools be--so knowing how important it is for a parent to be involved in their children's schooling, I took on different rolls on there at the Laboratory Schools and eventually I was appointed by President Hannah Gray . They had created a--a Board of the Laboratory School. So I was one of the first members appointed to that Board and also, I continue with my desire to do women's' rights advocacy. So I was very involved with Planned Parenthood simply because of my beliefs that a woman is responsible for her body and it's for her to decide when she wants to have children and those were the things that I was really working with at that particular time in my life. Story_ID: 18796 Speaker 1: Let's go back and talk about DuSable Museum [of African American History] and what attracted you to that organization, you know in the first place? Speaker 2: Well, I had always been an admirer of Dr. Burroughs, Dr. Margaret Burroughs. Dr. Burroughs taught at DuSable High School and I also attended DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois] and I--she was the art teacher there. I was never in her art class but Dr. Burroughs was somewhat of a--of a curiosity for many of the students because at that time Dr. Burroughs wore hair in what we call a "natural" and so the girls especially would say, "You see that women, that teacher has nappy hair. She won't even comb her hair. She won't press her hair," and I always admired her because I said, I would always defend her. I said, "Well I think it's really wonderful that she feels confident and secure within herself and she doesn't need to press her hair. If she wants to wear her hair natural then she should." So, (laughs) like I said, Dr. Burroughs has always been a--a role model of mine. Now as I would take my children to [University of Chicago] Lab School and I would go through the park and I noticed the DuSable Museum after they had made the move from 38th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue] and I remember going over there one morning talking with Dr. Burroughs and I realized that she really needed some help and I said well since I have the skills and the education then that's where I would focus my energies and that's exactly what I did. Speaker 1: So what did she tell you at that--that--at that time, you know, that made you realize that she needed help and you had the skills, you know to be of assistance? Speaker 2: Well I think it was in terms of her vision for the museum and what she wanted to have it become. She felt that the DuSable Museum could become the premier institution within the United States, and I shared her beliefs, and as usually what happens people have ideas and visions but they don't have money to bring in staff. So I felt that with my educational skills, I could at least be there to help answer letters, do whatever clerical work needed to be done and that's what I did. Speaker 1: And what did you--so can you talk sort of--at the time that you started you said this was 1979? Speaker 2: About 19--no 1976. Speaker 1: '76 [1976], okay but you developed the Walk-a-Thon in 1979? Speaker 2: In '79 [1979]. Speaker 1: Okay. So talk about the institution and its sort of importance to the community and how even--well, let's start with that and then I (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, I--I think that the DuSable Museum is extremely important to not only the African American Community but the Chicago community, the national community, the world community, because it is in that institution that we are able to tell our own story and I feel that that is very important if we have--if we are to understand our past, be able to perform in the present and have a vision for our future. So to have an institution like that, that would tell about the contributions of African Americans to me was just simply fantastic and much needed and I have to take my hat off to Dr. Burroughs and to others--others in her group who had the foresight to know that this is--this was really what was needed. It was because of Dr. Burroughs that--Dr. Burroughs and the founding of the DuSable Museum that throughout the country we had other persons who decided that they would do the same thing. Speaker 1: Now, what did you learn about the challenges or the challenges of museum operations? Speaker 2: Well, I learned that number one, museums period were something very unique for the African American experience. We always thought in terms of museums being very high up there with very little involvement with out people. It's a very exclusive society--the museum world. So we were now becoming part of something in a sense that never--should I say didn't want us but never was receptive to us, and being able to take that banner and run with it to me was something very positive and something needed. Being there at DuSable, I--I received a better understanding of what it takes to run a museum. You learn about the curator. You learn about the archivists. You learn about everybody associated with the museum, so it prepares you in case you want to go on to do something else. At least you have a grounding, you have an understanding. Story_ID: 18797 Speaker 1: Do you have any sort of behind the scenes anecdotal stories that you'd like to share with us? You know about--you know times with--with DuSable [Museum of African American History], you know that you would feel--but that are, that are--, Speaker 2: Well--, Speaker 1: --twists, or you there are--? Speaker 2: I don't know if these things have cute twists, but I was always fascinated with the caliber of people who would come and who were members of the staff like Mr. Turner. Mr. Turner was one of the founders and at that time Mr. Turner might have been like in his eighties, but you could see this very distinguished gentlemen coming everyday to the DuSable Museum to lecture about the history. I always remember Mr. Turner, because like I said, it was his dignity. It was what he represented that made me feel very proud of being an African American and it also emphasized why having a place like DuSable was very important. Also Marian Hummons (ph.) who was Dr. [Margaret] Burroughs's sister--Marian died this year and to see her come in with her secretarial skills. She was actually Dr. Burroughs' secretary, and Mrs. Hummons always had comical remarks that she would make, but I thought it was in terms of keeping us going so that we would understand why we were there to help DuSable. Story_ID: 18798 Speaker 1: What about the story of the--how the Harold Washington Wing [of the DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] came to be? Speaker 2: Oh, the Harold Washington Wing? That--the Harold Washington Wing or the expansion had been a dream of Dr. Burroughs for many, many years. We had received monies to--at least get started in terms of the planning--the architectural design. Nothing really happened and I had--I know several people who are politicians in Springfield [Illinois] and so one day I received a call that if we didn't do something quickly, we would lose the funds that had already been allocated so I decided that we would have to build the expansion and you have to understand the Trustees that I had to work with, the staff people that I had to work with, when I became Chairman of the Board of Trustees. I don't know what it is about us (laughs) as people, but it's like we can never get together. We cannot unify behind a common cause. Jealousies will creep in. All kinds of things will creep in to in a way prevent--prevent us from achieving our goal. Well, I understood my Board of Trustees. I understood the staff when I was Chairman, so I knew what I had to do in order to make this expansion possible. Some of the things I did without even saying anything to them. We had--we had architectural plans drawn for a museum that would cost six million dollars. But, we didn't have six million dollars. It became my responsibility to try to go to get the additional money that we needed. Well, we couldn't do that, for whatever reasons we could not do that. We went to lenders. We went to banks--well banks. We had meetings but we never could do that. What we had--we had one point five million dollars and of that, we could get a match from the Park District. So what I had--I don't know why I was staying up late one night thinking about how to make this happen, and I thought about, well, if we only have--if we can only build a building for three million but they designed the building to cost six million, why could we not meet with the architects and the construction people, the general contractor and tell them, build us a building for three million and that's what I did. I brought--I brought the architect together, Wendell Campbell, the general contractor and we met at Wendell's office and I said to him, I said, "We only have three million dollars. Can't we take the plan and cut it in half?" And so they looked at each other and they said, well, "Yes. We can give you whatever you want." I said, "then that's what we want," and that's how we were able to get that building and so I--(laughs) like I said there again I had to keep going in a sense on my own, because if I had gone back to the Board and said, well we're about to do this and do that, then there were people on the Board who--well, who really--males who--who weren't going to let it happen, and I knew that. So I had to work around them and that's how we were able to have the groundbreaking and build that museum and many of the Board members didn't think that it would happen. In fact, some of them would joke about it and so I wouldn't say anything, because I knew it (laughs) was going to happen, and then right before when I needed them or whatever, then I went to them and told them, we are now going to have the museum and this will happen and at--even at the last minute, there were still those who were trying to throw a wrench into preventing what was going to happen and that's what I had to do. Speaker 1: So did that experience teach you anything? Speaker 2: Yes, it taught me something really very valuable in that I--I can build a building because I can read blueprints. I understand what goes into construction and so that opened up another sphere to me in terms of education. So, it became a very profitable experience. It also taught me what I already knew because I've always worked with people in terms of how much--how much you can let people know about what it is that you want to do, until you're almost--all--so--until you have almost accomplished the project, because they will try to stop you. Speaker 1: Now, so--. Speaker 2: And then the other thing. After the building was completed, then of course everybody had everything to do with it and--every time I look around I'm seeing people taking credit. I said, how can (laughs)--how can they take credit, and so I--I that--I guess that's to be understood, but like I said, the truth is what I'm saying to you right now, regardless of what other people said, I--I also insisted upon bringing certain people with me so that they knew what was going on and the process, because I'm always like this. If anything happens to me, I want the project to continue because I simply feel that I'm not indispensable and you don't know what might happen to you, so you always bring somebody with you to carry on. Story_ID: 18799 Speaker 1: What do you think--cause you're still on the Board at DuSable [Museum of African American History]? Speaker 2: Yes, I'm ex---ex officio. Speaker 1: Right, right. What are your hopes and you know aspirations for the organization? Speaker 2: Well, for DuSable, it seems that we--we never pick--oh, I shouldn't say that. (laughs) No, I'm not going to say that. My aspirations for DuSable is for it to realize its potential to become the top African American Museum in the country, offering really great programs and being able to bring people together from all over the world to see what it is that we have to offer. It is something I feel that is doable and I'm never giving up faith--I'm an optimistic kind of person. So, eventually I know it will happen. Speaker 1: Now, Margaret Burroughs--what--you know you had said that, you know she's the one who attracted you and you know, you remember her as a teacher from DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois] and that she had her own unique qualities to her, but this is a person you worked with and I'm wondering if you could go and talk about who the essence of Margaret Burroughs is? Speaker 2: I think the essence of Margaret Burroughs is her love of people--of her people--of herself--of her history, the history that she feels is very valuable to the world, because if you don't tell your history nobody will think that it has any validity and that's what she has always tried to do to impart to the world--to all of us, the fact that we should have pride in who we are--from where we come, the fact that our people being the first humans--you know Africa is really considered the cradle of human civilization and there were many marvelous things that happened in Africa that we all need to be proud of, so Margaret has taken it upon herself to make certain that we know, that we don't forget that the legacy of our ancestors continue. Speaker 1: Do you have any Margaret Burroughs's stories or things that you would say, you know are to--you could you just give an insight look into her? Speaker 2: Well, something--let me think about it--oh, what she has always done with me understanding what I had to go up against once I became chairman--she would be there to support me to tell me now, Peggy, we can go on, we can--we can--you can do this. No matter what, keep going with what you feel is the most important thing. So, I always had her support and there are some stories but I don't want to call any names or anything like that, where we would really get together and decide our strategies in terms of how to approach these different people or these issues and we always won, and I always listened to her and I think--like I said I--I admire her tenacity. I admire her--her insight about people and about how to keep things going. Story_ID: 18800 Speaker 1: I was saying that the two of you seem to be such unlikely comrades. So, I'm wondering how, you know, you're--you're sort of prim and proper, she's sort of viewed as sort of a renegade, you know, artist? Speaker 2: Well, I--I think that my relationship with Margaret [Burroughs] is a very special relationship. To be it's borne out of respect for who we are as individuals. Margaret is a dynamite. She has such vision. She's--she's a beautiful person. Her soul is beautiful, and all she wants is not for herself but for others, and I can identify with--with that. She has her way, and I--and her ways and people don't understand her in terms of I think her abruptness probably gets in the way. Maybe, her--her outright--her out rightness because she's very vocal in terms of how she feels and then also I think it's her--she doesn't have the time to fool around with attitude. Let's get to the point and also the fact that she--this is what she wants and she is going to go after it. In essence, I'm the same way, but I think I'm a--a low-keyed kind of person who understands people and personalities and I tend to be a little more diplomatic and so, we love each other and it's out of that love and it's out of the desire in terms of the betterment for DuSable [Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] that we really get along. We really get along. Like I was saying before, with the people that we have to deal with at DuSable, we do strategize. We know what we're going to do to accomplish our goals or purposes and so we're able to do that. People tend to be at the--sometimes I think they're afraid of Dr. Burroughs. They don't want to approach her. Some people have told me she's a cold person. In fact, I've had people say, well, "Peggy will you talk to Dr. Burroughs? Can you see if you can get her to come to this? Can you do this for me? Can you do this for me?: And, I'm always saying, yes, because I know that if I pick up the phone and I talk with Margaret and she'll say, "Oh, Peggy, yes," and if I have to go by and pick her up, then I go by and pick her up, but like I said, we're both alike. I--I see myself in Dr. Burroughs, in Margaret and that's just her way of doing things. Maybe because I understand people. I accept them for who they are, but I'm always able to see the beauty in people and I see the beauty in--in Margaret and we work very well together. Speaker 1: Do you think that the--the fact that you both have backgrounds as teachers have any--any impact on things? Cause I often see her as sort--in some respects, that this doesn't make any sense, but almost anti-organization. That she--yeah she's built an institution so--but she does seem you know, if you talk--she's not your typical--you know she seems sort of anti-organization. Speaker 2: But she really is not, having been the founder of so many different organizations. I would say that if she had not been there, there would not be a South Side Community Art Association, with other aspects of the Union, with the artists. I mean she helped to found the Artists Association, the National Artists Association, even with the Association of African American Museums, Dr. Burroughs and Dr. [Charles H.] Wright are the founders of that very important organization. So, no, she's not anti-association or anti-organization. She's just a dynamite person--when she--who has a vision, who perseveres to implement that vision and she knows how to go about making it happen, and people don't quite understand that. She doesn't--I wouldn't say she's an impatient person, but I know she perseveres because she can see that something needs to happen and she wants to make it happen right away and it does, and those organizations or associations that she has been with are still here. The African American Museums Association, still here, after what, thirty something years. The National African American Artists Association, still here after twenty something years. The South Side Community Arts Center, still here after--when was that? That was started maybe like in the '40s [1940s] or something like? So, what she originally helped to start is still here. I think that what happens in the associations, some people get in and they don't like Margaret Burroughs and her personality, and then I, I won't call any names, but that's exactly what happened. Story_ID: 18801 Speaker 1: I think with Dr. [Margaret] Burroughs her untold story to me is the fact that other people didn't like her because of their hidden agendas. Dr. Burroughs is a--a very natural person--very unpretentious and the people that she encountered were to me, many of them phony kind of acting people who did not want her to be any longer a part of what she had started. I think that those people couldn't--they didn't like Margaret--couldn't accept her for who she was and then there again there was this lady with this nappy hair running around and who was she? But the other interesting thing about Dr. Burroughs to me her marriage to Charles Burroughs who was a very brilliant person from Russia. He was brilliant in terms of being a linguist, he could speak different languages. He was just one of the few black people in America who could speak Russia, so--Russian, so that when the people came--when visitors came from the [U.S.] State Department, they usually would get Charlie Burroughs--Charles Burroughs to do the interpreting. He was a very dedicated person to the DuSable Museum. I valued the fact that I was able to be there when he was also the curator at the DuSable Museum [of African American History] before Ramn Price , and so I saw him somewhat on a daily basis--very insightful person. He did write. He did some beautiful writings. People don't know that side about him because Margaret and what she was involved in empowered him--over powered what he was about, and then he was a very low-keyed person anyway and not very assertive, but he was a very brilliant person and then you--I always valued the information that I received from about his growing up in Russia. The one thing that I feel was very destructive for him when he came to America and he had to deal with the issue of racism. It was very hard for him to accept. Speaker 2: Anything else you want to say about DuSable or the, you know, DuSable Museum or the you know, Margaret Burroughs or Charlie Burroughs or anyone else? Speaker 1: Well, and I can't remember this. There were just so many interesting people coming through in the early '70s [1970s], middle '70s [1970s] who made contributions to--Mr. [Eugene Pieter Romayn] Feldman, and I can't remember his first name, but Mr. Feldman did write a book about the birth of DuSable. Mr. Feldman was a gentlemen who really documented the history--the founding of DuSable and he was--he was their dedicated person and after he died he did set up money to establish the Feldman Fund for interest--for students who were in interested in coming to DuSable to work as interns, but they--the people who came through DuSable in the '70s [1970s] were a historical people who had dedicated their lives to black history and to children and to people knowing about who we were and why we should be proud of who we are. Story_ID: 18802 Speaker 1: Let's go to the Women's Commission and how did you get involved with that? Was your involvement with that after your involvement with Planned Parenthood or--? Speaker 2: Well, it was really about the same time the--my involvement with the Women's Commission, the first Chicago Commission on Women actually started in 1983 when [Chicago, Illinois] Mayor Harold--when Harold Washington decided he was going to run for mayor. In 1983, we noticed a group of us [Rev.] Addie Wyatt--what's her name--[Rev.] Willie [T.] Barrow, Rebecca Sive-Tomashevski at that time--we noticed that he had a campaign going, but the campaign had no momentum. We decided to put together a women's group. We called it the 'Women's Network' and bringing that women's network together, I became the coordinator, since I could volunteer my time. All of them--they had other things that they were doing. So, I became the coordinator of the Women's Network for Washington. The network was responsible for bringing together a coalition of women from all over the city of Chicago and not only just bringing the women together, but to raise money for the campaign. The initial money--some of the money was coming from Edward Gardner who owned Soft Sheen. A great portion of it was coming from the Union leaders, Jim White and [U.S. Congressman Charles] Charlie Hayes--the money. If you knew anything about politics you wanted to run, you needed money, then they were considered the'money men' and those guys were bringing in money but it was not quite enough money. So they needed like a grassroot group of people to start bringing in money for the Harold Washington campaign. That became our responsibility. We brought in women. We called it the 'Women's Network'. The women had bake sales. They did all kinds of things to fund raise for the Harold Washington campaign and it was also to me the motivation of the women to get out and spread the word about Harold Washington that ended up in his becoming mayor of the city of Chicago. Now, then they print the books, and that's what they did, they wrote the books--books, and they'd tell the story of how Harold Washington became Mayor. What they'd leave out--they'd leave out the involvement of the women, and to me if it had not been for the women, he would not have been mayor. So, when I talked with Harold about the Women's Network, my thing was that we weren't just going to be there to help him become mayor, but we also needed a vehicle by which we could take care of women's issues such as domestic violence, such as childcare. The economic issues in terms of women getting better jobs, getting contracts with the city and so out of that we decided that if--you know, when he became mayor that we would have a woman's commission, and he said yes, he would let us have a woman's commission, but you know what happened when Harold became Mayor. The 'Vrdolyak Ten' people, [ref. to allies of Chicago alderman Edward Vrodolyak], they got in there and all kinds of things took place, so that it was like the Woman's Commission was put on the back burner. After maybe like a year, then I just simply became motivated. I would write Harold letters and then I just decided one time I found out where he was going to be at a speaking engagement and I went and encountered him and I told him, I said, Harold, you said we were going to have our women's commission. You can do that by ordinance. Even if you don't--if you can't, you know, you can't--get it though City Council, but you can say that we need a woman's commission and you can write us in by ordinance. And that's how we became a women's commission. Nancy Jefferson was also a part of the Steering Committee and with that women's commission we were able to set up our office. Now the first executive director of the Women's Commission was Helene Colvin-Wallace and Helene--but that's another story, but anyway she was the first one and I was the second one, and with the Women's Commission we really impacted city government because our responsibility became to look at the different city departments and look at the places where women--look at the women in the department and what positions they held and we found out that all of them were pink collar workers--most of them. They had--they were the secretarial or your clerical people who worked in the department, but we wanted heads of departments, and that's what we ended up with. We had many heads of Streets and Sanitation--different departments within city government. In fact I made a brochure of--of the different women that we had as heads of departments and that was the first time that you had women as heads--as city department heads, and that you really had a really good women's program to move the women along in city government so that they just wouldn't hold--always these little pink collared jobs. Harold was--he was a--a very--he was a very good person in that I know when I worked as executive director of the Commission, it was his faith in what I could do that he never bothered me. He just said look, you know I have problems here (laughs), I know you are going to do the right thing. Do it. And that's exactly what I did. We were able to get more women on the fire department. We found out that the women could pass--they could pass the examination--the oral, the written examination, but very few of them could pass the physical examination. The reason why they couldn't pass the physical examination had to do with their--the weakness of their upper body strength, and so we worked with the University of Illinois [at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] to come up with a program where the program enabled them to go in and develop upper body strength. Story_ID: 18803 Speaker 1: [Chicago, Illinois Mayor] Harold [Washington] didn't create us [Women's Commission] by ordinance. It was by executive order. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He could do anything he wanted to by executive order. He would never--he could never get the vote to create us by ordinance. Speaker 2: Yeah, I have, well I'll ask some other questions now, but I have another question to ask about that. The Commission--see you actually--you --was that a full-time position? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And it was a--you were in Peshtigo Court [Street, Chicago, Illinois] weren't you? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: You know--I know cause you were--. Speaker 1: Upstairs, yeah, in Peshtigo Court, yeah. Speaker 2: Cause Monica Faith Stewart told an interesting story. 'Cause she really wanted to head that commission. Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: Oh, (laughs), okay, so you know, okay (laughs) (unclear). Speaker 1: What did she say? Because, no she--. Speaker 2: That--that destroyed her. Speaker 1: Really? Because see what happened, Helene Colvin-Wallace who had nothing really to do with the campaign because she was working in Washington, D.C. Harold who had been--he was Congressman knew her and Helene would come in every now and then for a fund raiser or something like that. That's all that we knew about Helene. We knew that Helene wanted to come back to Chicago once Harold became mayor. She wanted to come back to Chicago and she wanted to have a job in his administration. So, while we were busy working to get the women's commission she decided that she wanted to be the first executive director. Now, I didn't want--I had never even thought about the position at that time because I was busy doing--I forgot what I was doing, but it was something else and I understood that at that time--oh, my daughter [Pia Montes] was still in high school and I did not want a full time job. I really didn't and I knew that that required a full time job. So, I was not about to say "Harold, I want it." 'Cause I could have had it. So it--that was not my interest. What we did was Monica, Helene--it was somebody else who applied for the job. Well, to be truthful with you, Monica was not going to get the job because she wasn't that close to Harold and at that time, like I said, Helene was doing every kind of politic--political trick she could to get the job. So we knew that Helene at that time being closest to Harold was going to be the one to get the job and that's really what happened. That's really what happened. She knew she was getting it when she was coming in. Speaker 2: So, how long were you executive director? Speaker 1: From 198--oh, Pia graduated--from 1985 to 1989. Story_ID: 18804 Speaker 1: How did you like that experience [at the Women's Commission] because this is another--I mean you know, your other working experience really was as a teacher, so this is a different--. Speaker 2: Well, I--I really loved that experience because we were able to--you could see the progress that we were able to make in terms of making improvements within city government. Moving those women into high-paying jobs, better positions, changing or starting programs that would enable them to get better jobs. Like I was saying with the [Chicago, Illinois] Fire Department--the fact that once we understood why the women couldn't pass the physical, then we had a program created with the University of Illinois [at Chicago] that actually trained those women in terms of developing their upper body strength and that was really fantastic to have the number of females. It was a large number that graduated because they came out of that program. The same thing when we worked with the [Chicago] police department. We wanted to make certain that more women would become lieutenants, maybe captains and working with the police department, we were able to be successful in having those women promoted. We were also able to look at what was happening in terms of sexual assault. We came up with programs there--what the first person--what the first policemen would do when he came to interview, or came to the aid of the rape victim. So we were able to put in some very good programs, and I feel--like I said it was a very rewarding experience and I'm happy that I was able to be a part of it. Speaker 1: Now what are your views on--well, no, forget about that. What--what do you--what groups and organizations were instrumental in this whole sort of movement of you know, women's' rights here, you know when you weren't the commissioner there? Speaker 2: The--definitely the union women, the female--well the black sororities, Delta Sigma Theta, Alpha Kappa Alpha, and the other ones--was--say labor unions--NOW--National Organization of Women. We brought in--there were many--there were many other racial organizations affiliated with our Women's Network. There were the Native American women, there were Southwest Women Working Together. The different Caucasian women's groups. Even the Asian women's groups. So we brought in all these different women's groups as a coalition and that's how we were very successful and even when we started--when we started the Commission--deciding who would be on the Commission meant that we wanted diversity and that's what we did. It was a very diverse Commission. Story_ID: 18805 Speaker 1: There has been some, you know, talk over the years. You don't hear it so much these days, but the conflict between the women's movement and the black Civil Rights Movement, and I was wondering in your role did you ever encounter that? Speaker 2: Well I didn't--let me say I didn't encounter the conflict. I think that you have to understand that when the women's movement started, there was no longer that much tension--attention focused on the Civil Rights movement and the women's movement took many of the tactics that the Civil Rights movement people used. The other thing you have to understand about the women's--the women's rights movement--you have to look at the makeup of that movement and it was a predominately white women's movement. There were some black females involved, but the majority of them were white women. You also have to look out of--you have to look at the environment out of which they came. Many of them didn't come out of a lower class socio-economic background, but they came out middle, upper middle. You have to also look at what is it that they really wanted and to be truthful with you, I think they never could define what they really wanted. If you look at how women have come to--to--today--in today's society, to me it--it doesn't get down to their--who they are as persons but whether or not they have sexual freedom to do what they want to and I remember when they first started--the women's rights movement first started and they were taking off their bras and burning the bras and I never could see the sense in that except to me they were saying, they wanted sexual freedom. Well, my God, they have sexual freedom because they can do any and everything they want to do, and to me that's not why the--that to me was not what the women's movement was about. It--to me it was about the equality of women, the parity of women. No being able to hold women back because they are female, but to let them develop their potential. Let them do what they want to do with their lives, and--to--everything to me has just got turned around when I look at the results today. Only a few white women actually benefited from the women's movement, and in a sense, there is a--a silent women's movement going on today. There has always been--. Speaker 1: You said only a "few" white women, or you--did you mean that--only a few white women or black women. Speaker 2: White women. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because the majority of them are still pretty much where they were in the '70s [1970s]. They still make up the majority of pink collar workers. That glass ceiling is still there. So, what the movement should have done in the year 2001 to me has never been realized. black women were able to--have always been able to--not the majority, but a handful of us--you're able to push ahead and to achieve. You've always been able to do that. So, what they were talking about to me was nothing new, but I felt that there should have been a--parameters that went along with it, and today when you look at it, like I said, you see the women, they are able to--there should be more respect for them in terms of who they are and also understanding that there are things that they should not do in a public manner. Story_ID: 18806 Speaker 1: Now I want to talk to you about the Bronzeville Children's Museum [Chicago, Illinois], because this is the project that you are involved in now and have been for the last what five years? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And, so I'd like you to talk about the genesis of you know, how that has come to, you know, being and even though you are still in process, you know, talk about that--that project. Speaker 2: Well, being within the--within the African American Museum movement, I discovered that there was a youth children's movement. In fact children's' museums have been around for over a hundred years and I--I discovered that you now had a group of mothers interested in their children having a museum experience but an interactive museum experience because usually museums--the major museums--they would take their children to the museums and all they could really do, maybe they would look and so these mothers felt that the children should be able to interact with the exhibits in order to learn what the exhibit was trying to teach them. I too, being a teacher, being an educator, I feel that it is very important. I think it's foolish for you to bring a child into a museum and you are talking to that child and you are telling them to look up at the wall and look at the pictures. So, even when I was--even being at DuSable [Museum of African American History] there was also this dream to have a children's' gallery and there again the forces that are within there it's like if you have an idea and it's not their idea, then they are going to make certain that it never happens. So, I started with this idea of the children's' gallery in 1989 when I first became chairman of the board. In fact we convened a education committee with the different age levels, and it's a long story, but it never happened. Still, I was convinced that our children needed to have a museum experience that would be interactive, where they would learn about the contributions--about the history of our people, and when I was in Dallas, Texas attending an association--American Association of Museums Convention and right across from us--from one of the seminars, there was the Association of Youth Museums having their luncheon and so I went in and I discovered this whole new world of children's' museums. In fact, they told me that they were just there in Dallas, but their convention was going to be held in Houston, and what they had planned to do, they called it their "tour de force" of all the children's museums between Dallas, Texas and Houston, Texas, and so I asked them if I could join and they said, oh, yes. So then I canceled all my reservations to come back to Chicago and I decided to take that tour so that I could see what they were talking about in terms of children's museums and it was a very enlightening trip. Along the way we must have visited maybe like eight, ten children's museums, and when we got to Houston, to this big, beautiful children's museum and I just became convinced that our children needed a children's museum, an African American focused children's museum because there wasn't any. There are Jewish children's museums, Asian children's museums and so I thought we needed an African American children's museum, and so about four years ago, five years ago, I got started with--to implement that idea through trials and tribulations we ended up at Evergreen Plaza being called the Bronzeville Children's Museum. Our dream was to be located in Bronzeville, but after working over six years with the City of Chicago's Department of Planning and Development, nothing ever worked out, and I would have lost our 50--we would have lost our 501(c) 3 if we had not been able to go to Evergreen Plaza. Going to Evergreen Plaza with our Bronzeville's Children's Museum was the best thing we could have ever done, because Evergreen Plaza is a very active mall and especially an active mall for African Americans. Then it's a very assessable mall, so being in that--in that place was like I said, just fantastic, and we have been able to have visitors because of the accessibility of being on 95th Street. We have people that come from Racine, Wisconsin; Zion, Illinois; Wheaton; Arlington Heights, Joliet, Lamont, Frankfort [all Illinois municipalities], Gary [Indiana]--as far--Merrillville, Hammond [Indiana municipalities], as well as the Chicago area and so it's just been a fantastic experience to be there. We also realized that we have been so popular that we--we have actually outgrown that space. In fact, we outgrew it a few months after we opened because we can only have one exhibit at a time and you--people just--they want to come and bring like the whole school. Well, we can't accommodate the whole school at a time and it just made us realize that we had to expand. I went down to Springfield [Illinois] and worked with [Illinois State] senator Emil Jones and senator Margaret Smith and we were able to get one point five million under the Illinois First Program and using that money, we will end up with a new museum. It will not be in Bronzeville. It will be somewhere on the South Side and it will be a beautiful children's museum. I am very proud of that because our children, and when I says ours, I'm talking about not just African American children, but all children need to be exposed to our contributions at a very early age. Our target age happens to be children three years old to eleven and when you see those little three-year old kids come in and they can touch and they go away signing, then you know that they are learning and so we're happy to be able to, to have this museum. Story_ID: 18807 Speaker 1: --Opening this Bronzeville Children's Museum [Chicago, Illinois] and everybody thought it was a good idea. Then finally I went back and I said we have opened, and I came with the brochures, (laughs) and of course some of the people at--on DuSable [Museum of African American History]--the trustees, some of them--"Well that's in competition with us," and blah, blah and I told them, "That that's saying that the Chicago Children's Museum is in competition with the Field Museum [of Natural History], with the [John G.] Shedd Aquarium--that's saying that all of these Children's Museums are in competitions with the other major museums in their city and they are not because they are different, they are really different and the target--the age area--the age grouping happens to be different and anyway there is room enough for all of us." Story_ID: 18808 Speaker 1: You have shown through your life that you are able really to do things and I want you to talk about--I mean that you are a doer more than you are even a talker, you are a doer, and I want you to sort of address that. Why, why--what is sort of the essence of who you are? Speaker 2: Okay, well I think the essence of who I am--number one I am a person who love people. I love nature and I love doing. I don't like to talk a lot, but I think that whenever I speak whatever I have to say is very important. I--I've listened to people all my life. I have watched people all my life and in most of the cases that is what they do--they talk. There really isn't any plan that they have to implement and it's always talking and I've learned even as a--a little girl I observe people. Like I said I listen and I notice what they do and what they don't do and I was always determined that I would not be like that. If there is something that needs to be doing, I am not going to talk about it. I will get up and I will do it and so it has been in my life for those things that need to be doing, I'm going to be out there doing them. I've always believed that to have a dream is good, but a dream is no good--a dream--having a dream or vision is no good if you're not going to do anything with it. You have to get up and make that dream or that vision come true. That requires work and that's what I am. I am a worker. I've always been a worker, even as a little girl at--at home. I would take care of my chores. I love having a clean house, a clean room and I would like be the supervisor over my brothers and sisters because they would do their work right or their chores right and I was there to make certain that it would be done just exactly right and that's how I am today. So that I want things to look--I want things to look good because that represents who I am as a person. I don't mind doing anything that will make a project go. That means if I have to get down on my knees and scrub floors, I'll do that. Sweep, pick up paper, paint--I can--see I can do everything. I guess I've become a 'Jack-of-all-trades' in order to make a project go, and that's who I am and that's what I will always be doing. I was laughing with somebody and I said, "Well, if they cut off my legs I will still find a way to move around. If I'm blind, they have Braille, so I'll always (laughs) as long as I'm able to get up and breathe, then I will be doing." I also feel that living is--is educational in a sense in that it doesn't start at a certain age and then stop at a certain age. Education to me is on-going, therefore I'd never considered myself retired, although a lot of people tell me, "Well, didn't you retire from the Board?" And I say, well "I guess I left the board but I've never retired and I don't intend to retire because I love what I'm doing and I feel that people retire when they are tired of what they are doing, when there's no longer the passion. See, you have to have a passion for even work. Your work, if there is not a passion in it, then why do it and I feel that I have a passion for living, for learning and therefore I will continue to be doing and I won't retire because it's--it's too much and then it's fun. That's another thing. What I am doing and what I have always done to me is fun. So, I didn't have to get paid--they--some of the jobs they pay me. That's why I can volunteer because it's fun, it's, it's learning--it's educational. Story_ID: 18809 Speaker 1: Your hopes or concerns about the black community? Speaker 2: Well, my--I--there again I--I'm remaining very optimistic, but still within me there is a--gnawing in terms of our not being at the point where we--where I feel we should be in terms of equality--in terms of the realization of potential. I feel that still--I'm not concerned about the handful of our people who make it. They will always make it. They--they have always made it. Even during the time of slavery. You had freedman who were out there doing their part, doing their thing, but it's the majority of our people that I'm concerned about and to me as I look around today, the majority of our people in many instances are worst off than they were fifteen, twenty years ago. Who was it--[U.S.] President [Ronald] Reagan said it, "Are you better off or worse off?" Well I think our people are worse off than they were fifteen or twenty years ago. I feel that our people don't understand the--the value of being politically involved. I believe that they don't understand how important it is to hold up? those people that they elect. Story_ID: 18810 Speaker 1: The people that they elect to hold them accountable so that they don't go back every four years if they have not done anything for the people. The people--our people also still don't understand their history. Many of the are still ashamed of the fact that they were slaves. Well, to me being a slave was nothing because every race in the history of mankind at one time or another--that group was a slave. They were slaves, and so being a slave to me--what is that to be ashamed of? You should be ashamed if you are not doing something with your life today, and so, in many instances when it comes to the majority of our people and there again I stress the majority of our people, I feel that no, they have not made it and there is still an awful lot to do to help the majority of our people. Story_ID: 18811 Speaker 1: Why do you think philanthropy is important or volunteerism? Speaker 2: Well, I think it's very important because in many instances that is the way that you go about helping. You go about helping from the sincereness of your heart. You go about helping because you understand what the concerns and the problems are and you have the time and the skills and the expertise to help. So, to me it's very important. I think that in terms of philanthropy, we as African Americans have not done our part when it comes to the monetary and I think that is very important. I think that in many instances, our people who have money don't deem it their responsibility to really help the different African American organizations. I believe in helping my own, you know, taking care of what's in my home first and I see that many of our African Americans are quite wealthy. They give to the white organizations--the white museums, but when it comes to giving money to our organizations, our museums--we don't get that kind of money or support from them. I feel that we should be helping ourselves. We are always looking to other people to give us money and to me that is wrong. We have enough of our African American rich people--even here in the city of Chicago [Illinois], if they gave, say like ten thousand dollars, can you imagine what kind of pool that would be so that if they created a foundation where different museums would need money or organizations--grassroots organizations--church groups, they would have a ready pool there to help them--they might not be able to give them everything that they wanted, but they'd be able to give them something, but now, there is nothing, and that's why I think it's--it's you know, disgraceful to us as African Americans not to be able to help our own and to me that--that's the problem with our race. We don't help our own, and as long as we are in that kind of frame of mind, the majority of our people will probably still remain where they are. So that there is no, what is that, trickling down of what is at the top. Story_ID: 18812 Speaker 1: What are your views about reparations (unclear)--[wait, just wait let--. Speaker 2: --The train go by]. (pauses) I think that reparation is something that is owed to African Americans. There have been all kinds of justifications in terms of "Well, we can't do this. There are too many of them, or we did this--or they might have racial mixtures--race missing, so we don't know if they are truly from slaves or not." That's not the point, the point is this. They have done reparation for Jews. I mean they've been able to locate where they had their treasure--their arts. They are getting billions of dollars. They even did reparations for the Japanese. So why can they not do reparations in some form for us as African Americans? I know they are not going to think in terms of giving every African American family a thousand dollars or anything like that, but there are other ways that they can help. Maybe a general--a huge fund can be set up in terms of those students who don't have money but who want to go to college. Something bigger than the United Negro College Fund because education to me is the key to everything and people can downplay education, but it is very important to be educated because you can think for yourself. You can receive information, process it and then you determine what is right and what is wrong . So to me if they wanted to do something about reparations, they could at least create a fund that would be an educational fund to help students who want to go to college--better the quality of education in elementary school as well as in high schools. So, yes I believe in reparations. It is something that is due to us. Our people helped build this nation. Many and when you go back and you look at inventions. You look at a lot of things. They have a black background to them, and the whites have got rich off of it. So, to me it's time to give reparations. Don't tell me that it's something that it's impossible to do because quote, "They claim they put a man on the moon," they have satellites still spinning in the--out in outer space, then they can certainly settle question of reparations. Story_ID: 18813 Speaker 1: Your family's been a very important part of your life and I'm wondering if you could just talk about what pride, you know, what--what your proud of with your family and why you think family is important. Speaker 2: Well, with my family, I am very proud. If you are talking about my present family which would be our children [Paul and Pia Montes] and my husband [Paul J. Montes]. I feel that our--we ended up with (laughs) two very--two very good citizens. To me that--that's very important. We didn't have trouble with our children and they are producers. They are providing something to the--to our society. I think that family is very important because in the end that's all really that you have. Family members come in all sizes, all shapes and definitely all personalities, but they come out of that--that blood which means that you are all special no matter what each one of you decide that you want to do, but you are family and that you have to stick together. You have to be supportive of each other, and my family has always been important to me. Knowing the history of my family. My great grandfather, my grandfather, my grandmother, my mother, my father. All those things have been very important to me, and I think it helps to make me a very special people, because I am proud of the stock out of which I have come. Speaker 1: And what do you want to accomplish before you leave this--this earth? Speaker 2: Well, accomplishing the expansion of our Bronzeville's Children Museum [Chicago, Illinois] and being able to write. I--I would like to write about my--my life's experiences--about the people that I've encountered--just about life in general. I would like to be able to take the time to at least publish a book, and I think I would be very happy since I am not--I have more years behind me than in front of me, those are the two things that I would really like to do and having--being able to do those things, that's my legacy..