 Story_ID: 639913 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My full name is Winifred White Neisser, Winifred W-I-N-I-F-R-E-D, White, like the color, W-H-I-T-E, Neisser, N-E-I-S-S-E-R [HistoryMaker Winifred Neisser]. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Indianapolis, Indiana, March 23rd, 1953. Speaker 1: Okay and what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: My title is senior vice president movies and miniseries for Sony Pictures Television. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is Sunday, November 17th, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Los Angeles, California, in my home. Story_ID: 639914 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: First one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Ooh, favorite food? Probably shrimp. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is purple. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Probably autumn. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite vacation destination because I just like to travel. I've--so many places I like and so many places I haven't been to, so. Speaker 1: Okay, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My children [Alexis Neisser and Nicholas Neisser] would probably say my favorite phrase was, use common sense (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, that's a--that's a handy phrase (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 639915 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Your mother's side of the family and your father's [Walter White, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's and then we'll get your father's and then-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --put them together. So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Winifred also. Her, her name was Winifred Virginia Parker [Winifred Parker White]. Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Moundsville, West Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her birthday is September 23rd, and I honestly am not sure--oh no, yeah, I should--I know that. She was born September 23rd, 1929. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family, in terms of how far back you can trace your ancestors and where they were from? Speaker 2: Well, mother's mother's [Frieda Campbell Parker] family was from the West Virginia area as far back as I know, which is not terribly far back. Her grandfather [Joseph Campbell] was a prison guard in the prison in Moundsville, West Virginia [West Virginia Penitentiary]. I, I was told that he was the only black prison guard there for quite a while. And I don't know--I'm not even sure what his name was to be honest. Her grandmother's name was Blanche. Her, her name was Blanche Campbell, and they did tell a story about Blanche's mother whose name I believe was Latisha [ph.]. And Latisha was a free black woman living in Virginia, working as a domes- doing domestic work for a family when she met her soon to be husband who was actually hiding in a cornfield when she met him (laughter). So this is like our family lore that-- Speaker 1: So he, he was enslaved and hiding in a cornfield? Speaker 2: We believe so. Yeah, we believe so. And--but they, the family that she was working, took him in and they ended up getting married and they (unclear). Speaker 1: Now that's an interesting dynamic. They took him in--you know. Well, if he had escaped and they brought him into their household, they would be adding a worker. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's what--that's what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Without having-- Speaker 2: --we were told. Speaker 1: --to pay for it. Speaker 2: But apparently, it was a--I'm told it was a Ger- a German American family and obviously they had treated my great-great-grandmother well and--as I said, I don't know any--that's, that's just the family lore that-- Speaker 1: Well, that's-- Speaker 2: --got passed down. Speaker 1: --what-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that's what we have. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And that's, that's, that's all we can go, go on is--yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So she was a free woman, though-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --working for these German (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --people. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 639916 Speaker 1: So--and then on my grandfather's side, my mother's father [Frederick Parker], not sure where they came from. There--there's always--there's been some talk about some of them being from the West Indies--you know, obviously, from Africa but we don't where. His family were coalminers in the Pennsylvania area. And his, his father I'm pretty sure did work in the mines, at least for a while. He--my grandfather really is sort of the patriarch of my family. He, he grew up in--I can't think of it now--now, of course, I'm not gonna remember the small town in Pennsylvania. But he left home--his father died when he was twelve and his mother remarried, and he did not get along with the man that his mother married. And he left home and went to Washington, D.C. and actually worked as a stable boy and--but went to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School] in Washington and was very smart; and had no money, but had a couple of teachers who believed in him and encouraged him to apply to college. And apparently, from what my grandfather would, would say is that when he first sent in his college applications, and I don't know who--where he first applied to, he was rejected and he didn't really know what he was doing. But Charles Hamilton Houston, who was at Amherst College [Amherst, Massachusetts], somehow became aware of my grandfather and helped him to apply to Amherst. And so in 1918, my grandfather went to Amherst College. And-- Speaker 2: Turned out Charles Hamilton Houston would later be the dean of the law school at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Yes, and--but he was in Amherst. He went to Amherst as an undergraduate, and I don't exactly when he was there, but he apparently helped him grandfather get to Amherst. And my grandfather had a, a scrapbook, which unfortunately was destroyed in, in a--it was--it was in my parents' basement in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] when they were--when the basement flooded. But he had a scrapbook from Amherst that had all of the little trinkets and pictures--not, not so many pictures, but memorabilia from his time at college. And we def- you definitely got the sense that it was almost magical because it was so transformative for him--not easy because he was working in the kitchen and--you know, and, and he was in school with a lot of wealthy white young men who--some of whom were nice to him and many of whom were not. But he played sports, he played on the football team, and, and he was surrounded by people who were his intellectual equals, and it was magical. And there were--and there were definitely professors who reached out to him to help bring him along. And he became a high school math teacher. I don't know that that's what he wanted to do exactly. He ended up actually going to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for graduate work I think for a year. He did not like Harvard very much. Story_ID: 639917 Speaker 1: But this, this would have been in, in the '20s [1920s]? Speaker 2: Yes, so--I, I believe he started in 1918 and graduated in 1922 [from Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: So he was born around 1900 or so? Speaker 2: He was born in 1900. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yep, he was born in 1900. So, anyway, he became a--he became a high school math teacher, spent most of his time teaching at Crispus Attucks High School in Indianapolis [Indiana]. But before going there, he went to one of the schools in Virginia that-- Speaker 1: Virginia State? Speaker 2: It wasn't Virginia Sta- it was a smaller (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: --school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, I should--I should have looked this up. And anyway, that's where he met my [maternal] grandmother. My grandmother also went to college. And they got married--must have gotten married in 1925. Speaker 1: Trying to think of the--was it anoth- another black college [HBCU] or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --blue something. Is it that--it's some kind of blue something (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I feel like it was some kind of institute. Speaker 1: Insti- oh-- Speaker 2: And I'm trying-- Speaker 1: --oh, Palmer-- Speaker 2: --and I-- Speaker 1: --Institute [Palmer Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina]--not, not Palmer; no, it couldn't be that. So--okay (unclear). Speaker 2: So, at any rate, they ended up moving to Indianapolis, and that's where they spent most of their married life. And my grandfather taught at Crispus Attucks High School for many, many years. And, and he was one of the sort of renowned teachers that helped a lot of kids who, who needed extra support, that my grandparents were always taking in kids and--you know, they would come and live them for periods of time. And then he worked in the '60s [1960s]. He worked with a man named Sam Johnson [Samuel H. Johnson] to start a summer program called the Summer Study Skills Program in Knoxville, Tennessee. And there--with money I think that came from a foundation that was related to the Episcopal- Episcopalian church. They looked for kids in the South primarily who were--who scored well on their PSATs [Preliminary Scholastic Aptitude Test], but who were in high schools that were not really capable of preparing them to go on. So it was a two year summer program, and these kids would come and study for six weeks at a time, and it was really intense. I, I know because I got to go to it when I was in high school [Homestead High School, Mequon, Wisconsin], in 1966 and '67 [1967], even--and I was the only--I think the only kid from the North 'cause everybody else was from the South. And, and a lot of those kids went on to go to Ivy League schools and schools all over the country. Speaker 1: It sounds like almost like an Upward Bound program or something. Speaker 2: It was kind--and actually, there was an Upward Bound program on the same campus as, as the Summer Study Skills Program. I think our program was a little more academically intense. Speaker 1: Now what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Frederick Parker. Speaker 1: Frederick Parker, okay. Speaker 2: I didn't even think of that. I'm talking about these people and not giving you their names. And his wife's was Frieda Parker [Frieda Campbell Parker]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 639918 Speaker 1: Okay. So he, he started--is, is the Summer Study Skills Program still in existence? Speaker 2: This--the program that we knew as the Summer Study Skills Program ended in the late '60s [1960s], but a lot of the alumni from the program are still working to give scholarships to black students in the South. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, but any rate, so I said he's--my [maternal] grandfather [Frederick Parker] really was sort of the patriarch of, of our family and all of us grandchildren, you know, knew that there were standards we had to uphold (laughter). He was a--he was a stern taskmaster, but a very funny, charismatic man, and a very good teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think we all felt that the trajectory of our family was dramatically changed by my grandfather being able to go to Amherst College [Amherst, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's quite a story. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And being mentored by Charles Hamilton Houston, you know, who made a career of mentoring people. Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: So, so your mother [Winifred Parker White] was raised in, in Indianapolis [Indiana]? Speaker 2: My mother was raised in Indianapolis. She had two sisters and a brother [Frederick Parker]. Speaker 1: Okay, what did your mother say about growing up in Indianapolis? Speaker 2: My mother seemed to enjoy growing up in Indianapolis. It was definitely a segregated existence, but she didn't--she didn't complain that much about it. You know, I, I think--I think their--theirs was a fairly happy household. My--as I said, my grandfather was the, the math teacher at Crispus Attucks [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], and my grandmother was a social worker. And my mother was the valedictorian of her class when she graduated. She was the second of the four children. My, my Aunt Frieda [Frieda Parker Jefferson] is her older sister. And I think my mother was the one who may have been in many ways closest to my grandfather. I think she was the most academic of the four (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And when did your mother graduate from Crispus Attucks? Speaker 2: She must have graduated in--let's see, she graduated from college in 1950, so she must have graduated in '46 [1946] from high school. Speaker 1: Yeah, that sounds about right. Speaker 2: So, when she got ready to go to college, she wanted to go to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]. I don't know where else she applied. She applied to other places too I'm sure, but she was rejected from Cornell, and she was devastated. And my aunt had gone on to University of Arizona [Tucson, Arizona], which she hated. And so my grandfather steered them to go to Purdue [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana] and when they both got into Purdue--they were only eighteen months apart, my, my aunt and my mother, so they were--they were very close. They were--I think they were best friends their whole lives. And when my aunt and my mother decided to go to Purdue, Purdue said that they could not live on the campus, that they should go--that the black students for the most part were living in West Lafayette [Indiana]. What's on the other side of the tracks, as they used to say. So my grandfather wrote to the governor of Indiana and said, you know, I have read the Purdue handbook, and it says that undergraduates are supposed to live in the dorms--that freshman in particular are supposed to live in the dorms. And my daughters are coming to Purdue, and I expect them to live in the dorms. And so what came back was they could live in the dorms, but they would have to be each other's roommates. So my mother and my aunt went to Purdue and they roomed together. Speaker 1: So they basically integrated the dorms at Purdue. Speaker 2: They integrated the dorms of Purdue, yes, yep. So-- Speaker 1: That went on for many more years. I've interviewed some scientists that actually had to stay off campus doing graduate degrees at Purdue. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: In the--you know, in the '60s [1960s], they were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, wow, well, well it's, it's--and it's actually--I have a picture of the group of, of black students that my mother hung out with, and that's how she met my father. My father [Walter White, Sr.] had come back from the war [World War II, WWII] and so he was one of the G.I.'s returning to go to school and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Well, well, well let's go to his side of the family-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and then we'll put 'em together. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 639919 Speaker 1: So your, your father's full name is? Speaker 2: My father's name was Walter Hiawatha White [Walter White, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay, Hia- is there a story behind the Hiawatha? Speaker 2: You know, I'm not sure what that story (laughter)--that story is. I mean, his--suppose- supposedly--and I, I wish I could--one of the pictures I looked for that I couldn't find was his father's mother, whose name was Maggie [ph.]--was, was an Indian [Native American]. But she was supposedly a Cherokee Indian, and Hiawatha is not a Cherokee name, so. Speaker 1: No, I know it's a popular poem ['The Song of Hiawatha,' Henry Wadsworth Longfellow], you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: "By the shores of Gitche Gumee / By the--," (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --"shining Big Sea Water--." I know my father's cousin's name, it was Hiawatha, but-- Speaker 2: Oh, that's interesting 'cause I haven't-- Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I think it just grows out of reciting that poem in, in school-- Speaker 2: Probably. Speaker 1: I, I don't know, but I thought--I thought I'd ask you if there's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) some, some big story. Speaker 2: --that's the only thing that I know; that's what I know about it. So, so my father was born in Paris, Texas. And I know very little about where my father's family comes from. I do know that his father [Luther White], I think, spent most of his life in Texas. My grandmother's family came from Oklahoma, and I'm not sure how they got from Oklahoma to Texas, but, but that's--but they did spend some time in Texas and they had a farm in Paris, Texas. My grandmother [Viaria Rucker White] married my grandfather when she was only thirteen. My grandfather was at least ten years older. And she, she used to talk about the fact that she really wasn't ready to get married at thirteen, but she--there wasn't really any schooling left for her. I think she went through sixth grade, and she--you know, she could read and write but not really well. My grandfather had fought in World War I [WWI], and, and I guess when he got back, I guess that must be--that must have been about the time that he got married to my grandmother. Now I don't know--I don't know very much about those days when they were in Texas. We have a couple of pictures of the family--the family there. I do know that my grandmother's brother, Herman, left Texas and moved to Gary, Indiana, because there was work in Gary and it was in the steel mills. And about the time that my grandmother had my father, and my father was the second of four boys, there was some kind of racial problem in the Paris, Texas area and a couple of men were lynched. And that was the motivation for my family to leave Paris, Texas, and join Uncle Herman in Gary, Indiana. Story_ID: 639920 Speaker 1: Yeah, now that--I was gonna ask about Paris. I read a lot of stuff and I--it's something about Paris, Texas--I think there's even a movie about a racist called 'Paris Trout'-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but--with-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. But it's something about Paris--I've read about something going on there and that's--this is it--two men--two people lynched and so they leave town as a result. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so they left--so they left and, and they came to Gary, Indiana and eventually my, my grandmother's sister and her husband also came to Gary. Actually, my [paternal] grandmother [Viaria Rucker White] had two sisters and both--all three of those sisters ended up living in Gary. So when I was a child we did a lot of traveling to Indiana from Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. And sometimes we'd go to Gary and sometimes we'd go to Indianapolis [Indiana], and that's where--that's where our extended families were. Speaker 1: Okay, so I take it your, your father was--Walter White [Walter White, Sr.] was a good student, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, my father--you know, my, my grandfather [Luther White] worked in the steel mills most of the time that, that he was in Gary--I think all of the time actually. And my grandmother was a domestic worker, but they put all four of the boys through college. So--you know, as growing up I kind of didn't recognize what an accomplishment that was, but it was major. Speaker 1: That is, that is. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was major. Speaker 1: For them to have that vision. If all four of 'em--if one of-- Speaker 2: All four of 'em. Speaker 1: --'em made it, you might say that's an aberration or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --that he's just a lucky one. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: But all four. Speaker 2: All four of 'em went to college. And my father--as I said, my father met my mother [Winifred Parker White] at Purdue [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana]. And he had wanted to be a biochemist. Both my father and my mother were interested in biochemistry, so it wasn't just that they met socially. I think they had similar academic interests. Well, there were no jobs for a biochemist for young black men in 1948, when my father was graduating from college. And his cousin suggested that he might wanna try med school or dental school. And he ended up going to Howard for dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.]. He--my parents got married before he left to go to Howard, much to my grandparents' [Frieda Campbell Parker and Frederick Parker] chagrin, because my mother was only eighteen; she was about to turn nineteen. And they were certain that that meant that she would not finish college, but she did. She stayed at Purdue while my father went out to Washington, D.C. And my father somehow paid for her to finish, because my grandfather was so mad at her, that she got married, that he didn't wanna pay for her to--he wanted her to finish college, but he wasn't going to pay for it because she got married and you know, that was her way of saying she was grown. So that was-- Speaker 1: Now this is quite a cast of strong characters here. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Everybody seems like a really, I mean, above average character. Speaker 2: They were definitely characters and yes, they had very strong wills. So, when my--when my mother graduated from, from Purdue then she moved out east and she worked in the ha- worked in--did hospital work while my father finished-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --dental school and did his residency. The--I know--they did--they did the re- residency in Jersey City, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay, so when he was in school, did she work at Howard hospital? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 639921 Speaker 1: And then, then when he finished [at Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.], then that's what I was telling you earlier that he was--they were trying to decide if they were going go to Cincinnati [Ohio] or go to Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. And Cincinnati was because my father [Walter White, Sr.] had cousins who lived there and that he was very close to. But Milwaukee won out because by this time my Aunt Frieda [Frieda Parker Jefferson], the one who had roomed with my mother [Winifred Parker White] in college, was living in Milwaukee and teaching at--in the Milwaukee Public Schools, and my mother wanted to be near her sister. Speaker 2: Okay, her roommate from college and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were roommates in college [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana]. The whole time that my mother and--my mother is, is dead now, but my entire life, my mother never lived further than a mile away from my aunt. And they talked every morning on the phone and every night before they went to bed, so they were truly best friends as well as sisters. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, okay so, so you're born Indianapolis [Indiana], though, so you-- Speaker 1: Yes, I was born in Indianapolis because I guess when my mother was pregnant, my grandmother [Frieda Campbell Parker] thought it would be a good idea for her to come and spend some time at home while my father was working. So my mother went home, and I was born there, but she only--as I said, she only stayed there--I don't think it was more than six months before she came to--back to Milwaukee. Story_ID: 639922 Speaker 1: When you consider your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, their talents, their opinions, how they look, and how they walk, how they talk, who do you think that you take after the most? Speaker 2: You know, I, I think I might take after my father [Walter White, Sr.] a little more. I, I--there definitely traits from both parents. My father was quieter. He was a little more introverted, and in the span of the four kids, I'm one of the more introverted kids actually. He liked to read. He loved music. He, he couldn't--he didn't play any instruments. Apparently, at some point, he played the drums, but I never heard him play the drums. But he loved all kinds of music, and my father would listen to opera, and he would listen to popular music. He loved jazz. He had a very extensive jazz record collection and so I grew up hearing jazz in the house all the time, and I love jazz. So--and I know that's just from having my father listen to it all the time and talk about it. My mother [Winifred Parker White] was much more social. And she had very close--in addition to my aunt [Frieda Parker Jefferson]--she had very close girlfriends, and she was the one who was sort of always making the arrangements for my parents to do the social events in, in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. The--you know, my parents moved to Milwaukee at a time when I think there was a group of young black professionals moving to Milwaukee. And so my father became part of a medical corporation that included five or six other doctors, and they worked right on the North Side of Milwaukee, which was where the sort of center of the black community was in Milwaukee at that time. And those doctors and their families were the closest friends of our family and, in fact, I have a group of, of women friends--how many of us there--I guess there five us and two of us also have sisters. And those--those five friends they were all part of that community. One of them--one of them was the daughter of one of the doctors in that medical corporation, and he was probably my father's closest friend [George Hilliard]. Story_ID: 639923 Speaker 1: Who was it? Speaker 2: Who was it? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: His name was George Hilliard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Dr. Hilliard had six kids and they lived six blocks away from us, and so we were always running back and forth between the Hilliard house and our house. And Mrs. Hilliard--Joy Hilliard--was a close friend of my mother's [Winifred Parker White]. And their daughter, Emlee [Emlee Hilliard Smith], who lives in Chicago [Illinois] now is one of my best friends to, to this day. So my mother was, was a joiner. You know, she, she joined all kinds of community activities. She was active in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. She was always working with the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] at school. She used to run the mental health drive at school when they would collect money for the mental health hospitals. She worked when we first got to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] I think at Milwaukee County Hospital [Froedtert and the Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], but she stopped working when my brother [Walter White, Jr.] was born. So my brother's about eighteen months younger than I am. And I don't think that was something she wanted to do particularly. I think she kind of wanted to keep working, but it was the '50s [1950s], and I think the common wisdom was if you could afford to stay home and raise your children that's what you did. And so she stopped working and she raised the four kids. And then when my sister [Adrienne White Faines], who's the youngest, was sixteen my said this just too boring to stay home; I need to go back to work, but it had been a long time since she had worked in her field of biology. And she went back to graduate school, I guess at UWM [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee] in Milwaukee, and got a master's in counseling and then went to work at MATC, Milwaukee Area Technical College [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and worked with primarily students with special needs at the--at MATC. And she really liked that. She was really happy going back to work. So--but anyway, so you had asked me who did I go after--that, that whole thing of joining and feeling the responsibility to somehow be involved with the school and the community and all of that, that--that comes from my mother. And my, my sister and I often talk about the fact that--you know, what is this that we feel like we have to join everything (laughter). And particularly, 'cause both of us, you know, have, have demanding full-time jobs, and it sometimes gets a little overwhelming when you're kind of trying to do everything at the school and do, do things with the community and work full time. But it was definitely--that was definitely instilled in us that that was part of our responsibility. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: I would think that the wife of a doctor and, and, and a dentist would, would feel that kind of responsibility in a--in a black community (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: Almost like being a preacher's wife or something. You have-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's--I think that's probably right. And, and then you--you know, you also had the fact that they were coming from--because they had both gone to college and they were part of the sort of professional community--they were all members of their sororities and their fraternities; there--and my father [Walter White, Sr.] was an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity]; my mother was a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]. And those groups were involved in the community. Ever- you know they were all doing some kind of work to help the next generation come along. And then there were things like Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], you know, that my mother belonged to; and then she belonged to the Links [The Links, Incorporated], and--but, as I said that she also did all this work with the PTA. And when we were in high school she ran the, the AFS program [American Field Service; AFS Intercultural Programs], the foreign exchange student program, because--well, I'm getting ahead of myself. We ended up going out--we ended up moving and going to a predominantly white high school [Homestead High School, Mequon, Wisconsin], and so I think my mother saw that it would be good for us to connect with the foreign exchange students because they would have something in common with us as minority students in the high school, so she became very active in that. Story_ID: 639924 Speaker 1: Okay, well Milwaukee [Wisconsin] seems to be an in- interesting place for organizations. Some of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --some unusual things come out of Milwaukee. But--so, now can you--can you name for us your siblings in the order--now you're the oldest, right? Speaker 2: I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then the next is my brother, Walter [Walter White, Jr.], who's named after my father [Walter White, Sr.]. And then--and then I have a brother, Charles White, who is still living in Milwaukee. And my sister, Adrienne White; Adrienne White Faines is living in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, your brothers both have names of--you know, Walter White, of course, of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 2: Oh, I know, I know; in fact (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: --my mother [Winifred Parker White] used to volunteer for the NAAC- you know, used to work with the NAACP when she was--in, in the '60s [1960s]. And she used to make phone calls and say, "This is Mrs. Walter White." My father told her to stop it (laughter), 'cause people would assume. Speaker 1: She, she had some leverage being Mrs. Walter White. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, right. And Charles White [Charles Wilbert White], the great black artist. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Your other brother. Speaker 2: Char- my broth- my brother Charles is actually named after my father's brother whose name was also Charles [Charles White]. But, yes, that was--yeah, he's--that is the same name as a terrific artist, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. And I think there was a fictional character named Walter White from this moo- this TV show-- Speaker 2: 'Breaking Bad.' Speaker 1: --name-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: --is Walter. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, at any rate, but, so, now what did your, your brother and your sister end up doing? Did they-- Speaker 2: What do they do now? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: My brother Walter is a lawyer who focuses on international law, but he works for McGuireWoods [McGuireWoods LLP], which is American law firm, but his office is in London [England]. And he's lived in London--oh gosh, for almost twenty years I think. And, and then my younger brother Charles is--works for FedEx in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. He's the one who sort of never left Milwaukee. And then my sister Adrienne is working in Chicago. She has a new job. She's the CEO of the American Osteopathic society or--I don't if it's--I don't know if society is exactly the right-- Speaker 1: Maybe association, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think it's association [American Osteopathic Association], because it's like the medi- it's like the AMA [American Medical Association], but it's the osteopaths. So that--she's just been in that job since July. Speaker 1: Okay (unclear). Speaker 2: And she's--she--her background is public health. She worked for many years for American Cancer [American Cancer Society, Illinois Division, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] and spent--also worked at Northwestern Hospital [Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 639925 Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory, I think, is visiting my [maternal] great-grandmother [Blanche Campbell] in Moundsville, West Virginia. And my memory is that she had a houseful of cats (laughter). I don't know what that means, but that's what--that's the earliest childhood memory I can come up with. Speaker 1: Okay, now--well, can you--now you, you grew up on the North Side of Mil-Milwaukee [Wisconsin]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you grow up--grow up in the same neighborhood, the same house? Speaker 2: We were--we, we lived in the same house--let's see, we, we first--the first house that I remember in Milwaukee was actually not that far from my father's office on a street named Palmer [Street]. It was not a neighborhood that my parents [Winifred Parker White and Walter White, Sr.] liked very much. And I--even I remember that, that they didn't like the neighborhood particularly. And then we moved to Capitol Drive, which was a more mixed neighborhood, in terms of, of ethnicity. The, the first house, Palmer house, was definitely in the black neighborhood. Capitol Drive--the house on Capitol Drive, on 16th [Street] and Capitol, really was a very integrated neighborhood. And as a child, I remember there were a lot of people in the neighborhood who were immigrants. There was a family that lived next door to us who--well, it was an elderly couple who lived next door to us who actually were from Yugoslavia, which doesn't even really exist anymore. There was another family across the street that was three generations, and the grandmother only spoke Italian. And then there were families where the grandparents spoke German. You know, Milwaukee's a big German community, and there was a--there was a German bakery that you could walk to from my house that I remember going to as a kid. And, and the women who ran that bakery spoke German and English. So that's, that's kind of what I remember. It was a--it was predominantly a working class community. There were a lot of--a lot of the fathers worked in the factories and the breweries. And, and the elementary school was four or five blocks from the house, so I, I have vivid memories of walking down to the block and meeting Barbara Bracey [ph.] on this corner, and then we'd cross the street and go pick up Jeanette Lever [ph.], and then we'd walk a few more--you know, to somebody else's house--to Jim Seltzer's [ph.] house. And then by the time we got to school there was a whole group of us that had walked to school. And that was--the school was Emanuel Philipps Elementary School [sic. Emanuel L. Philipp Elementary School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and it was kindergarten through eighth grade. Story_ID: 639926 Speaker 1: Now is this when you lived on Palmer [Street] or--? Speaker 2: No, this was in Capitol--when we lived on-- Speaker 1: On Capitol, okay. Speaker 2: --by the time we moved to Capitol. So when we moved to Capitol Drive it was just as I was starting kindergarten. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and, and, and the name of the school then again was? Speaker 2: Emanuel Philipps [sic. Emanuel L. Philipp Elementary School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Emanuel with an I-- I or an E, Emanuel--is it-- Speaker 2: E-M-A-N-U-E-L. It's not--the school's not there anymore, but that's where I (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --went to grade school. Speaker 1: All right, so did you like school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did like it. I did like--I did like school. I liked my teachers as far as I can remember--maybe with a few exceptions. But I liked school and I--it was-it was clearly--education was clearly very important in my family and that was made very clear from the time we were--we could talk. I think all, all four of my--or all--the, the four of us kids always talked about the fact that from the time we could talk, we knew we were going to college, 'cause that's what our parents [Winifred Parker White and Walter White, Sr.] talked about, and, and we all knew that we had to work hard in school. My--and my mother who would look at your homework before you turned it in and sit with you and make you do it again. And it was all--you know, if you came home with a C you get the--you get the speech about you are not a C student, and your ancestors struggled all those years not so you could be a C student. And, oh my god, it was the, the ancestor speech. It was--I, I can remember like in, in sixth grade thinking oh, please don't give me the ancestor speech again (laughter). I--I'll, I'll do it. I'll work hard. I'll get good grades. Just don't give me the ancestor speech. When I was in seventh grade my--the, the principal of the school called my parents to come to meet with them. And she told them that I should skip the second half of seventh grade. Now this was also at a time--at this time, they sent kids to school by their birthday. So, because my birthday was in March, I started school in January. And there--you know, there used to be a time when kids could actually graduate in December from high school, so--so, had I stayed on that track I would have been a December kid. But I ended up skipping the second half of seventh grade. And I don't remember that being an issue. The only thing I remember is that I didn't--I therefore did not ever study Wisconsin state history, for which I now--I now look back and realize--because, because I've now raised my kids [Alexis Neisser and Nicholas Neisser], I know California state history 'cause I studied it with my kids. But I, I can't tell you Wisconsin state history, so it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: --definitely a deficit in my (laughter)--in my educational background. So when we--when I graduated or when I was coming to eighth grade at Philipps High School--I mean at Philipps School, my parents were looking at where I and my siblings would go to high school. The high school in the neighborhood was Rufus King High School [Rufus King International High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and Rufus King was having some racial issues. I don't remember specifically what they were, but there was a lot of talk among my parents about the problems at Rufus King High School. Story_ID: 639927 Speaker 1: That's interesting that they would have a high school named after Rufus King [William R. King] in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: That's a--he was one of the founders of Seattle [Washington]. Speaker 2: Right, I don't know--I don't know why-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --but--that Rufus King High [Rufus King High School; Rufus King International High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]--it's still there. Speaker 1: They, they changed the name of King County [Washington] to Martin Luther King High School [sic.]. Speaker 2: Oh, interesting. Speaker 1: 'Cause Rufus King had been a slave owner. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: I don't know. So--and it--and also around this time we started to notice that members of, of--you know, friends of--friends families were starting to move. And I think it was all sort of motivated--motivated by the same thing of kids coming to a certain age and looking at where they were gonna go to school. So, of course, my parents [Winifred Parker White and Walter White, Sr.] had friends who worked in the school system and went to their friends and said okay, where in Milwaukee are the strongest public high schools? There weren't that many private schools, and private school was not a big deal at that time. And one of--I guess the best high school in the area was in actually Ozaukee County [Wisconsin], not even in Milwaukee County [Wisconsin], and it was in a suburb called Mequon [Wisconsin]. And my parents decided they would move to Mequon. And when they started to look in Mequon, they had trouble finding a place. Mequon at that time, in my memory, was a farm community. I mean, when I first saw it I went, you gotta be kidding me (laughter); we're moving here. It was--you know, there, there were cows and it was--it was--it was fairly rural. Now, if you go to Mequon, it's a--it's a very nice suburban community, and it's much more built up and, and sophisticated than it was in 1966. My parents, as I said, were having a little trouble finding a place. Again, I did--they did not make me aware of this. But one of the things that, that when we were growing up, my mother--my mother believed that children should not be idle, so she kept us really busy. And on Saturdays I would take art classes and dance classes. And we took art classes and, and drama classes at the Milwaukee Art Center [Milwaukee Art Museum, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], which was down on the lake. And the drama teacher there for many years was a woman named Mrs. Krimeans [ph.]. And my mother mentioned one day to Mrs. Krimeans when she picked me up and my girlfriends from drama class that they were looking to move. And Mrs. Krimeans said, "Oh, you know, we live in Mequon, would you like to buy our house?" And apparently, Mrs. Krimeans' husband was being transferred to somewhere in Ohio so they were leaving, so my parents bought Mrs. Krimeans' house. And as soon as the neighbors found out that they--that we were buying the house, several of them got together and tried to buy the house from the Krimeans so that we wouldn't move there. Again, my parents did not tell me--tell us much of this so I didn't really--I wasn't really aware-- Speaker 1: I, I know we heard from [HistoryMaker] Vel Phillips that I mentioned before we started this interview about the housing crisis, and she played a major role. Speaker 2: She did. Speaker 1: She and a father-- Speaker 2: Father Groppi [James Groppi], yes. Speaker 1: Father Groppi-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah--no, I have--I, I have very clear memories of the Father Groppi marches; in fact, I did go out with my mother a couple of times when they were doing the open-housing marches. And that was before we moved to Mequon. That was--it was--actually, it was right around the same time I think. 'Cause I think I was about in sixth grade [at Emanuel L. Philipp Elementary School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and this would have been eighth grade, so it was--it was all in that--in that same period of time. So-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought when you mentioned your, your parents knew her very well-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and they must know about the struggle (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --the housing struggle. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And when you mentioned this attempted move, I said they--well, they--this is--here it is. Story_ID: 639928 Speaker 1: Yeah, so here we were, so we were moving into foreign territory. Now, you know, I was twelve years old and I didn't wanna move anyway 'cause all my friends were back in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]; I had gone to the same school from kindergarten through eighth grade; most of my friends in school were going off the Rufus King [Rufus King High School; Rufus King International High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], so I was like, if they can do it why can't I? And my parents [Winifred Parker White and Walter White, Sr.] said well, you're not old enough. You're not old enough to understand why we--why we're making this move, and we promise that we will bring you back to visit your friends in Milwaukee. Now the drive from Milwaukee to Mequon [Wisconsin] is about fifteen minutes, but to me it was like moving to the moon because it was so different. And, and, and I didn't wanna do it, and I didn't even know what my parents were going through because they really kept it--kept it very quiet from, from us. The, the first real inkling that I got that we were moving into hostile territory was when we actually moved into the house, and my mother said to us, "Don't answer the phone," (laughter). And (unclear), "What are you talking about don't answer the phone?" She said, "I'm--until I tell you differently, do not answer the telephone." So--and it was because they were getting all kinds of threatening phone calls from people. So we moved in the middle of the school year--or not in the middle but towards the end of the school year. We mu--we must have moved in March or April, and my mother drove us into Milwaukee everyday so we could continue--so we could finish our school years at Philipps School [Emanuel L. Philipp Elementary School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. And, and, and the only reason I bring this up is because, even though there were the neighbors who were hostile and, and nasty, one day towards the end of the school year my mother locked her car keys inside the house just as she was supposed to come and pick us up. And so she, she didn't know what to do in the days before cell phones and all of that. So she went--she went to our next door neighbor, who was actually a Jewish doctor, who was actually very nice, Dr. Finkelstein [ph.]. He wasn't home. So then she went to the next house, and she knocked on the door. And this is a woman she actually didn't know very well, and her name was Mrs. Kenop [ph.]. And she explained her situation to Mrs. Kenop, and Mrs. Kenop said--she--and my--and my mother said, if you could just call my husband and tell him that he needs to go pick up the children, or if you would let me come in and I would, you know, call him. I just need somebody to know that I can't get there. And Mrs. Kenop said, "Take my car," and gave my mother the keys to her car. So I re- I have--I just have this very vivid memory of standing there waiting for my mother and my mother driving up and going, "Where did you get this car?" It wasn't a particularly nice car, but it was--it was not her car. And that was--and that was one of the first signs to the family that things were gonna be okay, that there were--there were really decent people in the neighborhood who were, you know, willing to help us out. And, and, and things did sort of start to turn around a little bit after that. Story_ID: 639929 Speaker 1: So well how was--now, now you went to--what was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: Homestead High School. Speaker 1: Okay, in Mequon and how do you spell (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mequon, Wisconsin. Speaker 1: Mequon, Wisconsin. How do you spell that? Speaker 2: Homestead? Speaker 1: No, Mequon. Speaker 2: Mequon, M-E-Q-U-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and--all right, so, well, what was it like? Were you--were you--you were the only black student I guess, right? Speaker 2: Well, I was the--there was one in every grade, so the scho- scho- the school had a thousand kids. So there were like 250 in each grade. I was the freshman and there was a wo- a girl named Pat [ph.]--I can't think of Pat's last name--in the sophomore class. And her brother Jim [ph.] was in the junior class. And there was somebody else in the senior class, so I can't even remember. And the whole time that I was in high school at Homestead, there was always like one black student (laughter) in each class. By the time--by the time my younger brother [Charles White] and sister [Adrienne White Faines] got there, there were five, you know, or four, or something like that. But the whole time I was there, there was on--there was always one. And-- Speaker 1: So there wasn't in--the community stayed stable. There was no mass exodus out of the community? Speaker 2: No, there was defin- there was definitely not a mass exodus. And, and that, that was--the community as, as I said, was not very populated and it was that--those thousand kids came from a pretty wide area. There was a--there was a pretty extensive school bus system that picked kids up sometimes from quite a long distance to go to Homestead High School. And, and, and I said a lot of them were, were like farm kids. And, and I didn't--I did not find Homestead to be a hostile environment at all. Once I got into the high school it wasn't--kids were not mean to me. There were kids that sort of kept their distance, and then there were kids that--mos- mostly what I found annoying was there were kids who were well meaning but they were just ignorant (laughter). And so--you know, so they were always ask--you know, they were touching your hair and you know, asking you stupid questions. And they, they were not trying to be mean. They just honestly wanted to know. Because even though we were just fifteen minutes from Milwaukee [Wisconsin], they didn't go to Milwaukee. They didn't go to the city, and in most cases, I was the only black person they had ever encountered. Story_ID: 639930 Speaker 1: Now did, did you get active in school activities or were you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, I was Miss Extracurricular. I did everything. And, and that was--again, that was my mother [Winifred Parker White], you know, saying, "Oh, this looks interesting;" "go try that;" "go do this," you know; "you wanna make some friends, join"--you know, "join some clubs." So yes, I joined just about every club that there was to join. I, I did--I joined the choir, which was--which was great, and I, I, I loved the singing and I continued to do that to this day. And I tried out for--I, I was in all the plays. And I didn't do much in the way of sports, but there wasn't a lot of activity for girls sports when I was coming through high school [Homestead High School, Mequon, Wisconsin]. You know, but I, I took Russian and I joined the Russian club; and I joined the newspaper; I, I, I did a lot--I did a lot of extracurriculars. And you know--and eventually I made some friends. My, my friends were--when I look back on them I, I sort of make fun of them. We--they, they were primarily the outcasts in the--of the high school (laughter), and--but they--you know, they were good people, but they were definitely--we were definitely not the popular--not the popular crowd. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So--and, and because my mother was very active with the, the American Field Service [AFS Intercultural Programs] with the foreign students, I met--I always made friends with the foreign students. Speaker 1: So, so this is 1966? Speaker 2: Yes, 1966 was when I started, so I was in high school from '66 [1966] to 1970. And it turned out the foreign students--the fir- the first time that anyone ever asked me to go to a dance it was the foreign exchange student from Luxembourg. And I had never--I had never even heard of Luxembourg before he got there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And you know, talking about the, the kids in the high school, there were a couple of times when I was in high school it--this was actually after going to homecoming with the--with the boy from Luxembourg--where boys would ask me if I wanted to go to a dance or if I wanted to go to homecoming. And then they would have to come back and tell me that they told their parents and their parents said they couldn't take me. So, you know, so--which always annoyed me, but I also realized how humiliated it was for them to come back and say that. You know, it was--so it was an odd--tho- those were the sort of uncomfortable situations that I remember from high school. So I didn't--I didn't love high school, but I was--but I was successful, and I did a lot of things, and, and, and it was a good education. It was a good school. It was a good school. It was something, something like 90 percent of the kids went to college from that high school. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, so it was--you know, it, it was--it definitely provided a good education. But, again, my education was supplemented by going to that summer program [Summer Study Skills Program] in Knoxville [Tennessee] and--you know, and having my parents and my [maternal] grandparents [Frieda Campbell Parker and Frederick Parker] very involved in plotting my educational career. Story_ID: 639931 Speaker 1: Okay, now did you--did your parents get the black newspapers and stuff in-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: --at home and (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We got--we got the, the Milwaukee Courier and--and then well, you know, of course had Ebony and Jet and Crisis [The Crisis] and all of those were in our house all the time. Speaker 1: And, and because of your oc- your occupation, you know, like, what was your his- history with television in those days? Speaker 2: You know, I certainly did not--I, I certainly didn't think in high school [Homestead High School, Mequon, Wisconsin] that that's what I was gonna do, that I was gonna have a career in television. I watched television. One of my funny memories of television--and, and this was--goes back to being a very young child--was that I remember whenever someone black was gonna be on TV (laughter), it was a big deal. So, you know, we'd turn on 'The Ed Sullivan Show' and Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis Jr.] was gonna be on, the phone would start ringing because everybody wanted to make sure--(unclear) "you know Sammy Davis is gonna be on 'The Ed Sullivan Show'?" "Okay, well, I gotta hang up 'cause I gotta watch now." And the phone would ring, you know, five or six times because everybody would be calling everybody else, so I remember that. I remember that being one of my early memories of television. It was a big deal if Sammy Davis or [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte or James Baldwin or you know, somebody was gonna--Nat King Cole. When they came on that was a big deal (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's true. I, I don't think any other net- any other com- community--maybe--except for maybe a fan club or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --would do that. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: You know, but that--that's true. That was true when I was growing up, and everybody I interview has a story like that. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so--yeah, and, and you know, you--when you talk about things changing and you know, my--and when I tell that story to my kids [Alexis Neisser and Nicholas Neisser], they were like--they think that's the silliest thing they ever heard. They can't believe it. Well, it's not what they see anymore. They have no idea how rare that was and how unusual. Speaker 1: That's true, that's true. Now and--so in, in terms of movies, now you, you, you develop movies today for Sony Pictures [Sony Pictures Television] for TV-- Speaker 2: For television, right. Speaker 1: For television. I mean, did--were you a movie watcher? Did you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked going to the movies. I don't know that I was a movie fanatic, but that was definitely something that we all liked to do. My mother [Winifred Parker White] liked movies. I don't remem- my father [Walter White, Sr.] didn't go to movies very often, but my mother really liked movies and, and I, I have vivid memories of, of it being a big event to, like, go see 'The Sound of Music' or 'West Side Story.' Those were--those were--those were big movies. And I also have vivid memories of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] sponsoring screenings for 'To Kill a Mockingbird' and we all--the whole family went to that. We all went to see Sidney Poitier in--what was the movie that he won the Academy Award [Oscar] for? Speaker 1: 'Lilies of the Field.' Speaker 2: 'Lilies of the Field.' There was an NAACP screening and we all got dressed up and went to see 'Lilies of the Field.' Speaker 1: Okay, now that--that's something I--you know, I didn't realize it, you know. My parents were--weren't in it, and I guess that's why I didn't realize NAACP was doing that. Speaker 2: Well, they did it in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: They did it in Milwaukee. Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was--yeah. And those were--those were big--the--as I said, we got dressed up. It was a, you know (laughter)--all your friends were there (laughter); it was a big--it was a big deal. Story_ID: 639932 Speaker 1: Now was church im- important growing up? Speaker 2: Yes--yes and no. My family was Methodist. We belonged to the--you know, to an African Methodist church in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. Again, my father [Walter White, Sr.] almost never went. My mother--my mother [Winifred Parker White] was the sort of--was the driving force of getting us dressed up on Sunday mornings and going to Sunday school. When we moved to Mequon [Wisconsin], we stopped going to the church in Milwaukee. I guess 'cause they just didn't wanna drive into Milwaukee on Sunday morning. Although my mother missed that church 'cause she really liked it. And we joined the Methodist church in Mequon, which I thought was the most boring church that I could have imagined. It was, you know, a white Methodist church. There was not--there was really nothing wrong with it, but it was so different from going to the African Methodist church--the music and the whole--the whole atmosphere was just totally different. Speaker 1: Now that's kind of a radical step even for a black family that moves into a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --white neighborhood. Speaker 2: Yep, yep. You know, the people were perfectly nice there and very happy to have us there. But you certainly were aware that the church is--integrating a church was an unusual--that was an unusual step. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's been said that, that Sunday--the church hours are the most segregated in America. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know, I guess maybe that's a little bit better now, but it was--it was--it was unusual at that time. If I--when I was like sixteen I sort of protested and said I don't wanna do this anymore, and my mother sort of let me get away with that. I wasn't actually baptized until I was like fourteen or fifteen. I don't know exactly why, but for some reason I had--I had been christened, but I had not been baptized. And my mother wanted me to be baptized, and I really didn't wanna do it. And--but--and she finally said--and she almost never said things like this, but she said, "This is really important to me; I really want you to be baptized." And so I did it, but I sort of used that to get myself out of it (laughter)--out of the church as I, you know, got, got older. And then I didn't--I didn't really go back to church for a long time. Story_ID: 639933 Speaker 1: I would sometimes in college [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] get together with friends and go on Easter, and when I would come home for Christmas sometimes we'd go on Christmas. But then I, I didn't really have much use for it after that. But, but when my father [Walter White, Sr.] got sick--my father died in 1986--and my father had cancer and was diagnosed with cancer in 1984, and had--and had to have a pretty frightening surgery at that time, and we went home for the surgery--or I went. My sister [Adrienne White Faines] was living here at the time and we went home and all--so all four of us were there 'cause we really didn't think he was gonna make it or that we knew he might not make it. And the minister of the Mequon church [in Mequon, Wisconsin] showed up at the hospital and showed up--I wasn't there the first time he showed up. And when he first showed up my father didn't even know who he was, because my father (laughter) had not been to church for so long. But you know, that man kept coming. He kept coming back for the--really for the two years that my father was dealing with cancer, and there were ups and there were downs. That man constantly came to check on our family, and it made me look at religion in a whole different way, and made me realize that I needed to reconnect somehow. So I came back to Los Angeles [California] and started going to Holman Methodist Church [Holman United Methodist Church, Los Angeles, California], which is a church in the black community here, after that. So that was kind of interesting, but it took an event like that for me to understand why the religion was important to my--to my mother [Winifred Parker White]. It was--it, it was important to my father too, but my father had a problem with organized religion. He just felt that people manipulated it too much, but he was interested in religion and he was spiritual in his own way. And he, he did a lot of reading about different religions, and he liked to have conversations about Judaism and Islam. And, and he would argue--two of his brothers married Catholic women and they converted to Catholicism, and he loved to argue with them about being Catholic and what was wrong with the Catholic religion, so. So I knew that my father knew a lot about a ver- knew a lot about religion even though he was not a churchgoer. And, and it was clear to me that it was important to him as he was dealing with cancer--that the visits from the minister and the conversations with the minister were meaningful to him. Story_ID: 639934 Speaker 1: I take it you were a good student? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a good student. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you graduate with any honors or anything, or did--? Speaker 2: From high school [Homestead High School, Mequon, Wisconsin]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I was, like, number ten in my class, something like that. And I was one of--you know, one of the class speakers for the graduation, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's good. Now, now did you get counseling? Did you have good counseling about college? Speaker 2: Now that's an interesting question. I think it's all relative. I remember that, you know, they had meetings with the--with the counselors every year. And the first year that we went to meet with the counselor, she pretty much, you know, was, was telling us how to get into the schools in Wisconsin. Wisconsin had a pretty good university system, and that was kind of what she did mostly was steer people to the schools in Wisconsin. And it became clear in talking to my parents [Winifred Parker White and Walter White, Sr.] that my parents thought I might go outside of Wisconsin to go to school; and, and she was less sophisticated in that--you know, in that area, so. She never tried to--she never tried to discourage me from anything. I mean, I, I know that--I remember the first time she brought up something like the Ivy League schools. It was kind of like, well, if you're interested in that kind of thing. And I really wasn't paying that much attention. I really didn't--wasn't thinking about it so much. It wasn't until after I went through that program [Summer Study Skills Program] in Knoxville [Tennessee] that I started to really think about some of the Ivy League schools. And at this--by this time, my [maternal] grandfather [Frederick Parker] had retired from teaching at Crispus Attucks [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] and actually had gone to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and was, was helping Yale put together something called a Transitional Year Program, which was, again, for minority students who were really smart and maybe didn't quite have all the preparation they need to attend a school like Yale. And so the Transitional Year Program was a program to help them make up that deficit. It was an extra year of college. And they would--they would do that, that year and then the next year they'd be the full fledged freshman. So he was--he was--he was at Yale for a couple of years. And we always spent Easter with my mother's parents, so we went and visited him at Yale. I think I must have been a sophomore in high school--no, no, I must have been a junior in high school at the time that we visited Yale. And I was totally intimidated by it. And he--and during that week that we were there, we also drove around New England a little bit and she showed us some of the other colleges. And, and again, in this program in Knoxville the tutors who were there in the program--there were regular high school teachers who taught us, but then there were college students who came down and worked as tutors and residences in the doors and all of that. And so one of the tutors that I got to know and like was a young woman who was at Radcliffe. And so when I finished my junior year of high school I got a letter from Radcliffe saying, Francesca Farmer suggested that we write to you as somebody that might be interested in applying. And I had had no plan of applying to Radcliffe. I--in my mind Radcliffe was this women's college where people, you know, had teas and (laughter)--I thought it was--you know, I thought--I, I knew it was gone--I knew it was academically rigorous, but I also just had this vision that bore no, no resemblance to reality, but I, I just hadn't really thought about. And my mother said, "You got a letter from Radcliffe College [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. You'd better write to them and thank them, and tell them yes you will apply," (laughter). And so--and, of course, my grandfather wholeheartedly backed that up. And so that--you know, that all happened without the help or support of a college counselor. She, she never dissuaded me from doing it, but it wasn't--certainly wasn't her idea that I, you know, apply to any of the Ivy League schools, or the Seven Sister schools. Story_ID: 639935 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, but you applied and you got in. Speaker 2: I applied and I got in, and there were two other boys in my high school [Homestead High School, Mequon, Wisconsin] that also went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that year. And they were boys that I had not particularly been close to, but we got to be friends once we all knew we were going to the same school and flying out on the airplanes and all that, so. And there was a girl in my class that went to Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]. So, so there were a few of us that ended up going out there. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1970? Speaker 2: This is 1970. Speaker 1: So fall of '70 [1970], your, your--you start off at, at Harvard, and so what, what was it like? I mean--I mean, this is-- Speaker 2: I thought I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the sister school-- Speaker 2: --had died and gone to heaven, mostly because I was so glad to get away from that rural environment. I was happy to be in a city. You know, Cambridge [Massachusetts] was an interesting, bustling, exciting city to me. And there was so much ethnic diversity. (Unclear) now, when I went to Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in 1970, there were--I--the Radcliffe class only had three hundred women. The ratio of men to women was still four to one 'cause the women at Harvard was still--in fact, a lot of these Ivy League schools were in that place where they were becoming coed and they hadn't been coed. You know, Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] was taking women and Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] was taking women. And if Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts] had been taking women, I'm sure I would have been pressured to apply to Amherst, but they weren't there yet. So--but there were three hundred--there were three hundred women in my Radcliffe class and thirty of them were black. And I think--I may be wrong, but they certainly were saying at this time that that was more black women than had actually attended Radcliffe in the history of Radcliffe. So it was a--it was a definite--that 19--that year 1970 was definitely a turning point, where the colleges had said we have to--we have to do something. We have to change. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a country that goes through a flip after the death of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]-- Speaker 2: Yes, exactly (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Exactly. So it was--it was exciting. It was an exciting time to be there, and, and I was just so happy to not be the only (laughter)--the only one. And--but what was really interesting was that, that I, I not only found, you know, a kinship with the African American women, there were other women, other students who had similar experiences to mine who were not African American. One of my very close friends from college is a Japanese American woman who went to high school in Sudbury, Massachusetts, and she was the only Asian girl in her class. And so a lot of the stories that we could sit and laugh about were very similar. But I just didn't know--you know, you think you're the only person that's dealing with this at the time that you're dealing with something and the you realize, oh my gosh, this woman whose background is totally different from mine has had very similar experiences. Even her father had had similar experiences to my father [Walter White, Sr.]. Story_ID: 639936 Speaker 1: Her father had wanted to go into banking. And at the time that he was coming along, as a Japanese American there was no way a bank was going to hire him. So he had to completely change his focus and, and ended up going into academia. So that--all of that was just very--just very exciting to me. And, and then--you know, and then I met people who came from backgrounds that I had never even imagined. Another friend of mine, who was a very close friend of mine in college [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], was, was a Chinese young man who had been born in Cuba, and his family--his family became Cuban refugees, but they were ethnically from China. Again, it had never occurred to me. You know, you--it's like I knew there were Chinese families even in Milwaukee who ran Chinese restaurants. It didn't occur to me--well, guess what, the Chinese people didn't just come to America; they went to other places too (laughter). So these are all sort of no brainers but from my little community in Mequon, Wisconsin, and Milwaukee, Wisconsin, it had never occurred to me. So, so I loved--I just loved being in that community with these people from all these different backgrounds and from all over the world and, and to recognize what you have in common and what you--and, and to find out what was surprising about where people came from. I was always--was always a little nervous about the academics. I was always worried that--do they real- am, am I really smart enough to be here? This is Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and this is supposed to be the place where these really smart people go. And I, I was a good student, but I never thought I was a genius. I--what I--what I thought was I was a kid who worked hard and-- Speaker 2: Did, did you have to work a lot harder than you did in high school [Homestead High School, Mequon, Wisconsin]? Speaker 1: In some--in some courses I did, not in everything. Speaker 2: What was the hardest--what were the hardest courses? Speaker 1: Well, I ended up majoring in linguistics. Again, it's something that I hadn't even heard of before I got to Harvard. Some of the more technical linguistics courses were hard for me, but I, I ma- I, I did it. Linguistics you had to connect--you had to do a combined major, so you didn't just major in pure linguistics. You could do linguistics and anthropology or linguistics and psychology or even linguistics in a particular language. And I did linguistics and psychology because I got interested in how people learn languages. I don't know exactly why I chose that except the fact that I, I think I took a linguistics course my freshman year and it--the professor was really good, and you had to declare a major by your sophomore year, and I just was never--I was never a kid who had a clear vision of where I was going or what I wanted to do. But it was like, oh, I really like this class so why don't I major in that (laughter)? And that's--and, and that's what I did. Story_ID: 639937 Speaker 1: Okay, with--in your, in your major--or, or, or, or, or otherwise, were there any special teachers or mentors along the way at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: Or at Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], rather? Speaker 2: I didn't--one of my regrets about college was that I didn't go out of my way to form relationships with my professors. And I think at Harvard you kind of had to take some initiative to do that. The classes--it's a--it was--the classes were large for the most part, so the teachers that I got to know were in a couple of classes that weren't as, as big. I had a freshman seminar--a freshman drama seminar with a man who ran the Loeb Drama Cen- the Loeb Drama Center [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and his name was Bob Chapman [Robert Harris Chapman] and I kind of got to know him. And then I had a Spanish professor that I liked, but I didn't really get that close to very many of my professors. I did a lot of--like I did in high school [Homestead High School, Mequon, Wisconsin]--I did a lot of extracurricular; I did a lot of drama; and I did a lot of music. I did join the chorus and I hooked up with other students and did some jazz singing and things like that, and those were the closer connections that I made. But I didn't really go out of my way to form close relationships with professors, which now I, I just look back and go that was--that was a mistake. But I still had a great time in college. Speaker 1: Now the drama seems to be like a consistent thread through high school and then later on you work for [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis too. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: So, so what--did you play a--what role did you play in the theater when--I mean, did--were, were you after a big part or did you--were you part of the support mechanism for the theater or what, what were--what were you doing? Speaker 2: I, I, I did mostly acting, and I--yeah, and I did do--I, I did get some--big- some bigger roles--in high school a lot and, and even in college. In college I did mostly musicals. It was really just fun, you know. I never--I never thought I was gonna be an actress. I never saw myself going that route. It just didn't--I liked it, but I think on some level I was aware of how hard it was and, and how subjective it, it is. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, what roles did you play in--what, what plays? Speaker 2: What plays? Let's see, we did 'Guys and Dolls.' I had the leading role in 'Guys and Dolls' my senior year at Harvard. We did a play--an original play that was really fun called 'Harlem in the Evening' that was based all on Langston Hughes' poetry. And, and it was--the dialogue was poetry and then there was music that was written to the poetry. And that--and that was--that was at the Loeb Drama Center main stage, and that was really--that was one of the highlights of my theater at Harvard. And we did--what else did we do? Story_ID: 639938 Speaker 1: I--those, those women who you the- you hear Lena Horne stories and Dorothy Dandridge and you go: there's some tough women. Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so we're talking about your roles in the--in the theater. So, so you're involved in the theater at, at Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and-- Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: --and-- Speaker 1: We--you know, we did silly plays. Like 'A Funny Thing Happened on the way to the Forum' [Burt Shevelove and Larry Gelbart] and--god, I can't think of the other one that's--that I did my sophomore year. And it was specifically a role, and the role was called the Negro, but it was usually played by a man, and I played that role. I just can't think of the name of the play. Speaker 2: In the sophomore-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in your sophomore year--the Negro. Speaker 1: The Negro, that was role, yep (laughter). And I just can't think of the name of the play right now. I'll think of it. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, now, so, all right, at Radcliffe you--now did you run for student office or anything like that or? Speaker 1: No, I didn't do any--I didn't do student government or anything, but I did--I worked with the Phillips Brooks House [Phillips Brooks House Association], which was the community outreach house and, and was a big sister and it would go into Columbia Point, pick up my little sisters, and bring 'em--bring 'em to the college campus, or take them out--you know, take 'em to the zoo or take 'em to the museum or-- Speaker 2: Now that was-- Speaker 1: I did that for a couple of years. Speaker 2: Columbia Point is a housing pra- pra- project in-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Boston [Massachusetts] who-- Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: --I know in the summer of '72 [1972], they made headlines-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Time magazine--I think a white man was burnt up over there by someone. Speaker 1: It was--it was pretty rough. It was pretty rough, but I had a couple of little sister--I mean they were--they were biological sisters, and they were my little sisters for--through the Colum- through the Phillips Brooks House program. There were a lot of us that did it that went--go, go out to Columbia Point and pick up the kids, sometimes we'd do group activities; sometimes we'd do individual activities. And that was a good way to get yourself off of the campus and kind of see what other parts of Boston were like. Speaker 2: Did you--did you watch the--some of the local black TV programming in those days? Speaker 1: You know, I didn't watch that much TV in college. It was not that common to actually have--I mean, a couple of kids I knew had televisions, but we were so busy otherwise that watching--now I hear kids on the college campuses do watch TV when--and televisions are just everywhere and plus they can watch them on their phones and stuff. But-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I, I didn't really want--my, my memory of television in the early '70s [1970s] is pretty slim because I really wasn't watching television then. Story_ID: 639939 Speaker 1: I know at a place like Har- Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] there's always some major personality coming to campus to speak. Did you--was that an exciting part of campus? Speaker 2: Oh, I remember one day leaving the library and going to hear Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] speak. And it was one of those things--I knew he was coming, but I wasn't really sure if I was gonna go. And finally I'm like, looking at my watch and going oh, it's eight o'clock, Jesse--I'm just gonna go and see Jesse Jackson. And I was spellbound. He was--he was in his heyday. He was really on that night, and, and that was--that was really exciting. And I also remember as a senior going to some kind of a seminar and hearing Alice Walker speak. And I was totally mesmerized, and then had to read everything that she ever wrote. I thought she was amazing. So, yeah, people were coming, coming to Harvard on--you know, on a regular basis. There was almost too much--well, there was; there was too much for you to actually take advantage of everything. And there were a lot of things I think that I missed sometimes because I just wasn't paying attention, didn't realize-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know, who was gonna be there. Story_ID: 639940 Speaker 1: Was there one black student organization or many, or, or were you a part--a part of, of any--? Speaker 2: There was--well, there were a few. There was the black student organization that--I can't--Harvard black--I think it was just the H- Harvard black student association. So that was--that was strong when I was there. And I had a little bit of a love-hate relationship with that (laughter). I liked going to the meetings, and if there was some kind of, you know, particular activity--for instance, there was a time when I was an undergraduate--and I gotta really think about this. But it wasn't South Africa that we were dealing with. There were so many protests in the '70s [1970s] 'cause it was-- Speaker 1: Angola or, or-- Speaker 2: Maybe it was Angola, and there was a big--there was a big march that we participated in. But there was some--there were--I can't believe that I cannot remember what this was, but the black students actually took over the president's office at one point. Now, I was not part of the group that was inside the office, but I was definitely part of the group that was marching around outside of the office. And I just--and I am trying--I cannot even remember what that demonstration was about. There were so many demonstrations in the '70s [1970s] between the anti-war--mo- most of it was anti-war [Vietnam War]. That's what-- Speaker 1: This was-- Speaker 2: But, but this was-- Speaker 1: --(unclear)-- Speaker 2: But this a particular black student protest, and I am not sure--and I cannot remember right now what it was. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the homestretch or the anti-war-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --campaign, because the, the war actually ends in when--'74 [1974] and you graduated [from Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah, Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] resigned in the summer of seven--right after I graduated, the summer of '74 [1974]. So I was--I was involved in the--in the group as a social group and, and also there were--you know, there was a lot of pressure to bring in more black students to give more support to the black students. There were a fair number and I, I, I wouldn't be able to give you percentages, but there were a fair number of students that were brought to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and then left because they found--I think--I, I think not so much because they couldn't hack the academics as they--as that they found the environment alienating. You know, for me it was--it was great because I was--I was coming from that isolated white community [in Mequon, Wisconsin]. But I think those kids who were coming from a, a supportive black community came to Harvard and went: what is this? And addressing their needs and helping them integrate into the Harvard environment was something that I think Harvard struggled with for a long time. And I--and I suspect they still do, to some degree. Story_ID: 639941 Speaker 1: We interviewed about maybe ten years ago Archie Epps [HistoryMaker Archie C. Epps, III]. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, he was there when I was there. Speaker 1: The late Archie Epps who, who had a--played a role in trying to I guess bring students into the mix of what was going on there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He was ver- very Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] himself. Speaker 2: Yeah. And there was another man there, Dave Evans [David L. Evans], who's still there. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's the one that accompanied Allen Counter [HistoryMaker S. Allen Counter] on those missions to Suriname. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: And so there--you know, so the--so, so there were people trying to address it, but it was hard. You know, I, I, knew from, from other kids that some of them were having a very, very hard time. Speaker 1: I think--was it Ewart Guinier in the-- Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm, when he--when start--first started the, what was then called Afro-American Studies [Department of Afro-American Studies; Department of African and African American Studies], and that was an embattled department when I was there. Of course, now, now it's quite a big and popular department-- Speaker 1: Henry Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.]-- Speaker 2: --with Henry Gates, and--and Cornel West was there, you know, for a long time and now he's not there anymore, but it was--Cornel West was actually in my class at Harvard, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, what was he like as a student (unclear)-- Speaker 2: He was crazy (laughter). No, he was popular, you know, but he's, he's--he had a big personality even then (laughter). Speaker 1: So he hasn't changed much? Speaker 2: I don't think he's changed much. I think he--I think he's always been who he is. Speaker 1: Was he--was he still like a strident--like, social change person in those days? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and always, you know--and contrary--and contrarian, you know, like to argue and, and would, would, you know, take a--I thought sometimes take a contrary point of view just to take a contrary point of view. But, but you know, interesting and nice, and, and I always liked him. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: And I know he was a very popular professor when he was there. I, I still had some, you know, connections with undergraduates who just adored him. Story_ID: 639942 Speaker 1: Now any- anybody else that you remember--I mean, there are so many per- personalities there. Not everybody get--gets a chance to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So--and-- Speaker 2: Let me think; who do I remember from being there? Gosh, I'll have to get--I'll have to think about that. Speaker 1: Anybody black women-- professors over there on the Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] side that made an impression on you at all? Speaker 2: I didn't--I'm not sure I ever had a black female professor when I was there. Speaker 1: Or even a white female, let me know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm, I'm telling you, I did not have--I did not have-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --close relationships with my professors, so they're not-- Speaker 1: Okay, we won't-- Speaker 2: It's embarrassing-- Speaker 1: --we won't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that they don't--they don't stand out, but they--but they-- Speaker 1: All right-- Speaker 2: --did not stand out, but the environment-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --was, was certainly--the environment was certainly stimulating and fun. Speaker 1: So, well, when you got ready to graduate, had you--in '74 [1974], what was your plan? Was your plan to go on to graduate school, or-- Speaker 2: No, I have a very clear memory of my senior year. I lived in, in Quincy House, which was one of the Harvard houses [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And they called all of the seniors--they said come down for a senior meeting. This was, like, in September or October--opening of the year. And they said, okay, we're gonna help you make this transition as you graduate. And then they had somebody talk about if you want to go to medical school, this is what you; if you wanna go to business school, this is what you do; if you wanna go to law school, this is what you do; if you wanna go to graduate school, this is what you do. And I remember sitting there going: I don't wanna do any of these things. What am I gonna do (laughter)? And I--you know, I applied to the Peace Corps; I applied to VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA]. This was, you know, before they had Teach for America. I really didn't know what I was gonna do. I really did not have a plan, but I knew that I had to do something because my parents [Winifred Parker White and Walter White, Sr.] had to pay for my siblings [Walter White, Jr., Charles White and Adrienne White Faines] to go to college. They were coming up right behind me. My parents were not pressuring me. You know, they said you'll figure it out; you'll find a job. But anyway, I found out a--about a program that was associated with Lesley College [Lesley University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which was a little college down the street from Harvard, and it had--was primarily a teachers college. And you could go to Lesley for a year, and if you got into this program, which was the Shady Hill program--Shady Hill [Shady Hill School] was a private school in Cambridge [Massachusetts]. You could teach during the day, and they paid you a stipend, and then you could--and you had to take a couple of extra courses at night. And so I applied for that program and I got in. And they took--there were, like, sixteen of us in the program, and they came from all over. And so that was sort of my stopgap while I tried to figure out what I was going to do. Speaker 1: Okay, so this, this pro- program would earn you a master's degree in elementary (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --education. Speaker 2: Yep. Story_ID: 639943 Speaker 1: You had also started working in the summers at Elma Lewis. Speaker 2: Yes, I had started working in the summers at the Elma Lewis school [Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts]. I can't remember who made that connection for me to go to the Elma Lewis school. But I had, had volunteered--I started as a volunteer and then I actually got a job I think teaching drama to the kids. And it was a gas. I loved going to the Elma Lewis school. I just thought it was such a--an exciting place, even though they were always running out of money; you never knew if you were gonna get your paycheck or not, but the, the things that they taught those kids, and the performances that those kids then were able to do at the end of the summer were really quite impressive. And so I worked with--I worked with, you know, little kids. They were not--they were, like, third and fourth graders. And I really enjoyed that. And then they also had that--the whole adult arts program. And I--you know, I would go at Christmas to see the 'Black Nativity' [Langston Hughes], which they did every year, which I always thought was very moving. And I just loved the whole idea of the Elma Lewis school. Speaker 1: Yeah, what was El- [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis like? She's a black woman from the Caribbean. Speaker 2: She was from the Caribbean. She was about this tall (laughter). Well, you, you, you said you had worked there so you, you saw her. You know--(laughter) what she was like. Speaker 1: Well, I want you to describe to the people watching this- Speaker 2: Yeah, so she's--she--you know, she was--she was this, this short, round woman with a very deep booming voice and one of the most passionate people I have ever encountered in my life. You know, she, she was--I think she must have been as--even though for all their financial struggles, I think she must have been an effective fundraiser, because she was such a dynamic and charismatic speaker. And the fact that she could keep all of us working there, and we never knew if we were gonna get a paycheck or not (laughter) had to do with the force of her personality. So, so I loved--I loved going to the Elma Lewis school; I loved being there; I loved working with the kids; and even though it was challenging sometimes, I, I really enjoyed it. I also--you know, those last years of college and the couple of years that I stayed associated with the Elma Lewis school was also the time that Boston [Massachusetts] was having those terrible--the terrible problems with the busing. And it was Louise Day Hicks and you know, all those, those women who were out there throwing bottles at the school buses that brought the black children to the--I mean, it was horrible. And Elma Lewis was a refuge for them. A lot of those kids would come at the end of the day to the Elma Lewis school and take the drama classes and the music classes and, and the people at Elma Lewis would also listen to them and help them work out the tensions that they had to deal with on a daily basis. And some of the teachers at the Elma Lewis school were actually riding the buses with those kids-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --as they were going through that. Speaker 1: Elma Lewis school was more than just a drama school for-- Speaker 2: It was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --art--yeah, it was really just arts. It was--it was--it was drama; it was music; it was singing. I don't--I don't remember there--I think there was even some visual arts, but I think there was much more of an emphasis on the performing arts when I was there. Speaker 1: The school-- Speaker 2: No, there definitely was visual arts, because they had a connection to the Boston art museum [Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So--but this a--but a lot of these kids that came there were not necessarily, you know, gonna go on to become performing artists, but it, it was a refuge. I also remember working there that Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] came and visited the Elma Lewis school when he was about to run for president, and that told you something about the influence that Elma Lewis had in Boston at that time. Story_ID: 639944 Speaker 1: All right, so this, this is in '75 [1975] now, I guess. Speaker 2: Um-hm. So this, this would have been after I--you know, I graduated in '74 [1974], but I think I worked--did I work-- Speaker 1: Yeah, you were--you were assistant operations manager at Elma Lewis [Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts], right-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so--well that-- Speaker 1: --assistant-- Speaker 2: --I mean, that's the other thing that you realize. I mean, part of the reason that [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis had so many problems was she had a lot of people working for her who really didn't have the experience (laughter) that they needed to have to keep us--ca- an organization of this size running, you know, smoothly. I mean, we were all--there was always a question about the people who were doing the accounting and all of that. But anyway, yeah, somehow I got the assistance operations manager, so I was involved in the administration. And I had a good friend who also was working there too, so. In fact, my friend Emlee [Emlee Hilliard Smith] that I mentioned who was from Milwaukee [Wisconsin], she had graduated from Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts] at the same time that I graduated from Harvard Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and she came to Boston [Massachusetts] and we, we both did some time at Elma Lewis. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, so how long did you work for Elma Lewis? Speaker 2: Well, let's see. When I finished the program at Lesley [Lesley College; Lesley University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I went right to work for Elma Lewis full time. And--but during that time, you know the--really that program at Lesley--what they were training you to was to go--was to go into public schools or even into, you know, some of the private schools. And during that year, a lot of my friends from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] had like traveling fellowships or they--or sometimes they just had money and they took time off. And so, so that whole year that I was at Lesley and I was living in Cambridge I would get these postcards from China and South America and Paris [France] and all these people that were having these great adventures. And I had a cousin who was a schoolteacher and who was teaching on a base in Germany, in Bremerhaven. And I thought well, okay, now that I have my teaching certification, maybe this is the way that I get to travel if I, you know, can apply to teaching jobs. So I applied to a few teaching jobs in faraway places. Nothing came through and, thus, I went to work at the Elma Lewis school. I was offered to--I was offered a job working in New York City [New York, New York] at a private school, and I was offered a job in Boston, but the Elma Lewis school somehow spoke to me on an emotional level, even if financially it wasn't the smartest move I ever made. Story_ID: 639945 Speaker 1: Come November, I get a call out of the blue from this school in Ponce, Puerto Rico, and they are looking for a teacher to come down in January. Because it was a school that was set up by the petrochemical companies that had set up plants in Puerto Rico, and they needed a school to educate the children of the men or employees that they brought down from the mainland. And this had started I think in the '50s [1950s]. By now, in the '70s [1970s], a lot of the employees at these plants were also islanders, and so their kids could also go to this school. And the school was a fully bilingual school. And--but there was a teacher and the, the teacher who taught first and second grade was going back to Texas 'cause her husband, who worked for Union Carbide [Union Carbide Corporation] was being transferred, and they needed somebody to come down in January. So they called and asked me if I would like to come and visit the school. And I remember it very clearly--it was--I picked up the phone that day that it was snowing outside in Boston and I thought: Puerto Rico sounds good to me (laughter). So I--so I went and visited the school and ended up moving right after Christmas to Ponce, Puerto Rico. Speaker 2: So this is nineteen seventy-- Speaker 1: This was the beginning of '76 [1976]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So this was (unclear), so I moved January--like January 1st of 1976, I moved to Ponce, Puerto Rico, and began teaching at the Caribbean School. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, all right, at the Caribbean School, all right. All right, so how did you like that? Speaker 1: Well, it was harder than I thought 'cause I was fairly naive about these things. I had not factored into the equation that living on an island in the Caribbean would be a much different lifestyle than living in Boston, Massachusetts (laughter). And, and really the problem was that it was conservative as far as women were concerned. So I was, like, twenty-three years old I think, twenty-two, twenty-three years old--and it--I, I was looking for an apartment and people would say, "Why did your parents [Winifred Parker White and Walter White, Sr.] let you move down here by yourself, an unmarried young woman?" I mean, there was--that they really could not understand that. And there were places that I applied for to--you know, for an apartment and the landlady would say, well, you can have this apartment, but you have to be in your room at ten o'clock at night. And I'm like, you gotta be kidding me. Story_ID: 639946 Speaker 1: So finally, I--there was a--another teacher, a single teacher, who needed a roommate and I moved in with her. She was from the island, but she was from a small town on the island. She was a year older than I was, and she was very much considered an old maid by, by (laughter) her family. And on the weekends her mother would come in from the little town Mayaguez [Puerto Rice] where she lived, and sometimes the three of us would, like, go out to a club or to a dance, but the whole focus was to help her find a husband. And I, I was like, oh, this is--this was so foreign and deadly to me. So really for the first few months I wasn't that happy there. The teaching was fine, but the social life was miserable. People were very nice to me, and, and you know, my Spanish was getting better, but I just could not find the people that I could relate to. And finally, a teacher at my school, who was married to someone--there was a military base in Ponce [Puerto Rico]. A teacher at my school [Caribbean School, Ponce, Puerto Rico] was married to someone who worked on the military base and he told her, you know, there's a black man who teaches sixth grade here who's single; we should, you know, introduce them--you know, introduce Winifred [HistoryMaker Winifred Neisser] to Joe Conway [ph.]. And so when she first mentioned this to me I thought: oh, this is dicey, but okay (laughter). And so, so they took us out to dinner or something, and Joe Conway turned out to be a very nice guy. And so Joe and I started to do things together, and after two or three times of, of going out then he told me he was gay, and--but that was--that actually turned about--out to be the blessing for me because then I knew there was, like, no pressure, you know, that we could actually just be friends (laughter), and there wasn't gonna be any--you know, I was--because I was terribly worried: what if--you know, if this is--has to be a romantic thing and we don't hit it off, and then I'm back by myself again. But he needed somebody to sort of help him cover up for the fact that he was gay, and he was happy to go out dancing and socializing. And he actually had kind of an interesting, fun group of friends, and so my whole social life turned around after I met Joe Conway. And it was like--and I began to enjoy Puerto Rico a lot. We did a lot of exploring together; we had a good time. And, and then the following school year, another woman came down from Rhode Island, and she needed a roommate, and the two of us were able to rent a house together. And we got to be very good friends; we're still very good friends. And, and so then I really enjoyed living in Puerto Rico. It was--it was--it was a very interesting time for me, and it was good to be immersed in a--in a different culture and, and to--and, and, and to--and to learn to slow down. I think that was also one of the hardest things was--you know, island life people just--nothing is urgent for them. And that took a long time for me to sort of stop going: why is this taking so long? Hur- I mean, even McDonald's was slow (laughter) in Ponce. There was nobody--nobody moved fast. And then after a while you go: you know what? This whole thing about moving fast may be a little overrated. You don't--not everything has to happen instantly; sometimes you need to take your time and just sit and enjoy people and enjoy your experience and not be so rushed. But at the end of, of a year and a half of being there, I did kind of think I may be too--too young to be living this slowly; you know, maybe this is someplace I'd like to come back to when I retire. Story_ID: 639947 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But-- Speaker 2: So in '78 [1978], you, you went back to Wisconsin? Speaker 1: I came back to--yeah. Now, now the other part of it--the, the significant thing that happened to me when I was there [Caribbean School, Ponce, Puerto Rico] was I also realized that I didn't really wanna be an elementary school teacher. I was--I could do it but it--you know, it, it really was a stopgap; it was not something that I saw myself doing for a long period of time. And, and it really was where I got interested--you had asked me when I got interested in television. This was really when I got interested in television. Because I had a classroom of kids where half the kids were from the island and had grown up speaking Spanish; half the kids had--were from the mainland, had grown up speaking English; and I had one kid who was Chinese who spoke not English or Spanish. But the common denominator of all of these kids was that they all watched a lot of TV. And they would watch TV in the language that they didn't understand, and television was sort of instrumental sometimes in helping them to learn the language. And I sort of put together that even back in--when I worked at, at the Elma Lewis school [Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts], those kids watched a lot of television. And when I worked at the Shady hills school, those kids watched a lot of television. The iron thing was that the kids at Shady Hill [Shady Hill School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], who were the private school, watched a lot of the television that had been created for the inner city school kids. Those kids watched 'Sesame Street.' Those kids watched 'Electric Company' ['The Electric Company'] and they liked it. The kids at the Elma Lewis school, they could sort of take it or leave it. They were wa- they were watching 'The Six Million Dollar Man' and they were watching wrestling on TV. And they were--you know, they, they weren't necessarily watching the shows that were meant to educate them. Some of them were but a lot of them weren't. And the kids in--I had one kid in, in my class in Puerto Rico who had some learning issues. And he was a kid from Puerto Rico; he was an island kid whose main language was Spanish, although he picked up English pretty quickly over the course of the year. And--but I would sit with that kid--his name was Mario [ph.]--and I would sit with Mario, and we would go over a concept--a reading concept or a math concept. You know, and I would give him special attention, and the next day he would come in and he barely remembered what we had gone through the day before, which used to, like, drive me crazy. But he could tell me in great detail every episode of 'The Six Million Dollar Man' that he had ever seen (laughter). And so I just re- so I really got interested in educational TV during that time that I was in Puerto Rico, and I decide that's what I wanted to do. And I wrote to the Children's Television Workshop [Sesame Workshop] and tried to see if I could work there, but they didn't have any openings at the time. And I had expressed this desire to my mother [Winifred Parker White], and my mother said, "Okay, now that you've identified something that you wanna do, why don't you come back and go to graduate school? University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin] has money. They're looking for minority graduate students. Come and go to the University of Wisconsin." Well, going back to Madison, Wisconsin, was not really what I wanted to do after living in Boston [Massachusetts] and living in Puerto Rico. But I applied, and they did have money, and they took me. And they had a television and film department, and so I went back. Story_ID: 639948 Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Okay, so-- Speaker 1: --University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) so, I went--so I went to--so I moved to Madison. I was not happy about it, but I got there. And once--of course, once you--once I got into school then there were all these, you know, signs up of, you know, internships and things--even in Madison, Wisconsin--for television. And I applied for an internship at the NBC affiliate [WMTV-TV, Madison, Wisconsin], which was in the 105th market. It was a little TV station literally in a cornfield, and they had a news internship for graduate students. And when I went in for the interview I told the station manager that, you know, I was interested in news, but my real interest was educational TV. And he said, "That's very interesting because--," you know, I guess this was '78 [1978]. He said, "The FCC [Federal Communications Commission] is really putting pressure on the local stations to meet the needs of the community and do more public affairs programming," and he said, "We can," you know, "we know how to do the news public affairs program, and we don't know what we should be doing to meet the needs of the children's audience; so here, take these papers," he had a pile of papers about this high, "take these papers home and look at them, and come back and tell me what should we be doing to meet the needs of our children's audience." So I took them home and I, you know, skimmed through them, and I came back and I said, you know, "You might try to do some half hour children's specials on different things that, you know, might be of interest to local children in, in the Madison area." And he said, "Fine, I'm not going to pay you more money, but this will be your project. Find who in the--who with the TV station would like to help you with it, and you can work in the off hours, and you can use all the equipment and come back, you know, with a proposal." So I actually think I had been there for a little while before he gave me this idea. And they--and at the end as--the internship then turned into a job where they gave me some part-time duties in the--in the promotion department. And he said, "And if you wanna do this," you know, "you have access to the equipment, you have access to the people, but I'm not gonna pay you extra money for it." So that was fine, and this, this was--as you can imagine, in a college town, a lot of the people who worked at the station were younger people, and a lot of them had gone to University of Wisconsin, and they were delighted to do something that was other than news 'cause all of the local programming was news. And so I worked with, you know, a, a, a young group of, of people, and we wrote scripts, and we ended up doing a half hour children's special every quarter. We did one on--I think the first one was on what you can do in Madison in the summer as a--you know, with the kids were in the summer. Then we did one about children's theater in Madison, 'cause there was actually a children's theater department at the University of Wisconsin. And we--so we did, you know, what--how, how you put a play together. We did one that was African fairytales. I went to the African studies group and got some grad- graduate students and they acted out African fairytales. We did one at Thanksgiving that was Native American stories. Story_ID: 639949 Speaker 1: We went to the--you know, again, just used the resources at, at the University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin]. And so, oh, I think I did eight of them over the course of a couple of years, and really did not know what I was doing but each time learned a little bit more. And I was taking classes at the same time, so I was learning more about production. And at the end of--by the time we had done eight of them, I was getting towards the end of my Ph.D. classes. And the station manager--his name was Tom Bolger [Thomas Bolger]--was at that time the president of the National Association of Broadcasters, and the NAB conference was coming up in Washington, D.C., and he took me with him to the NAB conference. And I got to give a presentation on what WMTV [WMTV-TV, Madison, Wisconsin] was doing for the children's audience, which was, you know, a great opportunity. And then he knew I was coming to the end of my coursework at Madison. Theoretically, I was going to write a dissertation, and I was going to write the dissertation on how Fidel Castro used television to educate the Cuban population. And, and I actually even went to Cuba (laughter)--and went to Cuba with a group of anthropologists who were going to--led by Professor Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole]. Did I--I would imagine you've-- Speaker 2: Is the president of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So she was--she wa- she wasn't at Spelman then. I'm trying to think where she--I think--was she at UMass [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts]? She was somewhere in New England at the time, but she organized a group and, and--that went to Cuba. And so I went with that group and sort of laid--you know, did some preliminary work of trying to figure out how I was gonna come down there and do research. Because Cuba--travel to Cuba was still a little bit restricted, but there was this little bit of time when Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] had sort of omitted--opened it for educational travel. So, so I--so my plan was I was gonna leave Madison [Wisconsin], but I was still hoping to work on my dissertation. And Tom Bolger then gave me the names of various people to connect with who might help me move to a bigger market or you know, to the next level of television. And one of the people he connected me to knew that NBC had a management training program, and they hadn't filled all their slots. And so I ended up going to NBC in New York [New York] for a series of interviews. They--I must have interviewed with ten people in the course of one day. They just went from person to person to person to person. And so then they said, "Okay, we'll call you in a week and we'll let you know what we're thinking." And a week later they called me in Madison, and they said, "You have to come back to New York for more interviews." So, I went back to New York and they took me out to lunch and they said, "Oh, and by the way," (laughter), "this internship that we were--this, this position in the management training program--which was gonna be in children's programs--we decided it doesn't make sense for it to be in New York; it's gonna be in Los Angeles [California]. So if you're still interested and you're willing to move to Los Angeles, you have to go to Los Angeles and have more interviews." So, so I did, and I actually think--was the Cuban trip before that or the--the Cuban trip was right around there. But I went--I came to Los Angeles and had interviews and then about a month later they told me that I had the position. So that's how I moved out to L.A. Speaker 2: So this is 1980. Speaker 1: This is 1980. Story_ID: 639950 Speaker 1: Did you work dir- directly for Phyllis Jackson [HistoryMaker Phyllis Tucker Vinson Jackson] when you--? Speaker 2: Not right away. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The first year I worked, they moved--they, they put me in primetime series and variety, and Phyllis was already the head of children's programs. And then the way that the program worked was they had you work--they gave you increasing responsibilities over the course of the year, and they tried to expose you to a number of different areas of how the corporation worked. And they didn't guarantee you a job, but at the end of the year they sat down with you, and if they were gonna give you a job they put you in a department. And they knew I was interested in children's, and so at the end of that year that's when I went to work for Phyllis. Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you work on at first? Speaker 2: Well, at first there was--there were two things going on. Phyllis reported to a woman named Lucy Johnson, and NBC--so Phyllis did mostly the Saturday morning cartoons and the afterschool specials. And then there was this other area called Project Peacock, which was gonna be primetime specials for the family and children's audience. And so my responsibility was to work on the Project Peacock specials, and then I also worked on some of the Saturday morning cartoons. So the animation was a whole new area for me. And-- Story_ID: 639951 Speaker 1: At the time they were doing 'The Smurfs' I believe, right? Speaker 2: There--yeah, they, they--I started just as 'The Smurfs' were starting, yeah. And that turned out to be a huge hit, and Phyllis [HistoryMaker Phyllis Tucker Vinson Jackson] got a lot of the credit for that, for developing that and making it a hit. And then we did 'Alvin and the Chipmunks,' and 'Spiderman,' and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, she said that she was the godmother--mother of 'Alvin and the Chipmunks.' Speaker 2: She was. Speaker 1: She, she had to fight for that. Speaker 2: She did. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: She did. That--pe- because people thought it was an old hat idea, and she really helped to modernize it. She had that--she had that vision. Phyllis had very strong commercial sensibilities--really good, really, really strong instincts. Speaker 1: Now this is a talent that--I mean, you--can, can you really teach that (laughter)? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't know that you can teach it, and I--and I know that my, my commercial instincts are not as good as Phyllis' were. They just--they just weren't. Speaker 1: But there's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I had a good-- Speaker 1: --something about you that's instinctive too, 'cause-- Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it seems-- Speaker 2: --I had-- Speaker 1: --you know. Speaker 2: --I had a--I had a good story sense I think, you know, so it's like, I, I didn't always come up with the ideas or I did not always recognize, you know, what the hit would be, but, but I do--working with the animators--animators were visual people and they didn't always understand how you tell a story. They, they understood what was funny and they understood visually what worked. They were--they were an oddball group of people. I loved working with them, but they were like--to me they were like the kid that sits in the back of the--of the classroom when you're growing up that's throwing spitballs at the ceiling and who the teacher is saying you are never going to amount to anything (laughter). And yet they were these crazy--mostly men, not very many woman. But they were these crazy guys who just saw the world in a whole different, funny, way. So I always thought they were great, and they were really fun to with, but they were so different from anybody else I had ever encountered. And--but my strong point I think was being able to say, okay, now this is funny and this is funny, but this is not a story. So (laughter) let's see if we can figure out how to make this into a story that's--even if it's only a fifteen minute story, 'cause sometimes that's how long a cartoon was. But at least you got to, you know, take people along with the ride. You can't just have these sight gags for fifteen minutes and expect to hold the audience. So that's-- Speaker 1: Okay, well, well, what--were any of your concerns about education fulfilled doing the-- Speaker 2: You know what? They were because, again, at, at that time, there were--the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] was really looking at television and, and how it affected children. And they were looking at, at TV ads and looking at, you know--can children tell the difference between an ad and a program? And so a couple of times a year, at least, we would have meetings with child psychologists and, and child development specialists and people who were looking at--professors who were looking at different areas of need for children. And I loved that because you would spend a couple of days sitting and spit balling ideas and talking about what is in the best interest of children and how can we take this stuff that they love and that's fun and use that to teach--to teach them things and also to teach them how to interpret the media. So I really enjoyed all that time, partially because you got both sides of it. A lot of people would say--you know, they looked at television and went: really, there's something educational here? But we worked really hard to try to figure out how to get some of those messages out to kids and how to do, you know, little, little intrastesh- interstitial programming sometimes--short programming. Things like, we didn't do 'Schoolhouse Rock!,' but 'Schoolhouse Rock!' would be an example of that, you know, how you plant the seeds in kids' mind by using--by using television. I can still--every time I write encyclopedia, I can hear Jiminy Cricket singing the 'Encyclopedia' song that I saw on the Mickey Mouse show ['Mickey Mouse Club'] (laughter). Speaker 1: The E-N-C-Y-C-L-O-- Speaker 2: Exactly (laughter). Speaker 1: --P-E-D-I-A, yeah. Speaker 2: See, you know (laughter) that's--so, so I, I really enjoyed that time of trying to figure those kinds of things out. That was--that was really--that was what I wanted to do. Story_ID: 639952 Speaker 1: So, now here you are. You're at NBC now. Did you pinch yourself at any point and say well-- Speaker 2: Many times (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) how in the world did this-- Speaker 2: --I was like, how did I get here (laughter), especially because it had never been on my radar. That just had never been what I thought I was going to do. So, yes, there were many times that I went: oh, my god, how did I get here. But I was glad, you know, that I--glad that I did get here. Speaker 1: Now during this period of time, you were doing the children's programming. Well, well, you did that when you worked initially in developing children's programs for the Saturday morning show. I got that. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then later on in '85 [1985], you become vice president of family programming. Speaker 2: Right, and so that was--that was an expansion of the Project Peacock idea. And they--and that's when we started--that's when we did things like Jim Henson's 'StoryTeller' ['The StoryTeller'], which was live action and puppets, but it was a series of stories based on the old--on old fairytales and told in a little darker way than maybe we had done on Saturday morning that were--and designed to get the children's audience, to get parents to sit down with their children. So--and that was--the, the--those were fun. We did some two hour movies that were for the family audience. We did some one hour primetime specials. We did one on hunger, but it was a drama--the story about the problem of hunger in America. We did Christmas--some Christmas stories, something--a story called 'Christmas Snow' that Sid Caesar starred in. And I can't even remember what else, but the--but we did a series of those that, that were outside of the Saturday morning and, and programs that NBC put more money into than afterschool specials. And so I continued to work on the cartoons, but tho- but a lot of my responsibility was getting those programs on the air. Speaker 1: So did NBC do the afterschool specials (unclear)? Speaker 2: NBC did have version (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear), okay. Speaker 2: --of afterschool specials. I believe-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --they had started on ABC. Speaker 1: Right, I was thinking-- Speaker 2: And so--yeah, 'cause ABC called them the 'Afterschool Specials' ['ABC Afterschool Specials']. NBC called it something else. Speaker 1: It was something similar-- Speaker 2: But it was very similar. Speaker 1: --(unclear) concept. Speaker 2: Yep, very similar in concept. Speaker 1: Were, were, were these programs based on children's literature or juvenile literature at that time or were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Most-- Speaker 1: --they or--original? Speaker 2: The afterschool specials were actually mostly mo- focused on kids' problems. You know, they'd be about bullying and just--they were--they were--there were a little bit more issue oriented, but the other--the prime- the primetime family specials that we did, some of those were based on children's literature. Speaker 1: Issues like bullying is--bullying is in the news now, even-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well-- Speaker 1: --in the NFL [National Football League] now, you know. Speaker 2: --it's, it's much bigger now than it--it's a much bigger issue now than it seemed to be. Speaker 1: But, but do the issues back--I mean, categorically remain about the same, you know today. Speaker 2: Yeah, there, there were--you know, there were things like eating disorders and you know, dealing with divorce (laughter), you know, those kinds of things. In, in fact, later, people did research and found out that, that a lot of the audience of afterschool specials was actually mothers more than the--than the kids, 'cause they were dealing with--a lot with family issues that mothers were always trying to figure out how to talk to their kids about. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--I'm not surprised, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, not surprised. Story_ID: 639953 Speaker 1: As vice president--let's see--see, you were the vi- vice president of family programming from-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I still reported to Phyllis [HistoryMaker Phyllis Tucker Vinson Jackson], though. Speaker 1: Yeah, from '85 [1985] to '89 [1989]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And is, is there a highlight of that period of time, a favorite show, or? Speaker 2: Oh, the Jim Henson series was my favorite. There is no question. And I--and I really enjoyed having an opportunity to work with him. I thought he was a genius. Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything that we don't know about Jim Henson that you do that you could tell us, since he's not-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: He's not here any longer and-- Speaker 2: I have nothing negative to say about him. What I--what I can say is that he understood something about puppets that--and I don't know that--you know, you asked me about can you teach--you were talking about something else--can you teach that? I remember going to a dinner where they honored Jim Henson. And he got up to accept the award, and he had Kermit the Frog, the puppet, on his hand. And Jim Henson was not a ventriloquist. And we sat there while Jim Henson talked to Kermit the Frog (laughter), and you could see Jim Henson's move- mouth moving whenever Kermit talked, and yet you believed that Kermit the Frog (laughter) was actually talking. I don't know how he did that. I still can't figure out 'cause you--I am looking right at him, and I see and yet I believe that that frog on his hand was alive. It was just--there was--it, it was like magic. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's something about it that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, there was something about him be- the--I--maybe he believed it. I don't know what it was, but he was able to put you in a different reality. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so, so did NBC have to make any special contract with Jim Henson? I mean, I know he works for public television [Public Broadcasting Service]--had, had the pub- public television thing going too and his own productions and independent thing, but was there any--I, I was won- wondering was there-- Speaker 2: Well, this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a con- contract or-- Speaker 2: --'The StoryTeller' series that we did obviously had to be outside of his deal with public television, and it didn't--we didn't use the Muppets; we used--he created particular puppets for this particular series. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they were--they were scarier and they were--you know, they weren't funny--light, funny puppets. These were--these were bigger, like monsters and--but they weren't--it, it wasn't a horror mo- series, but it was just a more serious dramatic series of, of--I think we did six or eight of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they won all kinds of awards. Story_ID: 639954 Speaker 1: Now you got married in 1989. Speaker 2: Yeah, so, basically what happened then was that, that whole FCC [Federal Communications Commission] thing where they were really looking at children's programming back in the late '70s [sic.], Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] came in and loosened regulations on everything. And by the end of the '80s [1980s], there were not the strict regulations on children's programming anymore, and the networks no longer were feeling the pressure that they had felt. And pra- television was changing and they weren't making the money on children's programs that they had made early, partially because there were more networks popping up, there more syndicated--there was more syndicated programming going on so there was a little more of a choice for children to find programming, and the cable companies were starting to emerge. The Disney Channel was coming out; Nickelodeon was coming out. And you could hear the people in--at NBC going: hm, do we really have to do all this? So--in, in fact, I remember sitting in a meeting with Brandon Tartikoff, who was then the, you know, president of NBC, saying--and he said to us--to Phyllis [HistoryMaker Phyllis Tucker Vinson Jackson], and Sam Ewing [Samuel Ewing] who worked with us, and me and--or--I guess Sam was gone but--you know, we make as much money showing 'Friday Night Videos,' which was a late night show on NBC, as we make on our whole Saturday morning schedule, and 'Friday Night Videos' is a lot cheaper to produce. So it was like, oh, my gosh, I can see the handwriting on the wall. This gig is about to end. And I had gotten some--you know, some more experience doing live action television outside of the animation and I liked it, and I walked across the hall to Tony Masucci, who did the movies for television, because I had heard that there might be an opening in his department. And I said, "Would you ever consider me for this opening?" And he said, "Yes." Basically, what had happened is a woman who was a tee- a movie executive had had twins, and she just found having twin babies at home and being a TV executive was exhausting. And so she was leaving, and so I was able to move into that slot. So I lost my VP stripes, became a director of TV movies, but it got me into the movie department. And that's how--that's how I made the transition. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, so this, this is--you were a director of motion pictures for television at NBC programming. So, so you were developing the original motion pictures for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and at that point, NBC was making thirty of them a year. There was--so that was a big--all the networks: CBS, ABC, NBC, all had movie nights. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, in the past, I, I remember when the networks started showing old movies--motion pictures actually--from the theaters-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and it was a big deal for a while, but I guess--did they-- Speaker 2: But this was-- Speaker 1: --run out of (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) these were original movies-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --for television. So it was 'NBC Sunday Night at the Movies' and, and I think occasionally they would put a feature in there. But we did thirty or--thirty to forty movies a year. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so what, what were some of the memorable projects from this period of time? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, most of them were--you know, a lot of them were based on true stories. I did a whole franchise called 'In the Line of Duty' ['In the Line of Duty: The FBI Murders'], which were stories of FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agents. Perhaps the most memorable franchise that I worked on was the Danielle Steel franchise. Danielle Steel I think may still be the most popular novelist in the world for women's literature. And Brandon Tartikoff had this idea of running Danielle Steel movies against big sporting events, you know, baseball games and things like that, and it was a huge success. We would put a Danielle Steel movie on against a baseball game and we would win--or even a football game. And, and she had so many movies. She--I mean, she had so many stories. She wrote like three of them a year Story_ID: 639955 Speaker 1: Now this is (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Three books. Speaker 1: Yeah, now this is significant because this is an era when America changed from having one TV where everybody would sit around it-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --like a fireplace-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --like, like they did when we were growing up-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to an era when-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --there was a TV in almost every bedroom or (unclear). So the wife or the, the female-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in the family who didn't wanna see the Super Bowl or whatever could go-- Speaker 2: Right, could go watch something else, exactly. In fact, I--that, that I--that was something that I sort of even learned as a kid. Because when I was growing up, my father [Walter White, Sr.] liked to watch, you know, all the sporting events on Sunday afternoon. And there was, like, a movie that would come on Sunday afternoons, and I could never watch it because my father was watching football or baseball or whatever it was. And so for, for--when I was ten years old at Christmas I got a television for Christmas. I didn't ask for it. I would have never asked for something like that. And, and the reason was 'cause my father recognized that on Sunday afternoons I liked to watch something different (laughter). And that was a big deal. I had a TV in my room and--but after that, from ten years on, I always had a--had my own TV. But that's--it was the same principle that, you know, Brandon [Brandon Tartikoff] recognized. There was another audience out there, but--that's not watching sports that we can tap into. So we did--we did twenty--I supervised twenty Danielle Steel movies. Speaker 1: Twenty, okay. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Did, did you use--I, I guess you used different directors? Speaker 2: Yeah, we used different directors and different writers. We had the same producers--did every single one of them. And we did them over the course of several years, and I start--and we started doing those when I was at--when I was a director of TV movies, and I continued to do them even when I transferred over to NBC Productions and was vice president of movies over there. I continued to supervise the Danielle Steels. Speaker 1: Okay, did, did Danielle Steel herself have anything to do with them? Speaker 2: Oh yes, Danielle Steel was very--was very hands on. She did--she was very particular about the way her stories were told. And there were definitely times when we would make--you know, create a change and she'd say, "No, that character would never do that," and, "No, you can't do that." And we used to have to go up to her mansion in San Francisco [California] sometimes for meetings. And she was very protective of her--of her property, but she was making millions of dollars so you can't blame her. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now what else--so, so the Danielle Steel movies and? Speaker 2: I'm trying to think what else we did. We did--you know, they were all--they were all individual, so--they actually all run together a lot. I'll some, some, sometimes turn on Lifetime television and I'll see a movie and I'll start watching it, and then I realize oh, I know the dialogue; oh, I know what's gonna happen; and then I go: oh, I must have worked on this movie (laughter) way back when. I'm just trying to think were there any other highlights of the NBC movies. No, I don't think there are any that you would recognize. Speaker 1: What, what--was there an issue tackled that, that you really wanted--you really felt, you know, strongly about that-- Speaker 2: Well, we did a lot of movies about violence, you know, against women. That was a--that was a very common--'cause there were a lot of those stories of women overcoming abusive relationships. Speaker 1: What was the one--the one with Farrah Fawcett I think was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, 'The Burning Bed.' I--that, that, that was--that was an NBC movie. I didn't work on that one, but that was--that was a big one during that time. 'Something About Amelia' was also a big one I--that I didn't work on, which was about incest where Ted Danson played a father that had abuse- sexually molested his daughter. And then there was one on AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. God, I can't think of the name of that one--with Aidan Quinn about, you know, young men who died, who came home and, and had AIDS ['An Early Frost']. So those, those were some of the, the big issues that NBC had tackled during the, during the time that they were doing a lot of movies. Story_ID: 639956 Speaker 1: All right, in about--well, 1992 you become the vice president for movies and miniseries. Speaker 2: Um-hm, and that was--and that was for NBC Productions, which was NBC's--the television business had changed so that the, the networks could now produce some of their own programming, which had been--again, before Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] had not--the law was very strict. There were people who produced and there were people who distributed. Now there--now the law had changed and so NBC started its own production company, and so I went to work over there. So I was--I was working with the network, but I wasn't at the network; I was at the studio. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so what, what, what were some of the projects that you produced there--I mean, that you helped? Speaker 2: Well, we started--we started a big miniseries that was supposed to be done in Japan that actually didn't happen but took a lot of time. And I worked with a group of producers. Again, they were all doing movies for NBC, and I was, you know, responsible for sort of bringing them in. But I have a very hard time remembering which movies we actually did 'cause they blend in with the movies that I did at the network. And I was--and I continued to do the Danielle Steels. Speaker 1: Okay, even-- Speaker 2: Even then, yep, 'cause those were movies that NBC wanted to own, so that still took a big part of what I was doing. Speaker 1: Now, did, did, did you miss not, not being a part of the development of children's programming and-- Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: --educational television? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. And mostly what I missed was having that extra added perspective of working with people outside of television to analyze what it was that we were actually doing. I think I miss that the most. 'Cause once you got into TV movies nobody really cared. They just--how are you gonna get--you know, how are you gonna get ratings? How are you gonna get people to watch? And that was the focus, focus of it. So even though I liked telling the individual stories, and I liked--you know, I liked working on them, I missed that other element. I still do. Speaker 1: So do you think the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] relaxation of rules kind of hurt the quality of television you think or? Speaker 2: Well, a lot of things happened at once. The, the, the FCC relaxing the rules definitely changed things, but what, what changed things even more was the advent of cable television. And instead of being--you know, working for one of three big networks or one of four networks once FOX came, you are now dealing with a universe where there were hundreds of channels. And so finding the properties that would rise above the hundreds of channels is, is still challenging. But more importantly, you know, we, we talked about some of the films that NBC did, like 'Something About Amelia' and 'The Burning Bed,' the AIDS movie ['An Early Frost']--which--the name of which I'm, I'm having tra- hard time remembering. But one of the movies they did was 'Roe v. Wade' ['Roe vs. Wade'], which was all about the whole abortion issue in America. When they did--when NBC decided to do 'Roe v. Wade,' advertisers pulled out of it, and NBC said okay, we're gonna do it anyway. But once we (unclear)--got into the cable world and the ratings fight became so fierce, they didn't wanna take those kind of chances. They didn't want to put on programming that advertisers wouldn't support, and they didn't wanna put on programming that was more controversial. And that--that's really--I think that was a real tragedy for the broadcast networks. I--'cause I--'cause they--and at one point were, were sort of leading the charge sometimes in doing program--programming that pushed social issues. And I don't think--they're not doing that anymore. If you--if you're looking at programming that pushes social issues, it's coming primarily from the cable networks because a lot of them are not as dependent on advertisers. And certainly the premium cable networks like Showtime and HBO [Home Box Office] don't have to answer to advertisers, and they don't really have to answer to the FCC, and that's why they can push the, the envelope in terms of language and, and sex and violence as well. And the broadcast networks still have rules and regulations that they have to adhere to, which puts them at a slight disadvantage. Story_ID: 639957 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If the whole Janet Jackson episode with her--what did--what did they call it--her costume-- Speaker 2: Equipment malfunction. Speaker 1: Her--yes, her-- Speaker 2: Or costume (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, her, her costume malfunction. If that had happened on HBO [Home Box Office] nobody would have cared at all. It would not have been an issue, and yet CBS, you know, was taken to task for it. Speaker 2: A wardrobe malfunction (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, wardrobe malfunction. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Exactly. So all of those things influenced how network programming--and still--they still influence how network programming has evolved. Speaker 2: So would, would you say then that the network programming, because it's still available regardless of whether you have cable or not on the air, is--tends to be--appeal to a more conservative audience than, say, cable TV? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah--well, because it has to--it has to serve a broad mainstream audience and because they get those airwaves, you know, as a privilege from the government, whereas the cable networks have to pay their distributor to be on cable. But it, it makes sense in some ways, but in other ways it definitely puts the broadcast networks at a bit of a disadvantage when it comes to programming. Speaker 2: Okay, I guess it would be one advantage--perhaps too, and I know that older people like my parents for instance had, had five hundred channels, but they only watch the networks. Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: Consistently watch the networks (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. So--but, you say it's, it's your parents that are doing it. If you ask my kids [Alexis Neisser and Nicholas Neisser] what they watch, they're not watching NBC, ABC or CBS unless it's some- unless my son is watching a sporting event that you can't get someplace else. You, you know, the- he'll watch the Super Bowl or the basketball playoffs or something like that. That's, that's not the programming that they're watching, which is not a good sign (laughter) for the future for the networks, so. Story_ID: 639958 Speaker 1: Your career at NBC basically ends in '95 [1995], is that--? Speaker 2: Yeah, basically NBC Productions went through a major restructuring. The people that had hired me and put me in that position were replaced, and they didn't fire me. They actually said, "What would you like to," you know, "would you like to stay on or would you like to leave?" But I realized I was kind of out of sync with this new group that was there, and at this point I had two kids. I had--let's see; this was, like, the end of '94 [1994], so Nick [Nicholas Neisser] was two and Alexis [Alexis Neisser] was four. And I thought: I don't mind taking a little time off here and regrouping and trying to figure out what I wanna do next. So I said--so I came to the end of my time there, and I was really planning on taking time off. And went to a cocktail party for a friend of mine who was an agent, and--I, I can't remember if she was being promoted or something. And I ran into a woman who worked at what was then Columbia TriStar [Columbia TriStar Television] and who had been my--who had sold movies to me. The--basically, when you were at the network, there were certain producers--you were assigned certain producers and they would always bring their projects to you. And this woman and I had worked on a few projects together, and I ran into her at this cocktail party--Helen Verno. And she said, "What are you up to?" Because since I'd been at NBC Productions I hadn't been dealing with, with her anymore because we were now competitors. And I said, "Oh, I'm just leaving NBC Productions," and she said, "Oh, my god, my development person is just leaving. Would you think of--would you consider coming to work for me?" So I was--my leave of absence was I think three weeks before I was back (laughter) working again. And I went to work at what was then Columbia. This was before Sony [Sony Pictures Entertainment] bought the studio. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, so, so at Columbia, which, which becomes Sony later on-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Now I will say that part of way that I did--part of the reason I took the job was because she said to me--you know, she said, "I don't think I can pay you what NBC was paying you." And I said, "Well, look, I was really planning on taking time off, so if you tell me I can go home every night at six o'clock and, and that you're not going to ask questions if I take off to go on a fieldtrip at my kids' school, and give me, you know, a certain amount of flexibility, then I don't mind working for less money." It wasn't that much less, but it was still less. And she said, "Fine," and so that was--that was my compromise of going back to work. Speaker 1: Okay, that was a good move for-- Speaker 2: It was. It, it actually was--it was a great move. And it turned--and you know, and it was just lucky that the studio was ten minutes from my house, so (laughter). Whereas NBC had been like a forty-five minute commute. Story_ID: 639959 Speaker 1: Some of the projects you worked on for Sony [Sony Pictures Entertainment], are there any highlights? Any--I got a list of some of 'em (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I--yeah, it's been a--it's been an eclectic group that I've worked on there. The ones that I--that I like the most, 'Call Me Claus' was one of my favorites, which was a Christmas movie that [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg starred in and Garth Brooks did the music. That was really--that was a fun project to work on, even though at one point Whoopi and Garth weren't speaking to each other, but (laughter) they got over it. And, and that was a--that was a movie I really liked because then I could show it to my kids [Alexis Neisser and Nicholas Neisser] and my nieces and nephews, and everybody got a big kick out of it. And they shot it in Los Angeles [California], which was unusual for TV movies, because the budgets are such that we usually try to go someplace cheaper. But Whoopi wouldn't go anyplace cheaper because, first of all, she doesn't like to fly, and she's a real union advocate, and she, she made it part of her deal. We either shot it in Los Angeles or she wasn't gonna do it, so, so we, we did--we did shoot it here. And I was able to take the kids on the set and they got to see her, and it was really--that was really fun. So that was one of my favorites. But I also--I actually liked working--and we did a Tom Selleck franchise called 'Jesse Stone,' which was like a series of detective stories, that I liked. Speaker 1: Right, now that, that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Working on those-- Speaker 1: --that was a fair--that was really pop- popular. Speaker 2: It was very popular on CBS. We did eight of them. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)I know he-- Speaker 2: --was very popular, yeah. Speaker 1: He was on the Oprah show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show']-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and he was talking about-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --this-- Speaker 2: I know he did a lot to promote them. He was a very--he's a very smart--a smart actor as well as a talented actor, and he knows what it takes. He knows what--he knows what works for him, and he also knows that you have to promote and support your movies, and, and he did. And it was a very popular and successful franchise for us. Story_ID: 639960 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know you did a remake of 'Steel Magnolias,' right? Speaker 2: Yes, we just--that's just a little over a year ago that that aired, and that was another one that I just really liked. I never got to go on the set 'cause they shot it in Atlanta [Georgia]. But, but that was one that I was very proud of, and I enjoyed working on the script. It was one of those--both 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun'] and 'Steel Magnolias' you had strong material to work, and the trick was trying to adapt it so it worked for the television movie but not screw up what you already had, you know. 'Raisin in the Sun' was et- was probably a little bit easier because we had a, a feature script and we had the play, and this--and the cast from the play was in our movie. So-- Speaker 1: The recent Broadway play? Speaker 2: Yeah, from the--yeah, so it was Sean Combs and [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad and Sanaa Lathan, and they had op- they had just done it recently, so it was--so that adaptation was a little bit easier. 'Steel Magnolias,' you had to--you had a feature script that was probably forty-five minutes longer than we had to do for television. So you had to cut stuff out and then adapt it for an African American cast, and, and update it a little bit. 'Cause the feature actually--I think it might be twenty years old now. It's, it's--I was surprised when I looked to see how old it was. So it was--it was fine tuning that the writer had to do to make it work. But I was really pleased with the way it came out and, and, I think everybody that worked on it felt-- Speaker 1: Yeah, so, so-- Speaker 2: --good about it. Speaker 1: Yeah, once again, this is Phylicia Rashad, Queen Latifah, and Alfre Woodard. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: These are all good actors. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 639961 Speaker 1: You did Ben Carson's [HistoryMaker Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.] 'Gifted Hands' ['Gifted Hands: The Ben Carson Story']. Speaker 2: Oh yes (laughter). I forgot about that one. Yeah, that one--that one came to us as a sponsored program that TNT wanted to do. That was hugely popular. I mean, he's, he's got a lot of followers. He's got a huge faith based audience. So we still--I mean, it's been three or four years since that has aired, and I, probably once a month, get a request from somebody that they wanna show 'Gifted Hands' to some church group or--and, and groups--and you know, I got one from Australia and we get them from the islands, and he's, he's got a huge faith based audience. But his, his story is very inspiring. You know, it real- it, it, it really is. And it's not really an atypical story, in terms of, of strong willed mother, you know, saying to her kids you can--you can do something with your life, except for the fact that they were teenagers before they realized that their mother [Sonya Copeland Carson] couldn't actually read. So, you know, she really--she really overcame some stuff to make sure that her kids went as far as they could go. But it's not that different in some ways from my [paternal] grandmother [Viaria Rucker White], you know, who had an elementary school education and putting her four kids through college. I think that story is repeated across the country a lot, and people don't know it. And not--and not just in the black community. I think in a lot of these ethnic minority communities you find-- Story_ID: 639962 Speaker 1: Okay, the one I think is probably an older one is 'Having Our Say: The Delany Sisters' ['Having Our Say: The Delany Sisters' First 100 Years'] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultnaeous) Yes, 'Having Our Say: The Delany Sisters.' Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. You know, that was--that was a New York Times [The New York Times] article that became a book that became a play; in fact, the play was written by one of my Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] classmates, Emily Mann, and who I had not seen for a long time. And, and we got to reconnect a little bit when we did the TV movie. And that one was particularly special because Camille Cosby was one of the producers of it, and she contacted the White House when we made the movie, and we got the have a screening in Washington [D.C.] (laughter). So we alt- we all got to go to Washington and have a screening for senators and congressmen and Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] of 'The Delany Sisters.' That--now the sisters themselves, one of them had already died, and the other one was not well enough to come, but a lot of their relatives came to the screening. And I remember talking to one of the nephews who I did not--I, I, I don't remember his name, but he was telling me at the cocktail party for Hillary Clinton. He said, "You know, the funny thing about this is all of us in the Delany family, we thought that, that these old maid aunts were the most boring," (laughter), "boring part of our family." There were these two old maid aunts who became dentists and lived together and these--and now they're the most famous. They've made the whole family famous because of this New York Times article, so. But it was--it was interesting, you know, to think of somebody living for 100 years and having basically seen the whole 20th century and being able to talk about it firsthand. Speaker 1: Yeah, their story just caught fire. Speaker 2: Yep. Yeah, so--but probably I'm, I'm just guessing that a lot of people around the country hadn't--didn't know about them [Sarah Louise Delany and Annie Elizabeth Delany] until they were on television. Speaker 1: I think that's probably right. I think that's probably right. How would they? Story_ID: 639963 Speaker 1: You also did one called 'Broken Trail' that--that won four Emmy Awards. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Broken Trail' was a story that was--it was loosely based on a true incident about a cattle run that--where, where two men ended up rescuing four Chinese women who had basically been, you know, sold into sexual slavery, which happened a lot with Chinese women that came to the country. So this was--this was in, you know, in the 1800s. And so these women were sort of by accident rescued from this brothel, and these cattle runners ended up taking them from San Francisco [California] to Wyoming. And when I say it was loosely based on the story, it--one of these women ended up marrying and having a rant- having a ranch in Wyoming, and this was the family story that got passed down. So this was--so 'Broken Trail' was the--was the story of the trip from San Francisco to Wyoming on the--on the cattle run. Speaker 1: I'm thinking I, I re- I never--I always wanted to see it. I never saw it. Speaker 2: Oh, it's out (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I all-- Speaker 2: --on DVD. Speaker 1: I saw the last part of it on, on cable or something. Was--wasn't Robert Duvall in this? Speaker 2: Robert Duvall and Thomas Haden Church, yep. Speaker 1: Right, right-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --right, right, right, right. Speaker 2: Now that, that was a project I really quite liked a lot. Speaker 1: And, and it seemed to, you know, kind of be like a reverberation of, of--what's it, 'Lonesome Dove' and some--I mean, it was, was Robert Duvall being the star-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --the star of that-- Speaker 2: I'm su- Robert Duvall-- Speaker 1: --Western-- Speaker 2: --was the definite--Robert Levall [sic.]--Robert Duvall as a cowboy was definitely the draw. I think that's what really got people to watch it. And then-- Speaker 1: The story was a lot different from 'Lonesome Dove.' Speaker 2: The story was a lot different from 'Lonesome Dove.' And you know and I love those stories that tell you something different about our history. You know, there--how many Westerns are there, you know--hundreds of Western movies have been made, and most of them are about white cowboys, you know, shooting at each other. And sometimes, sometimes they're about white cowboys and Indians [Native American]. But the West was so much more interesting and so much more diverse than the mythology and the stories that we hear, and this was a chance to tell one of those stories. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so was that the, the movie that received the most--well, well, the, 'The Delany Sisters' ['Having Our Say: The Delany Sisters' First 100 Years'] received both a Christopher [Christopher Award] and a Peabody [George Foster Peabody Award]. Speaker 2: Yeah, the, 'The Delany Sisters' got, got a lot of recognition. I think 'Broken Trail' probably got more Emmy Awards than anything else we've worked on. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, it's interesting. I didn't know a black woman had anything to do with 'Broken Trail' (laughter) when I heard about it. But you know, I was surprised to find out that Suzanne de Passe was the producer of 'Lonesome Dove' (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of 'Lonesome Dove,' yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Which is--you know, it seemed incongruous. At the time I'm thinking, well, why--she's Motown and she's doing 'Lonesome Dove.' Speaker 2: Yeah, yep. Story_ID: 639964 Speaker 1: Well, you know, it's a (unclear)--I mean, that, that's the other thing. When I--when I think about--and I'm really going--I'm going back to college for a few minutes. But you had asked me about being in, in the black student association and, and I said I had a bit of a love-hate relationship with it. And part of the, the complication was in the early '70s [1970s], there definitely was sort of a way to be black. You know, there were--there was--there were ideas about this is what black students do and this is what they don't do. And, and when you're at a place like Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and you have so much energy coming from so many different perspectives, and people like my Cuban Chinese friends sort of making me look at the world in a different way, I thought: I don't wanna be put in this little box where this is what black people do and this is what they don't do. And so there was--you know, it's like I'm, I'm happy to sit at the black table sometimes, but I don't always wanna sit at the black table. Sometimes I wanna eat with these other people who--who's--who have something different to talk about or have something different to tell me. And so that's--so it's, it's kind of--I'm always happy when you hear things like Suzanne de Passe did 'Broken Trail' [sic. 'Lonesome Dove'] because it shows, well, you know, we do have other interests. We do have other perspectives, and we do have other experiences that we bring, that our, our African American heritage is rich, and that's great. And we need to fight to tell our stories. But we all--also have other stories. I mean, for all of my complaining of going to that high school in Mequon, Wisconsin [Homestead High School], I know something about German immigrants because they grew up in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. And that's part of who I am too, you know. That's--it's--I, I don't necessarily feel like I'm part of the German community, but I like bratwurst, and I can polka (laughter), and there are things--experiences that I've had that have enriched my life because of that exposure. Speaker 2: Okay, I'm sure that black people know as much about cowboys as anybody in-- Speaker 1: I'm s- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) on earth. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Yeah, so. Speaker 1: We don't--yeah, we don't get (laughter)--we don't get the credit for it. There were a lot of black cowboys. Story_ID: 639965 Speaker 1: You're still working and, and-- Speaker 2: I'm still--I'm still in the same department still-- Speaker 1: Are, are there any pro- projects you're--you're working on now that you're really excited about that you, you, you wanna tell us about? Speaker 2: Let me think what's upcoming. We have a 'Bonnie and Clyde' miniseries that's coming on in a couple of weeks in December that I think is pretty good. We just finished doing--I'm waiting to see the rough cut of a movie on Gabby Douglas, gymnast, which at first I wasn't that excited about. But the more I got to--inside of her story and got to talk to her mother [Natalie Hawkins], and--you know, it's a pretty interesting--pretty interesting journey, this little eighteen year old gymnast has had. And so I'm looking forward to that one. We're doing more miniseries now than we've ever done before because there's suddenly--we did the 'Hatfields and McCoys,' and that was a huge hit, and so all of a sudden there's a resurgence of interest in miniseries. Speaker 1: Yeah, now that was, you know, fronted by, by Kevin Costner. I mean, he was the, the driving force behind that, right? Speaker 2: Yep, and that was a script that this producer--I think that producer tried to get that story set up I think it was twenty years. I know that script had come across that desk a few times, and he finally got somebody to rewrite it. I think he might have paid out of his own pocket, and I think he might have done some of the rewriting himself. And he took it to Kevin Costner, and Kevin Costner said I like this, and then everything started to fall into place as a result of that. And it was a huge hit, bigger than any of us ever thought. And it--as I said, it's been largely responsible for the resurgence of miniseries. We're working with Suzanne de Passe now to do a history of Motown [Motown Records], which is something that people have talked about for years. And now it seems like it might actually--we're in the very early stages of it, but it seems like we might actually be able to pull that off. Speaker 1: Now would this be as a documentary? Speaker 2: No, this would be a drama. And it would deal with, you know, various Motown artists and how it got started and some of the ends and outs kind of from her perspective--the ends and outs of, of that--of that era, which was obviously extremely influential on the music scene and popular music in America--and the world actually. Story_ID: 639966 Speaker 1: Is there a project--do you have some stories that are floating around in your mind or in your gut that you'd like to see pro- you know pro- produced that, that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, there, there are definitely stories that I wished we could have gotten made that never got made. There was one story that we worked on for a few years, which was--it was the Amy Biehl story. And Amy Biehl was actually a young woman who went to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and had a--and then got a Fulbright scholarship to go to South Africa. It was a young white woman who went to South Africa in the early '90s [1990s] and was murdered in 1993, as she was driving some black South African students back to their township and ran into a rally--a political rally. And some young men, who had been part of the rally and was all revved up, saw a white woman driving a car into the black township, and they stormed the car, and they pulled her out, and they murdered her. And she was--it was a big story here because her family lived down in Orange County [California]. So it was on the headlines in the local papers here for a long time, but I think the story got worldwide attention because it was, you know, a young woman on a Fulbright murdered by black South Africans. So it got all--it got all kinds of attention. Speaker 1: So the irony of that she was killed by friendly fire. Speaker 2: She was--exactly. They didn't know. They thought she was a white South African. Speaker 1: An Afrikaner or-- Speaker 2: An Afrikaner. They didn't know who she was. So, but at any rate, the story got worldwide attention. The Biehl family was invited by Desmond Tutu [Desmond Tutu] to come over to South Africa because this wo- this young woman had been working with, with Tutu. He knew her and he wanted to show the family that--he wanted them to see what happened and for them to understand what happened and to apologize for South Africa. And they went over to South Africa, and they were very moved by what they learned and by the people in the township who really loved Amy. And so they started a foundation to help children in the townships. And then they were called over by Desmond Tutu again later on to participate in the Truth and Reconciliation hearings [Truth and Reconciliation Commission], where they had to sit down and face the young men who had murdered Amy. And if--and you know, the whole process was that if they took responsibility, and it could be proved that it was a politically motivated crime, they could possibly get amnesty. And so this was, as you can imagine, an emotional thing for this family to go through, to face the people who murdered their daughter, to hear the details about what had happened, but they did. And they supported the amnesty, and two of the four young men were freed and let out of prison. So then they continued to build their foundation. They get money from Madeleine Albright and the state department [U.S. Department of State] because of the way that they had dealt with the South Africans. And four years later, they're working in the township of Gugulethu [South Africa] in their Amy fac- Amy Biehl Foundation [Amy Foundation, Cape Town, South Africa], and these two men who have been freed come to them and say, "We have spent the last four years working with youth in the township, and we wanna come and work at the Amy Biehl Foundation." And they hired them. And so to this day those two men who murdered this girl are working in the foundation under her name with their mother--with her mother [Linda Biehl]. Story_ID: 639967 Speaker 1: So the Amy Biehl story, I was so--I was just so moved by it. And we have ever been able to--oh did you--does that change things for you? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead, continue. Speaker 2: We've had it set up a couple of times. We've never been able to make it, and I think that her mother [Linda Biehl] is trying to get it made as a feature. But because of that relationship with her mother--I, I, I sing with a choir, which is one of my sort of full-time hobbies that I--that I really enjoy, and the choir went on tour to South Africa two years ago, and we did concerts to raise money for the Amy Biehl Foundation [Amy Foundation, Cape Town, South Africa]. So that was a--and, and one of the rare instances where my professional life sort of seeped over into another part of my life and, and it kind of all came together. But that was--and that was a trip of a lifetime for me. Story_ID: 639968 Speaker 1: Do you want to do something else at this juncture or--? Speaker 2: I, you know, I think about it a lot because I've been doing this for such a long time (laughter) that--and I think okay, now if you're gonna do something else, you probably need to start thinking about that now or start making the plans to do that. I, I still have the interest in the use of media for education. Now, things have changed a lot. There's a lot of different media out there, and so I am kind of interested now in exploring the world of online education and, and you know, what are the different ways that you get messages out to people that maybe you're not through television. And that's something that I'm interested in exploring, but I don't have a concrete vision of what that is. But, as you can tell from talking to me, I've never had a concrete vision of what I was going to do next, so--even though I've done this for the last twenty years. So that's, that's something that I think about. I think about doing something that has more of a connection to music. But, again, I don't know exactly what that would be. I really--I'm on the board of the Otis College of Art and Design [Los Angeles, California], and that has cemented my interest in arts education and you know, which I guess goes back to the Elma Lewis school [Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts], and providing opportunities for people to find different ways to express themselves. I do think arts education is an important part of, of our culture--and really of any culture. You know, I, I, I think there--that I've always been interested in folk art because that's the art that people do because something in them says they have to do it. They don't usually do it to make money (laughter) but you know when you--I'm, I'm always been fascinated by things like, when you go into the museum and you see the baskets that are made out of telephone wire that some (laughter)--you know, that were made by some tribe in some rural community in Africa. You know that they didn't do that so that they could make money. Could--somebody saw the telephone wire and said, "I could do something with this." And, and maybe the initial instinct was to do something practical with what was available, but the artistic designs that come out of it show you that there's something more going on than practicality. There's some vision that they had to enact on. They had to create. And that's just--I, I, I think that's part of what makes us human, and that's fascinating to me. Story_ID: 639969 Speaker 1: When you look back on your career, what does the position of African Americans in, in the profession today as compared to when you started? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it--when I started at NBC and I came into that management training program, there had been very few African American executives at NBC. And at the time that I was there, there was somebody in TV movies, there was somebody in miniseries, there was someone in business inf- there were two or three people in business affairs. There were six or seven of us that were all sort of starting at the same time, and we were all very hopeful. Again, because it was like when I went to college [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. There were more of us than there had ever been before, and there was this sense that we were gonna get in there and change things. Things did not change in the way that we imagined. Some of those people that I was working with then are still in television and--but most of them are not. And I still walk around Sony Studios [Sony Pictures Studios, Culver City, California] and I don't see very many African Americans in executive positions. There are a few. There's a woman who's in charge of finance at Sony TV [Sony Pictures Television], and that's a big, important position. But there aren't that many of us really influencing the creative decisions. And even though every year they give speeches about the fact that we're creating programming for a world audience and for a much more diverse audience than commercial television has, has ever had to provide programming for in the past, I, I still don't see us in, in the real powerful decision making positions. There are not that many of us. And, and I include myself in that. So I still think there's a long way to go. I think there's a lot of stories out there to tell that aren't being told because of the people who are ultimately making the decisions. It's, it's, you know, it's--progress is being made, and there certainly is--you know, there certainly is more diversity on TV than there was when I was a kid, a lot more. But it's almost a fear that the audience isn't going to accept the stories that the people who are--if the protagonists don't look a certain way, or aren't from a certain background. Story_ID: 639970 Speaker 1: I have a story now--you asked me about stories that, that I want to tell. I have a story now that's actually--that I really like, and it's about an Iranian man [Reza Kahlili]. And it's a man who came to school--came to college in the United States and then went back to Iran after the shah [Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi] left, and was very excited about the Iranian Revolution and joined the Revolutionary Guard [Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps] and then got disillusioned when he saw what was happening. Then he ultimately became a spy working for the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency]. And it's, it's true and it's unbelievable what this man went through. But I get--but as soon as you say to the networks the star of this is an Iranian man, they can't imagine--well, who's gonna play him? And will the audience accept--would they be interested in an Iranian man. And yet I think that the younger audience is much more sophisticated and much more open to protagonists from different backgrounds, certainly than they were in my generation, and certain than they were in my parents' [Winifred Parker White and Walter White, Sr.] generation. And, and I think that the people who have provided entertainment in this country have always understated the audience and what they would accept. Speaker 2: Yeah, you're so used to seeing movies even though the, the locale will change, the point of view is still from a white male. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And it's something my daughter pointed out at age nine, and it's true. But, so, so, so you'd like to see a movie with the point of view, you know, of someone other than a white male-- Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly. And, and you know, and there's progress made when some--a movie like 'The Butler' makes, you know, a lot of money. It's--they didn't--it had a--it, it, it was a lower budget movie and granted, you know, they had Forest Whitaker and Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] and that certainly helped to bring the audience. But a lot of people came to see that movie. Sony [Sony Pictures Entertainment], Sony rejected that movie. It was at--it was in development at Sony and they could have made it, and Sony said we don't think this is--you know, this is gonna happen. So I say, well, good--you know, good to you--good for you guys that you went forward and you found a way to get this made, and you made money. And they did. So it's the little independent features, which are really, really, really hard to get made. I mean, it's, it's not--I, I can't even imagine what they went through to get 'The Butler' made. And '12 Years a Slave'--oh, my god. It must have really been hard to raise the money to get that movie made. And, and that's just not--that's just African American stories. A lot of these little independent features really--just the fact that they get on the air--get made at all and get dis- distributed is a miracle 'cause it's really hard to get that financial backing. Story_ID: 639971 Speaker 1: What advice would you give young people coming out of communications school today or, or coming out of even, you know, education and psychology (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, who, who want to get involved in the television-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --or the movie business? Speaker 2: The good news is that the barrier of entry in some ways has been lowered by the technology. The fact that my son [Nicholas Neisser], when he was sixteen years old, could put a fifteen minute move on YouTube. That's not something I could have done when I was sixteen. And, and if I go back to my days at WMTV [WMTV-TV, Madison, Wisconsin] and you know, I was lucky enough to have somebody say you can use our equipment and you can make your half hour special. Well, today you wouldn't need the television studio equipment. You know, there--the, the affordable equipment is there to make a movie. The problem that you'll have is getting that movie distributed. But the fact that you can actually make it means that there is--there's hope that you can get your story out there. You just may have to find a non-traditional route to do it. And the main thing I would say to people, and this may be old school but I firmly believe it, is that don't get so in--don't get so tied up with your message or with the technical abilities that you know how to make a film and forget how to tell a story. Because the routes of making these movies work is still the basics of literature. It's still--it's--you know, what, what makes a good story. What's the beginning and the middle and the end? What's--who's the protagonist? What is the protagonist trying to do--all those things that you learned in your history class and your English class, and even that I learned--you made the reference that I did a lot of drama. I think I learned a lot about telling a good story by acting out in plays and particularly the plays that last. And one of my worries is that people get so excited about film school that sometimes they forget that it's not just making a film. What is it that you have to say? So, you know, kids come to me and they say, "Should I go--should I major in film in college?" Well, no, maybe you should major in English or history, (laughter) or something so that you would actually have a story to tell when you get out and you go to film school. 'Cause you can learn the techniques of putting a film together. Story_ID: 639972 Speaker 1: Okay, now, once again if you look back over your career today, is there a major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it? Speaker 2: Maybe take more chances. You know, the fact that I've worked for two major corporations over most of my career, if I look back on it, maybe I would have stepped out of the Corporate America at an earlier point and tried to do some--produce some projects on my own or tried writing some things on my own. But it's riskier, but I s- I sometimes think--I sometimes regret that I haven't done that. Story_ID: 639973 Speaker 1: Okay and once again, when you look over everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, god, I don't know. That's a good question. I mean, I, I, think of, of what, what I like doing in my job, a lot of it is helping the writers and helping the producers to--helping them to execute their vision. And I've spent a lot of time--more time helping other people execute their vision than I think executing stories that I personally liked. So I think that is what my legacy is, is that people--you know, people will sometimes come back and say, "Oh, my gosh," you know, "I really enjoyed working with you; you helped me figure this out; you helped me figure that out." I'll get no credit for that (laughter), but I don't really care 'cause that was kind of what I enjoyed. Maybe that's my [maternal] grandfather [Frederick Parker] and the teaching coming out or something. I liked helping somebody else get, you know, to the next step. Story_ID: 639974 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm really concerned about the state of education. You know, I really--you know, I talked about my [maternal] grandfather [Frederick Parker] being the patriarch. I think, as I said, I think my grandfather going to Amherst College [Amherst, Massachusetts] changed the whole trajectory of my family and, and has affected generations and still--my, my son [Nicholas Neisser] is at Amherst now. And you know, he can see his grandfather's picture when he goes to the athletic building 'cause he was in--you know, he was on the football team. There is a level of confidence that he has about being there that a lot of African Americans just don't have. They just don't have that sense of I can do this, I belong there. And, and, and we still are sometimes so isolated, even with all of the media and all of the, the exposure that we have of this is what people in the world are doing, there's a mindset that you have to have that says: and you can do this too. And an education is a big part of that. And the fact that we just are so much struggling it seems like in every big city with our public education, really frightens me. That's--you know, that, that was the, the thing that, that made the playing field level at one point is that everybody had access to a decent public education, or theoretically they did. And people don't believe that anymore. And you know, there's, there's a lot more emphasis and interests on--in private schools, which is all fine and good, but you know what? You shouldn't have to be rich to get an education. To me that is a basic right in this country. And if, if, if, if my grandparents had to depend on private schools, then none of us--none of us would, would have done as well as we did. My, my father's parents [Viaria Rucker White and Luther White], they didn't know anything about private schools. Story_ID: 639975 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family, about your children and-- Speaker 2: About my current family (laughter) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: So I met my husband out here. My husband actually went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and went to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And we had a lot of friends in common, but we didn't meet each other until we were out here. And I met him through others--through other friends and found out that when we went out to dinner one night that three of his grandparents were from Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. That was kind of how we sort of bonded. We found out we had this strange thing in--you know, this strange thing in common. And I thought oh, this is so interesting 'cause most people don't know that much about Milwaukee and, and, and so--but we didn't start dating right away. We, we, we had--he was an agent and so we met sort of professionally but, but we didn't--we didn't have that much business in common. And then a year or so went by, and I went to a fundraiser for Radcliffe--for the Radcliffe li- the Schlesinger Library [Cambridge, Massachusetts], because I had done--I had overseen a fundraiser for a pro- project that they did, an oral history project called [Black Women Oral History Project]--where they had gone around and, and interviewed black women in their commu- in their communities who had made contributions that were not necessarily going to make them famous--midwives, people like [HistoryMaker] Vel Phillips. She was actually in the (laughter)--in the exhibit--or was it Vel Phillips or maybe it was Mrs. Halyard [Ardie Clark Halyard]. But somebody--one of the women from--that I grew up with in Milwaukee had been in this exhibit. And anyway, so I was--the--they had a, a fundraiser a year later, and I felt like I should go to it because I had helped raise money for the library. But it was $100 a plate, and I wasn't gonna pay for anybody else to go so I went by myself. And when I got that there, there was Ken [Kenneth Neisser], my husband, who I knew from work, and he had come with other people who had paid for a table and they had brought him. And so we ended up talking and laughing that night, and we started dating after that. Again, I didn't think--I, I certainly didn't think he--this was somebody I was going to marry. But by this time, I'm in my mid-thirties and so is he, so my parents--my mother [Winifred Parker White] had given up on me ever getting married, and his parents [Patricia Mansbach Neisser and Carl Neisser] had sort of given up on him too. And he went to Milwaukee to visit friends and decided they would visit my mother. And then when they did that, they also--they found they had all these people that they knew in common. They decided on this meeting that we should get married, and then they were relentless and hounding us for the next several months, until we finally decided that we would. So we got married in 1989 out here, and, and that was the same year that I left children's programming and started working in the TV movie area [of NBC Productions] and moved. We bought this house, and my daughter was born, like, February of 1990. So it was--that was a huge (laughter)--that year was just one change after another, but all good. So, so I have my--a daughter, Alexis [Alexis Neisser], and then my son, Nick [Nicholas Neisser], was born two years later. And Alexis now lives in Chicago [Illinois] and works in city hall, does social media for Rahm Emmanuel, and quite likes Chicago, and I don't think--don't think she'll be moving back to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] anytime soon. But, but that's good 'cause I--we have a lot of relatives in Chicago and I like--I like going to Chicago too. And my son is a history major at Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts] and wants to work in entertainment, so we'll see--we'll see where that goes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yep. Story_ID: 639976 Speaker 1: Is there anything I need to ask you I have not asked before I ask my last scripted question? Speaker 2: Is there anything--no, the only thing that I actually thought I would talk more about that I didn't was just that whole struggle to balance work and family. And I hit on it a little bit-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --when I went to--when I talked about going to work at Columbia [Columbia TriStar Television] because, you know, I, I talked about how my mother [Winifred Parker White] always did all these activities, but family was first and foremost. And I always--she was--she was just always there for us, and so I always felt the whole time I was raising my kids [Alexis Neisser and Nicholas Neisser], I need to be there for them; I need to be, you know, more involved; I need--I'm, I'm working so much. But that was always something that--that was a constant source of tension. Sort of a constant feeling when I was at work that there was something that was not being done where the family was concerned. And then when I was home with the family, aware that there was stuff that I hadn't done for work. And I do think that entertainment bus- entertainment industry can be all-consuming. There are definitely people who work around the clock, twenty-four seven, and there's plenty of work to do. But I also think that that affects something else that we talked about and that is the perspective is on who the audience is. I think when you're so consumed and working with the other people who work in entertainment that you sometimes lose sight of who the people are who were out there watching what you're--what you're producing. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so I take it it's worked out on some level, the arrangement you made with Columbia way back when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, as--you know-- Speaker 1: --schedule. Speaker 2: --as the--as the kids got older, the work got more intense, and, and I didn't quite have as much flexibility as I started with, but I did have it in those years when the kids were little, and that was--that was a blessing, that really was. Story_ID: 639977 Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Ma'am, how, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That's a big question (laughter). I certainly would like to be remembered as somebody who cared a lot about my family. And you know, I, I have such warm and deep memories about my own mother [Winifred Parker White] that I hope that, that my kids [Alexis Neisser and Nicholas Neisser] will remember me as somebody who really--who cared about them and, and who believed in them and you know, who nurtured them. And, and I, I just hope they--that, that they'll have pleasant memories of, of me and the--and the time that we spent together. I'd like to remember--to be remembered as somebody who liked to laugh and who generally had a positive outlook. And I would like to be remembered as somebody who had an interest in other people, in their lives, but also in their stories. And I don't know. I, I worry I, I--it's not that important to me sometimes that, that people remember me for my career. I don't know that my--I've had the stellar career that is gonna go down in any kind of history books, but I'm sort of okay with that. I just--I think it's more important to me that, that when the people come up to me and say, "You know what? You really helped me figure that out," or, "You really helped me get this made." I think that's what's been important to me. Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Well, thank you. I don't know how you do this over and over again, but (laughter). Story_ID: 639978 Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a picture on May 28th, 1989. And this is my wedding, my husband on the left and me on the right. Speaker 2: Names? Speaker 1: Oh, Ken Neisser [Kenneth Neisser] and Winifred White Neisser [HistoryMaker Winifred Neisser]. Speaker 2: This is me as a baby. I think I'm two years old in this picture. Speaker 1: This is my eighth grade graduation picture [at Emanuel L. Philipp Elementary School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 2: Thirteen, so that's like '66 [1966] or so. Speaker 1: That'll be 1966. Sorry I forgot the date. Speaker 2: This is a picture of [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee on the left and me on the right. And this is at the screening at the White House [Washington, D.C.] for the Delany sisters movie ['Having Our Say: The Delany Sisters' First 100 Years']. And I do not remember the date unfortunately. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my family. At the top is my husband, Ken, me on--and then on the bottom row is my daughter, Alexis [Alexis Neisser], and my son, Nick [Nicholas Neisser]. And this was taken two years ago, so this is two--two--Thanksgiving, 2011. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my family. It's too many people to name, but it's my brothers. On the back, Charles [Charles White] and Walter [Walter White, Jr.], and then my son, Nick, and then my cousin, Ralph [ph.], and my other cousin, Edward [ph.], my cousin, Bryan [ph.], and then in the next row my cousin, Vernetta [ph.], her daughter, Lauren [ph.], my aunt, Frieda [Frieda Parker Jefferson], my husband, Ken, then it's my daughter, Alexis, and me, my nephew, Camile [ph.], my sister, Adrienne [Adrienne White Faines], and my uncle, Ralph [ph.], in the front. Speaker 1: This is my husband's family. My husband is on the far left, my brother-in-law, Wong [ph.], in the back, his partner, Rick [Richard Neisser], my husband's brother, my son, Nick, my nephew, Carl [ph.], my sister-in-law, Linda [ph.], my father-in-law, Carl [Carl Neisser], my mother-in-law in the front, Pat [Patricia Mansbach Neisser], me, my niece, Emma [ph.], and my daughter, Alexis. Speaker 2: This is my group that I grew up with. My--I talked about my girlfriends. On the far left is my sister, Adrienne, her friend, Carol [ph.], Carol's sister who is my friend, Flateen [ph.], is after that. My friend, Emlee [Emlee Hilliard Smith], is in the middle. My friend, May Castenell [ph.], is next, and my friend, Gloria Scott Tibbs is after that, and me on the end. Speaker 1: This is the same group minus Carol and Adrienne. Me on the top, my friend, May, and Gloria on the second level, and Flateen, Emlee, and Val [ph.]. Val actually died--on the bottom. And these are the women I grew up with in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. Speaker 2: Okay, this is my father's family. On the far left is my Aunt May and my father's brother, Jewett [Jewett White, Sr.]. Then my grandmother, she's holding my cousin, Ramone [ph.]. Behind her is my grandfather, Luther White. In front of him is my Uncle Luther [Luther White]. Next to him is my father, Walter White [Walter White, Sr.], and next to him is his brother, Charles White. And the little boy in the front is Jewett, Jr. [Jewett White, Jr.]. This is picture of my father's mother, whose name is Viaria White [Viaria Rucker White]. She died in 1991. Speaker 1: How do you spell her first name? Speaker 2: V-I-A-R-I-A. Speaker 1: This is my father's picture from the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my grandmother, Frieda Parker [Frieda Campbell Parker], at work. I have no idea what year that was, but I would imagine it was in the '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: This is a grade school picture of me. I think that's my first grade picture. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my family. It's me on the end, my daughter, Alexis, my husband, Ken, and my son, Nick. And that has to be--oh, gosh, Alexis must have been about ten and Nick must have been eight, so that would have been, like, 2000. Speaker 1: That is a picture from the '80s [1980s]. It's probably around 1985, when I was first out here when I was singing as a hobby. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother [Winifred Parker White] taken at the momentous meeting between my mother and Ken's parents, so that must have 1988, when they decided we should get married. Speaker 1: This is a picture from a high school play, me playing in 'South Pacific' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II]. I don't know who these other two teenagers are. I don't remember, but it was a summer of stock. Speaker 2: Now did you play the Polynesian woman [Bloody Mary]? Speaker 1: Of course, yes. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I thought about that-- Speaker 2: --(unclear). Speaker 1: This is a picture of Frieda Parker and Fred Parker [Frederick Parker] on their fiftieth wedding anniversary. When was that? That must have been 1975. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my grandmother's family back when they lived in Texas. I think it was Paris, Texas. I cannot tell you who all those people are, but I do know this was my grandmother, third from the left. Speaker 1: That's the town they had to get out of? Speaker 2: Um-hm, the town they had to get out of. Speaker 1: This is a reunion picture of students that went to the Summer Studies Skills Program that I talked about in Knoxville, Tennessee. And we had a reunion in 1998, and that's when they established the scholarship program for other students. Speaker 2: Oh, you don't need this picture necessarily. Just--here's a--here's--this is the picture. This is a picture that's at Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts] and it's of my grandfather, Fred Parker, when he was on the football team at Amherst. So that must have been 1918--'18 [1918], 1919, something like that. Speaker 1: This is a picture from my days of children's programming at NBC. And on the far left is Sam Ewing [Samuel Ewing], and in the middle is [HistoryMaker] Phyllis Tucker Vinson Jackson. And on the far right is me, and there we are with the Smurfs. Speaker 2: And this is--here the, my high school graduation picture from Homestead High School [Mequon, Wisconsin]..