 Story_ID: 483600 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My full name is Ras, R-A-S, Ammar, A-M-M-A-R, Nsoroma, N-S-O-R-O-M-A [HistoryMaker Ras Ammar Nsoroma]. Speaker 1: Okay. And now can you give--now there's a story behind this name-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I know so can you tell us the story? Speaker 2: All right. Actually I was, I was born Kevin Wayne Tate and when I was about nineteen years old I converted to Islam and I was given the name Ammar by my, my aunt. A lot of the--my father [Luke Tate, Jr.] has--had ten sisters and a lot of the sisters practiced Islam. Originally they were a part of the Nation of Islam and the time I started to learn about Islam, I went to one of my aunts for information and she gave me that name Ammar. So once I converted to Islam, I started using the name Ammar and for a while it was Ammar Tate or Ammar Kevin Tate. I still used--I used the name Kevin. Eventually I wanted to have African last name and originally you know I thought about choosing an African last--you know like a family last name you know like Ba or Jope [ph.] or Diallo or you know but I thought I really unless I do actually trace my roots and find what family, African family name I, I originally--for my, my people originally had you know I really don't have a connection to any name. Around 1996 I went through a spiritual rites of passage with the, a man from Ghana, his name is Anthony Mensah and he conducted rites of passage groups here in the local university, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] also in the community. I joined one of the rites of passage groups in the community and as part of the rites of passage your group that you're going through with you have to, you have to choose a name to represent your group and they were chosen from Adinkra symbols and Adinkra symbols are symbols that are used in Ghana, West Africa. And they, they have a meaning and and in our group we chose nsoroma. So when I started to look for a last name and I thought that has a more personal meaning to me than just choosing an African name out of the blue so I chose the name Nsoroma and it means, literally it means star child. Nsoroma is star and ma is child but usually people when they speak of it, they speak of it as child of the heavens or child of the supreme being. So and then when I legally changed my name, I was, I was into Rasta- Rastafarian so I chose the name Ras even though I'm really not--I wouldn't say I'm a Rasta now so when I legally changed my name I added Ras so that's Ras means wisdom. It's also like a title of a kind of like a prince in Ethiopia so. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a full explanation. Okay so what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born here in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, June 20th, 1967. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an artist, freelance artist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I work mostly in murals. Speaker 1: In public art and that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Public art, yeah public art. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Portrait, studio work also. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what is today's date? Speaker 2: It's November 29th, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in my studio in the Lincoln School of the Arts [sic. Lincoln Center of the Arts] in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Story_ID: 483601 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, they make me ask five lightweight questions as a warm up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They only require a short answer. First question is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food? Favorite food? (Laughter) I guess it would just be like black bean soup. Black bean soup (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. I thought maybe carrots, but I'm sorry (laughter). All right do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Color? I like indigo. I like indigo. Speaker 1: Okay. Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall, I like the fall. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: See that's the problem. I haven't been on very many vacations so and the places I would like to go I don't think of them as vacation places you know but so I would have to say no. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I like know your- know thyself. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I like to say know thyself. Story_ID: 483602 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Luke Tate, Jr.] side. But we'll start with your mother's side first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: It's Erma [Erma Riley Tate], E-R-M-A, Jean, J-E-A-N, Riley, R-I-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Mother was born February 13th, 1939 in Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. So what do you know about your mother's side of the family? First of all how far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: I don't know very much about our genealogy. I know my mother's, my mother's mother, her name was Minnie [Minnie Riley] and she married a man named, his last name was David [John David (ph.)] and but he wasn't my mother's father. My, my mother was born before they met. And I know that my mother's mother Minnie, she had my mother when she was very young and that my mother was raised by her, her grandparents [Mamie Riley and John Riley], raised by her you know the mother's parents, Minnie's parents. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I don't know who my mother's father is. My mother never really spoke of her--of him--of her father and my mother, she has a sister named Geraldine [ph.] and a brother Ernest [ph.] who's now passed and her youngest brother is, his name is John, John David [ph.] and he, he was the son of the, of the David that my Grandmother Minnie married. That's about all I know of my, my mother's family. Speaker 1: Are there any stories about ancestors back in the slavery days or after the Civil War or anything like that are passed down in the family or stories or songs or anything from that period? Speaker 2: My mother, she never really talked to me about things like, you know much about her past and my mother you know she didn't, she wasn't close to me that way. So you know I, I often thought about seeking out relatives you know who will talk to me on my mother's side, but I don't get a lot of information from my mother so I don't know any like, the stories that are passed down or anything. Story_ID: 483603 Speaker 1: With your mother [Erma Riley Tate] growing up in Birmingham [Alabama], that being a hotspot during the Civil Rights Movement, did she have any stories about some of the civil rights struggles there or was she there during those days? Speaker 2: My mother she came here I know in the '60s [1960s], in the early '60s [1960s], but as far as, as far as things that were happening in Birmingham when my mother was there she, she never talked to me about any of that you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Well the early '60s [1960s] when it was hot there-- Speaker 2: Yea, I know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know '63 [1963] especially. Speaker 2: So guess I should, those are some of the things I should be asking my mother. Speaker 1: Well significant she didn't talk about it but, you know too because people don't you know--now did you, did you have the impression that your mother missed Birmingham or wanted to go back or anything? Speaker 2: No, no, not really. At one point she talked about moving back there, but she hasn't made any real effort to try and you know I, I imagine my mother, she probably wasn't a part of any--a part of any like real movement, civil rights like movement, activities when she was there. She, she kind of keeps to herself and my mother's kind of quiet. I think I pick up that nature from her. But she's not like, like I would know, like if you would describe a person as being militant or politically active. My mother is not really like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did she have a chance to finish school in Birmingham? Speaker 2: That's something she talked about. She talked about, she said she got straight A's in school and that she started college but she had to take care of her, her grandfather [John Riley] and so she didn't finish, actually finish college 'cause she had to take care of her grandfather at the time. Speaker 1: Do you know where she went to school? Speaker 2: Nah, I don't know where she went to school. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now did she talk about why she came to Milwaukee [Wisconsin]? I mean what brought her to Milwaukee? Speaker 2: I think it was--oh my, Minnie [Minnie Riley], her mother came here first and then my mother followed if I'm not mistaken, my mother's the oldest of, of the four. Speaker 1: Okay. Now it was in the early '60s [1960s] but you're not sure exactly what year? Speaker 2: I'm not sure exactly what year. I know that they stayed in a housing development here called Hillside [Hillside Terrace, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] which is like on--it's still here actually and it's like between 6th Street and I would say 10th [Street] between Cherry Street and Walnut [Street]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was like central for the African American community at the time. You know they didn't move very far beyond that area. I know that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now can you give us your--well what did your mother do when she got to Milwaukee? What kind of work did she do? Speaker 2: She was a telephone operator I know around the time I was born. I knew that from the, from the birth certificate, from seeing my birth certificate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Later, later my mom, she, after she was divorced, she--I know she was on welfare or, or general assistance you know. So I know that from growing up. I know that, a lot you know just I, I didn't like going to the store with food stamps. I think a lot of people experienced you know that kind of shame you know about being on welfare but it was necessary I guess. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And she did work, you know. She never had like one steady job. She would--she always had like odd jobs and you know. Story_ID: 483604 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's name is Luke [Luke Tate, Jr.], L-U-K-E, Tate, T-A-T-E, Jr. Speaker 1: Okay. And what's his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born in Lexington, Mississippi. Lexington, L-E-X-I-N-G-S-T-O-N [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Maybe the S don't belong there (laughter), but his date of birth, I assume he was born the same year 1939 and December 3rd. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If it's not '39 [1939], it's either 1940. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you know much about the ancestors on your father's side? Can you go back further on that side? Speaker 2: My, my--well I know my father's father is Luke, Luke Tate [Luke Tate, Sr.]. Speaker 1: So your father, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandfather and he has eleven children. He's you know now he's deceased. He has ten sisters, wait nine sisters and two sons. My father was the oldest of the children and then he has and then he has a brother Phillip [ph.], there were only two males and the rest are sisters. A lot of, a lot of the sisters have children in excess of like ten or twelve, fourteen so I have a lot of cousins that I, I don't know and stuff. You know when I was dating I just made sure that we weren't related, whatever woman I met you know because it was so many cousins around. Most of the sisters, well five of them I think lived here in the city [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. And I know that my, my (background), my father's father--mother, his grandmother's name was Lukevitz. I know that was a strange name that's why I remember it. Speaker 1: How do you spell it? Speaker 2: It's L-U-K-E-V-I-T-Z. I think that's it. It might be instead of the E it may be an O. You know I remember-- Speaker 1: Okay, so it can be Lukovitz? Speaker 2: Yeah, Lukovitz. Speaker 1: Yeah that's, that's the name of-- Speaker 2: My, my father's grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know that was a strange name. I know my father's mother name was Juanita [Juanita Tate], J-U-A-N-I-T-A. Speaker 1: So that's your father's grandmother's last name? Speaker 2: No, that's her first name actually. Speaker 1: Lukovitz? Speaker 2: Yeah and I remember that because it was a strange name. And actually my, one of my aunts, the one who, who gave me my Muslim name her name is Juanita. And usually she talks to me a lot about you know the family and everything and, and I know that my, my father's--the Tates were from a plantation owner. I don't know, I just know his name was Tate. They referred to him as Old Man Tate and that he had plantations in Mississippi and Louisiana and that you know a lot of the African American Tates in this country are from his plantation that I know. Story_ID: 483605 Speaker 1: Like my aunts on my, on my father's [Luke Tate, Jr.] side they're a lot more open with history and, and my Aunt Juanita, she you know I'm probably--she's probably the aunt that's closest to me and she was the one that gave me the name Ammar [HistoryMaker Ras Ammar Nsoroma]. Speaker 2: Now how is she--did she talk about how she joined and when she joined the Nation of Islam? Speaker 1: Well they joined in the '60s [1960s] I know, you know and as far as I know she was--maybe four I think maybe four of my aunts were a part of the Nation and as far as I know she is the one that followed it most fervently and that she took a Muslim name and her children all have--she has ten children they all have Muslim names. And that they had, had the last name Mohammed you know and, and that you know she, she became a follower of the Dean Imam- Warith Deen Mohammed after, after Elijah Muhammad died and she--'cause she would still consider herself a follower. Speaker 2: Okay. That's more conventional Islam now than you know what I was back in the day (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: So she's more of a conventional Muslim today-- Speaker 1: Yeah she's more conventional. Speaker 2: --I guess than the old Nation of Islam-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --yeah okay. So she follows W.D. Mohammed now? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: All right. Now does she talk about Malcolm X or any of the figures of the early part of the Nation? Speaker 1: No, no, no she didn't. Not that I recall right now, not that I recall. Speaker 2: Any stories, well you know I don't know if she would have run across Betty Shabazz or, or anybody else or Clara Muhammad or any of the other women who are prominent in the Nation of Islam. Speaker 1: No, I don't--I don't remember (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She didn't really talk about them. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 483606 Speaker 1: Changing your name did that convert you to, I mean did you formally convert to Islam when you changed your name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I did actually. I con- I formally converted to Islam. I, I practiced from age nineteen to roughly aged twenty-seven, I practiced Islam and I was, I was more an orthodox practice of Islam and what can I say about--I kind of--I fell out around the time, it was around the time the Rushdie thing was happening. That didn't influence me. This Salman Rushdie you know he was the author who wrote a novel ['The Satanic Verses'] and it had, it had something controversy about the Prophet Muhammad in it and then it was a, a death edict placed on him-- Speaker 1: Yeah fatwa. Speaker 2: Yeah fatwa, and it didn't really influence me so much. What influenced me more at the time was I met a woman actually from Paris, France, who was visiting here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and we grew kind of close. You know I was, I was celibate you know of course being orthodox and but I, I found out her family was originally from Tunisia you know, but you know she you know she was an African, Tunisian, but she told me about how how women were treated in Islam, kind of the contradictions you know as opposed to the males you know. I was already concerned about things like not being, being able to like greet women or shake their hands and stuff you know and unless you were a really close friend of the family and things like that and kind of the women walking like two paces behind the male. You know, certain things like that kind of concern me and some of the things she told me you know that she experienced you know being from a family being from Tunisia and stuff just kind of like like sealed it for me and then also while I was practicing Islam I became a vegetarian. And I also started growing my hair in locs [dreadlocks] and those things were kind of like frowned upon by--with the people I was practicing in Islam with and you know they would tell me things like there was a hadith. You know hadith is a saying of the Prophet Muhammad, a saying or things that other Muslim scholars said about Muhammad. They said there was a hadith that said you had to comb your hair or there was a hadith you can't go to extremes in your faith or that you can't, you can't go through extremes in your diet or, or that a vegetarian diet will make you passive like a cow you know things like that. You know it was, those things were kind of bothering me and I thought things like me growing locs in my hair and changing my diet, I thought they would enhance my spiritual practice. But people you know, the people that I was practicing with or you know the mosque that I attended, they were, they were like former followers of the Nation [Nation of Islam] than they were following the Imam Warith Deen Mohammed at the time so they were, they were still kind of button down type and close shaven and suit you know and I wasn't really like that and you know so I think it was the whole thing of me getting nappy hair and you know. Not many of them even wore beards you know. I was growing a beard at the time and most of them were like close shaven you know and I really didn't have that much of a beard at the time to trim so (laughter) you know so it was just coming in and you know I didn't bother trimming it and then I have the nappy hair to go with it and then I was you know a vegetarian so you know, you know the you know the most extreme, the most extreme I guess people like them when they went in their diets were not eating pork and eating the bean pies and stuff like that you know. So you know I guess I was strange to them. So things like that it kind of like led me away from Islam but I kept the name you know, Ammar [HistoryMaker Ras Ammar Nsoroma], because it was, it was part of my, you know experience. Story_ID: 483607 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about, something about your father [Luke Tate, Jr.]? Did he talk about growing up and did he grow up here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] or did he grow up in Mississippi? Speaker 2: He grew up in Mississippi. My father, he grew up on a farm with--his father [Luke Tate, Sr.] was I guess a sharecropper. So his--him and his sister, his brother and his sisters they worked, they all worked on a farm you know like the where they went to school so many months. Like they didn't go to school during the harvest and stuff like that and you know they stayed in--it's basically like a, kind of like a trailer, shotgun type of house. I visited the house when I went to my grandfather's funeral and it was really small but all of them I know stayed there on that farm and worked on that farm. I know later my father moved to Detroit [Michigan] for a while I think before coming here. Some of his sisters are, are in Detroit and Flint, Michigan and I don't know very much about my father's childhood. I know my father was, he was sort of a character like a rough type, got in a lot of trouble with the law and was a gangster type and you know I remember being very young and putting, putting my finger in bullet holes in my father's, bullet holes scars in my father's abdomen and stuff you know playing in them and stuff you know because they were deep, deep wounds and stuff you know. I, I remember that from childhood. My mother [Erma Riley Tate] and my father they, they separated early. It had to be I think I was maybe three. I remember my mother packing us up early in the night and we all left and we went--and we stayed at a like a friend of hers house for maybe like four months or so until we got our own place. Story_ID: 483608 Speaker 1: Was there a story that you heard from your father [Luke Tate, Jr.] or any of the relatives about why he left Mississippi? And it might be--it might seem self-evident, some people why you wanna get out of Mississippi these days but is there a specific story we can attach to it? Speaker 2: I think my father was in trouble, you know why he left but I can't, I can't remember for sure. But I think he was running from something you know and like I said my father he was, he was always in trouble but I can't remember for sure. Speaker 1: Did he ev- did he ever tell you stories about some of the bullet wounds he got and what they came from? Speaker 2: He did you know 'cause he would, he would tell me things you know 'cause we, we would ask about 'em and he told me stories but I can't, I can't remember 'em you know 'cause I had to be like--it had to be like before I was three years old you know. I know asking him the questions and I know him talking about 'em but I can't recall 'em. Story_ID: 483609 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: No, I don't know the story about how they met but, but he was in--it had to be--I think it would have had to been 1959, and they, they, they met here. My sister who's the oldest, she was born in 1958 and she was born in, she was born in Alabama. Now she, she had a different father than, then the rest of us. Well different father than you know than me and my two older brothers and my, my oldest brother Luke, Luke III [Luke Tate III], he was born in 1960 and he was born here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. So I'm assuming they met in 1959. And like my, my sister Audrey [ph.], the oldest, she always thought that her--that Luke [Luke Tate, Jr.] was her father so until I think maybe until she was like about eighteen, nineteen or something, she told me, she told me about it one day. She said that my mother [Erma Riley Tate] said to her one day it was a man walking down the street and he may not been walking down the street, but he was somewhere and they was there and that she told Audrey that, that was her, her father you know. That's, that's how she told me that she found out that that Luke wasn't her father so. I don't know but so she had to you know known Luke long enough where, where she thought he was her father. Speaker 1: Okay. So your parents were together from 1959 until-- Speaker 2: Until about 1970. Speaker 1: Seventy [1970]? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970], yep. That's when they separated-- Speaker 1: That's about eleven years. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So okay. Now were they married? Did they actually get married? Speaker 2: Yeah they were actually married and you know they separated. I know my father was, was cheating a lot and stuff. He was you know, he was kind of cruel. He had like a--I know he had a kind of a vicious sense of humor. I remember, I had to be like two years old. I could have been younger. I don't know why I can, I can remember these things, but I remember my father he--I think he had a blanket on his finger and he was using his finger to kind of--to crawl up my back and he was saying, "A roach, a roach," you know and I remember screaming and stuff and he was, and he was cracking up laughing and it was hilarious to him. So I know he had a--he's kind of had a vicious sense of humor. I know he was kind of cruel to my mom but I think it was like him--the womanizing, him cheating and stuff that eventually, you know why they cheat--why they separated. Story_ID: 483610 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities and their talents and their dispositions and who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think a lot of my personality is from my mother [Erma Riley Tate] 'cause she's kind of quiet and soft, soft spoken. My father [Luke Tate, Jr.], I didn't spend a lot of time after they separated with him. I would see him like every once in a while. My, my two older brothers they actually lived with him after, after the separation. They went and lived with him. I never had that opportunity to go live with my father. So I, I wasn't influenced a lot by my father. So it would be my mother. As far as talent, I don't think my father had any artistic talent. He was, he was kind of you know he had talents probably in gambling and you know, I guess with women, I don't know but you know things like that. You know he, he spent a lot of time in prison. I remember visiting him in prison, him and my two uncles on my mother's side. Speaker 1: Do you know what he did? Speaker 2: I don't know what my father did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or what they say he did? Speaker 2: I don't remember what he did. I don't remember what he did nor do I remember what my uncles did. Speaker 1: Was he in there for short stretches of time or long periods of time? Speaker 2: I think my father was in there like short, like short stretches but more than once and my uncles were short stretches. My oldest uncle, Ernest [ph.], I think he was in there for a short stretch but then my uncle, Robin [ph.], he was in there more than once in prison. But my father, he would I would you know he would come visit us and take us places and even like moved near us once. I remember that and then, and then he moved away to I think Flint, Flint, Michigan, you know but then he moved to back to Lexington, Mississippi. My, my oldest brother [Luke Tate III] stayed with him while he was in Flint and then my, the brother closest to me, Gregory [ph.], stayed with him while he was in Michigan. I remember actually when he came to pick up my brother to take him to--on Michigan he was actually gonna take me also and then we would--my father had like a truck and it was like a pickup truck and I was actually--I had my bags packed and I was actually about to get in the truck to leave you know and at the last second my father said, "Wouldn't you rather stay here?" And he said, "You got--you have a summer job and everything," you know and he said, "There's really no room in the truck," you know and that was that you know. I said I guess. So that was that. So my brother left with him and they went to Michigan--Mississippi. Speaker 1: About how old were you then? Were you in high school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was fourteen. Speaker 1: Fourteen. Speaker 2: Yeah I just, I was just old enough to get a summer job here in Wisconsin. That was my first job. Story_ID: 483611 Speaker 1: Now tell me, now your aunt you said had a tremendous amount of influence on you, tell us, tell us about, tell us something about, about her? Is that true? Is she the most really influential person? Speaker 2: Yeah, in my family, my aunt is. Speaker 1: That's your father's sister? Speaker 2: Yeah my father's sister. Her name is Juanita. She like I said she practiced Islam and when I got introduced to Islam, I went to her about, you know with my questions about it. She, she gave me my Muslim name. Speaker 1: Now did her lifestyle impress you? I mean because you're around a lot of rough stuff, living in the projects, your daddy's [Luke Tate, Jr.] doing all kind of crazy stuff, he's getting in trouble a lot anyway, did, did you aunt kind of impress you more with her--with Islam being (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well let me see, no, no--well when I was growing up I didn't know much about Islam and I didn't take interest in it until I was like nineteen and I knew my aunt was Muslim but I didn't have very many questions about it and what it you know, what it actually meant or my, my mother [Erma Riley Tate] and her family they practiced Christianity--African Methodist--African Methodist Episcopal, the A.M.E. church and you know we, we went to church. I didn't go--like my mother didn't go to church with us when we were growing up. She kind of sent us to church you know they had, they had like buses that would come around to pick up children you know and, you know sometimes we went to the A.M.E. church you know like my grandmother [Minnie Riley] went to and her husband went to, my grandmother's husband, John David [ph.], went to and, and sometimes we went to any church that you know that, they would come into the neighborhoods and neighborhoods and knock on the doors to recruit children to take to their Sunday schools and stuff and then they would send the church bus and they would--kids would just go on and go you know so sometimes we just went to those churches too and I, I had negative experiences in churches. I didn't wanna go to church. It was something we were made to do and so when I found out about Islam it was like a whole different experience, like as opposed to the Christian churches. I got like kind of guilt feeling--church, I was, I was made to feel guilty when I was growing up you know about the whole thing about Jesus dying for your sins and you have to, you have to you know be good because he died for your sins all this and stuff and it was like this heavy guilt trip you know and, and it just it influenced me a lot against Christianity and, and in fact too that I was made--like we were forced to go to church something we didn't wanna do and stuff, even though I enjoyed the stories, the bible stories. I thought they were interesting you know. I got into the stories a lot but I just didn't--I didn't like the people that were teaching. I didn't like you know what they--what the preachers I didn't like what they were saying and I just thought negative. So but my aunt, she was of all my aunts, I was--she was the closest one to me. I would visit her a lot. Well the truth is too, I had other cousins who they would always move close to whenever we moved, I think they had like twelve, twelve children in their family and you know one, I had one that was my age, Tyrone [ph.], but they were all bad. You know they're, they were always involved in drugs and they would rob from other relatives and from each other and you know a lot, a lot of my cousins are like that, like if I see 'em today and they don't recognize me, I won't acknowledge 'em (laughter) but and my aunt her and her children aren't like that you know and I, I would spend a lot of time at her house even though her children are a lot younger than me, you know it's ten of them and you know she was real, real close to me and she encouraged my art a lot and, and she would always take me aside and like it's, it's kind of like she would impart like wisdom teachings to me and stuff. She was always talking about what the Honorable Elijah Muhammad said you know said this or you know said this, or the Dean Imam Warith D. Mohammed [Warith Deen Mohammed] said this, said that or she would talk to me about the Qur'an [Koran] and stuff like that you know when I was coming up and you know and so she had, she had a lot of influence on me. Story_ID: 483612 Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory? (Pause) You know my earliest memory, I don't know which came first, I remember living--we lived across the street I think it was on like 12th [Street], 12th and Wright Street here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and it was across the street from this prominent--bigger here in Milwaukee. His name was O.C. White. I guess he did a lot of things during--he was a--for one he was a radio personality here on the radio station called WAWA [WAWA Radio, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and I guess he was really influential during the Civil Rights Movement here. Later he, he I know he got an organization called the O.C. White Soul Club [O.C. White Soul Club, Inc.] and they would rehab houses in the, in the African American community and things like that but I--we lived, lived cross the street from him. Speaker 1: Now was he a reverend? Speaker 2: No he wasn't a reverend, you know but mostly people know about him as being the deejay on WAWA and-- Speaker 1: That's WAWA radio? Speaker 2: Yeah, WAWA. Speaker 1: Did they call it that (pronunciation) WAWA? Speaker 2: Yeah, AM-- Speaker 1: AM okay. Speaker 2: And I just remember I remember living there you know. And I remember I think maybe my father [Luke Tate, Jr.] taking me across the street to speak to, or you know to meet him or something or going with my father over there and then I remember moving from there. I remember I--seemed like we moved in the night and I remember we moving, we moved to I think it was like 3rd [3rd Street; Dr. Martin Luther King Drive] and Brown, Brown Street here in Milwaukee, and I remember arriving in the night and I remember I think it was like seeing a rat or a mouse in a sink there and so I think we moved like the next day or something and you know and, and then we, we end up living on 27th [Street] and Concordia Street [sic. Concordia Avenue] here. So this is all before I was three years old. So like these are some of my earliest memories. I remember my [maternal] grandmother [Minnie Riley] coming to the house once and bringing us oranges 'cause something--it was something about my father spending his you know his check or something, spending the money from his check not having you know, bringing his check home (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's spending all of that lost it basically? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: What did he do for a living when you were growing up? Different things or-- Speaker 2: He--I know he was a machinist when, when I was, when I was born from my birth certificate. I remember seeing it on my birth certificate, but I'm not sure where he worked. You know there were like companies in Milwaukee at the time like A.O. Smith [A.O. Smith Corporation] and Allis-Chalmers [Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing Company]. We actually lived down the street. We stayed on 24th--I mean 27th and, and Concordia. We lived a couple blocks from A.O. Smith, but I don't know if that's where he worked. Story_ID: 483613 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? What was Milwaukee [Wisconsin] like for you as a little kid? Speaker 2: Milwaukee. Let's see. Some of it, well some of the smells I would, I would visit one of my aunts and she lived in the projects in Hillside [Hillside Terrace, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] where I mentioned that my [maternal] grandmother [Minnie Riley] stayed, sometimes we would spend the night and they had, they had Hostess, Hostess, they make snack cakes, you know like Twinkies and CupCakes [Hostess CupCake] and things like that, they had a Hostess plant there so we would smell that in the morning and then they had a Wonder Bread plant in, in Hillside also so it wasn't so much of the bread we would smell, they had you know they had other things like sweet cakes and pound cakes and rolls and things like that Wonder Bread company made and we would smell it was like a sweet syrupy smell you know we would wake up to you know. I guess that's, that's familiar to all people who stayed in Hillside. Sights, when, when you know I spent most, most of my time in the neighborhoods. Like I didn't--my mother [Erma Riley Tate] didn't take us like as children on like, the whole family we didn't all pick up and go places together because it would be her you know, you know like four children you know and then eventually the two others but so I remember going places with my mom when I was young you know like because I was, I was the youngest for maybe like six years. Like my next youngest under me is six years--we're, yeah we're six years apart so my mom you know when I was still young my mom would take me you know she would take me on when she would go shopping or, or I guess job interviews or you know I, I remember once my mom taking me on a bus and I would always hold on to her skirt you know like when we were riding the bus or something and once I must have let go and I grabbed another woman's skirt and the woman got off the bus and I followed her off the bus (laughter) and, and then I remember looking up and I recognized that wasn't my mother an then the bus, all of a sudden the bus stopped you know because the bus had pulled off, the bus stopped and my mother got off to get me, but I must have been like four years old. I remember getting lost in the store. Actually I spent a lot of time with my, my sister also. My sister, Audrey [ph.], she's eleven, eleven years older than me and I spent a lot of time with her when she was growing up and you know she would take me around with her you know. Even when she was a teenager you know, when she was all into boys and stuff. I was right along with her, you know. Story_ID: 483614 Speaker 1: But growing, like growing up I had a lot of freedom I guess because it was like you know so many of us you know. My mom [Erma Riley Tate] couldn't watch all of us and she would be off working and stuff you know. Like going to school even, my, my brother Gregory [ph.], he's kind of like slow so he would get picked up from a bus and be taken to school but my older brother, Danny [ph.], who's six years older than me, he would--seven, seven years older than me, he would take me to school when we both went to 20th Street elementary [20th Street School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and now it's called Phillis Wheatley [Phillis Wheatley Elementary School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], the school, he would take me to school on the bus. We got bus tickets to go. He would, he wanted to save his bus tickets so he, he would walk to school. You know he would have us walk to school. This is, this is after we moved. First I went--I went there to kindergarten--prekindergarten. We, we stayed two blocks from there and then in my kindergarten year we moved I think like maybe over a mile, we moved over a mile away and we, we would walk to school, he would have us walk you know because he wanted to save the bus tickets and use after school and stuff. Eventually I started catching the bus by myself you know and I was so I had to be five years and stuff. Speaker 2: That was pretty young for doing that-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --catching the bus by yourself. Speaker 1: Yeah, so and so I had a lot of freedom and stuff and-- Speaker 2: So you learned how to negotiate the streets and stuff early? Speaker 1: Yep and so when we, when we moved and I--and we changed schools, we started going to the school closest to us which was four blocks away and I would walk to school. Like it would usually be my mother or my sister or you know my oldest brother, they would show us where to go one day, that one day and then the next day, we had to do it ourselves and we would be on our own you know. Whenever we had to go somewhere you know they would do that so you know so we would always have the one day to learn and then the next day we would be on our own so after that they showed us--they showed me how to get to school that one day you know. Story_ID: 483615 Speaker 1: Did you move a lot? Did you go to a lot of different schools? Speaker 2: We, when we moved from, we-- Speaker 1: Let me see a second, yeah. Speaker 2: We moved from 20th [Street] and--22nd [Street] and Wright Street. That's the house actually, that's the house we moved in right after my mother [Erma Riley Tate] left my father [Luke Tate, Jr.]. She had you know moved in with a friend of hers which was on, I think it was 20- 22nd and Center Street. Her friend stayed in this apartment. It might have been like two bedroom apartment you know and the woman had daughters I know. They had children. I don't remember how many children she had but you know I remember it was, it was me and my three siblings at the time. And you know I think I slept in the, in the living room on like they used to have those plastic, plastic bean chairs or something-- Speaker 1: Bean bags. Speaker 2: Yeah bean bags or something and I remember sleeping on that it was like a red plastic thing and I think we probably lived there three, three or four months and then we moved to 22nd and Wright which was two blocks away and we stayed there maybe three years and then my mother met a man Huey Easter [ph.], she started--they started dating and then they bought the house we moved to they bought and it was on 28th [Street] and Lisbon [Avenue]. We stayed--they eventually broke up because he was like, they never married but she had two children with him my younger brother and sister, Huey [ph.] and Cassandra [ph.]. They eventually broke up because he was like abusive and stuff. I think he had like low self-esteem or something he was always accusing her of cheating and all kind of stuff with--I know she wasn't and you know and he would like abuse her and stuff. But even, even before they moved, they bought the house together you know but we, we lived in that house like for thirteen years you know. She eventually like lost the house but, but so we didn't move a lot after that. I mean while--for those thirteen years we were there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is from what year to what year? Speaker 2: It would have been in like 19--I was five, so it probably would have been '70 [1970]--'72 [1972], '72 [1972] to eighty-- Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984]? Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984] yeah--'85 [1985]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when I graduated high school [Milwaukee High School of the Arts, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. That's when, that's when we lost the house. But at the--you know I went to 31st Street School [Westside Academy, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] you know we--you know I was six you know, I would walk the four blocks there and back you know by myself and I went there from the first grade to the third grade and then 1974, '75 [1975] they had busing in the City of Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and that's when they started taking African children from our community and busing them to schools in the, in the you know predominantly white schools and they did a little of the reverse you know taking children from the all predominantly white schools and busing them into the African American communities. So I was bused to this school called Hawley Road [Hawley Road School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and it's--Hawley is H-A-W-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: H-A-- Speaker 2: W-- Speaker 1: --L-E-Y. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I finished elementary there. Story_ID: 483616 Speaker 1: You were, from what you say now, you grew up with a lot of freedom and a lot of freedom to roam around and do things but you're kind of quiet person. How did you start into art? I mean how did you-- Speaker 2: Oh art, well-- Speaker 1: --first drawing and is that how you started, drawing or what? Speaker 2: I could--I could always draw I mean as far as I could remember you know. My, my oldest brother, Luke [Luke Tate III], he's an artist also. He always tells people that he taught me how to draw but I'm not too sure if that's true 'cause I always had the memory of drawing and I was always good at it and it wasn't something necessarily, my, like my mother [Erma Riley Tate] and father [Luke Tate, Jr.] encouraged me it's just something I did and it didn't discourage me you know. Speaker 1: Was it hard to find materials? I know from I draw a little bit myself when I was a kid but I mean to be able to get a good pencil and (background noise) something to draw on was it easy to find those kinds of things? Speaker 2: Well I always like even when I was in pre- pre-K [pre-kindergarten] the earliest memory I have of people taking a special notice in my art is when I was in pre-K at 20th Street School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and I remember we went on a field trip to the zoo, in Milwaukee County Zoo [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] here and the next day you know in class I drew a picture of a lion. I think it was--I made it yellow. I think I had crayons. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: We were talking about your early years drawing-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you said you started drawing at 20th Street School? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, that's the earliest memory. Speaker 2: You drew a lion right? Speaker 1: Yeah that's the earliest memory I have of someone taking a special notice in it because before that I think I thought it was maybe something--I didn't think anything special about it. I thought it was something maybe everybody could do. You know what I mean. Speaker 2: Do you remember trying to draw for the first time or just kind of-- Speaker 1: I don't remember trying to draw for the first time but I drew before that you know. I knew, I knew I drew it before that but nobody took a special interest in it or nobody made a big deal about it until that day you know so I didn't know that it was anything different about it. But I remember the day after the zoo trip I drew a lion from memory. I remembered drawing it. It was, I remembered I colored him yellow with like crayons and I made the head maybe blue. I remember that. And then the teacher got so excited I think she--not that I drew it but I think because it was from memory also you know 'cause you know I saw it the day before and then you know up until, up until then I didn't know it was anything out of the ordinary, my ability, and then after that you know teachers kind of provided me with paper and all kinds of stuff you know like with supplies and-- Story_ID: 483617 Speaker 1: A lot of my teachers they took a special interest in what I was doing and when I was in the third grade even, I had a--my third grade teacher, what's her name? It was Irma, Irma Corbett [ph.]. But she spelled her name with a, it's like my mother's [Erma Riley Tate] name but it I think she spelled it with an I instead of an E and her last name was Corbett and she paid for me to go--to take art lessons at the Milwaukee Art Museum [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] here. You know they have art classes for, for you know youth on, on the weekends and I remember her paying for me to go and-- Speaker 2: Was it the Milwaukee-- Speaker 1: It's the Milwaukee, Milwaukee Art Museum. Speaker 2: Art museum okay. Speaker 1: Milwaukee Art Museum. And I used to go on Saturdays so I was in the third grade. I had to be eight years old? Yeah I was eight years old and I, I had to catch the bus down there and I remember my sister, my oldest sister Audrey [ph.], she took me down there the first day. But she showed me what you know, she showed me what buses to catch to get there and I had to catch two buses. But the second bus it would, it would be a bus, it would be one bus of like maybe five or six buses that would stop at that stop you know. You know it was like a 30 you know even though it was a 30 bus, there were two different 30s and then there were like a lot of other buses too and she took me down there. She didn't bring me back. So on the way back I had to find my way back and when I got on that bus because the second bus there is the first bus back and I got to the bus stop you know I saw those numbers again, I couldn't remember what the right one to get on and, and I started walking and I walked, I knew where I was, but I didn't necessarily know how to get home from where I was you know on that bus or I didn't know what bus to get to. I remember walking to it was like a comic book stand. It was probably like eight blocks from that, from the museum. It was a newsstand, it was a newsstand, but they had comic books there. That's where I would go 'cause it's comic books. I remember stopping there and I remember two, two African American women you know standing there and they, they were looking at me and I think they were saying something about how cute I was but then they said, I think I might have looked sad or something. I'm not good at hiding my facial emotions and they said something, "Oh, he must be lost." Well then they started laughing, I remember they started laughing and stuff and they didn't try to help me or anything but I remember I walked, I walked until I knew where to catch a bus from where I was familiar with 'cause it was a bus we would catch coming from my [maternal] grandmother's [Minnie Riley] house but it was probably like, it was probably two miles away from the museum you know. But, but after that I figured it out you know. I figured out how to catch the buses. But well I was saying that well that my teachers they always had supplies and things. You know my teachers were providing me with you know. Story_ID: 483618 Speaker 1: You were saying also that you, you and your friends would create comic books-- Speaker 2: Yeah when I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were saying this off camera. Tell us about that, now how did you? Speaker 2: When I started going to Hawley Road School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], that's the school we were bused to, we had--it was probably about seven of us. We started creating comic books. It was you know, I, I mostly did the drawings. It was a person who did the drawings. We created our own characters. We had a name for you know the comic like the company and we had a name for the company, created our own characters, our own you know story lines you know, somebody would do writing, somebody would do the lettering, somebody would do the coloring you know and the, and the drawing and stuff and then we would try to sell them in the classroom or in the school and we would--our teacher at the time I remember his name, his name is Derek, Derek Kenner. His wife actually was a--Debra her and another woman Debra Kenner and Sarah Ford they were actually publishers of a magazine called Colorlines that was I think it was fairly popular at the time and it featured African American artists-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --throughout the country and I, I took--I got a lot of influence from that magazine seeing artists in it and then also a lot of them were local African American artists but, but anyway-- Speaker 1: Yeah Colorlines yeah, was I remember that. Who were the--like Derek Kenner's wife, what was her name? Speaker 2: Debra, Debra Kenner. Speaker 1: Okay. Debra Kenner and? Speaker 2: And Sarah Ford, I think. Speaker 1: Sarah Ford okay. Speaker 2: And Mr. Kenner, he, he would, he would provide us with the paper and you know the things we needed. We usually used just like kind of white, the white construction paper you know at the time and, what they had in school at the time. You know nothing fancy. But he would provide us with whatever we needed and then in the middle of the school year, he went back to school for his master's [degree] and he, he stopped teaching so we got a new, we got a new teacher. Speaker 1: So now this is what school? Speaker 2: This is Hawley Road School. Speaker 1: Okay so you're in eighth grade I guess? Speaker 2: No, no, this is fourth grade. Speaker 1: Fourth grade, fourth grade okay. Speaker 2: Yeah this is fourth grade and we got a new teacher. Her last name was Pete [ph.]. I, I don't remember her last name but I remember she got married while we were--while she was our teacher and she--it became Shabazz [ph.]. I didn't know what that name meant then, I didn't know it had anything to do with Islam you know at the time, but she was really mean to us you know and she wouldn't give us the paper we wanted and we started--she gave us line paper when we asked for paper and we you know, we had a business going we want you know, you know the good stuff and so-- Speaker 1: How much would you sell the comic book for? Speaker 2: I think we were selling them for like a quarter. You know they were, they were--the real ones were about a quarter then you know so we were selling them for like a quarter and stuff you know. Speaker 1: How long were your comic books? Speaker 2: How long? Speaker 1: Yeah, how many pages would you all put together? Speaker 2: We would try to do, we would try to do like twenty-eight. You know the real-- Speaker 1: You'd actually do twenty-eight pages? Speaker 2: Yeah we would try you know. The real comics they had you know about thirty pages, but they had advertising. We didn't have advertising of course. You know we would try to do like you know-- Speaker 1: So y'all had a lot of heart? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Twenty-eight page comic book and that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah and we would try to you know at least when I do them I would do like sometimes I would do like, some of the--you know I would like make an action scene and might take up, I might take up a whole page or something you know. It would be-- Speaker 1: So it would have these little panels? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now who, what were--did you have certain heroes that you created-- Speaker 2: Yeah we had-- Speaker 1: What were some of the names? Speaker 2: I remember one called King Fearless [ph.] 'cause and that was also the name of my comic company. It was called King Fearless Comics [ph.] you know, so I remember King Fearless was one of 'em. I think we had another one called Mighty Man [ph.] or something and but you know I can't recall all of them but we had, we had it going for a while. Speaker 1: Now were you at the time were you conscious of making the heroes black or did you? Speaker 2: Yeah, we were making them black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At the time we were--you know we were bused to that school and they--it was part of our identify struggle I think to make them black because we were going through this thing with the, you know we--essentially we were in a place where they didn't want us to be. You know it was a court appointed thing or something. Story_ID: 483619 Speaker 1: So what was the ratio, how many black students were there [Hawley Road School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]? Speaker 2: It was probably, I would think maybe it was maybe 15 percent maybe something like that. But-- Speaker 1: You're definitely the minority in every class? Speaker 2: Yeah, we were the minority. Excuse me. And even though I was, I was in the fourth grade we would get picked on by the white fifth graders and the white sixth graders you know. You know they would--the N word. You know they would take their lips and like stretch 'em and things like that or you know with the fingers you know all kinds you know all kinds of things. They would pick us, pick on us you know during recess or whatever and so we were constantly fighting. And then right around that time, it was this 'Roots,' this 'Roots' thing was, you know 'Roots' had just aired-- Speaker 1: This was like '77 [1977], '78 [1978]? Speaker 2: Yeah and I think it affected us you know a lot. They didn't talk you know, now if I, if I was an educator and, and something like 'Roots' had aired, I would have made it a point to talk to my, my students about it or something, but nobody talked to you--talked to us about it in school. So we were you know here we were, we were bused at this school you know being picked on by these white children and you know, I don't know, most, most I don't think most African American families at the time talk about--it wasn't something you was educated about, slavery, it was probably more a thing of a shame you know unless you, I don't know unless your family is like you know highly educated you know but so we, we didn't know much about slavery. What we knew about slavery was essentially what we saw on 'Roots' and so, so we went to school and we were already being picked on. It was deep-- Speaker 1: Did it increase because of 'Roots' or decrease? Did it make white people understand you more or, or-- Speaker 2: Oh no, no it wasn't no understanding. We, we--you know the teachers didn't want us there. The principal, the principal retired the year after we came. You know the teachers didn't want us there, the students. So it wasn't that it increased, it's just, it was more for us to deal with you know 'cause we saw this, we saw this, this view of ourselves you know as victims or you know not in control and stuff and the, and the media through 'Roots' and then we come to school and we're being called you know the N word and being teased and stuff and-- Speaker 1: So the general effect of 'Roots', was that uplifting to you or like more (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It made us angry; it made us angry. Story_ID: 483620 Speaker 1: Some of us, you know I'm, I'm kind of ashamed of it now and I was a part of it, but some of us we organized at the time and we, we made our white class [at Hawley Road School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]--we divided up the white kids in the class and we, we made them slaves essentially. You know we, you know, like So and So gets these group of people and So and So gets these group of peoples among the African American males (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How did that work? I mean how, you couldn't enforce that could you in the class or how did you? That's just something you all did? Speaker 1: It was something we did and you know, do our homework, go get this you know, this sort of thing. You know and we made rules like you couldn't, you couldn't bully you know this person's slave without talking to them first, this kind of stuff. It got to a point where one of the, the white students brought their parents, brought their parents in you know and it you know I'm ashamed of it now. The parents actually asked their child who, "Now who's your master?" Disgusting. You know it's funny now, but you know it was, it was shameful. Speaker 2: So were the kids actually following suit (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: They were acting like they were your slaves? Speaker 1: Yeah, we were, oh we didn't have control on what the older class people, like the fifth and sixth graders that were picking us so much, we would fight them. We, we you know we couldn't make them do anything but we, we essentially had control over the kids in our classroom. Speaker 2: Were they afraid of you? Speaker 1: They were afraid of us, they were afraid of us. But I mean that's how we reacted and I, I think it's because of the lack of education on the matter and then also what we were dealing with in, in the school you know being bused and stuff. Essentially you had to fight. Like if you, if you like with the fifth and sixth graders if you showed that you can handle yourself, then they would leave you alone and stuff you know you had to you know bust their nose or something or knock 'em down or something you know. Then they would stop teasing you, but if you couldn't fight, then you got picked on. Speaker 2: So the black students kind of have to stick together? Speaker 1: Yeah, you know after, after, after that first year we, you know we didn't have any problem you know with being picked on and stuff (simultaneous). Story_ID: 483621 Speaker 1: Did school [Hawley Street School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] go to, to the sixth grade, is that it? Speaker 2: Yeah it went to the sixth grade so you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was middle school? Speaker 2: Yeah, so I went to-- Speaker 1: Middle school starts after sixth? Speaker 2: Yeah it started after sixth then. Now it, now it starts in sixth, in sixth grade but then it went you know middle school started at seventh. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's seventh and eighth in middle school? Speaker 2: Yeah. So-- Speaker 1: Were you influenced by what they called the blaxploitation movies, did you see a lot of those when you were a kid? Speaker 2: Yeah, I saw, I saw a lot you know, but as far as you mean influence in like what way like as far--? Speaker 1: Well just what effect did it have like 'Shaft' or 'Super Fly' or, or-- Speaker 2: We used to go to the movies. We sent to this theater called the Oasis [Oasis Theatre, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. It was on 27th [Street] and Center [Street]. I think we had--it was like seventy-five cents at the time. We would go see the movies there and you know we would see like 'Super Fly' or 'Shaft' and even though we were, we were young, we would I know those are rated R movies but they would let us in. We see 'Super Fly,' 'Shaft,' 'Hit Man' you know with Hooks [sic.], what was his name? Speaker 1: Fred Williamson, [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks. Speaker 2: Yeah Robert Hooks he was in 'Hit Man' and yeah we would see they would be like two movies for seventy-five cents and stuff. Speaker 1: So even the nudity and stuff that didn't even, they just let y'all in any way? Speaker 2: Yeah they would let us in and you know the--I remember the floors being sticky (laughter) from sodas or I remember would yell out, "Rat," and everybody would put they feet up on the seats you know. Speaker 1: Did you ever see a rat in there? Speaker 2: I never saw one but you know when after the blaxploitation was over, we--when I was older I was probably like between ten and eleven and twelve we started--we would go see kung fu movies. You know those didn't--I think the Oasis was closed by then and we would have to go downtown and see the movies and those were rated R too, but those they wouldn't let us in, they wouldn't let us in to see those movies so we would ask people going in you know like adults going in if they would say we were with you know if they would allow us to go in with them you know. Speaker 1: That's interesting they wouldn't let you see a kung fu-- Speaker 2: They wouldn't let us see kung fu. Speaker 1: --movie when there's no nudity in kung fu movie. Speaker 2: Some of them, some of them had-- Speaker 1: Oh, did they? Speaker 2: Yeah some of them you know some of them had breast shots and stuff some of them you know I remember one it had like pubic shot you know. I, I rented that movie recently and they took that out you know but yeah I guess maybe because they were downtown it wasn't like a neighborhood theater and we would ask the adults. Sometimes we would have to pay their way or something you know. Story_ID: 483622 Speaker 1: Were you aware of other black artists that (unclear) in those days (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I was coming up? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: When I was coming up you know like I said I mentioned before Colorlines you know I was, I saw that magazine Colorlines and that influenced me a lot and then I was in sixth grade [at Hawley Road School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], you know I didn't know anything about Jacob Lawrence or Ossawa Tanner [Henry Ossawa Tanner] or anybody like that. But when I was in sixth grade I had an art teach his name was Art Flowers, Arthur Flowers, he was my teacher at Hawley Road [Hawley Road School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and he entered my some of the artwork that I did, he entered it in an art competition for youth at the Milwaukee Inner City Arts Council [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], it was on 7th [Street] and North Avenue. And so it took place in the summer, the competition took place in the summer so he got my work at the end of the school year and I found out or he told me when the competition you know 'cause they had, they had an annual arts festival, it was, it was called Celebration of the Community Arts Fest- Festival [Celebration of Community Arts Festival]. So I found out when the last weekend in July usually. I found out when that competition was and whenever or I found out where the Inner City Arts Council was and I went down there to inquire about my work and stuff and so I started going there you know regularly and I started developing a relationship with, with the Inner City Arts Council and the artists there. Speaker 1: Now who was in charge of it mostly? Speaker 2: At the time it was a person, her name was Florence, Florence Dukes and she was the, the executive director there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I started developing you know a community--a relationship with the council and the artists there and also I started seeing the publication Colorlines and I would see artists in there and then I would see like some of those artists' work in the community. Like one is Reynaldo Hernandez because he did murals in the community and I would see his murals on, on buildings. Speaker 1: Now is that the artist that huge mural with the eagle on it? Speaker 2: That's right. He did-- Speaker 1: That's Reynaldo Hernandez? Speaker 2: Yes, Reynaldo Hernandez and I would see his work throughout the community. You know it was, it was like it was spectacular then for me to see his work and see it so large and then see his work in the, the magazine you know, read about him and then being able to go down to the arts council and see him walk in or something you know being able to talk to him or him and other artists. Another artist who had a lot of influence, not so much, not so much his art, his style didn't have much influence on me, it was more he took me in under his wing and he was almost like a father, father figure to me. His name was Cornelius Erby. Cornelius is, C-O-R-N-E-L-I-U-S, and Erby, E-R-B-Y. And I spent, I spent a lot of time at his house and you know he would talk to me about different techniques and stuff and you know we would ride bikes together and you know go to art shows or, or do--or watch movies at his house. You know they had--he was one of the first people that I think that had a Betamax at the time yeah, had Betamax you know. You know whatever, he would just hang out with me. Speaker 1: So he was kind of like a mentor? Speaker 2: Yeah he was a mentor. He, he had a son, but I didn't see much of his son around when I was coming around. I would see his daughters. You know he had two daughters and then his son. I think his son got in I don't know he was always caught doing things. I never saw his son. And then another artist was Evelyn Terry [Evelyn Patricia Terry] and that's the person I share this studio space with too. Story_ID: 483623 Speaker 1: You were talking about Evelyn Terry [Evelyn Patricia Terry]. Speaker 2: Yeah, Evelyn Terry actually I met her at one of the Inner City Arts Council Community Arts Festivals [Celebration of Community Arts Festival]. I was familiar with her work before that. She was doing pastels at the time and like watermelons and strawberries. I met her and, and another artist Jacqueline Williams [ph.], she actually used to share this space with Evelyn Terry, Jacqueline Williams, both of them working with abstract. I met her at--I met them both at the Community Arts Festival. Before even I got close to Evelyn, there was a group I think it started late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] called the Freewheelers and it was an association of African American artists. I think it grew out of the Black Arts Movement of the '60s [1960s], and I was familiar with them because they would have exhibits at the like local libraries and things like that and you know it was the local African American artists and I, I became familiar with their work and you know through the, seeing the exhibits and also seeing some of them down at the Inner City Arts Council [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and seeing their work in Colorlines publication and I was able, able to join the association but it was right toward--before they became disfunct- defunct and so it was right at the end I think I made like one exhibition with them. I was still a teenager. I was like sixteen and-- Speaker 1: What were your mediums then at sixteen (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I used a lot of pastel when I was younger. I used pastel, I think like maybe because I saw like artists like Evelyn using pastel. I, I painted you know, I painted a lot from school, in school we used acrylics a lot but I think pastel to me was more read- it felt more readily available and stuff. Speaker 1: You can control it. Speaker 2: You more control and stuff and with the paints, the paints was usually something the school provided and stuff, but the pastels was something that I you know purchased myself and stuff so you know even though in high school, I was working like I've done like, I did murals like I remember doing two and like a girlfriend I did, and two of her aunts' homes at the time like in their bedrooms of their children and stuff, did murals on the wall there. Actually I first learned about murals when I took the class that my art teacher [Irma Corbett (ph.)] paid for at the art--Milwaukee Art Museum [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] I first learned about murals in that class. Speaker 1: That's when you were eight? Speaker 2: Yeah this was when I was eight and then and actually they weren't even, the class I was supposed to go into they weren't, they weren't even painting or doing any of that sort of thing and I didn't wanna go in that class and they allowed me to go into an older class with older kids because I guess they saw more potential in me and so I learned about murals and stuff then and then I started seeing you know the murals of Reynaldo Hernandez around the city and stuff and, and so I guess my first mural was like you know I was doing the ones in my, my girlfriend's, in her aunts', I did two of her aunts' bed--homes in their bedrooms and like I was paid--I think the most I got paid was thirty dollars or something. But probably you know I think like maybe a week of work or something and came to like thirty dollars but-- Speaker 1: Yeah thirty dollars for a week's work (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Something like that you know. Yeah one, one I think I actually never finished you know. Probably could go back and finish it now. Story_ID: 483624 Speaker 1: But eventually my first mural that I worked on, public mural, I was, I was sixteen, wait, yeah sixteen, yeah I was sixteen and I was turning seventeen that summer. I saw a flyer on a, on a maybe like a telephone pole and they were looking for artists to volunteer for this organization and I think it was called CWSA. I think it's Cooperation, Cooperation West Side Association [Cooperation West Side Association, Inc.] and they were doing a mural on this they had gotten a corner store to provide space on the wall for a mural. And it, it wasn't painted directly on the wall, it was painted on, on some boards and then installed on the wall with, with a molding around it and I volunteered and with two of my high school friends, let me see, Brian Bernal and Randy Echols. Bernal, B-E-R-N-A-L, and Echols, E-C-H-O-L-S. Randy or Randall and let me see, oh the lead artist was actually being paid. It was a college student Cathy, Cathy Bichler, I think. B-I-C-H-L-E-R, L-E-R, I'm sorry and you know, even though she was the lead artist and she was being paid, me and my friends we actually came up with a lot of the concept like the original concept and design and stuff and idea and all that and while we were working on that, we were offered--somebody saw us working on that, we were offered another mural job and the four of us, me and my two artist friends and the college student, we did a mural on a drug store, Lippert Pharmacy, L-I-P-P-E-R [sic. Lippert Pharmacy], on 35th [Street] and Center Street and they had a drive through and we painted in their drive through, we painted a mural with spray paint actually I think it took us four days and they paid us five hundred dollars and we split it among us you know the four of us. We were able to buy school clothes or for you know it was two of our senior, senior years me and Randy was our senior year coming up and Brian actually, I think he was actually going into the, into freshmen in high school. Yeah that's interesting, I never thought of that before. So from there I, I kept working. I kept doing like small jobs. They, they didn't keep it up. Actually for, because we volunteered for the first mural project, they gave us like art books you know and they would pay you know and on the way we, on the way walking home we crossed a railroad track, we were walking over the bridge, they threw their books over the bridge (laughter). Speaker 2: To show their disdain. Speaker 1: Yeah. I kept mine, mine are like art history, it was pretty thick. So you know it was probably like a eighty dollar book you know. I kept mine, I don't know--I don't have it now but I, I had it for some years but and I kept working since then so. Story_ID: 483625 Speaker 1: Now what high school did you go to? Speaker 2: I went to-- Speaker 1: Oh well middle school we have to--what middle school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, after Hawley Road [Hawley Road School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] I went to Jackie Robinson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Jackie Robinson Middle School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Is that an all-black high school, I mean middle school? Speaker 2: Yeah predominantly, yeah it was predominantly and you know it was named after Jackie Robinson first. Speaker 1: And then what high school? Speaker 2: I went to Bay View [Bay View High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Bay View was actually they had, then high schools had specialties. Bay View was the art specialty school at the time so I went there and it was Bay View was probably like five miles from my house so you know I get up-- Speaker 1: Was that what you would call the white part of town? Speaker 2: Yeah it's the white part of time yeah. It was near the lake on the South Side [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. We lived on the North Side [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], so it was like a forty-five minute bus ride. You know so you know it was a lot of white kids, you know we were the minority then at that school. But it wasn't, it wasn't like my experience at Hawley Road or anything you know. They hardly, they hardly even bothered you at that school you know. Speaker 1: Now were you a good student in school for the most part or did you struggle? Speaker 2: I was, I was, I was a good student like intelligently, you know academically, and I you know up until during elementary I probably missed like maybe three or four days my whole from kindergarten to sixth grade you know. I remember, I remember in the second grade I missed one day that year and that year and I mean that day I missed, they had the art teacher brought clay. That that one day I missed, and I didn't get to work with clay again until high school and you know after that I missed very few days you know but then when I--once I got into--once I got into middle school, I missed a lot of days. I missed like maybe thirty days like you know like in one year you know. Some days I just wouldn't go to school. Like my mom [Erma Riley Tate] would, you know she would go to work before we all left and stuff and you know I would catch the city bus to school. Speaker 1: You just didn't like the school? I mean the way you were treated there? Speaker 2: Yeah, I just, I just didn't like the school and and you know sometimes I would hang out with one of my uncles or something you know or. Speaker 1: Did your grades dip? Speaker 2: My grades were pretty good, but it was just my attendance was real bad you know and then when I got in high school, my grades started getting kind of bad in high school. And then I, I would skip school a lot in high school and stuff. What I would do, I would go to my, I had like art classes in the morning, I go to my art classes and then I would leave school, go like, they had arcades then, I go--they had an arcade right around the corner then they stopped letting us in during school hours and stuff unless it was like lunch so, so I, I started, we would start catching buses, catch a bus to Marquette University [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. They had a big arcade there and we would go down there. They didn't know us from the college students pretty much you know. You know we would run around in the dorms there and stuff but I didn't do too--or you know we would go to the malls and like shoplift or you know I didn't do too much of that you know after getting caught a couple of times, but. Speaker 1: So did you ever get in big trouble for? Speaker 2: Shoplifting? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Not too--I got caught once you know they, they make you do like a--this education thing about shoplifting and then they take it off your record. It was something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, so it wasn't big deal (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 483626 Speaker 1: But what they did, they had this program in high school where you would go to school half a day and then the other half you could go to the art museum [Milwaukee Art Museum, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and it was called satellite program and you go to the art museum the other half and do courses there. So I got--I became part of that and then you had to have good attendance and you know good grades and stuff so that got me back in, in the swing of it and stuff and so but Bay View [Bay View High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] was the artist specialty school and then my last year in high school I guess they wanted a more centralized location and this, this was like right after that movie 'Fame,' I think and I think it might influence a lot. They, they put a lot of money, they had investors and they put a lot of money into the schools it was West Division High School [Milwaukee High School of the Arts, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and it was, it was more--it was more in the neighborhood where I grew up and they made that the art specialty school and before it was a law specialty school and they switched specialties with Bay View, so Bay View became the law specialty school, like law enforcement and stuff like that and [U.S.] military and ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and stuff like that. Speaker 2: Okay so they turned West Division which is was that a traditional black high school? Speaker 1: Yeah it was traditional. Speaker 2: And they turned it into the arts high school for the whole city? Speaker 1: Yep and then they named it the High School of the Arts. So, so they came, my junior year they came over and did like a program and they recruited a lot of us from Bay View to try to come over to the High School of the Arts. So that's what I did, I went over there. I say that was my last year of high school and that was the first year the High School of the Arts. Speaker 2: Now did you get any honors in high school for your art or? How, how, how was your art viewed in high school, how did they? Speaker 1: The teachers took like interest in me, the art teachers they liked my work. Story_ID: 483627 Speaker 1: You said you got in, in a lot of trouble in school actually. Speaker 2: Yeah, right before I got bused I started getting, in the third grade when I still at 31st Street School [Westside Academy, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] I got--I started getting in a lot of trouble and I got made--we used to get what you call suspension warnings you know. First I think you would get 72s [ph.] you know they would be like a trip to the office and then you would get suspension warnings and I probably got like a hundred suspension warning and then one day I got in a fight and then they brought us into the office and we started fighting again in the office and the vice principal was breaking it up and she got hit you know. Speaker 1: Did you hit her? Speaker 2: I think I hit her. That was my first suspension. (Laughter) So you know after that they--what do you call it now HAD? Speaker 1: Attention deficit disorder [attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder] or something? Speaker 2: Yeah, they thought I--they called it hyperactivity then and then they thought I might be hyperactive that's what they were saying and so they sent me to a doctor and then they--he prescribed me Ritalin and then they I had to go see a social worker and I would leave school every Thursday, catch the bus. It's not too far his office is not too far from here actually. To visit him to have a session with him, this German guy, Vincent Gracer [ph.], Gracer. He had white hair you know. Every Thursday I went to him from third grade to to like the sixth, no wait 'til the seventh maybe eighth grade. Speaker 1: By yourself (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I would-- Speaker 1: They would just send you by yourself to the, a psychologist? Speaker 2: He, he was a social worker. Speaker 1: Social worker. Speaker 2: Yep. I would leave every Thursday, catch the bus from school. Like leave early from school and you know. Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Erma Riley Tate]-- Speaker 2: I was taking Ritalin too. Speaker 1: Did your mother, did she--was she active in school? Was she, was she able to really? Speaker 2: My mom, you know if I got in trouble, my mom she, she would never come to school 'cause, 'cause she was working so you know, you know usually like sometimes my uncle would stay with us, you know, my mom would spank me and then my uncle would spank me too you know for the same thing I would always get two spankings. I always hated him for that. But, but my mom never really came you know up to the schools, so she wasn't really active in school and stuff and usually stuff I would get in trouble to it would hardly ever get to the house like they would never call or you know it would usually be something that would be handled in the school and my mom didn't really have to know about it and so but you know once I was going to the social worker, I would talk about problems with him and stuff you know. We usually we would play board games or he'd take me out to restaurants to eat you know. We would go to a lot of openings of restaurants but he would always ask me to get receipts, so you know (laughter) and stuff because he was putting it on--getting, you now-- Speaker 1: Putting them on a tab you know. Speaker 2: Yeah he's getting his putting them on his taxes, you know his business and I don't know but I stopped going to him. One day one of my uncles he was staying with us at the time, the other uncle not the one that would spank me, this was the more cooler uncle, Ernest [ph.]. He asked me, "Why do you go to him," you know. And you know I told him and he was like, "Well, what would he do if you didn't wanna go anymore?" I said, "I guess he wouldn't do anything," you know. Said, "Well tell him you don't wanna go anymore," and then I told him and then that was it you know I stopped going. But-- Speaker 1: Did it do you any good? Did the experience help you? Speaker 2: We would just talk you know. Speaker 1: Was he a good person to talk to? Speaker 2: He was a good person to talk to, but I see the criticism people have with people like psychologists or psychiatrists or social workers because you know he would just turn every question back in on me, you know, "How do you feel about that? What do you think about that, or what do you think you should do," you know. So and I would ask him, "How much you getting paid," you know? It was, it was enormous. It was something like then I think he told me it was like forty-five dollars an hour or something you know. This was in the, you know '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: It'll take you like three days to do a mural--a week to do a mural and make thirty bucks, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah. Story_ID: 483628 Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry, you were asking me about the teachers? Speaker 2: And I was asking you about hon- did--were you honored for your art in high school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, was I honored-- Speaker 2: And did they, did you get any kind of special recognition for it? Speaker 1: I would, I would enter art competitions like they had a Journal Art Competition [Milwaukee Journal Art Competition], calendar art competition where they would display artists work in calendars, excuse me, the winning work in the calendar every year, the Milwaukee--the newspaper here now it's called the Journal Sentinel [Milwaukee Journal Sentinel], it was, they had two papers, now they combined them into one. But I never won the competition but I, I got into their exhibition and stuff where they would exhibit the work at the, whatever you know. Speaker 2: This was citywide? Speaker 1: Yeah and, and I won like some competitions I won, like I remember this fraternity did a competition, Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] at Marquette University [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], fraternity, black fraternity, I won that competition I remember and the teachers there they gave me a lot of recognition. I learned a lot from my high school art teachers and they would always get, like Dr. Horner [ph.] for one he would always get on me because I would sit during his class, I would sit in class and like goof around and tell jokes and all that kind of stuff while people would be working on their projects you know and then I would do--I would always do mine at home the night before and then come in and then you know I'd have it done but you know he would criticize me because he never had a chance to look at it before I did it and he was never able to give me advice or anything. Speaker 2: Did you have a lot of respect for art teachers in those days in terms of their ability to give you advice? Did you think they really could improve your work or? Speaker 1: I did, I did. A lot of the things they told me I still you know remember to this day and it influenced me a lot like for one we used to have regular critiques you know and we would get an empty room and he would, Mr. Gifford [ph.], he would hang up my work and we would all look at it and you know critique it and one of the things he would say you know if we, you know 'cause we were painting and we had a lot of white space still showing you know from the gesso or whatever, he would call it insufficient information you know it's not enough information to critique the work you know so you got to cover the whole painting you know cover the whole space before you know that, and I remember as far as like, I used to do a lot of portraits in high school you know to earn like extra money you know and then also I could use it to talk to girls during my lunch hour or something and then at first I would, I was just using browns for facial tones and stuff, skin tones, and Mr.--Dr. Horner he told me you know, you know that when I look at flesh tones and stuff, there's all kinds of colors in flesh and don't just use browns you know there's green, purples, oranges, reds you know, and even what generally what you're wearing might reflect in your face and stuff. You know I started you know he influenced me like that real early and stuff, and so I value what they said and stuff yeah. Story_ID: 483629 Speaker 1: So when you were on the verge of graduation from high school [Milwaukee High School of the Arts, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], I mean in your senior year, I mean did you have a plan for what you were going to do next? Were you going to go to college? Were you going to go to another art school, I mean an art school like the Art Institute [School of the Art Institute in Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Okay those art competitions like sometimes if you won, you could get an art scholarship to, to some of the schools like I think I was thinking of Parsons [Parsons School of Design] or something in New York [New York], and but you know I would never win and you know then I, I entered this art competition at the, at the Milwaukee Area Technical College [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] here, I think it was called the Art Olympics [ph.] or something and I won like overall there and then-- Speaker 1: What year is this you won the art award? Speaker 2: This was would have been 1985. I graduated in 1985. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, so then I don't remember what the prize was but that encouraged me a lot you know. Generally like when I, when I didn't win those journal competitions [Milwaukee Journal Art Competition] I thought, I thought it because I was painting and drawing black images. I thought maybe that was you know, I thought maybe it was something to do with racism or something. That's something--you know you never really know you know so you don't know if it's your ability. That's the trouble you know, you don't know if it's your ability or if it's you know somebody's personal problem. But-- Speaker 1: 'Cause it's subjective. Speaker 2: Yeah it's subjective. Yeah so then that encouraged me when I won at the Art Olympics so then I, I decided to--'cause I would be heartbreaken--heartbroken when I, when I lose those competitions you know because I, I always thought I would win. So when I won that one, I decided to enter this competition for a scholarship at Milwaukee Institute of Art and Design [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], so I won a--I entered a competition and entered a portfolio and I won a scholarship so I was able to go to--it was a partial scholarship so I needed, I needed more money and I didn't know that right away. I went down there for my first, like the first day to go to school. I think it was, I think I was like one of three African Americans in the, in the freshmen class, maybe, maybe one of five in the whole school at the time. This would have been like the fall of '85 [1985]. I wasn't able to go 'cause, that semester 'cause I needed more money and at the time my mom [Erma Riley Tate], she had, she had remarried. She married this guy that she met in prison somehow and he had gotten out and came to live with us and he was like no good, he was like a drug addict and thief whatever, doing all kinds of stuff. I actually beat him up once because he was yelling at my mom. I had came in and he was yelling at my mom in the kitchen. I went in and beat him up, yeah. But like we, we ended up losing the house because of you know, because of the stuff he was doing and I went to live in Alabama after I wasn't able to get into school, but what I you know what I had done, I applied for grants and then my grants came in that, that winter and I-- Speaker 1: Winter of what, would have been '86 [1986] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-six [1986]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I stayed in Alabama 'til, 'til the winter of '86 [1986]. Story_ID: 483630 Speaker 1: This is 1986-- Speaker 2: Okay yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You got some grants that came in? Speaker 2: Yeah some, some grants came in-- Speaker 1: Now, where did you go in Alabama? You went to Birmingham [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Birmingham. I went to my sister's--my mother's sister's house. I stayed with her, Aunt Geraldine [ph.]. I stayed with them. Actu- I worked at a Church's Fried Chicken [Church's Chicken] there and-- Speaker 1: Now at that time did you start to get into any of the black cultural kind of activities and things? Speaker 2: Nah, I was still pretty like non-political-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know. Like my whole like awareness was, was basically how I was being treated by white people you know at that time, you know acknowledging like I'm like one of four or five out of school and how that's affecting me and stuff like that you know that sort of thing. So, I left that--I left Birmingham to attend school at MIAD. I think I went two semesters and then I got kicked out 'cause my attendance. Speaker 1: Where is this at? Speaker 2: It's here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], Milwaukee Institute of Art and Design. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got kicked out because of my attendance and then, and then I went back. I went back and then and I dropped out and then I didn't go back to school until I went to School of the Art Institute of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in, I think like '91 [1991] or '92 [1992] somewhere around there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I never finished school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So my plan was I guess was just-- Speaker 1: So during this time, now let's get this straight, so during this time you attended some art school and then you were, you like, I see here you worked at Pick 'n Save [Pick 'n Save Warehouse Foods] for a while? Speaker 2: Yeah I started work at Pick 'n Save in 19- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighty-eight [1988]? Speaker 2: Eighty-eight [1988] I think, yeah, I worked--I started 1988 until, until 19--no I'm sorry it would have been eighty- no wait, wait I'm getting confused. Speaker 1: It says '88 [1988] to '90 [1990] here, but is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah, it had to be eighty- that could be right, but I think it had to be '86 [1986]. I think I worked there four years, yeah '86 [1986] to, to '90 [1990] 'cause I remember working there four years. Story_ID: 483631 Speaker 1: While I was working there, also--I was also working at the Inner City Arts Council [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was a intern there, you know I was doing all kinds of stuff. That's when I, like my kind of my political consciousness started like you know developing, there and then working at the Pick 'n Save [Pick 'n Save Warehouse Foods], that kind of like gave me some kind of political consciousness. Speaker 2: Really, now I wouldn't guess the Pick 'n Save, now the Pick 'n Save is a supermarket? Speaker 1: Yeah, it's just a supermarket. Speaker 2: But (laughter)-- Speaker 1: I think it's like the worker you know exploitation and stuff you know (laughter) and then what was it? Okay you know what it was too, I started right out of high school [Milwaukee High School of the Arts, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] I started--we have here what you call African World Festival. First it was called Afro Fest and now it's called African World Festival. They invited like a couple of years after they got started, they invited like a group of artists to come down for free to display art and do stuff so right after my first--that summer right out of high school I went down there with another artist friend of mine and we displayed some of our artist stuff. I started-- Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: Where was I? Speaker 2: You were interning, talking about interning at the Inner City Arts Council and some of the political lessons you were learning, and cultural lessons (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh at Pick 'n Save. Speaker 2: Pick 'n Save too. Pick 'n Save and the Inner City. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's where I guess I started, oh because I was down at African World Festival me and m- we, we would--we started out trying to sell our work. Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: What was I saying? Oh the African World Festival. I started out, we started out trying to sell our work down there but you know while we sitting around, some--we, we had paper with us and like I think oil pastels and you know to finish some of the drawings that we could try and sell or something and somebody asked us if we, if we could do portraits you know. And we said yeah we guess, so from there, we started doing portraits you know like on the spot at the festivals and I think I started out like six dollars or something. It was probably twelve by--or eleven by seventeen [inches] or something like that. It went to eight dollars or something. You know it probably take like twenty- half an hour or something. Then this other artist she made, she made and sold her own clothes. She like lectured me one day and was telling me I was charging too little and stuff and I think I went up to ten dollars. (Laughter) But you know now at festivals, I don't feel like fifty or something but, but I was just thinking that, but I started developing like a political consciousness just from being down at the African World Festival because where we would do our our portraits, they had what they call the culture area and they had you know they would have cultural activities, they would have people from Africa come and talk about their country or every year they had a village from the--Ola- Oyotunji Village [Oyotunji African Village, Sheldon, South Carolina] from North Carolina [sic.]-- Speaker 2: Oyotunji yeah. Speaker 1: The Yoruba village in North Carolina and the king would come and he would bring his entourage and there would be a stilt walker and stuff. They have a procession from the main gate to the cultural area and stuff and you know I started getting my cultural like sampling down there, and then like the more political stuff just from working at the Pick and Save like worker conditions and stuff and, for instance I had this buddy named Robert Cunningham. He's a school teacher I think he actually is a school teacher here now but he--at the time he was in high school and he worked--I worked in produce and he worked in frozen. He would come over, he would complain to me you know like what was going on and all this and all this and then I would tell him what to do or I'll give him my opinion. You know I was kind of quiet and then he would go do whatever I said, and he you know caused a lot of ruckus and all this kind of stuff and he was making things happen in the store and then eventually you know they, they would have him up in the offices you know and he's plotting strategies and talking about us, "Man where you getting all this stuff?" And then he, he said, "I'm getting this from Kevin Tate [HistoryMaker Ras Ammar Nsoroma]." He was like, "Kevin Tate? He don't even talk," and stuff so then after that you know they were, they were on me and you know and they were constantly on me and then-- Speaker 2: You mean on you in a good way or bad way? Speaker 1: They were on me in like, they, in a bad way, they're always watching me. They wouldn't let me talk to--I couldn't talk to other employees and stuff like that, you know. Story_ID: 483632 Speaker 1: I started--you know people come in the store, you meet different people. This one brother, Dr. Ahmed Mbalia he would come in and he would ask me you know, he always, he always when he greets people or you know people of African descent, he would always say like you know, "How's it going African?" Ahmed H- I'm sorry A--A-H-M-E-D, and Mbalia is, M-B-A-L-I-A. Speaker 2: Oh he's an African American right? Speaker 1: Yeah. And you know he would come up to me and ask me, "How is it going African?" You know and I tell him about the conditions and I would call it Pick and Slave you know. I would tell him about the conditions and stuff and then later I find out he, he was--he started, one of the people who started the Pan-African Revolutionary Socialist Party you know displaying a group of all African people's revolutionary party and later I became involved in that, but like with Robert Cunningham he's--he organized like he started organizing protests outside of the Pick 'n Save [Pick 'n Save Warehouse Foods] like different for different situations like he would--he was I think out of high school he was going to University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] for mass communications so he started interning on a radio station here WNOV [WNOV Radio, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and he started working under a deejay called Matthew Stelly [Matthew C. Stelly] and he was kind of, kind of a militant and through him you know like people calling in, Robert you know end up like organizing protests and through I guess my, my instigating him like or you know like organized protests in the community like at different stores and stuff like that one for instance, somebody was frisked in a Walgreens [Walgreens Company] and were taken in the back and they made the man drop his pants. Robert organized this protest and he had signs, signs said, "Don't Drop Your Jeans for Walgreens," you know stuff like that but, but through that I started you know I started developing you know like a political consciousness and I started going to black bookstores and buying books and, you know actually I got a lot from watching BET [Black Entertainment Television]. You know at that time they had like talk shows with like Bev, I think her name [HistoryMaker] Bev Smith you know and I remember this brother coming on he was from Panama and he was talking about what was happening, what the U.S. did in Panama you know with the bombing and stuff like that affected me greatly and just the things I was reading and stuff and and then converting to Islam, you know in Islam they seek knowledge from the cradle to the grave and stuff so I was reading everything. I was reading about, you know Malcolm [Malcolm X] and you know and all kind of stuff so that's when I started developing my political consciousness. Story_ID: 483633 Speaker 1: What about the Inner City Arts Council [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], were there people there bringing information? Speaker 2: Well like, with the Inner City Arts Council like Reynaldo, Reynaldo Hernandez, you know he was doing things. He would do like he had these posters he had done like ancient Egyptian like Hatshepsut, this ancient Egyptian queen. Speaker 1: Hatshepsut? Speaker 2: Hatshepsut and, and you know he told me the history of her or he told me like about the (unclear) and all this kind of stuff, and you know and Africans being in the Americas before slavery and you know or in China and stuff like that. You know I would hear those kinds of things, and so you know then just talking to people down there you know being at the council I would, I would get like even though I was in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], people would--we were doing things with people setting up things for people around the country in African American arts community you know they would come and do shows here through us and so, I you know I would talk to you know people from Chicago [Illinois] like Lydia Brown [ph.] and stuff and people come down to New York Negro ensemble theater [Negro Ensemble Company]-- Speaker 1: Ensemble theater. Speaker 2: --ensemble theater and stuff you know just talking to people come from all kinds of political backgrounds and stuff you know, most of them hot out of the still out of the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] you know their orientation and stuff you know so-- Speaker 1: Now did you meet any of the muralists and artists from the '60s [1960s] or '70s [1970s], like Shawn Lockett [ph.] or, or-- Speaker 2: You know, like I met him but but it wasn't like close enough that you know like a mentor/mentee type of thing. Speaker 1: Or Calvin Jones [Calvin B. Jones] in Chicago or? Speaker 2: Like I was more familiar with their work than I, than I was with them personally and stuff so I, I studied you know I looked at their work and stuff. Speaker 1: I think we brought [HistoryMaker] Jeff Donaldson up here once. Speaker 2: Yeah, AfriCOBRA [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists], and I, I met Donaldson at an exhibit he did here and I, I--when I was going to school, like Nelson Stevens, his daughters were going there when I was there and things like that. You know I was familiar with the AfriCOBRA movement and stuff and, and through, through my studio partner Evelyn [Evelyn Patricia Terry] you know I got to learn a lot about you know African American art culture, history and stuff. Story_ID: 483634 Speaker 1: Tell us about how you got in the University of Chicago, I mean the Art Institute of Chicago [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Oh Art Institute of Chicago? Actually I had this girlfriend, she was big in school and stuff and she actually I had, I had been celibate like from nineteen 'til I guess I was twenty-seven something like that. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: Why? Because I was practicing-- Speaker 1: Corresponding to being a Muslim? Speaker 2: Yeah I was practicing Islam and I had met this sister and I was, I was celibate until I met her and then that's when I was kind of falling out of Islam and stuff and then she had a big influence on me and I decided to go back to school and stuff through her impetus and so I went to school at Art Institute of Chicago and it was you know it was a great experience. I liked it a lot better than, than Milwaukee Institute of Art and Design [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] because mostly that was like a local, it's kind of a local kind of phenomenon Milwaukee school art of design but School of Art Institute of Chicago you got people coming from all over the world to attend you know and you got to see a lot more I think variety of styles and, and influences and things. Speaker 1: This is in 1991? Speaker 2: Yeah it's about '91 [1991]. You know also at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, you had, you had courses outside of studio courses you know, where at Milwaukee school of art design you just had art courses at at this SAIC you had you know literature, mathematics you know, liberal arts, you know, you know all kind, all kinds of things, science courses so, but I, I didn't graduate. You know while I, while I was working at Pick 'n Save [Pick 'n Save Warehouse Foods] actually I started doing a lot more freelancing and eventually it led me, it led me to quit and and concentrate on my art career. Another artist that influenced me was this artist, he's a photographer named Emerson, Emerson Matabele. He travels around the world taking photographs and then he sells them at festivals and I traveled--actually I took vacation from, from Pick 'n Save I think it was my first vacation you know I was a hard worker, and it was my first vacation and I was, I was toward the end where I was miss- where I was starting to be late a lot and stuff for the job and they were taking me aside and trying to see why I was late and stuff and I was telling you know I didn't want to work there anymore and stuff and they were trying to keep me there but I took my first vacation and I went on a road trip with him to New York [New York] to the African street festival [International African Arts Festival]. Speaker 1: Oh in Brooklyn [New York], that's the big one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah in Brooklyn, yeah. Speaker 1: --that the (unclear) has. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and the day before we were there Nelson Mandela had, had came and he had just gotten out of prison and came to the U.S. and I missed him by a day. But I did I actually I saw Fela. Fela was there and performed at the street festival. Speaker 1: Fela Ransome-Kuti [Fela Kuti]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Great musician. Speaker 2: Yeah and so I traveled there and I did portraits there while he was selling, in his booth while he was selling his photographs. And then after that I just never went back to work you know I came back and I just never went back. From then I just concentrated on my art career. I figured you know if I could give them forty plus hours and help them make money I can devote that time for me you know and make money for myself. Story_ID: 483635 Speaker 1: From there I just decided to concentrate on my art career and I was growing locs [dreadlocks] at the time. And I thought you know my locs would help me, help me in my drive and determination to continue this career because you know I didn't think anybody would try to hire me with locs. Locs weren't very popular then like the early '90s [1990s]. Maybe in New York [New York] or something but like as far as-- Speaker 2: So, it would kind of keep you in the arts because nobody would take you otherwise. Speaker 1: (Laughter) And I found that out when I moved to Chicago [Illinois]. I tried to get jobs like through the school and stuff and everything would be fine over the phone when I would call and stuff and they say come on down and stuff and once I got down there, you know it was a different story. They saw my hair and stuff and you know I had, I had a lot of money saved. You know I didn't have to find a job right away 'cause I, I actually I was saving money. It was gonna be my back to Africa fund or something you know but I decided to go to school I used that money to you know to get me a place and live for a while 'til I you know I start making money so, but eventually you know I never got a job you know working at a Gap [Gap, Inc.] or, or vitamin store or wherever I tried you know. So I just, I had to keep working and doing art you know. That's how I made my money, I just kept doing art. So eventually I just--I just stopped. I was paying out of pocket at the School of the Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] so you know I had to take time off to catch up paying and stuff and never went back. Speaker 2: So you were never offered a scholarship or anything? Or did you try-- Speaker 1: I had a scholarship, it was a partial scholarship and then the rest I, I was paying out of pocket. I was paying the difference out of pocket because I didn't wanna take out any loans and stuff. I'm real cheap that way you know. I like you know I like to take care of myself. I don't like to be in debt and stuff so so the remainder I was paying like maybe four thousand [dollars] a semester out of pocket or so you know. Speaker 2: That's a lot of money. Speaker 1: Yeah. So then I still I think I might still owe, I'm not gonna say it on tape. But you know so I took time off and then I never went back and then I just kept doing my art you know as paying--I was doing my art anyway to pay for it, I just kept working. Story_ID: 483636 Speaker 1: During this period did you start association with the Chicago Public Art Group? Speaker 2: Yeah I started work, I did a mural with Chicago Public Art Group in I think it was summer of '90 [1990]--'91 [1991] I think and that was my first like big pay you know 'cause before that I had a, I had a roommate who came from Milwaukee [Wisconsin] with me to go to school at Columbia [Columbia College Chicago] downtown in Chicago [Illinois], and even though she was supposed to be paying like half the rent and stuff she wasn't and later I found out she had like mental issues you know because she couldn't keep a job you know and so I was paying, you know I was taking care of all the bills myself and then like some, some of the bills she was supposed to be taking care of like the, like the phone bill or whatever, and the phone end up getting cut off 'cause I just assumed she was paying it you know so my--you know my phone is my contact to my work. You know people call me from Milwaukee or wherever and say you know 'cause I would go--I had my class arranged--my classes arranged where they were all from Monday to Wednesday you know, you know and then from Thursday you know on I would you know do, do work you know like my freelance work and I would even come back to Milwaukee because people were getting me--I was getting work in Milwaukee and stuff. So I would catch the train you know do whatever I would had to do and then come back on Monday to go back to school and stuff. So my phone was like my, was my connection to my money and stuff. So the phone end up getting cut off and you know all kind of stuff and so you know I was really happy when I got that job with the Chicago Public Art Group because that was my first real--I was able to get the phone back on and that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: So you had a full time job with them? Is that correct? Speaker 2: Well it was, it was you know a job I had for like six weeks you know because it was like an art job, but it was like six weeks and instead of it being something I got you know like two hundred dollars here and four hundred dollars here or something, it was like you know it was something like maybe it was like a five thousand dollar job or something. I forget how much it was but you know we had--I worked with two other artists and we had a group of, of youth that was provided by the summer employment, some kind of summer employment mayor's office program or something and we--I had to supervise them and stuff. So the artists were Stephanie George and Bea Santiago [Beatriz Santiago Munoz]. Bea is short for Beatriz--Beatriz, (pronunciation) Beatriz. She was Puerto Rican, Beatriz. B-I--I'm sorry, B-E-A-T-R-I-Z, and we did a mural in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] on 53rd [Street] and Lake Park [Avenue] under a viaduct and we did it with the, it was the Chicago police community, community-- Speaker 1: Community policing? Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah community partners association or something. It was Chicago police and community neighborhood partners. Some kind of association and we did--the mural was called 'The Circle Journey.' It kind of dealt with like the journey of shaman. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: We're talking about the mural on-- Speaker 1: On Lake Park, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah it's called 'The Circle Journey' and it kind of dealt with like a shaman's journey and through the public--Chicago Public Art that's when I met artists like Marcus Jefferson. I think he uses the name Akinlana now, Marcus Akinlana, Kiela Songi [ph.] Smith [Kiela Smith] and Tobato [ph.]. I forgot Tobato's last name and I think Olivia Gude was running it and I think John Pounds-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And I liked to do more work with them some, some day. And I, you know I was also doing work I did like freelance work with Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois]. Actually after my first roommate left, the roommate that moved in Nikki, Nikki, Nikki Mitchell [Nicole Mitchell]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know Nikki? Speaker 2: Yeah, she's a musician? Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah she--I met her at Third World Press while I was trying to get work and she moved in. Yeah so, not too long, I didn't stay there. I think I stayed there until '94 [1994] and then I moved back to Milwaukee. Story_ID: 483637 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe with The HistoryMakers. We are continuing an interview we started two days ago. We were talking about--oh today's date is December the 1st I think, 2007. Right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And we are now at the African holocaust museum [America's Black Holocaust Museum, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Story_ID: 483638 Speaker 1: You were attending the Art Institute and you just finished a mural on 53rd [Street] and Lake Park [Avenue] in Chicago [Illinois] and you were telling us about why you left the Art Institute and-- Speaker 2: Oh well, I didn't finish there at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] because I was paying a, a lot out of pocket and I needed time to catch up with the bills and I took time off. But I never really went back after a while. You know, when, when you start working--I was more, I was more interested I guess in work I was doing then you know as an artist than school. I always--at times I feel like I you know I should go back and times I don't you know. But I really liked the school. I even had John Rozelle as a teacher when I was there. When I was working on the, the mural in Hyde Park there in Chicago for the, for the Chicago Public Art Group, I got in--well the, the mural it was called 'The Circle Journey' and it kind of dealt with shamanism, and me and the two other artists, Bea Santiago [Beatriz Santiago Munoz] and Stephanie George, we, we divided the mural into sections, three different sections and we kind of did our work in of our own in each section. Even though we planned the mural out you know about third--we were a third of the way done and, and our representative for the community police partnership he wanted to speak to us because he felt like it wasn't enough white faces in the mural and that some of the funders for the mural were upset about it, but the trouble was he would never, he would never speak to me about it or Stephanie George. He would speak to Bea Santiago. He was, he was African American but he was, he was kind of light skinned you know he was like as high in yellow as the sun I would say you know and he was also married to a white woman. I don't know if he felt ashamed coming, coming to speak to me or Stephanie, he would go speak to Bea, Bea even though she was Puerto Rican she you know if you just looked at her you would probably consider her Caucasian. So he would always seek, seek her out to talk to her about it and one day after he had spoken to her that evening about us putting more faces in--white faces in the mural, he, he was supposed to come down that following morning to talk to us and he arrived and Bea was late getting there so he, he just kind of walked around for an hour back and forth until Bea got there. Then he came spoke to us, I mean came to spoke to Bea. Speaker 1: So he wouldn't to you all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He wouldn't talk to us about it no. I guess it was kind of embarrassing for him but we, we you know we end up putting more white faces in there. It, it wasn't that we was trying to exclude anybody, we, we had, we had crowd scenes where there were people of all colors and stuff in it. But I think the problem is that we had three maybe three main figures in it, in the mural and, and each of those figures were, were you know, were dark and or you know African American or whatever you know. Bea who was you know, she was Puerto Rican but you know to all appearance she looked European or Caucasian. She had the darkest figure. She painted the darkest figure in the mural and it was like blue black. (Laughter) Big blue black figure you know. So I was surprised he even talked to her about it but, but I kind of always had some kind of in my early career as a muralist I got in was also, there was always some kind of political controversy. Speaker 1: Well I guess one could generalize that public art-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --is going to create black public discussion-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --about images. Speaker 2: Yeah and you know initially on, on each public art project or mural project, you have community meetings where you know people are invited to you know to talk about the theme and review the sketch and stuff before the, before the--you know they approve it or whatever before the work is started you know. You know sometimes you don't always get the participation you want in those meetings and then when the project is you know on, on the way then and they see what's actually going on then you get kind of a you know opposition. Story_ID: 483639 Speaker 1: Like for instance, I was doing a mural right before I left to go to Chicago [Illinois] to attend school here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], it's actually right across the street from this location here at the America's Black Holocaust Museum [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and the mural deals with like the history of black Milwaukee or African Americans in Milwaukee. It's called the 'Patchwork' [Ras Ammar Nsoroma] and the mural was funded by the City of Milwaukee but it's sponsored by the O.C. White Soul Club [O.C. White Soul Club, Inc.] and I went you know it's different you know historical African American persons who had significant contributions to the history of Milwaukee here. Speaker 2: Now what year is this? Speaker 1: This would be, I think it's '91 [1991], 1991 and I went you know I had did preliminary sketches and I they were approved by the people that hired me at the O.C. White Soul Club but I--it was this person on the--he was like I guess overseeing the funds from Milwaukee County [Wisconsin] and I guess he hadn't seen the sketches beforehand and he came down to the site actually one day when I was painting the mural and he had a, a sheriff's deputy with him and he was asking me who, who is this person in the mural and who is this person and you know I didn't get to view the sketches and stuff and he actually had me stop working on the mural. He had the sheriff deputy--I was painting on the ladder and he had the sheriff's deputy escort me off the ladder and had me stop painting the mural. So the people you know I didn't--I wasn't a punk or anything you know I didn't--I wasn't gonna fight the sheriff's deputy but you know I didn't wanna have a physical altercation with him you know, but later he, like myself and the people that there working on the mural with me you know we made a protest later. We called the O.C. White Soul Club, we called the mayor's office and did you know a lot of-- Speaker 2: Well what was the contention? What--under what premise did they stop you? Speaker 1: I think he just--I think it was a personal thing with him you know and he wanted to-- Speaker 2: You mean with you, he didn't like you or what? He didn't like the contents of the mural or? Speaker 1: It wasn't anything controversial about the mural. It was just different people that was involved in the commun- you know in the-- Speaker 2: You think he didn't like the mix of people working on it? Is that what it is you think? Speaker 1: I don't know what it was. I think he had a personal problem he wanted to--he probably had a problem with the O.C. White Soul Club or probably had a problem with, I don't know, he was African American. I don't know, you know I don't know what it was. Speaker 2: What did the mural represent that he might not have liked? Speaker 1: Well the, the mural I'll describe the mural it's actually like a quilt and it's being stretched and it's held on either side by like a female African American elder and then a male African American elder and the, the mural is in a patchwork design with kind of eight point, eight point star pattern and between the eight point stars there's these squares and the squares are portraits of the of different people in Milwaukee's African American history and so it's not a very controversial you know it's just portraits of people from the African American community and, and so I think, well I think it would be him having--trying to you know just exert some pull or personal power or something. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What eventually happened, he came down the next day you know I was told not to work on the mural again. I was contacted by I think she was a state representative at the time, Marcia P. Coggs and her, her family they have a, a, a long political history here in Milwaukee and both in the city and the state. Her husband was Isaac, Isaac Coggs [Isaac N. Coggs] and they you know they were involved in the civil rights struggles and everything here in Milwaukee. I was given a phone call by her you know to continue working on the mural. The next day I went down there to work on the mural and he showed up again with, with his sheriff's deputy and, and she just happened to have pulled up at the time and she's like a woman probably all of 5'2" if she's that high you know and she, she came in front of me. He tried to walk around her but she had an aide, her aide with her and he was probably a man of 6'4" or larger and he stood in front of me and blocked the guy's path and stuff and they--and then she had some words with him, and that kind of sealed the deal. So I, I continued working on the mural you know from that time and finished it. Story_ID: 483640 Speaker 1: But you know there were struggles like that. I guess I don't--a lot of it might have been, some of the other struggles you know in the beginning I probably didn't have many, very many people in my mural that weren't of color. Eventually I started doing murals where the people are painted whether they were African American or not, I started painting them like in oranges or purples or blues you know so no matter, no matter what race they were, they were different colors you know. So you know I, I did that to you know 'cause sometimes you know it gets kind of boring just to paint browns and you know all the time and tones of browns and stuff. I did that to make it more to make the murals more interesting. I did that also you know where people didn't focus on necessarily the race of the people you know in the mural and you know they can look at it and see all these different colors and stuff you know. They say, "Well, you don't paint white people?" I say, "Well, I paint purple, orange people, blue people," you know whatever, whatever, whatever it takes you know but when I, when I returned to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], I think it was around 1994, I started getting a lot more mural work and, and besides mural work, I started stepping up my, my work doing portraits and, and doing studio work, my studio paintings. And I started--besides you know I worked earlier, I worked a lot in pastel and I started using more acrylic and also mixed media in between my work. You know like sand and glitter and cloth and tar all kinds you know sorts of different mixed media in my work, paper collages. Initially when I, I started some of my first studio paintings they were like my Islamic influence and about, I would say when I was nineteen years old that would probably have been '86 [1986] I discovered the Yoruba religion and I discovered Orishas you know the, the African deities that represent spiritual forces and the, that's part of the Yoruba tradition or Ifa of the Nigerian, Nigerian people and, and they, they had a great influence on my work. About the time I joined this group called the African Diaspora [ph.], I think initially it was an organization that started at the University of Wisconsin-Madison [Madison, Wisconsin], a cultural group in Madison [Wisconsin] but then they had a chapter here in Milwaukee. Speaker 2: Now what year was this? Speaker 1: This would have been, this would have been around, around '86 [1986], '87 [1987]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They had a, they had a gallery here in Milwaukee. It's just a few blocks from here. It was called the---I think it was called the People's Gallery [People's Theatre Gallery, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. It was actually it was ran by a man named Gerald Wallace. He used to run the People's Theatre here in Milwaukee sometime before that and he acquired the space that was formerly owned by AT&T [AT&T Inc.] and the space turned out to be the second biggest exhibition space in the State of Wisconsin you know second to the Milwaukee Art Museum [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], so he acquired that space in numerous you know and had shows and stuff there before it was you know eventually, I guess taken away from him. But-- Speaker 2: What was the name of the gallery? Speaker 1: The People's Gallery. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: If I can remember it correctly. And you know I, I and a number of other artists and African American community exhibits there but that's how I hooked up with the, the African Diaspora because they were having meetings there and you know it was besides African Americans there were people in that organization that were from Cuba or Puerto Rico, you know, different people throughout the African Diaspora. Story_ID: 483641 Speaker 1: Yeah, it seemed like the Yoruba influence was great around that time in early '90s [1990s] and still is I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah I think so, and even though I was in African Diaspora [ph.], I still didn't know very much about the, the Yoruba religion or the Orishas you know because religious, religiously I was pretty much into Islam and I didn't you know kind of seek other, seek any other religious knowledge at the time but one day I was doing a portrait at one of the African Diaspora's member's homes, she was a woman of Puerto Rican dissent, when I entered her house, she had a, kind of a bowl sitting by the door and it had brown bananas on it. You know I asked I say, "What are those bananas for? Banana bread?" You know (laughter). And she started laughing and she said, "No, they're for Elegua," you know for Elegua, sh- Elegua and I said, "Who?" And then she explained to me you know who he was and he was the guardian of the crossroads and you set up an altar for him at the door and stuff of your home and and you know the bananas were one of his foods to put on the altar and I, I went back and I asked one of the elders at the mosque about the Yoruba religion and stuff and he, he was very honest about it you know. He didn't down talk it or anything or make light of it you know and it's just piqued my interest and I started studying more about it and then it just kind of opened his whole other world to me of African spirituality and it started influencing my work greatly. From then on I, you know I included what I learned about African spirituality in my work. You know one of the things that struck me about the African about African religions is that we you know when you look at like the three major western religions you know the African religions and their spirituality were the cradle to all three of those religions. You know I came to see. And then we didn't possess anything less than any of them had that any of those three religions possessed and we and I came to see that our spir- spirituality was the foundation of those three religions. Speaker 1: Now when did you learn that? I mean how did you come to that conclusion? Speaker 2: Well through study you know, through independent study and talking to, to people. And you know reading books like Cheikh Anta Diop or [HistoryMaker] Yosef ben-Jochannan or and through organizations like Askat [ph.] and stuff you know and authors like Jacob Carruthers [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.], you know all kind of sources and you know talking to elders and like the Yoruba religion here like it's a person here named Medahochi. He's high up in the, in the, in the Ifa culture in Americas. Medahochi Kofi Za-, Kofi, Kofi Zannu [Medahochi Kofi Omowale Zannu], that's his name. Story_ID: 483642 Speaker 1: So now are you a member of a particular African religion now or are you exploring the spirituality of these groups or? Speaker 2: I never, I never like became initiated in any practice. I just kind of--I'm like a student. I would say I'm a student of Pan-African spirituality and, and political organization you know. But I never like became a member you know. I, I affiliated myself with like organizations like the Ausar Auset Society or Ifa religion or you know study with them but I just kind of take what I can, the knowledge I can and use it in my work and in my life. I, I've, I've come to find myself that you know a lot of organized religion, people, people in it kind of seek to use it to control other people you know their, their actions and their you know and their life and stuff and I had enough of that in, in Christianity and Islam. I, I don't hate those or I don't have anything bad to say about those religions you know but it's--I think that religions are only as good as the people that represent 'em you know that are around you and I think you can do just as well practicing a religion on your own you know and, and I come, I come to, you know I don't want to represent any religion, I wanna represent myself you know let my actions you know speak for who I am and for what I believe and stuff you know. So I just, I just kind of been on a solitary path, you know I take what I can and let it you know bring me closer. I come to find that actually like my work, my work is kind of my spiritual practice you know. I believe like when you're doing work the work you were meant to do, you know that you were called to do, that it's kind of an uplifting of you know of your spiritual self and like a communion with yourself, the ancestors or you know the deities or you know the most high. You know it's kind of go into a trance or meditative state and you know you, you're it's like a spiritual call like you, you could become like a spiritual mediator. I come to believe like the work I,I do in communities you know for, for you know for my community is--each work is kind of like a prescription for the community for the people you know I interact with you know that something that is needed you know by them and I become to be like a mediator to, to you know bring that work and that to address maybe to address this problem or to enhance this, this success in this community or something and it it's kind of a vehicle to uplift or you know or, or prepare the community for it or the people for it so you know even though, even though I believe like every, you know every action like represents you know what you believe you know what you practice. You know your every action and even your every word and thought you know I think my, my artistic work takes a special significance in my life as it pertains to what I believe and what I think about spirituality and, and the most high or the ancestors. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's your artistic philosophy, basically, I guess? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 483643 Speaker 1: Now you came back to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] in '94 [1994]? Speaker 2: About '94 [1994]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what were some of the major projects that you worked on when you came back? Speaker 2: Let's see '94 [1994] I, I started doing a lot of work for the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association]. I did murals and illustrations for them here in Milwaukee. I--one of the bigger projects I did was for the Wisconsin Black Historical Society here in Milwaukee. I did a mural there that was--it, it still stands. It's about twenty feet--twenty-five feet high and a hundred and maybe a hundred and twenty feet long and it kind of, it was kind of the history of Africans from, from the motherland to Milwaukee, Wisconsin kind of and then I started doing a lot of work of their exhibits there in the Wisconsin Black Historical Society Museum [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Now what year was this mural? Speaker 2: This--the mural I did was in 1994 you know and I think I was doing work prior to that in the museum like on the exhibits and stuff you know historical exhibits inside the museum, but the mural-- Speaker 1: Now does the mural have a name? The main one? Speaker 2: No, I don't remember the name of the mural but the theme is, the theme is deals with more or less, it's a black or African female and an African male you know. They start off as children in Ancient Egypt or Kemet and they travel throughout scenes in different historic, historical areas or eras until they kind of in modern times in Milwaukee, Wisconsin and it, it kind of represents like normal people making history you know being part of history and stuff. You know how, how you might interview different people and you know they were part of different struggles and different historical events throughout history you know and they have connections to these different, you know these different people and different events, but they you know just ordinary people just kind of dealing with that. Story_ID: 483644 Speaker 1: Yeah tell us about the Walker Center for the Arts [Walker's Point Center for the Arts] and the work that you do for them? This is in '95 [1995], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a, a arts association here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. I did two murals with them and usually it would be me working with local teenagers from the community or that was part of their program, and the first mural I did for them it was--it dealt with Mexican American culture and African American culture. It was kind of something we--I decided with the teenagers. We--you know I would, I would take the teenagers through the mural making process from the beginning like where we decide on a theme, pick images and then create the images and put it on the, on the mural and stuff and then you know finish the work. So they came up with a theme because we were both dealing with Mexican Americans and African Americans, so the mural took on like similarities in the cultures and, and in both--and also in African culture and Mexican culture and similarities in African American and Mexican American cultures and a lot of it had to deal with snakes (laughter) believe it or not. You know because there's a rainbow serpent I guess if I pronounce it right--correctly Quetzalcoatl in Mexico culture and in and in African culture it's a rainbow serpent called Ashamarae [ph.] and both of them are featured prominently in the mural. The next mural I did for them also with students or, or youth, it it kind of at the time the, the center was kind of trying to kick them off of a program where they would work with different artists and but keep like a core group of youth and they would work--they would sponsor work from different businesses to do murals but the, the youth would do the murals in the community but they would work with different artists you know and they would get paid from businesses and I was actually the first artist that they worked with and they was--so they recruited a lot of information from me about the whole mural making process and stuff. And the mural we did, we actually we did it for a Hispanic church in that community. They're on the South Side. The center is on the South Side of Milwaukee. There's a lot of Hispanics in that area so the theme usually take on like a Hispanic significance. So we did it for a Hispanic church and the feature of the mural is like the Virgin of Guadalupe and I, I like the mural. The mural is still standing. It's on a wall facing the church and it's very interesting. You know with each mural project, I, I have to do research and I take on like, I do like historical information about the subject you know of the people and and the community I'm dealing with and try to place that in the mural and stuff. So I learn a lot about cultures and stuff and different communities with each mural I do. I try to learn something new, something new with each project that I work on. Speaker 1: Can you imagine just painting without doing any research? Speaker 2: Yeah it would be pretty ignorant and I'd probably get in a lot more trouble than I'm already getting into, you know. For instance one weekend I didn't--I wasn't able to work with with the children on their mural that featured the Virgin of Guadalupe and, I had a art festival that I was exhibiting at that weekend. I told the, the director of the--of the center at that time that I wasn't gonna be able to make it but she decided to paint with the children anyway and that you know that day I wasn't gonna be there and that day she decided to have the children paint the face of the Virgin of Guadalupe and they painted her like you know they made her look like a Caucasian. I came back that Monday and the people from the church were yelling at me. You know they were saying, (speaking Spanish) "La morena, la morena," you know, she's brown or you know in Spanish or something. And I was like yeah I know, I know. You know but the woman had the children paint her, her to look Caucasian. Speaker 1: Was the woman Caucasian who-- Speaker 2: Yeah the woman was Caucasian who had her paint that. Speaker 1: So she basically did the image that she picked? Speaker 2: Yeah and I quickly got on the ladder and painted her brown. You know but that's, that's the kind of thing that would happen if you didn't research you know, you know the cultures and history of, of the people you're dealing with, you know. Story_ID: 483645 Speaker 1: You find that people want religious and historical figures to to reflect who they look like? Speaker 2: I--yeah, usually, usually they do. But I encounter, I encounter that problem in, in African American community. I, for one I try to seek out churches and spiritual organizations to do murals in my community and I've done a number of churches in, in African American community, but at times I, I've been encountered with them wanting murals, but they not wanting murals that feature an African American Jesus you know or an African Jesus 'cause he would have been African in Palestine you know or Israel at the time but not necessarily you know even if you're not dealing with the historical you know information it's just that you're an African people and it seem like you would want a deity or prophet or whatever you wanna call him to reflect your culture and, and your identity but you know I encounter that where, where it's not always accepted and-- Speaker 1: Well I think we all have, African American people experience in churches images of Jesus as a blonde hair, blue eyed, sometimes brown eyed, but lot of times blue eyes, white man basically. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tending sheep or praying in the garden or whatever and you know the all-black congregation that seemed to be an image but it's been challenged over the years by some black ministers like Bishop Turner [Henry McNeal Turner] and others who spoke out against it years ago, Marcus Garvey who did too. But so you find it still that, that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well I would say the, the, the most recent one I probably did was ninety--ninety--maybe yeah '99 [1999], '99 [1999]. Around '99 [1999] or 2000 I worked on one and, and I was able to--it was, it was a baptism- baptismal scene featuring Jesus and John the Baptist you know and I was, I was able to paint them black you know but while I was working on it you know, I had comments from congregation members and stuff like that. At one point they had Caucasian visitors to the church and they wanted to cover the mural with a sheet you know because they felt ashamed and stuff (laughter) or you know things like that or you know once I think this was more in the '90s [1990s], I think probably around this was around '94 [1994] and I was--I submitted a sketch to do a mural right at this church, African American church, and you know other people submitted sketches too. They said they liked mine the best but the reverend told me that he had a problem with, with my depiction of Jesus and he felt, the words he used, he felt he was too ethnic looking and he said, he said, he point to some children that were running in the church, he said he spoke to the children and asked them who that was in the mural and, and they said that they didn't know and I said, "Well that's your fault," and then he got very upset and he was like, "Well, I'm paying you to do this and that," and well I told him that basically I'm not gonna do the mural 'cause I feel like I'm contributing to something that's carried- like a tradition that's carried on since slavery or something and I don't wanna be a part of it. So I didn't end up doing the mural there. You know and I'm not, I'm not trying to take a holier than thou attitude, but you know like if I went to a, you know a Caucasian church and they wanted a Caucasian Jesus, I wouldn't have no problem painting it. But you know I feel like it's something different--you're dealing with something psychological and backward or something when, when you get that request from our own people you know. I think it's something different entirely. So and I don't want--for one, don't want to be a part of it. Story_ID: 483646 Speaker 1: Tell me about the murals that you painted for Ausar Auset Society? There's two of them you painted, you painted one for Ausar Auset Society in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and one in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) First, first of all what is Ausar Auset Society? Speaker 2: Ausar Auset Society, it's a spiritual organization. It deals with ancient Egyptian spirituality or they say Kemetic, I guess Kemet was one of the names that the people of ancient Egypt used for that land and it means the black land and so the society used the original African language of the people from that area so, so Ausar would be the name that of what the Greeks would say Ausar and Auset would be the name for what the Greeks would say Isis so it's those two deities and they deal with like African spiritual culture like meditation and, and spiritual self-improvement and things like that. So I did--I was you know involved with them and stuff. I think I started becoming involved with them around nineteen ninety--'92 [1992] maybe, '92 [1992] or '93 [1993] maybe and, and they commissioned me to do a mural. They also had a school called Kemetic Institute and I did a mural. The mural was six feet high and thirty-four feet long and thirty-six, I think thirty-six feet long something like that. But anyway it deals with Assyrian metaphorian. It's a story, it's similar to 'The Lion King' where the main figure Ausar or Osiris is, he's like murdered by his, his brother, his evil brother Set and Auset or Isis has to go in to hiding and eventually they have a son Heru or Horace and he grows up and avenges his father's death. So the mural deals with that and I think it's one of my, one of my more popular murals but eventually like memories of the society from different cities started seeing the mural here in Milwaukee and eventually I was commissioned to do a mural by the, the Ausar Auset Society in Washington, D.C. and they wanted the same exact mural. I think maybe they wanted me to add like two more scenes or something to the mural. Initially the mural I did here in Milwaukee, it took like a month to do so I thought maybe you know they wanted two of the same murals, they wanted the mural twice to put it in two different areas of the city you know. Speaker 1: In Washington? Speaker 2: Yeah in Washington. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One they wanted in the school and another one they wanted like in the spiritual, the place where they did the spiritual practice. So and that mural instead was maybe eight feet high and forty feet long, so I had to do two of those for that size and initially, you know since I did the mural here in a month, I thought okay maybe it'll take me two months to finish this mural--to do these two murals for him but it end up taking me two years (laughter). Speaker 1: Two years? Was it because you had to travel back and forth, had other things or did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No actually at first I was doing--actually I was doing it here in my studio, my panels and it's gonna be shipped out there. Speaker 1: What did you paint it on? What, what kind of canvas did you use? Speaker 2: On like the one plywood panels. Speaker 1: Plywood? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And what, what happened was, it's because I did the work before and I had got it out of me and when I start trying to do it again, it was like, like forcing me to swallow razor blades or something you know. I just, I just couldn't do it (laughter). And it just took me so long and it was like a painful process. I just couldn't do it as quickly as I tried. Speaker 1: Now that's a real dramatic expression--I mean explanation of. Let me ask you now when you do something like--did you try to do it in ancient Kemetic style with the same proportions and stuff? Speaker 2: What I did, I mixed the like the ancient Kemetic style in like my own style and a modern kind of style. I did like a mixture of it you know to make it interesting you know and to be, to have my individual you know personality in the pieces too so it's a mixture and I think it came out really nice. Story_ID: 483647 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask this question, some may criticize it, but do you get paid--do you have to take any kind of a pay cut when you do work for the black churches and the black spiritual organizations say versus when you do like a public art piece or? I'm wondering. Speaker 2: Yeah, usually like I kind of sum up what I think people can pay and stuff and I try to give them a reasonable price and stuff and and you know so you know I could ask for more in certain circumstances, but I try to be reasonable you know and I try to get what I'm worth too and how long I you know, like if it's gonna take me so many weeks I try to get so much dollars a week and you know and in those instances I try to get done as quickly as possible you know. Like I, you know in some instances I might like charge maybe seven hundred [dollars] or more a week and if say for instance I couldn't get a church to pay much more than seven hundred dollars, maybe I'll just have to finish that mural before the end of that week you know. Something like that and I, I usually wouldn't work more than--I usually don't work more than four hours on a, on a piece. Speaker 1: A day? Speaker 2: Yeah a day. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause I don't, I don't like to overwork myself and stuff. Speaker 1: Yeah you know I think there was a movie years ago called, with Charlton Heston where he played Michelangelo-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: The Pope [Pope Julius II] would actually beat him with a stick to get him to work more or longer to get finished faster. Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't have any kind of conditions like that. Yeah I have self-composed conditions and I stick to them. Speaker 1: I think maybe 'Pride of the Passions' [sic. 'The Agony and the Ecstasy'] was the name of the movie. Speaker 2: Yeah, well when--it, it differs though when I'm working outside. When I'm working outside on large pieces, it's, it's been times where I would do like twelve hours or more a day and times where I worked into the night and had lights and stuff outside. It's kind of different. Story_ID: 483648 Speaker 1: Well tell us about what you did, the work you did for America's Black Holocaust Museum [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]? We're here now and some of it I notice that some of the work depicts the Middle Passage. Now did you have to--what kind of research did you do for that? Speaker 2: Okay, it's two parts. So the mural, or it's two portions of the exhibit. My part has to deal with like the African village, so it takes place you know chronologically it starts when African life before they're taken on slave ships. On the slaver ships I like to say. So I painted like an African village. You know people doing communal things in the village so you know I research African communal life and African like village architecture and stuff like that, and like as you walk into the museum as you exit the lobby, there's walls on either side of you and on each wall there's village life and also painted the sky connecting the two walls over the ceiling and as you, as you get closer to it's like a, a wooden ship where my scene ends, as you walk through there's a--you start going towards the coast and I painted like the parts of the African coast and the ocean as you enter the slave ship, the slaver ship. So that's, that's my part of the mural but then you, then you enter into kind of the hull of the ship and there's computer generated images of enslaved Africans in the, in the hull and stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. People usually confuse that with my work, but that's, those are like computer generated images that a company did. Story_ID: 483649 Speaker 1: Now you've done quite a bit of work for the--well we talked about the black--the Wisconsin Black Historical Society [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and, we talked about that already, and there's a mural I think a lot of people talk about here. It's the 2003 mural which is under, it's, it's in an underpass on the expressway right? I believe. Speaker 2: Yeah, the project was called the Marquette Interchange and it's a freeway project where they were rebuilding the freeways here in Milwaukee and it's called Marquette because it, it's sent--most of the project centers around Marquette University here in Milwaukee, Wisconsin but then parts of it extends into the African American community and initially when they built the freeway going through the African American community here in, in the '60s [1960s] it destroyed like a great part of the community here and we were-- Speaker 1: That was during the--what they call the urban renewal-- Speaker 2: Yeah the urban renewal. Speaker 1: --and the urban and the great highway building? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: They happened in every city. I want to point that out, Tulsa, Oklahoma, and my home town in Dayton [Ohio], most of the black communities in the country were affected by that. Speaker 2: Yeah, so people were misplaced and stuff so because it was going on again you know, they wanted I guess the Wisconsin Department of Transportation and various people in our community wanted to make it a more positive experience for communities here and some people got involved in the planning process for one the Wisconsin Black Historical Society, it's director Clayborn Benson and another figure Ella, Ella Smith [ph.], she worked for a community radio station here and they got in on the initial planning process. You know like a course like a great percentage of money is put aside for federal and government projects to do with art so to get ahold of that money you know they made plans to, to deal with the freeway as it came into our communities to reflect maybe some of the history and culture. Speaker 1: Yeah now the money you referred to that's part of the federal Percent for Art law--act-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and there are local acts in most cities too that require that a certain percent or capital development project budget be spent for art and it must be spent for art on a local level, a state level and a federal level. I think on the federal level it's one half of 1 percent of the total cost of the project must be spent for art work so that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a lot of people--a lot of us don't know about it. Speaker 2: A lot of us don't know about it. Story_ID: 483650 Speaker 1: So Clayborn Benson, the director of the Wisconsin Black Historical Society [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and some of the other people in our community, they got the idea of, of doing like special highlights to deal with our--the history you know on these places where the freeway came into the community so eventually they decided to deal with some Underground Railroad history as it pertains to Milwaukee, Wisconsin in the area where the freeway is founded like avenue was kind of a thorough- thoroughware--thoroughfare is that the word, for the underground in Milwaukee and they wanted to highlight a male and a female individual who were part of the Underground Railroad history in in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. It was Joshua Glover and Caroline Quarlls so initially we, we began the project in 2003 you know with the planning process and I was hired by Clayborn Benson to do like sketches of what that work would look like if they dealt with that work, the Marquette Interchange project and the work was called community sensitive design you know where they would deal with they reflect historical cultural and maybe architectural elements of communities you know on--in--on the freeway you know and the design and everything as it went to different communities. So initially I was hired to do sketches you know for the proposal and eventually I was hired on with two other artists to do different works on the freeway. So the work, the work I did is actually is concrete relief work and initially I was hired just to do the--I got the contract just to do the, the design on paper and I wasn't hired to do, excuse me, the actual fabrication of the work like and as it pertains to it being carved and (cough), and then initially after it's carved and cast then it's, it has to be painted but with each step of the process initially I wasn't hired to do those steps, but eventually they came to see it was--it made more sense for me to do it and I was you know my contract was renegotiated to, to fulfill each portion of it you know. I did the carving and then once the carving--I did the carving initially in styrofoam, and you know life size styrofoam pieces of you know or the same size as the actual pieces are right now. Then they were cast you know rubber, rubber molds were made called form liners and they were cast in concrete and then installed on the walls under the freeway. Speaker 2: That's quite a project. Speaker 1: Yeah and then I was hired to paint the pieces and I did the, I used three colors. I did a burgundy, a olive green and a brown, a dark brown and I, I used--it was kind of a wheat color that the all the freeway bridges and walls are painted and I used that to lighten some you know to dilute some of the colors and stuff like that to make gradations of the color you know of the three colors. So, so it began and the paint process of 2003 I think we finally finished my part of it was finally finished in you know in the fall of 2006 and then I think it was dedicated in the summer of 2007. Speaker 2: So just reached its conclusion. Speaker 1: Yeah you know with the governor and everybody there and stuff. We received plaques and stuff. So it was like the first of its kind of a project--the first of its kind project in the State of Wisconsin where you included art on the scale with a--on that scale with, you know, along the freeway and stuff like that. Story_ID: 483651 Speaker 1: Now you did another mural ['1290 WMCS-AM Radio Station's 20th Anniversary Mural,' Ras Ammar Nsoroma] about the history of radio, black radio in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, well first of all if you don't mind I'd like to talk briefly about a work I did in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002] I went and did some work in L.A. in the Watts area [Los Angeles, California] for an organization called Social Public and--Social, Social Public Art--Social and Public Art Resource Center [Venice, California]. Speaker 1: SPARC, right? Speaker 2: SPARC and I hadn't heard of them. Even though I was--I'm familiar with some of the work they had done you know some of the murals that they had sponsored I wasn't familiar with the organization. And actually I can say they had a twenty year program where they had recruited artists from around the country to do murals in different communities in Los Angeles and actually I--when they contacted me it was the last year of the program and so you know I was able to go out there and do some work in, in the Watts area and I end up doing it at the Watts Labor Community Action Committee [WLCAC]. I think that's the correct name. And the mural is, is a hundred feet long and about twenty feet high and what is it called--oh it's called 'The Resurrection of Watts' [Ras Ammar Nsoroma], and it kind of deals with like the history of the uprising in Watts and, and because when I, when I got out there initially and had the community meetings, though the people at the, at the center at the WLCAC wanted me to do mural with a different theme the people in the community meetings, they were talking about how they didn't call the you know the riots in Watts, they didn't call them riots, they were called rebellions and, and they let me know about the political situation and they talked about things like there being more liquor stores in Watts which is probably like a square mile than the whole State of Connecticut and that there were a lot of leeches you know in the community like businesses and stuff and that, that each time they had you know uprisings or rebellions in the community, it was like a cleansing, a spiritual cleansing of the community where they got rid of you know certain, certain businesses and you know were targeted and stuff like that that were leeching off the community and stuff it wasn't putting any positive, any positive energy back into the community and stuff so the--my mural kind of took on that theme and stuff from those community meetings. Speaker 1: A theme of purging or cleaning (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah purging like a spiritual cleansing and stuff and the fires you know being a fiery phoenix that rebuilt the community and stuff and like the main figure in the, in the mural is, is of--it deals with 'cause now when I was here, it was--Watts was predominantly African American and Hispanic Americans like about 50/50 they would say. So I have like a Hispanic and African American family kind of merging. The--it's like a male, like a male and female are both, both nationalities or ethnicities are, are emerging from a mummy's cloth holding up a baby and the mummy's cloth is being burnt off by fire and the fire is like spreads out to like a kind of a wing it's like a fiery wings of a phoenix. So it, it deals with both the family as a foundation and then also of the spiritual cleansing of the, of the community by the uprisings and stuff. Story_ID: 483652 Speaker 1: When you came back from that you said you curated your first show called 'JuJu' ['JuJu: The Role of the African American Artist to Transform, Heal and Protect']. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] right? Speaker 2: Here in Milwaukee and it was my first show I curated and it was called 'JuJu' and it was held at the Milwaukee Institute of Art and Design [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and it kind of dealt with African American culture using art to, to like, to control its environment you know spiritually and politically you know using art as a spiritual influence you know to uplift and and heal or transform the community. And I and I got the idea from when I was doing my work in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and sometimes you know I would stand back from the mural and look at it, it was an outdoor mural you know, and I would witness people different people interacting with the mural, not knowing that I was there you know because I would be you know a ways back and I would look at their response and them just looking at the mural. You know maybe not even knowing exactly knowing what it's about because it would be--it would be in different, different parts of the mural and process you know, different people looking at it on different occasions. And you know I would see they would always go over with like a big smile on their face and they with a different, a different disposition. Is that the correct word disposition? Speaker 1: Disposition, yeah. Speaker 2: Disposition than they came with you know before they started looking at it and I started thinking about it like how art you know is a vehicle to, to heal and affects people's emotions and like kind of trans- transfer like, like a healing or, on a community or something you know. And also, also it was, it was like an overall feeling I felt in that community and the African American community in Los Angeles that I got that influence me to deal with that subject, juju, when I got back here to Milwaukee. So by taking that feeling and that influence and inspiration from L.A., I curated my first show here in Milwaukee and I decided to name it 'JuJu.' Speaker 1: Who were some of your other artists involved? Speaker 2: Some of the other artists were Muneer Bahauddeen, George McCormick [George Ray McCormick, Sr.], Gerald Duane Coleman, Tujuno Alabone [ph.], Medahochi Kofi Zannu [Medahochi Kofi Omowale Zannu], Tamara Madden [Tamara Natalie Madden]. I could go on and on but it was, I think it was a great success. It was part of--at that time in Milwaukee each year they would do what--they had international cultural festivals and that year it was, you know each year they would focus on a different culture and that year was African and African American culture. So it was part of that international festival. Story_ID: 483653 Speaker 1: You know I could really ask probably a lot more questions but I'm going to try to-- Speaker 2: Bring it up to the present? Speaker 1: Yeah. What are your future plans? Now you got some recognition from the governor and some other people when you did the piece for the Milwaukee--for the Marquette-- Speaker 2: Interchange [Marquette Interchange]? Speaker 1: --Interchange yeah, but, but what you're teaching art in public schools or charter schools right? Speaker 2: Well I did once. I don't do it now. Speaker 1: You don't do it now? Speaker 2: No I just did that briefly. I taught at a school called (unclear) briefly. Speaker 1: So are you primarily now? Speaker 2: I do primarily freelance. Speaker 1: Practicing art? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know I try not to, to do any like my, my teaching is limited to like mural projects. I try to limit like any work I do with youth to look to mural projects you know. Speaker 1: Okay. But what's your, what's your future goal? Do you have a goal, I mean a future goal that you want or status that you wanna attain? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd like to start focusing more on my studio paintings. I'd like to be known more in that area to get more exhibits around the country and internationally and I'd also like to get more work in more places throughout the country and internationally, like more mural work and I also liked to have my work at a point where it doesn't matter where I live in the country or in the world where you know I won't have to rely on the economic conditions of a area for my financial support. Story_ID: 483654 Speaker 1: Now you're a member of ABEA right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now wha- tell us about ABEA? Speaker 2: ABEA is an organization that started here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] by a woman named Della Wells and it, it, it stands for African Americans Beginning to Educate Americans about African American Art. It's long and I just shortened it to ABEA. So it's kind of an African arts advocacy organization and then we sponsor exhibitions and we do workshops and we you know like support artists in like you know any like troubles they might have with galleries or you know they need protest you know and stuff like that to take place things like that you know. So-- Speaker 1: Now are you a member of the National Conference of Artists at all? Speaker 2: I'm, I'm not with--I plan to and a lot of the members in ABEA are and so I curated one show in ABEA so far and like different members get a chance to participate in different shows and curate you know different shows and participate on different levels you know, so. Story_ID: 483655 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this now, we always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Whoa that's an, that's an interesting question. 'Cause it can take you know we can go into a lot of areas with that. But me, I'm like I'm a member of an organization, the Pan-African Revolutionary Socialist Party, and also Africans on the Move and I, I think about African American community, I think about Pan-Africanism and our connection to Africa and what Pan-African of course is the movement of African people, African people worldwide and you know African diaspora you know come together I would say to see themselves as an African people and to fight for the, the unity of Africa and you know I would like to see us be more involved in what's happening in Africa you know as a community here or Africans in any community in throughout the world to to come together to fight you know to support more positive involvement in politics and Africa you know to take a stand you know to fight against you know the corruption that's going on in Africa, to deal with you know disparities you know and education and disease and poverty you know address those issues. You know and the, and the like the raping of the land and the resources in Africa also you know. You know its oil wealth, it's diamond wealth, it's gold, you know also like copper you know all these things. You know they not used to benefit the people in Africa. You know their--the money goes into you know the hands of like a few corrupt leaders and then the rest goes into like multinational corporations you know like the De Beers or Firestone [Firestone Diamonds] or you know the list goes on you know. So I like us as a people here to deal with those kinds of issues you know 'cause we have our own issues here in the states but our issues you know pare- they're very small in comparison to the issues in Africa, that Africans are dealing with you know on a daily basis you know. Story_ID: 483656 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, when you look back on everything you've done to this point and you're still a young man, is there any major thing you would do differently up to this point? Speaker 2: I would, even though I started dealing with like cultural--African culture and and things like African spirituality early in my work, I would have liked to start dealing with more political issues earlier, include those in my work earlier. I'm starting to deal with that more now and I'm trying to bridge the two, the cultural, the spiritual and the political you know kind of the, the material and the spiritual together. I'm trying to bridge that in my work and I would, you know if I could have if I would have dealt with the political issues earlier you know. Story_ID: 483657 Speaker 1: Likewise when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I don't know if I can deal with that, you know the legacy thing. It's hard, you know I don't have much of you know of a legacy I think. It's just I would think my work, my work in the community [in Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and that I, I tried to stay in the community and do work for the community and not disassociate myself with my community you know. Story_ID: 483658 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family. We haven't talked about your family either. We need to talk about your family. Speaker 2: Okay yeah, I met my wife now Janeen, Janeen Rogers [Janeen Nsoroma], in 1995. Actually met her in the studio where we conducted our first interview, I met her there. She was visiting my studio partner [Evelyn Patricia Terry]. Her and another artist I met her there and I did a portrait of her and then we, we started off from there. And about a year later we got a son, Kwame [Kwame Nsoroma], in 1996 Kwame, he's now eleven and in 1999 we had our daughter Adjua [Adjua Nsoroma] who is now eight and both of them they're really like gifted artists I, I would say. They have their own particular styles. I try not to influence them too much. I try to let them progress naturally. You know if they ask about any artistic advice, I'll give it to them but I try not to put pressure on them. You know because once you start pressuring you know people, you know people and stuff they kind of lose that, that natural ability or and they kind, they kind of lose their, their what do you say their, like their enthusiasm in it and stuff you know, so I kind of let them develop naturally. Speaker 1: Okay one last question and we're gonna look at some of the art work. We're gonna shoot some of that. Speaker 2: Also, also I'd like to mention a lot of people say my wife's face is in a lot of my work you know. If it is, it's like subconscious you know but I thought that might be interesting. Speaker 1: Yeah, it is, it is. Do you ever put yourself in your work? Speaker 2: No, no I try not to, no. I try not to. Story_ID: 483659 Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Sir, how, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Like to be remembered? I'd like to be remembered for doing something for my people you know. But I'd like to do a lot more than, than I have to this point and I'd like my work to reflect my people in the community and the struggles and the triumphs and the, and the directions you know future directions of my people. So-- Speaker 1: All right. Thank you very much. Story_ID: 483660 Speaker 1: That's me about age nine, a school picture. Is that it? Speaker 2: That's me I was probably aged five then. That's me in the red and white shirt and next to me is my, my cousin April [ph.] and my sister, Audrey [ph.], has the Afro and then right behind me is my brother, Luke [Luke Tate III]. And that was taken at my grandmother's house. Speaker 1: This is me. I'm probably about five I guess. It's at my grandmother's house, Minnie, Minnie David [Minnie Riley] and next to me is my brother Gregory [ph.]. He's two years older than me. Speaker 2: Oh actually that's me. I was probably about eleven years old then and (cough) excuse me, and I was working at my friend's house, William [ph.], and that's his younger brother in the picture, but we were working on our comic books right there. Speaker 1: That's me, I was probably twenty years old, nineteen or twenty. Speaker 2: That's me I think I'm twenty-four and that's a mural dedication for the 'Patchwork' quilt mural [Ras Ammar Nsoroma] and those are some of the people standing next to me that are featured in the mural and it's in Milwaukee, Wisconsin on 5th [Street] and North Avenue. Speaker 1: Some historical figures here in Milwaukee? Speaker 2: Um-hm yeah. Speaker 1: That's me around the time I was practicing Islam and I was greeting an Islamic imam. Speaker 2: That's, that me and my family, me and my wife Janeen [Janeen Nsoroma], my son Kwame [Kwame Nsoroma] and my daughter Adjua [Adjua Nsoroma] and it was probably around 2000. Speaker 1: That's me working on the 'Patchwork' quilt mural and I was about twenty-four. Speaker 2: That's me working on a portrait in somebody's home around '92 [1992] maybe, 1992. Speaker 1: That's me working on the WMCS 1290 mural ['1290 WMCS-AM Radio Station's 20th Anniversary Mural,' Ras Ammar Nsoroma] around, around I don't know 2003 maybe. Speaker 2: That's a mural cover I did for Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois] for a book called 'Why L.A. Happened' ['Why L.A. Happened: Implications of the '92 Los Angeles Rebellion,' Haki R. Madhubuti] and it--I did the painting around 1992. Speaker 1: That's me in high school, and I did a, a drawing of the performing arts center [Marcus Center for the Performing Arts] here in Milwaukee, Wisconsin and presented it to the, to the Lions Club [Lions Clubs International] here in Milwaukee. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay that's my grandmother, Minnie, I think it's around 1973. She's my, my mother's [Erma Riley Tate] mother, Minnie David. Speaker 2: That's 1973 so I would have been-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's 1993 [sic. 1973] and that's a portrait of me. I would have been about six years old. My brother Gregory, two years older than me, my brother Luke, standing behind me. He's six years older than me and then my sister Audrey who was eight years older than me--seven years older my fault. Speaker 1: This is an older picture of me and family. This one includes my youngest sister Cassandra [ph.] and my brother Huey [ph.] and my mother also. Here I would have been about I think eleven years old, ten or eleven. Speaker 2: That's an ad I was featured in for the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. It was photographed while I was working on the mural for the Joshua Glover part of the Marquette Interchange. Speaker 1: That's one of the many posters I did for the Milwaukee Inner City Arts Council [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] celebration of their community arts festival [Celebration of Community Arts Festival] and this from 1994. Speaker 2: This is a poster that I did for the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] for their African American history and liberation month and the poster is 1993, but I did the work in 1992. Speaker 1: That's--this is the original illustration that I did for a poster for the Wisconsin, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee again for their African American history and liberation month. And this would be for 2007. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is the portion of the Joshua Glover piece for the Marquette Interchange it's a concrete relief. Finished the work in fall, the fall of 2006. This is the part where he's running along the river being chased by the-- Speaker 2: This is another portion of the Joshua Glover piece for the Marquette Interchange and this is the portion where he's being freed from prison or jail by the crowd. Speaker 1: That's a close up. It's concrete relief..