 Story_ID: 303817 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing is Mr. Ron Brewington [HistoryMaker Ronald H. Brewington]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Scherrie Payne. That's S-C-H-E-R-R-I-E, Payne, P-A-Y-N-E. Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name, or? Speaker 2: No middle name, thank God. Speaker 1: Okay. And Scherrie is spelled with a C. Is there a story behind that? Speaker 2: My mother [Charcle Hickman Farley] said she made up that name. She had never heard of the name Sherry before, which I can't believe. But there was only one Sherry in junior high school [Hutchins Junior High School; Harry B. Hutchins Intermediate School, Detroit, Michigan], Sherry Stewart [ph.]. And then when I went on to Central High School [Detroit, Michigan], Sherry was there also. So, that was the only other Sherry I knew. By the time I got to Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], I think there were five Sherrys just on my dorm floor alone. But she said she made up that name. And I don't know why she thought of the name Scherrie, but she decided to put the C in it, so nobody would ever have the same spelling as mine. 'Cause she thought that would be really unique. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Do I have to give the year? Okay, I don't mind, I'm proud of my age (laughter). It's November 4, 1944, and I was born in Detroit, Michigan-- Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at 9:25 p.m. on a Saturday. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a singer. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what's today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is October 7, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? You don't have to give the address, but-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay, we're in Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I guess that's-- Speaker 2: Give the street? Blue Jay Way. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 303818 Speaker 1: All right. Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled by management to ask. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, I do, barbeque. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, that's a hard one. I love the fall when the leaves are falling and the color of the trees are turning. It makes me think of home back in Michigan, and we'd drive to the country and get apple cider. It makes me feel very nostalgic. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Oh, not really. I like tropical, any tropical place. I really like the Caribbean, or anything of that sort. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Warm and balmy, that's what I like. Speaker 1: All right. The last question in this set is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, I don't think I do. I probably should, but I don't, not that I can think of. Story_ID: 303819 Speaker 1: All right. Now I'm going to ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Her full name was Charcle Lee, C-H-A-R-C-L-E, middle name Lee, L-E-E. Her maiden name was Hickman, H-I-C-K-M-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then she married our father, Frederick Zeke Payne. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then Daddy, Samuel Gene Farley. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is your mother's date of birth and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Date of birth? Speaker 1: --place of birth? Speaker 2: June 17, 1920, and she was born in Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace those ancestors? Speaker 2: Wow, it's really difficult on our mother's side. She didn't speak much about her father, James Marshall, who had been a big bandleader. And he died in his late twenties. I believe he was twenty-nine when he died, he had tuberculosis. Speaker 1: So, do you know the name of his band? Speaker 2: No, I don't. She didn't know that much, because they had a fire in Birmingham at their house, and mostly everything was burned up in the fire. And after that, shortly thereafter, her mother, my grandmother Ada Lee [Ada Brack] moved to Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then my grandmother married. Speaker 1: All right. So, are there any stories about Birmingham, or life down there that have been told at all? Speaker 2: I don't think my mother knew much, because she was only six months old when her father died. And I believe she was around five or six when they moved from Birmingham. So, she had no real recollection of Birmingham at all. Speaker 1: Okay. But she doesn't--there're no stories that were passed down about life in Birmingham from your grandmother or-- Speaker 2: Let's see. My uncle, my Uncle Alfred [ph.] who was my great-uncle, my mother's father's brother, he used to talk about--he's been long deceased. But for some reason or another he worked at some kind of club in Detroit. I don't know if he was a bartender or valet or whatever, but he would never admit his ethnicity. And I don't know if he was passing--I believe he was passing at this club, that's what I think, I really do think that. Speaker 1: Did he look like he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he wouldn't say that he was from Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He would not say that. Speaker 1: Did he look like he could pass? Speaker 2: Well, I was a kid, you know, I didn't know. He was very fair-skinned, sort of reddish hair. And he spoke real, real fast, that's all I remember. Story_ID: 303820 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Charcle Hickman Farley] talk about growing up in Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, uh-huh. We talked about--she told us about the race riot they had back in the '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: Yeah, '43 [1943], I believe it was. Speaker 2: Was it '43 [1943]? Speaker 1: Is that the one that centered around the Belle Isle [Belle Isle Park, Detroit, Michigan] bridge incident? Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, right. Speaker 1: Well, tell us about--what did she tell you? Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember. She said someone had thrown a child off the bridge. I think that's how it started, I believe. And there was a woman who lived in the area who was black, but she looked white. And I think they had injured her in some kind of way because they thought she was a white woman, so they had attacked her. There was a lot of craziness going on. And she didn't go into it too much, and if she did, I can't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what school did your mother go to in Detroit? Speaker 2: She went to Commerce High School [High School of Commerce, Detroit, Michigan], which was right across the street from Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then she did complete one year (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that a business school? Speaker 2: It was more like a business school. It was connected, they had a bridge that connected it. And then in later years it was torn down, Commerce was, but Cass remained. And then my mother completed one year at Wayne State University [Wayne University; Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think she stopped because of the children, Freda [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] and myself. Speaker 1: Okay. Now from what we've heard from your sister, your mother was very astute-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --in terms of business. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Especially when it came to her daughters. Oh, yeah, she had a fierce love for us, and she was very protective. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any stories about her that you can tell us? (Laughter) The business acumen? Speaker 2: Oh, let me see. Speaker 1: Or prior to her getting married, anyway. Speaker 2: Well, she owned property. She owned quite a bit of property on the east side of Detroit, way out in the Gratiot [Avenue] area. And she held on to this property for quite a while, and then when she married our stepfather, [Samuel Farley], Daddy, who we refer to as Daddy. He wanted to get a bar. He was a policeman, a Wayne County [Michigan] deputy sheriff in fact. And then he had this idea that he wanted to get a bar. This was in the early '50s [1950s] or so. And so to get all the monies for it, my mother sold her property, which was on the outskirts of Detroit. And they bought a bar in January I believe of 1957. But shortly thereafter, after she had sold her property, the city built a shopping mall, I believe Eastland [Eastland Center, Harper Woods, Michigan], on her property. So, there went all the money that she could have really cashed in on. But then she also had a rooming house. In fact, that's how she met our stepfather. He was one of her boarders after he had gotten out of the [U.S.] Army and had moved up to Detroit; he was one of the boarders. Speaker 1: Was the rooming house on the east side too? Speaker 2: It was on John R [Street], John R, yeah. And our [maternal] grandmother [Ada Brack] had owned property, too, the house she lived in, of course. And then she had a small apartment building that was directly across the street, on Horton [Street]. She lived at 101 Horton, my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Your mother was basically raised by your grandmother, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: In Detroit? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh, and she had one brother, Uncle Johnny [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who was a tap dancer and he loved the piano, and he used to give Freda piano lessons when she was just really, really little. But Freda didn't--I hate to say it, but she didn't care too much for Uncle Johnny, because when she would make a mistake on the piano--I don't know if she told the story--he would take a ruler and hit her across the fingers. That wasn't very nice, so she wasn't too happy with Uncle Johnny. But he died at an early age, too. I believe he was thirty-two when he died, and he also died of tuberculosis, yeah. And I remember going to see him as little girls. And we weren't allowed inside the hospital, we were too young. So we had to stand outside below his window, and he would come to the window and wave at us and we would wave back. That's the only thing that I can remember about him. And he also took us to the penny arcade downtown. And I have this recording and I have not been able to play it, because you can only play it on 78 speed. But it's a little recording that he did on us. I must have been, I was three and a half, and Freda was five and a half. And Freda sang 'Mary Had a Little Lamb,' and I sang 'Hey, Ba-Ba-Re-Bop,' and I still have the recording. One day I'm going to find a 78 record player and make a copy. Story_ID: 303821 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Frederick, F-R-E-D-E-R-I-C-K; his middle name was Zeke, Z-E-K-E, Payne. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born December 17, 1917 in Asheville, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they called him Tiny. That was his nickname, he was a little man. Speaker 1: Okay. What do you know about the ancestors on his side of the family? Speaker 2: Wow, I wish my Aunt Mary Julia [ph.] was here. I know the family tree has been traced back to England. I should have brought that with me, oh my goodness. Leonard [Leonard Payne (ph.)] and Drusilla Payne [ph.] came from England. And from what I heard and was told, Drusilla's sister--they were run out of England because Drusilla's sister had been accused of practicing witchcraft. That's what I was told. And Leonard Payne fled also of course with his wife. And his brothers went to Ireland. But there was a member of our family, Cornelius [ph.], who traced back the ancestry beyond England, to Spain and Germany. Speaker 1: So, were these ancestors white people? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And then Leonard and Drusilla had Henry, Henry Payne. And I had the whole family tree written down, I didn't think to bring it. Henry--oh, I can't remember. But Henry had Henry, Jr [Henry Payne, Jr.]. And Henry, Jr. had my grandfather, who was David Payne. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when did the family become African American then? Speaker 2: Probably, I think, I believe Henry, Henry, Sr., I believe married a biracial woman. And he had two wives in fact. And then Henry, Jr.--oh, I can't remember. I can't remember, but I have it written down, the family tree. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So this is all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can get it to you. Speaker 1: --in North Carolina? Speaker 2: Asheville and Hendersonville [North Carolina]. Story_ID: 303822 Speaker 1: Did your father [Frederick Payne] talk about growing up in Asheville [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Yeah, my father was a very gregarious type, he loved to drink. So that was, when he imbibed with his liquor he would get really loose-tongued. But he was a fun type of guy, and you couldn't help but like him. And he was also a boxer, and had a title. He was known as Payne Killer, The Payne Killer. So, I adopted that name, too, the Payne Killer. Speaker 1: Payne Killer? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, he, did he--do you know what weight class he fought in? Speaker 2: I'm sure it was welterweight, I think. And he won titles. He fought in the same gym where [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy fought. Of course Berry's not as old as my father was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he talked about life in Asheville, and how it was so much fun. And I remember a story my Aunt Mary Julia [ph.], his sister told, about growing up in Asheville. Frederick, as she calls him, or called him, would talk about the bright lights and big city, and going up north. And of course Asheville was surrounded by mountains. And he would talk about what was beyond the mountains--the bright lights, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. So, she always had this vision of going beyond where the mountains were, and what was on the other side. And so one day he told her that he did climb to the top of one of the mountains. And she was so excited. And she said, "Well, what did you see, Frederick, what did you see?" He said, "More mountains." And that was it. And that's one of the chapters. Whenever I write a book, one of my chapters is going to be--in fact the final chapter will be "More Mountains to Climb." He was always saying, he was always saying little things that--you would get mad at him, but you'd have to laugh at the same time, even though he was drinking. Like there's this one song I wrote, and it came because of my father. I must have been around eighteen years old, and just learning to drive. And he called one afternoon, and he wanted me to come pick him up. So, I said, "Well," I called him Fred. I said, "Where are you?" And he said, "Hold on just a minute." And I know he was in a phone booth. He was standing on the corner of blah blah blah. So he puts the phone down, and then when he comes back he says, "I'm standing on the corner of Trouble Street and Lonely Boulevard." I said, "All right, that's a song." And that's when I wrote a blues song called 'Trouble Street and Lonely Boulevard.' Speaker 1: Okay (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So he was always saying silly things like that. But it made you laugh; you couldn't get mad at him. Story_ID: 303823 Speaker 1: Do you know when he [Payne's father, Frederick Payne] came to Detroit [Michigan], and why? Speaker 2: He came to Detroit I believe--oh, gosh, probably 1940, somewhere around there, I'm imagining, for work. I'm sure it was for work. I don't know if Freda [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] told you the story about Shiloh [Asheville, North Carolina]. That's one of the things I meant to mention. Shiloh was an area within Asheville [North Carolina]. And our grandfather on my grandmother's side, Billy Logan--William Logan, worked for the Vanderbilts, Cornelius Vanderbilt. Speaker 1: Right, they had a huge estate. Speaker 2: A huge estate. Well, that property where that estate was built was owned by our great-grandfather, William Logan. And he was somehow or another maneuvered out of his property, and was given this property--traded it off for Shiloh, which was like--say like in New Orleans [Louisiana], the bottom [Mississippi River Bottom], you know. But it wasn't like as nearly as nice as the property that the Vanderbilts built on. And somehow or another they finagled and got him to sign over his rights to his property, trading with the property that was in Shiloh, which wasn't as nearly as valuable as the other property. But he was, he worked for the Vanderbilts for years, William Logan. Speaker 1: So he continued to work for them even after they-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I guess so. And his daughter, one of his daughters was Julia Logan [Julia Logan Payne], who became, who was our grandmother. I never got to meet her, neither did my mother [Charcle Hickman Farley]. Because she died, I think, right after she and my father married. So by the time she got down to Asheville, or he took her, rather, I think she got the chance to meet the father, but the mother had already been deceased. Speaker 1: Okay. So, your father came to Detroit in about 1940? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think around that time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You said he was a boxer. Did he come to box, or did he learn how to do that in Detroit? Speaker 2: I really don't know, I really don't know. And he may have come sooner than that, I'm not really sure. But my Aunt Mary Julia would know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you said he boxed at the same gym as [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, but Berry was younger. In fact Berry was, my mother used to always say--because she worked in Berry's father [Berry Gordy, Sr.] and mother's [Bertha Fuller Gordy] store as a clerk when she was a teenager. And she said Berry would be running around with his--he was much younger of course. He was nine years younger than her, that's what she always emphasized. He was nine years younger, and he was short in stature for his age at that time. And she remembers him wearing the apron. And he had to roll it and tie it, you know, because he was short. So, she remembers that. But she said she worked quite a few years in there for Mom and Pop Gordy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we all went to the same church, Bethel AME [Bethel AME Church, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a story as to how your parents met? Speaker 2: Oh, let's see. My uncle James [James Payne], Fred's brother, I think they--he was already going with his, who became his wife, Alberta, Alberta Thomas [Alberta Thomas Payne]. And Alberta was my mother's best friend, and I think she set them up on a blind date, from what I'm remembering. And that's how they met. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So they were married in what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-one [1941]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was on Pearl Harbor Day. Was that December 7th? Speaker 1: December 7th, right. Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-one [1941], um-hm. So, Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] was getting bombed while my mother and father were getting bombed in the church, I should say. (Laughter) And you know what my mother said? She wasn't really super in love with Fred. But she said the reason why she married him was because her mother [Ada Brack], our grandmother, urged her, because she thought he was a nice young man. And he was very nice-looking, very cute, and he had a good job. And his good job, he worked at Ford Motor Plant [Detroit, Michigan]. And back then that was considered a good job. Story_ID: 303824 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities and their attitude about different things, and the way they walked and talked, who do you think you take after the most? Or what traits do you take after them? Speaker 2: I think I have a little bit of both of my parents, I believe. My mother [Charcle Hickman Farley] was very conservative in her dress, her walk and talk; she was very conservative. And she always stressed and emphasized to Freda [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] and me to act like ladies. And we had piano lessons, we had ballet lessons. And it wasn't because she wanted us to go into show business. That was the last thing she wanted. In fact, she was horrified when Freda decided she wanted to sing. She just felt that culturally we needed to have that enhancement to groom us. And she bought books on etiquette, how to walk. She would have us seated at the table for dinner, and she would show us which forks to use and the whole setup. "Always keep one hand in your lap. Then when you get ready to cut your meat, then you cut one piece at a time." And she just taught us to be very proper ladies. Now Fred [Frederick Payne] on the other hand, like I said, is a very gregarious type. When he wasn't drinking, he was sort of quiet. But he just had a personality you could never get mad at, because he just loved life. And I think I get a little of that from him. I love life, I love entertaining my friends, being around my friends, barbequing for my friends, you know, serving them, everybody having a good time laughing and talking. I'm really into family and friends, and that's what Fred was, too. He was always taking home movies and going around visiting all his cousins and his brother who lived in Detroit [Michigan], and of course going back home as well. But he loved his family and his friends. Those were very, very important. Story_ID: 303825 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh. Oh, I can remember being in my crib, just a very, very, small glimpse. I can just remember being in my crib. I can remember being at our [maternal] grandmother's [Ada Brack] house a lot playing with the other kids on the block. There was a little white boy named Butch who lived down the street from us who was semi, slightly retarded. But we would have so much fun with Butch. I remember we lived on Atkinson [Street, Detroit, Michigan], and there was a little Jewish girl, Kitty, was her name. And we would go over to her house all the time. We must have been like about maybe seven or eight years old then. I can remember when we first started taking our ballet lessons. There was a Russian couple on Woodward Avenue. Nicholas Sokoloff, that was his name. I can't remember his wife's name. I can remember going rolling skating at the Arcadia [Arcadia Ballroom, Detroit, Michigan] on Woodward. That was when we were probably eight, nine, or ten. And we would get on the streetcar, they had streetcars back then. And we would take the streetcar to Woodward. Aretha Franklin would go there, and her sisters Carolyn [Carolyn Franklin] and Erma [Erma Franklin]. And of course we didn't actually know them. But the Arcadia was a little rough, too. But those kids could skate, ooh, they could skate. It was tough, that's what I remember. Story_ID: 303826 Speaker 1: Can you describe your neighborhood for us? What was the name of your neighborhood you lived in? Speaker 2: Well, we first lived on John R [Street]. I remember they had the multi-dwelling. And then we moved to Atkinson [Street], and that was on the northwest side of Detroit [Michigan]. And that's where we went to Crosman Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell Crosman? Speaker 2: C-R-O-S-S-M-A-N [sic.]. I'm pretty sure there were two S's. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And I can remember the first--well, actually it was the second freeway being built, because it went right in front of our school, the John C. Lodge Freeway. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And I remember lunchtime. I can remember back then you bought little cartons of milk, and they were two cents. What are they now, about fifty cents? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And right across the street was Maxi's Candy Shop [ph.], and every Friday I would stock up on that candy, Freda [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] and I. And sometimes I would sneak money from my father. I would look on the dresser or go in his pockets and take his change. And all you needed was fifty cents, because fifty cents, whoa, man, you could have a bag of candy, penny candy. And my favorites were Squirrels, let's see, Mary Janes, Banana Splits. Of course, they have chocolate malted milk balls now, but I think you got two for a penny back then. Then you got a big bag of potato chips for ten cents, I mean a huge bag. Those were the best times. And on Friday we'd come home with all that candy. And of course we had to first do our chores. We had to vacuum, dust, and wax the furniture. And we got through with all of that, and we were ready to sit down in front of that TV and eat that candy. (Laughter) We started off with 'Rin Tin Tin' ['The Adventures of Rin Tin Tin'], I think and then--oh, there were so many favorite TV shows--'Dear Phoebe,' with Peter Lawford. And once when I met Peter Lawford when I was with the Supremes, I told him about 'Dear Phoebe,' and he was just shocked that I would remember that TV show, but I did. Speaker 1: I remember him being on a show, but I couldn't remember the name of it. Speaker 2: 'Dear Phoebe.' Speaker 1: 'Dear Phoebe.' Speaker 2: I loved 'Dear Phoebe.' And then there was 'The Creaking Door.' That was, that got to be around ten o'clock at night when the scary stuff would come on. And we'd be right there with that candy (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: The sights and sounds and smells? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Candy. (Laughter) That was the best thing, that candy, that's what I remember. And going to Belle Isle [Belle Isle Park, Detroit, Michigan] was always fun. And the fountain that would change colors at night, oh, that was, that was wonderful. We thought that was such a big deal back then. It was just so beautiful, and it still is. I'm glad they've kept it restored. And we would go to Idlewild [Michigan] in the summer. We bought a cottage up there, our parents did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's like a black resort, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a black resort. And there, there were two nightclubs, the Elmwood Casino [ph.] and the Flamingo [Flamingo Club, Idlewild, Michigan]. And that's where we first met and saw The Four Tops. All the black acts went up there--Nipsey Russell, the comedian, the old lady, what's her name? Speaker 1: Moms Mabley. Speaker 2: Moms Mabley, that's right. But we met all those people. Arthur Braggs owned the Fiesta Club [Idlewild, Michigan] up there, and we saw The Four Tops. On Sundays, see, the kids could come in on Sunday for the matinee show. So, I don't know if in my archives of pictures I have a picture of Freda and I with Daddy [Samuel Farley] and his best friend at the Fiesta Club when we had gone to see The Four Tops. And they had shake dances back then. I mean, it's so different now. Life is so different. Life was so much more simple then, and it was fun. Story_ID: 303827 Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little girl? What was your personality like, and what did you like to do? Speaker 2: Oh, I was very gregarious. I was the type, as my mother [Charcle Hickman Farley] would tell it, I loved to sing. From the time she said I was in the crib, I was singing before I was talking. And when I got a little older as a toddler, I would entertain her friends. And I would sing a song, and when I finished, before anyone could comment, I would ask, "Do you want me to sing it again?" And before they could even answer, I would start the song all over again, and sing it again and again and again. I was just the opposite of Freda [HistoryMaker Freda Payne]. Freda was extremely shy, she wouldn't even sing in front of our mother. In fact, she would make Mama turn her head and go in another room, or Freda would hide behind a curtain and then she would sing. And I was the type, you couldn't shut me up. And for some reason the curtains turned--or not the curtains--the tables turned rather, around the age of maybe, oh, nine, ten, something like that, or maybe even younger. And then I became the introvert and Freda became the extrovert. And actually when we were children, Freda would do a lot of mean things to me. She would take my dolls and take a knife and stab them and cut them. Oh yeah, she'd take the doll and tie it to the piano leg. We had a baby grand piano our mother had bought for us. She would tie the doll to the leg of the piano and then beat it with a belt (laughter). And you know why? My mother didn't realize that I was the one getting all the attention. It was like, you know, don't hurt the baby; look after the baby. Scherrie's [HistoryMaker Scherrie Payne] the baby, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And Freda felt like she wasn't loved. And so my mother had a psychologist friend who one day took Freda down to the basement of our home, our duplex, and just had a session with her. And when she came back up, she said, "Charcle Lee, there's nothing wrong with Freda." Mama thought Freda was crazy or something, you know. And she said, "There's nothing wrong with her." She said, "She said she just feels that she's not loved, because all of the attention has been given to Scherrie." Or like in grade school, Mama would try to help Freda with her homework. And she just couldn't seem to grasp the problem, if it was a math problem or something like that. And I always excelled. So Mama would say, you know, "What's wrong with you? Are you stupid? Why don't you, how come you can't learn it like Scherrie?" And blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Well it just didn't come natural for her. You know, she was, she had other dreams and aspirations. She probably didn't even realize it then, but she was just made to feel that she was not loved, and that she was stupid. And my mother regretted it later on in life. She really regretted it, because she didn't mean it. Of course, she loved my sister, and I guess she started showering her more so than me, and then I became introverted. So, you know, as parents we have to really catch ourselves. Because Freda, in later years when she had her son, Gregory [Gregory Abbott, Jr.], she found herself doing the exact same thing Mama had done to her. She was trying to help Gregory with his homework, and she was doing the same thing, "What's wrong with you? Are you stupid or something?" And parents try to live I think sometimes vicariously through their children. They want them to achieve what they never achieved, and so they start pushing and pushing and pushing. And I think that's what's wrong with so many of these kids today. Their parents are pushing them, instead of just letting them develop naturally into the beautiful young men and women that they were destined to be. Story_ID: 303828 Speaker 1: Did you like school? Now, you went to Crosman Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: Crosman Elementary School. Speaker 1: Did you go through all the grades there? Speaker 2: Yeah, I went through, I started in the first grade, first grade through the sixth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I went on to Hutchins Junior High School [Harry B. Hutchins Intermediate School, Detroit, Michigan]. And I remember an incident in Crosman. Oh, I remember two that were devastating. Oh, the first one was when I was standing in front of the class, and I had to go to the bathroom. And the teacher, I think she had me reading, because I excelled at reading. So I was reading to the class, and then she stopped, because the principal came to the door with another teacher to talk. And some people, the kids kept raising their hands asking to go to the bathroom. And then finally she said, "That's it. Nobody else better not ask me to go to the bathroom." So, I was scared to say anything. And I was standing up there waiting for her to finish talking to the principal and the other teacher, and I had to go to the bathroom. And the next thing I know, this puddle was coming down onto the floor. I don't think I ever outlived that. I still think about that, and have nightmares about it. And that was in the second grade, I think. Maybe not the second grade, but the third grade, something like that. But I never got over that, never got over that. And another incident I remember--coming into school there was this girl, Niecy [ph.], she was a real bully. And she was walking with Margaret Norton, who went on in later years to become Margaret Norton Gordy [sic.], who was married to Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy]. And she wanted to beat me up for some reason, and I hadn't even done anything to that girl. And Margaret saved me. She said, "Don't bother her. This is Freda's [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] sister." Freda would have kicked that girl's butt. Freda was a tomboy. Freda could beat up, and she did; she beat up the toughest girl in the whole school. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Tell us that story. Now what happened? Speaker 2: And another guy, Tyrone Davis, she beat Tyrone up on the playground. Speaker 1: Tyrone Davis, the-- Speaker 2: No, he wasn't a singer. It was just his name was Tyrone Davis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she beat him up. Well, Freda says that the fight with the girl Sandra Gasaway, that was her name, she said it was actually a tie. They were supposed to meet after school in front of Henry Ford Hospital [Detroit, Michigan], which was--no, it was the Herman Kiefer Hospital [Detroit, Michigan], which was right next to Crosman. And they met on the steps, and they fought. And Freda said that it was actually probably a tie. I don't know if she beat her up. Some people say it was a tie, and some people say Freda won. But Freda was tough. Freda was the same size she is now when she was what, eleven or twelve years old. And my mother [Charcle Hickman Farley] used to worry about her, because she was, you know, full-bosomed with the hips and everything. And of course men would make little remarks, or give an eye. And my mother would cut right into them and then tell them, "I'm the mama," that's what she would say. "And you keep your eyes to yourself" (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you have favorite classes or favorite subjects in school? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I loved spelling. And I'm an excellent speller. I shouldn't brag about it, but for the most part, spelling. And I did like math. I loved to divide. Sometimes at home I would make up problems, and just sit there and just do my division. And my daughter [Shoshana Payne Phillips] is very good at math. Maybe she gets it from me, I don't know. But I have a very low tolerance for those people who cannot spell, maybe because I was such a good speller. And I shouldn't be that way, but everybody excels at their own pace in whatever subject. Like, I might not do well in some other subject, where somebody else might really excel. But I remember a spelling bee we had at Crosman, and it was little girl named Kathy [ph.] who won the spelling bee. But I remember it had been narrowed it down. There was the whole fifth grade or sixth grade, whatever class it was. And they narrowed it down to three people who were left standing. And that was myself, June Ware [ph.], and this little girl Katherine [ph.], I can't remember her last name. And the word was cost. And so, June said, "C-R-O-S-S." So they said, "Oh, no, she misunderstood," and so they gave her another chance, and she didn't get it. So they looked at me and said, "Cost." So I said, "C-O-S-T," and sat down. So then Katherine spelled it, and it was C-O-S-T-S. But it sounds so much alike--cost, costs, it sounds the same. So they gave her one other word to spell. I think they called June Ware back up, because they said, "Well she must have understood." So they allowed her to get back up, and she and Katherine had one other word. I can't remember what the determining word was, but I knew how it to spell it. And of course I was just sitting there about to jump out of my seat I was so angry. And Katherine won the spelling bee and went on to the nationals for the citywide spelling bee. But I was very upset, and that's one of the memories that's just etched into my mind. Speaker 1: Yeah, it sounds like you were kind of manipulated out of that. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm. So that's one of my childhood memories that's deeply embedded in my mind. Story_ID: 303829 Speaker 1: Bethel AME [Bethel AME Church, Detroit, Michigan], did you spend a lot of time singing in a church? Speaker 2: No, I really didn't. You know, most people think that most black people learn how to sing in church. That was not the case. Freda [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] and I, we went to Sunday school, Bible vacation school. And we couldn't watch TV unless we went to Sunday school and church. My mother [Charcle Hickman Farley] was that type that didn't allow--there was nothing that you could do on Sunday but go to church. We could not play records, we could not dance. You don't do any work. You don't iron, you have to do all that on Saturday. Sunday was the day of rest, just like in the Bible, that's what it says. That's what she told us. And so, if we didn't go to Sunday school or church--now mind you, a lot of times she wasn't going either--but we had to go or we could not watch TV or do anything else. So, we were forced to go. Speaker 1: Now, was radio and TV a big deal? Speaker 2: Radio and TV? Speaker 1: I think you were talking about TV a little while earlier. Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. I remember the first television set our [maternal] grandmother [Ada Brack] had. She was the first one to get a TV set on the block where she lived, 101 Horton [Street] in Detroit [Michigan], which no longer exists. But I remember the neighborhood kids all crowding into the dining area with this little square box, and we'd sit there and watch TV. And then when we stayed with our mother, lived with our mother rather, on Atkinson [Street]--1699 Atkinson was where we lived when we were going to Crosman [Crosman Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] and Hutchins Junior High [Hutchins Junior High School; Harry B. Hutchins Intermediate School, Detroit, Michigan]. Then we moved to 2205 Glynn Court, and then finally 18408 Monte Vista [Street] in '64 [1964], that's when we moved to Monte Vista. But anyway, we would, as I said, get our candy, bag of candy on Friday nights, and we'd sit there glued to that TV. And my mother was the type, she would let us stay up late until we would fall asleep. She didn't--some mothers were very strict, or sticklers about their kids going to bed at a certain time, on weekends even. But our mother wasn't like that. We were free to stay up as long as we wanted to, which we did. In the summertime when it was really hot, she would open up the French doors of the patio and we'd make a pallet on the living room floor rug, rather carpet, with our bag of candy, and with the TV on. And I remember things like 'Amos and Andy' ['Amos 'n' Andy']. I know there was a lot of hoopla later on, I guess from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. They thought it was too stereotypical, and that it was a putdown. But I loved 'Amos and Andy.' I thought it was so funny, so funny. And maybe some of the stereotypes, looking back on it, were an insult to the black race, but I guess it's easier to laugh at yourself than have somebody else laugh at you. Then that wouldn't have been too funny, but I loved 'Amos and Andy.' I thought it was hilarious. Story_ID: 303830 Speaker 1: When you went to high school, now where did you go? You went to Central High School [Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: Central High School, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Central High School, okay. Speaker 2: I started in '59 [1959]. Wait a minute, no, '58 [1958], September of '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: Okay. And well, did you, when you started high school, did you think about going to college and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah? Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to be a pediatrician. I love children, and I wanted to be a doctor. And-- Speaker 1: Did you have any doctor role models in the black community? Speaker 2: No, not really, not really, not that I can think of. But I just always had the aspiration to become a pediatrician. Sometimes I wonder, did I make the right choice? You know, I got the bug for show business. Well, actually, I never really did get the bug itself; it was just sort of put there in front of me. I'll get to that later on. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) By the time you started high school, was Freda [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] performing? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was performing. And she was already, she had already recorded three or four songs under [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy's banner. Berry actually was her manager for a short period. He and George Kelly, they were partners. And we all went to New York in George Kelly's Cadillac--Berry, George, myself, and my mother [Charcle Hickman Farley] and Freda, to get a deal for Freda. And on the way there, I sang in the car for Berry, and he got excited. Now my mother was telling me this, I don't remember; I was around twelve years old, or thirteen. And my mother said he got very excited over me as well. I remember at one point we stopped along the turnpike at a Howard Johnson's restaurant and lodge. And Berry was wearing a do, he had a process, as we called it. And he had the do rag, a black do rag tied around his head, and he had his leather jacket on. And he was going inside this Howard Johnson's with this do rag on his head. So, I refused to get out the car. I was so embarrassed. And so, they just left me in the car. And after a while--I sat there for so long (laughter). And I was hungry, and I had to go on inside. But that was such a vivid memory in my mind. I think I told that to Berry one time, and he couldn't believe that I remembered that. And I remembered being in New York [New York], and they would--I remember them going into a pizza parlor. And I'd never had a pizza at that time, believe it or not. Had never tasted pizza, and I was just so upset that they were wasting time going to this pizza parlor getting slices of pizza when they could be doing something much more entertaining, since we were in the Big Apple. And I was just raring to go and see the sights. And I remember my mother said that Berry didn't ride back with us. Because when they got up in the meeting, George Kelly started trying to push his girlfriend at that time, who was Frances Burnett, and he and Berry got into a big argument and Berry got supposedly a big headache, a huge headache, so he flew home instead of riding back with us. But Freda recorded three or four songs with Berry, I don't know if she told you. I'm sure she did, so I won't even go into that. Speaker 1: Well, no, well-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was 'Father Dear,' 'The Moon Rock,' 'Are You Taking Applications for Love' ['Applications for Love'], and 'Send me a Star' ['Please Send Me a Star'], I think were the four songs. So, she must have been around fifteen, because I can remember her performing that in the backyard of one of our parents' friend's home for their daughter Barbara who had a birthday party. I think it was her sixteenth birthday party, and so Freda performed, sang the songs. And by then I had become completely shy, so I had gone into my shell. So, I wouldn't try to sing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But Freda was out there. That's all she wanted to do. My mother had to coerce her into finishing high school [Central High School, Detroit, Michigan], because she wanted to just sing. And as soon as she got that diploma in her hand, less than two months later, maybe a month later, she was gone. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're like, how many years younger? Speaker 2: Two. Speaker 1: Two. Speaker 2: Two years and a month and a half younger. Story_ID: 303831 Speaker 1: So you're a sophomore or a junior in high school [Central High School, Detroit, Michigan] when she leaves, right, a junior (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, uh-huh. And I was so sad about my sister [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] leaving, because it was just the two of us; we were so close. Speaker 1: Now did you, now tell me this. Did your mother [Charcle Hickman Farley] or anybody else ever--or did you two ever come up with the idea of singing together? It would seem that it would be a natural idea. Speaker 2: I know. And a lot of people have asked us that. And we've never, we keep talking about it, but we haven't done it. It would be a wonderful thing if we did. Speaker 1: You still haven't done it? Speaker 2: We still haven't done it. You know, occasionally in the church, you know, they would ask us both to get up and sing. Even at our father's [Frederick Payne] funeral we both got up and sang The Lord's Prayer. It wasn't planned, they just asked us to do it. So we got up and sang The Lord's Prayer. That was in Detroit [Michigan]. But as far as--oh, we did do a show in Japan together. It was called Soul Sisters Special Night [ph.], and we came on behind, is it, Nat King Cole's brother, is it Henry Cole? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Oh, what is his brother's name? Speaker 1: Freddy Cole. Speaker 2: Freddy Cole, right. Who was great. And we went on before him and we did something together. And then we each did our separate thing, and then we came back and did a thing together, and then Freddy came on. And that was somewhere in the early '90s [1990s], I believe. Speaker 1: It seems like it would be such a natural thing to happen. But-- Speaker 2: I know. I don't know why we haven't done it, or at least do an album. I shouldn't say album, that's dating me--a CD together (laughter). Speaker 1: Right. So when you were kids, nobody ever thought to put you on stage together? Because I saw her in a group with a young lady named, is it Audrey, or-- Speaker 2: Um, Walker. Speaker 1: Yeah, her last name was Walker. Speaker 2: Her last name was Walker. Carmen Mathis and Ursula Walker. Speaker 1: Ursula Walker, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. And that was the only group she was actually in? Speaker 2: Um-hm. And they did a lot of radio spots on WJR [WJR Radio, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Out of the Fisher Building [Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, we just talked about that a little while ago (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Oh, yeah, I was going to say wow, you have a great memory, Larry [Larry Crowe]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 303832 Speaker 1: So what did you do while your sister [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] was doing all these gigs and so forth? Did you just--poured yourself into school, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, basically. I remember one time an incident where we were performing at a talent contest out at Jefferson Beach [Jefferson Beach Amusement Park, St. Clair Shores, Michigan]. And she was in the senior division competing against Ursula [Ursula Walker], and I was in the junior division. And Freda came in second place I think. Ursula won first, and Freda came in second. She won a little radio or record player. Or maybe they may have tied, because Ursula was really good too. But I didn't win my division, but I remember after I sang--and I was still sort of confident then in myself. But when I came off that stage, our father Fred [Frederick Payne], when I went up to him I said, "How did I do, daddy," and he said, "Well, you didn't sound very good." And that just crushed me. I just told Freda about it recently, she never knew. And that was another thing that really sort of put a blanket over my soul I think, it really did. And I never told him what it did to me, how it crushed me. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how old were you then? Speaker 2: I was probably about thirteen or twelve, probably twelve, since this was the junior division. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just lost all my confidence after that. And it was a long time--and I don't know if I ever truly got my confidence back. I think I've been my own worst enemy, I can truthfully say. When I got up to Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] after I graduated (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's not get you there yet. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you, were you involved in clubs, or did you run for class office? Did you do any of those kinds of things in high school? Speaker 2: At Central [Central High School, Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 1: Yeah, high school. Speaker 2: Yeah, at Central I was on the student council. I was in the National Honor Society. In the library of Central, which I was shocked--we went back and walked through a couple of years ago, and they still had the plaque of all of those who received an award from the Detroit Police Association. And they chose one boy and one girl from each senior class, and then the names were added for each year. And I was one of, I was the girl who was chosen from my senior class. I was in the Latin club. Oh gosh, I was vice president then president of the student council. I was just busy, busy. Speaker 1: Okay. So when you were a senior in high school, did you know where you were going to go to college? Speaker 2: I put in applications to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and then Michigan State. I wasn't really sure where I wanted to go. And I remember on the application for Fisk, they wanted to know how many televisions you had. I don't know how that would be pertinent to pursuing a college degree, but I thought that was so shallow. And I did not go to Fisk, I went to Michigan State, because it was closer to home, and I was really a mama's girl. And my mother [Charcle Hickman Farley] was really protective over me, especially after Freda left. She wasn't going to let another one get away. She wanted me to go to Wayne [Wayne State University], right there in Detroit [Michigan] and not leave it all, but I was trying to get away from her because she was just clutching me so. I was like "Give me some room to breathe, Mama, let me fly." So-- Speaker 1: Okay. So you graduated in 1962? Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961]. Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961], okay, '61 [1961]. Speaker 2: I was a year ahead of myself, yeah. I had gotten double promoted, and then I went to summer school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I got a year ahead of myself-- Story_ID: 303833 Speaker 1: You started Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] in the fall of '61 [1961]? Speaker 2: Yes, I was sixteen. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now, okay, so tell me about Michigan State. Now what was that like for you? Was it what you expected? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was big. I think there were, I'm trying to remember how many blacks were there when I started. There were maybe four hundred some blacks out of thirty-two thousand. I remember my dorm was, I was in the first coed dorm, North Case Hall. South Case was boys, and North Case was girls. And when I got up to my room--now, they're not supposed to know anything about your race. But when I got up to my room I had two roommates, and they were both black--Linda Hollis and Glenda--what's Glenda's maiden name? She married Henry Carter who was a track star. But it was Glenda Nixon [ph.]. And they had both graduated from Northwest High School [Northwestern High School] in Detroit [Michigan]. And of course we got along really well. But when we looked and met the other black girls in the dorm, every single one paired with another black girl. And I said that's-- Speaker 1: Isn't that a coincidence? Speaker 2: Isn't that a coincidence, out of six hundred some girls in the dorm. And I had a lot of fun. I had a lot of fun at Michigan State. I remember there were a couple of times--I'm trying to remember what I did to warrant this. I don't know if I was really a rabble-rouser, but I remember one time passing by the head of our dorm, her office, and I heard my name being mentioned. She was talking with some of the other counselors there. And I don't know if they were mad at me about something because I had been raising my voice a little too loudly. I was also chosen, I was the first black on the homecoming court. I didn't make it as queen, but I was a princess. And I was the first to be on the homecoming court. Speaker 1: Now this is the era when a lot of, on campus there's a lot of campus unrest becoming to brew around race relations and the Vietnam War--that's when the civil rights volunteers were going down to the South. Do you have any reflections of that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wish I had been one of those. I remember [HistoryMaker] Denise Nicholas went, because she's from Detroit. And Denise was one of those who went down there. I wish I had gone. See, if I had gone to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] I know I would have been at one of those restaurants sitting at the counter with a sign. Speaker 1: So, Denise Nichols volunteered for-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Did she volunteer for SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], do you know, or SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], or-- Speaker 2: I can't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can't remember. Story_ID: 303834 Speaker 1: So, were you following the Civil Rights Movement pretty close? Speaker 2: I was keeping an eye on it, yeah. I wasn't a participant, I wished I had been. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I should have been. Speaker 1: How were relations between the races at Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan]? Speaker 2: I think they were, I think they were warm, if you were an athlete, you know, on the football team or a basketball player, someone of note. I'm trying to remember the circumstance why I heard my name being called. It was something that I had protested against in our dorm, and I can't remember what it was. I wish I could remember, but I just can't. Speaker 1: Was there any kind of black student organization in those days at-- Speaker 2: I think there was. I think there was, I just can't recall. Speaker 1: It would have been some kind of Negro student organization then. Speaker 2: Yeah, we were Negroes then. We graduated from colored to Negro. And when they first started using the term black, I was sort of offended. I said, "I'm not black, I'm a beautiful brown." I always loved my complexion, I love brown. But I had to come to realize they weren't talking about the color itself, just the terminology and what it represented. And I remember going back to high school [Central High School, Detroit, Michigan], I had developed a real complex, and I still have it to this day. When people, other black people talk about each other and they refer to us as having--or one person having good hair or bad hair--I cannot stand that. I mean I just cringe inside, I really do. I'm a stickler about that, because there's no such thing as good hair or bad hair. If you have good hair, your hair is healthy. If you have bad hair, your hair is unhealthy, and you can't do anything with it. But I was in school at the time when we had, what we termed in Detroit [Michigan] as elights. And I didn't know for the longest that the word was elite and that's where they got it from. And you were just an elight. And I can point out some in the yearbooks to you later on, but they really gave me a complex. I didn't care about the complexion; I didn't care about being light, because I've always loved my coloring. But it was the hair, I did not have straight hair, naturally straight hair. And sometimes I would get mad at my mother [Charcle Hickman Farley]; my mother had beautiful hair, but I didn't get her hair. And Fred [Frederick Payne], his hair was probably like mine, but his father [David Payne] had--in fact, I found out from my Aunt Mary Julia [ph.] that his father used to pass for white when he would go into town. See, my grandmother [Julia Logan Payne] was my complexion, or darker. But he could pass, and she didn't know it for the longest. She was wondering why they were getting all these nice things, and good meats and stuff from town. And this one little white lady used to come by sometimes, and that was his mother, but she didn't know it for the longest. She did not know it for the longest. But anyway, I always had this thing about not having what they termed good hair; I was ashamed of my hair. And I just read an article in Essence magazine on Diana's [Diana Ross] daughter, Rhonda [Rhonda Ross Kendrick], where she talked about the exact same thing--that she, not being a biracial child--and you don't have to be biracial to have straight or curly or wavy hair. But she always had a complex, because she did not look like her sister, or have the type of hair that waved in the water. Or when they got out of the water it was still waving in the wind. And we as black people really need to get a grip on that. I think that it's a horrible thing that we have done to ourselves. We've put that stigma on us and our children. Story_ID: 303835 Speaker 1: What was your major at Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan]? Speaker 2: I was majoring in medical technology. Speaker 1: Okay. And was [HistoryMaker] Robert Green there when you were there? Speaker 2: No, but he was a dear friend of another friend of mine who was deceased, who I met at Michigan State, Horace Walker. Horace was in married housing when I started. I think I met him as a sophomore, Horace, and his then wife, Mercedes [Mercedes Hutchins Walker], who were in married housing. And Horace was the captain, not the captain, but the coach of the basketball team. And we remained friends up until the day of his death. And Freda [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] and I both sang at his funeral (unclear). Speaker 1: Oh, Horace Walker, he was-- Speaker 2: Horace Walker. Speaker 1: He wasn't the coach, but he was a coach? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And Robert Green was a dear friend of his, and Carlotta [HistoryMaker Carlotta Walls LaNier]--I'm trying to think of Carlotta's--they were part of the Little Rock Nine, Carlotta and Robert Green. And Horace always kept in touch with them (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Carlotta Lanier. Speaker 2: Yeah, she came for his funeral. Speaker 1: She's Lanier now, but she was-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --Carlotta-- Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember. Speaker 1: Oh, I know what it is. Speaker 2: Carlotta, yeah. Speaker 1: Because they had like roots in Canada, too. It's a family that has roots in Arkansas and Canada. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Horace was a dear friend. Speaker 1: It's Carlotta Walls. Speaker 2: Right, Carlotta Walls, that's right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That's right. That was a great time to be growing up, and to be at Michigan State. And mentioning hair again, the Afro came into style and we were wearing, the bigger, the better (laughter). And all those who had that straight hair who used to sort of look down on me because I didn't have what they deemed good hair--they were trying to get those--the hair in little tight curls so that they could pick it out and make it a nice Afro, which only lasted like two minutes because it would fall; the hair was too limp. But the Afro was wonderful, it represented power and dignity and pride. And it was H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], oh, it was wonderful. Speaker 1: So when you were at Michigan State, were you, did you sing any at Michigan State? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. There was a band I sang with, Louis Helfrich was his name. He had a little, I think it was a quartet. And we sang around campus, and a couple of things off-campus. And-- Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Louis-- Speaker 2: Louis Helfrich. Oh, don't ask me to spell Helfrich. It was H-E-L-F-R-I-E-G [sic.], I think, Helfrich. I think that's how he spelled it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You have to remember that was like almost forty--wow, that was almost forty years ago. It was forty years ago (laughter). I'm old. Speaker 1: Oh, no. Speaker 2: But I'm still here. Speaker 1: That's right. So what kind of band did he have? Was it kind of a big band? Speaker 2: Oh, no, it was like a little quartet. Speaker 1: Quartet, okay. Speaker 2: He had, you know, bass drums. He had a keyboard, and he may have had a guitar. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you just, you know, performed in places like-- Speaker 2: Around the campus in East Lansing [Michigan], yeah. Speaker 1: East Lansing? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and other functions, maybe. I was a Delta. Delta Sigma Theta is my sorority, the Epsilon Epsilon chapter. Speaker 1: Okay. Any other highlights from Michigan State? Speaker 2: So many wonderful people I met. Bubba Smith, he lived in the dorm right behind mine. I watched Wonders Hall being built, and Bubba was one of the first residents in there. And I always called him my little brother, believe it or not (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, he was a huge man. Speaker 2: 6'7". Speaker 1: Right, and a football player. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And he became an actor as well. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I still run into Bubba. Speaker 1: He played for the Colts [Baltimore Colts; Indianapolis Colts] and the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 1: What was his real name? Do you know? Speaker 2: William [sic. Charles "Bubba" Smith]? Speaker 1: William "Bubba" Smith? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Yeah, he was very popular even afterwards, he played on commercials and stuff. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And I think Bubba's real name was--let's see. There was his older brother, Willie Ray [Willie Ray Smith, Jr.], and then Bubba, and Tody [Lawrence "Tody" Smith], who is now deceased unfortunately. He was a dear friend of mine too, a wonderful guy who played for USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], Tody Smith. But I think Bubba Smith's real name is William. Speaker 1: Okay. Well that's-- Speaker 2: But I always just called him Bubba, or Bubs, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's fine. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, were you in school with Cazzie Russell? Was he--no, he was at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was at Michigan, yeah. But I ran into him, and in fact talked, talked just briefly. I think we went out a couple of times after that, after, when I was living here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, Cazzie Russell. I always loved that name. I thought that was so tough, Cazzie Russell. Story_ID: 303836 Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers? Speaker 2: At Central [Central High School, Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 1: At Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan]. Speaker 2: No, not at Michigan State. Campus was just so huge. Speaker 1: Well, let's go back to Central then for a second. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because you kind of lit up when I said favorite teachers. Speaker 2: Yeah, there was Miss Bush [ph.] who was my Latin teacher, and Mrs. Stone [ph.] who was the English teacher. Those were my favorites that I remember. Speaker 1: And why were they your favorites? Speaker 2: Because they had a passion for their subject. For Latin, Miss Bush just had a passion. She just made it so interesting, made it fun. Mrs. Stone, Mrs. Stone loved the English language and poetry, and she just had such a passion. And she was just passionate in the way she taught, and she made it, passed it on the students. I'm not that good in English still, but still she--I just remember her personality. It was fun to be in her class. And she was a stickler. She was strict, she was tough. A lot of people were afraid of her class, but I wasn't. Story_ID: 303837 Speaker 1: At Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], did you stay with medical technology? Speaker 2: I graduated in medical technology, that's where I got my bachelor of science. Speaker 1: And what was your plan? To be a-- Speaker 2: Well, I had to do a year internship at a hospital, which I never did. There were five of us in the med tech program. And Andre Lee went on to be a hospital administrator. Lee Ethel Andrews, who I had gone to junior high school and high school with--no, just junior high school--she went to Northwestern [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan], I think. And Lee Green [ph.] who lives here in Los Angeles [California], I think Lee went on and got her master's [degree] in med tech. And she was at Michigan State with me. And then there was Sandy Sims [Sandra Sims] who became Fairley, Sandy Sims Fairley. And she's now a microbiologist, and she lives in Atlanta [Georgia]. And her son, Marcus [Marcus Fairley] who is pursuing the same field. Sandy and I were in junior high school together in the same homeroom at Hutchins [Hutchins Junior High School; Harry B. Hutchins Intermediate School, Detroit, Michigan]. And then she went to Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], and I went to Central [Central High School, Detroit, Michigan]. And then we met up again at Michigan State in the same dorm, the same floor. We lived right across the hall from one another, and we've remained friends all these years. As it turned out, when I moved to Los Angeles, she moved shortly thereafter and we met up at the same church in Pasadena [California]. And it was during a time I think when my mother [Charcle Hickman Farley] was dying from cancer, and a prayer was lifted up for my mother. And she heard the name, and that's how we realized--and she contacted me through the church. And we've been friends ever since we were twelve years old, eleven years old actually. Story_ID: 303838 Speaker 1: All the while that you're in school [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], the Motown sound is like sweeping the country (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: It's getting stronger and stronger, it's building up. By 1965, they're the sound of young America. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: In '64 [1964] I was in summer school, and I remember I was on my way to a chemistry class, quantitative analysis. And as I was cutting through the dorm to go the class, I passed by this girls' room. And they had several little white girls in there, and they were listening to this song. And I could hear (makes clapping sound), and it just caught my ear. And I stepped inside the room and I said, "What song is that?" And they said, "Oh, it's a song, this new song by this group called The Supremes." It was 'Where Did Our Love Go.' And I loved it. Of course, I had heard about The Supremes before that in Detroit [Michigan]. They had some local hits, like 'I Want a Guy' and 'When the Lovelight Shines in His Eyes,' [sic. 'When the Lovelight Starts Shining Through His Eyes'] I think. But primarily they weren't, they were known in Detroit, but not nationwide. So 'Where Did Our Love Go' was the song that broke them out of the box, that became where world knew about them after that. Speaker 1: You raise an interesting point. Because I remember in 1960, '61, [1961], '62 [1962], I remember hearing Stevie Wonder from the record--we would go the record store in those days. Speaker 2: Okay, um-hm, right. Speaker 1: In the black community--I don't know if you had a black station in Detroit on the radio or not, but-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, WCHB [WCHB Radio]. Speaker 1: Okay, in the early '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Because I know we didn't get one in Dayton [Ohio] until '64 [1964]. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Chicago [Illinois] ironically around the same time got their first black radio station. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: So, a lot of places in the country didn't have a black radio station. And we would listen for WLAC [WLAC Radio] late night from Gallatin, Tennessee (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, okay. Speaker 1: And order records. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Or you could go to your record store and you'd listen, have to listen--you'd see--you'd listen to the record-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --because you wouldn't hear it on the radio. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: A lot of black records you wouldn't. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You wouldn't hear them on the radio. You'd hear the Top 40, and every once in a while someone would crack the Top 40. But you would hear them at the record shop. Speaker 2: I don't know when our black radio stations came into being. There was WJLB [WJLB Radio] and WCHB out of Inkster [Michigan]. I can't remember exactly when they came into being. But you're right, we'd go to the record stores and listen to the records. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the records were fifty cents or something like that. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you could buy 45s, and you'd just take them home and you'd play them on your 45 player. Speaker 2: Um-hm, 45s. Speaker 1: And the word would spread from party to party. Speaker 2: I remember one time at my first, one and only party in high school [Central High School, Detroit, Michigan], Barrett Strong had just put out his song, 'Money' ['Money (That's What I Want)']. And he came to my party barefoot, and my mother [Charcle Hickman Farley] did not want to let him in. And I thought, "Are you crazy? This is Barrett Strong, he's got a hit record out, and you don't want to let him in?" "Well, he doesn't have shoes on," blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. I think he finally got in, talked his way in or something like that; I can't remember. But that was, that's another vivid memory in my mind. Speaker 1: No shoes, barefoot. Speaker 2: No shoes, he was barefoot. He was too cool for shoes (laughter). Speaker 1: So, you heard Tthe Supremes for the--you know, on the national, you know-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, 'Where Did Our Love Go' 1964, summer. Speaker 1: Right. So that's-- Speaker 2: That's when they broke out of the box. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember seeing them privately at, was it Edgewater Park [Detroit, Michigan]? Yeah, Edgewater Park in Detroit. I can remember what they had on. The first time I actually saw them was when Freda [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] was on a program with them for our governor at that time, Governor G. Mennen Williams. It was at a banquet, and we were the only blacks there--The Supremes, and my mother and father [Frederick Payne], and me and Freda. And they had a song out, 'Buttered Popcorn,' which was just a local hit. And they came inside and they went on the stage. I can remember them grouping together and singing 'Buttered Popcorn,' which Florence [Florence Ballard] led on. And then they came off the stage and they had to walk right behind our table. And I remember turning around and looking at them and smiling, because we were the same age. And they looked at me and smiled, and that was it (laughter). Speaker 1: So did you know any of them at that time? Speaker 2: No, I didn't know any of them. Had I gone to Cass [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], I would have been in the same homeroom as Diana [Diana Ross], and maybe things may have been different. But it wasn't meant to be. Story_ID: 303839 Speaker 1: After graduating from Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], where did you go? What did you do? Speaker 2: I came home. I did not want to be a med tech. I didn't know what I wanted to do, I was just confused. And so, after I sat around for a few months, my mother [Charcle Hickman Farley] said, "You are not going to sit around and have me take care of you." So, I started teaching school, and that's what I did up until 1969. I graduated in '66 [1966], and I had to stay an extra year at Michigan State because I failed the parasitology class, which is only offered once a year. So, I had to stick around, and I took the parasitology class and a couple other classes. And so I graduated a year later in '66 [1966]. And so I did start teaching when my mother said, "You've got to get off your behind." And I was just confused. I didn't know what I wanted to do, I was just sort of floating. And as things turned out, I started writing songs. I don't know why, I just loved to play the piano and sing. So I started writing my own little songs. And one day Freda [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] came in. She had just come in from New York [New York] where she had run into Edward [Eddie Holland] and Brian Holland, and they said they had started a new record company. They had just left Motown and formed their own company. And so, she had come in because she was going to sign contracts and so forth. So she was talking with Edward on the phone, in the kitchen. So, I deliberately went to the piano in the living room, and I started playing real loud and singing as loud as I could (laughter). And so, then he calls me to the phone. He says, "Hi, Scherrie [HistoryMaker Scherrie Payne], this is Eddie. He said "What is that you were playing?" I said, "Oh, just a little tune I wrote." He said, "Would you like to audition for our company, Invictus Records [Detroit, Michigan]?" I said, "Oh, I don't care." So they sent a car around for me and Ron Dunbar [Ronald Dunbar], and picked me up and took me to Lamont Dozier's house. And I sat there and I played about five songs for them. And I went down to the office the next day and signed my record contract. And they put me in a group called the Glass House. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is 1969? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or it may have been the end of '68 [1968], because by the time we recorded and put out a record, it was June of '69 [1969], 'Crumbs Off the Table.' So it was actually probably '68 [1968], I believe. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: It was, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So well, 'Crumbs Off the Table' was a hit. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, what else happened? I mean what-- Speaker 2: Well, one of the first songs we recorded was called 'Want Ads,' and I wish I had a copy of it. It's still in the can at Invictus. Whoever has the tape, I don't know, but it was just put away in the can. I didn't care too much for it. And then one day I was in the studio, about a year later. And Barney Perkins, who's now deceased, who was the sound engineer, was playing it. And just as it got near the end, I said, "Wait a minute. That's not me singing. Who is that?" He said, "Well, that's Edna," Edna Wright of the Honey Cone. And I said, "Oh, I didn't know they had recorded 'Want Ads.'" Now Edna says that she was coming to the studio as I was leaving out and she heard it, and she thought that was a boss jam. We used the word boss back then. And she said, "Scherrie that is so tough." And I said, "Well, it's okay." And she said that I said, "Well, I sure would like to record that." And I said to her, "Well, if you like it so much, you record it then." I don't remember saying that, but that's what Edna said. But so be it. Anyway she did a fabulous job on it, and 'Want Ads' went on to become a number one seller, a million seller. And that's what set the Honey Cone on their road to stardom. Like, doggonit, I blew it again (laughter). Story_ID: 303840 Speaker 1: How long did Glass House stay together? Speaker 2: Well, let's see, '69 [1969], and I think around 1972 or maybe the end of '72 [1972], Ty Hunter left us. And he went with the group called The Originals, 'Baby I'm For Real,' 'The Bells.' And of course we were all devastated. I loved Ty, loved Ty. And in fact Ty passed away in February of 1982 I believe. And I'm the only surviving member of the Glass House. Larry Mitchell died probably about ten years ago. And Pearl Jones, the other female singer and musician died, I think it was last year, of cancer. So, I'm the only surviving member. But Ty left in '71 [1971] I think, and then we got a couple other replacements in the group. But then the group went on to Motown [Motown Records, Detroit, Michigan]. Invictus [Invictus Records, Detroit, Michigan] wasn't really doing anything for us. We put out a couple more albums. And so then I--we were hardly working. So, at one point I went on the road as a backup singer behind Charo. And Caroline Crawford, who was a local singer in Detroit [Michigan] who's fabulous in her own right, she was already singing behind Charo, and she got me the gig with her, and we went on the road and came out here. In fact, Charo was still married to Xavier Cugat, and we rehearsed at his house, their house. And I went on the road-- Speaker 1: Now, well, wait a minute. Let me backtrack just a little bit. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, did you go on the road with Glass House and perform? Speaker 2: Yeah. We went to the Apollo at least twice. In fact, there was one story when we were at the Apollo backstage, and on the bill with us was I think the Chairmen of the Board, all the Invictus acts--Chairmen of the Board, the Parliament-Funkadelic with George Clinton; I think the Barrino Brothers, who I understand are uncles to Fantasia Barrino, who was the 'American Idol' winner. Let's see who else was on the show? The Honey Cone. We had a big show, I can't remember who else was on the show. Oh, the 8th Day, who also had a million seller with Invictus. Our group was the only one that didn't get a million seller, I don't know why. But anyway, Ty Hunter and I are standing in the wings watching the Parliament-Funkadelic act. And in between--you know, we did like five shows a day. It was like up the stairs, down the stairs, bam, bam, bam, starting at twelve noon until late at night. But in between shows George Clinton had gone and shaved his head, and came out in a diaper (laughter), in a diaper with his head shaved. And they just thought that was hilarious. And I remember Ty and I--you know, they were probably smoking that weed, that probably inspired him. But anyway, Ty and I stood in the wings watching George in this diaper with his head shaved. And I remember distinctly shaking my head saying, "He is going nowhere." (Laughter) Have I eaten those words many times over. I mean, he's like an icon. More power to him (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the leader of the Funkadelic. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, that's right. Well, see back then I was such a--like those who would try to like smoke weed in my car--they called me Grandma, Grandma Scherrie [HistoryMaker Scherrie Payne]. Because I think that's the part I take after my mother [Charcle Hickman Farley], very conservative. And I was strictly against any kind of dope or anything like that. And I remember one time--Freda [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] won't admit it--but Freda's roommate in New York wrote to my mother, I think. And she said, "Freda came in and her eyes were red," and she was concerned. And I remember distinctly going to the kitchen, and mama was sitting there crying and reading this letter. And I said, "What's wrong?" And she showed the letter to me, and we both sat there and started crying (laughter), because we thought Freda had gotten into dope, because she had smoked some weed (laughter). Oh, she's going to kill me. Did she tell that? Speaker 1: I'm not telling. Speaker 2: (Laughter.) Story_ID: 303841 Speaker 1: You toured with Glass House? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And when they started breaking up, then you got with Charo? Speaker 2: Charo, I sang backup behind Charo. Speaker 1: Now, I remember watching Charo on the different variety shows. She was pretty wild (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --from what I could see on the show. But what was it like to work with Charo? Speaker 2: She was fun, she was a lot of fun. I remember her sister, I think Carmelita [sic. Carmen Martinez Molina] was her name. She was two years younger than Charo, and she traveled with her, sort of like a road manager. And it was fun being with her. She was a lot of fun, very down to earth. And it was a lot of fun. I remember at the Westbury theater [Westbury Music Fair; NYCB Theatre at Westbury, Westbury, New York]--I remember--and this comedian, I shouldn't say his name; it wasn't a pleasant experience. And he's no longer with us, so I won't even mention him. But he had a thing about somebody smoking. And I remember he came out during her act in his bathrobe, to get a laugh from the crowd. I don't know if she appreciated it or not. But I remember afterwards when we were watching his show and he was getting ready to come on--or maybe he was already on. But he came off the stage, and Caroline Crawford who was smoking had a cigarette in her hand. And he hit her hand like this really hard, until she dropped it. I mean it brought her to tears. And Caroline was a tough cookie. She was the type who would cuss you up and down, and think nothing of it and keep on stepping. And it brought her to tears. And I remember her storming back, and I was right behind her, to Charo's dressing room to tell her what had happened to her by this comedian. And so Charo didn't want to rock the boat, but out of respect for the dead--and I didn't like this comedian thereafter. But out of respect for the dead-- Speaker 1: Was he a big-time comedian? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, uh-huh, a black comedian. I won't mention his name, it wouldn't be nice. Speaker 1: All right. You can tell me after we pause. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, what was Charo's exclamation? She said-- Speaker 2: "Cuchi cuchi," or something like that. Speaker 1: Something like that. Speaker 2: Something like that. (Laughter) And she still looks the same. I saw a picture of her not too long ago, and she looks the same. She looks terrific. Speaker 1: Where's she from? Speaker 2: From Spain, I think, yeah, from Spain. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, how long did you tour with Charo? Speaker 2: It was just I think one tour, just like three months or something like that. And then when I came back, we were supposed to go on the next, I was supposed to go on the next tour with her. Story_ID: 303842 Speaker 1: And that's when I got a call one day. I was over to Walter [Walter Gaines] and Barbara Gaines' house. Walter sings with The Originals still, and they are my very best friends in life. And my mother [Charcle Hickman Farley] called me and said, "[HistoryMaker] Mary Wilson from The Supremes just called you." And I said, "What?" And she wanted me to call her back, and I called her back. As it turned out, Lamont Dozier, who was my boyfriend at the time, had come out to California on business for himself, and he had run into Mary at a party. And she told him that Jean Terrell, who had taken Diana Ross' place had just left the group, and she was looking for a replacement, and could he recommend anyone. And so of course he recommended me. And so she wanted me to send some things out--pictures and so on and so forth, which I did--and recordings. And when she called back, I think it was a Thursday, Thursday night. In fact I was over to Walt and Barb's then again. And she said that she wanted me to come out to California. I said, "Okay, okay, sure." I said, "When?" She said, "Saturday." I said, "Saturday? Two days?" (Laughter) So anyway, I did it, I got it together. When I got home, I started thinking when I told my mother the good news, "I can't do this." "Are you kidding, The Supremes, the biggest female act?" "Am I crazy? I can't do this." And my mother gave me a big pep talk. She said, "I believe in you. You can do it." So Saturday, Walt's brother and sister-in-law took me to the airport, Herbert [Herbert Gaines] and Ruthie Gaines. And that was in October of 1973, and I've been out here ever since. Cindy Birdsong picked me up at the airport. Because she had just come back into the group because Lynda Laurence had just left, who had taken her place prior to that, and Cindy came back. And we went straight to Mary's house, suitcases and all, and started rehearsing. Because we had a gig--which I didn't know until I got there--the following Saturday I think in New Mexico for their state fair. And the rest is history. Speaker 2: So, you're singing the lead for The Supremes at this point? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. So you had to sing all the old songs? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And in addition to, I guess, some new ones? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: What new records did you make with The Supremes? Speaker 1: Let's see. 'I'm Gonna Let my Heart Do the Walking,' that was a big seller in the discos for us. Let's see what else. 'He's My Man,' which was big in the clubs, especially the gay clubs. I think I did three or four albums with The Supremes. And I think Motown [Motown Records, Detroit, Michigan] could have done more. Had they done more, then we would have had bigger and more hits, and the group would not have the demise that it did. There were some internal problems with the management, and I think that greatly attributed to the demise of the group. And finally Mary decided she was going to go solo, and removed herself from the group, which was fine. And we were going to continue on, Susaye Greene and myself. And then Motown finally--I think the edict came down from Diana, that's what I was told. I don't know if that's true or not--that since there was no original member left in the group, that it should just be retired. So at the end of '77 [1977], that's when the group was retired. Story_ID: 303843 Speaker 1: Any good stories from the years with The Supremes? Speaker 2: Oh, I have a lot of good stories. I got to travel, oh my goodness. Japan, Australia, the Philippines, Singapore, Hong Kong [China]. This was all like in the first year or two with the group. And South Africa, it was just wonderful. In fact, Cindy [Cindy Birdsong] and I made waves in South Africa, because we made some comments to the press about how we felt about the country and the apartheid situation. I remember on a tour, the guide who had taken us on the tour--we were right at the point where--Rikers Island [sic.], I believe it is. We could look out and see Rikers Island. And I remember him telling us that there was a political prisoner there, Mandela, Nelson Mandela, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's Robben Island [South Africa] I think it is. Speaker 2: Oh, Robben Island. Okay, there you go, right, Robben Island. And he was telling us about the political prisoner there, Nelson Mandela. And I'm talking about, this is 1975. So, it took a couple of years later for him to get out of there. Speaker 1: Yeah, he'd been in since the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So I still have footage, film footage, because I had my video camera. And I made some disparaging remarks about what I felt about the country. Although it was a beautiful country, it had such ugly ways and laws. And it made front page what Cindy and I said, and the promoters they were fit to be tied. They wanted us to make a public apology, a printed apology, which Cindy and I refused to do. Of course the African National Congress [ANC] there, they were very happy, because they're the ones who actually cornered us for a statement. Because they said we were playing to segregated audiences, which we did not know; we were not told that. And, but I have interviews I got on tape with some of the local leaders there from the African National Congress. I have newspaper clippings, which conveniently they came into my room and took and trashed. And I raised such hell that they had to retrieve them from the trash bin of the hotel and give them back to me. And I still have all of that information. Story_ID: 303844 Speaker 1: You were telling us about being in South Africa [with The Supremes]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. And I think later on they started telling American performers before they would go, you know, what was going on. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And only a few, I think Millie Jackson and some others actually went there in spite of what they were saying (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, uh-huh. Speaker 1: You know, and then she did a show and said, "Nobody can tell me what to do," and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And they had the same ban on tennis players, and lot of people. They tried to tell people to boycott South Africa-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: --because of the segregation. So, when you'd go to South Africa, the black people couldn't come see you-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --at the same time the white people-- Speaker 2: Or they had them on separate sides, black on one side, white on the other. See, that's not, we were not told this. I think--I don't know if the manager knew that, and in spite of that just booked us anyway. I never got the truth. Speaker 1: But you stayed in the big hotels? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, uh-huh, where the blacks couldn't even come into. Speaker 1: So in a sense--I know they were saying--they were telling the Japanese during that period that they were honorary whites. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: So they treated you the same way? Speaker 2: Um-hm, honorary white. In fact, Cindy Birdsong stayed a few days after we left, on her own. And she told the story of, the experience of going shopping. And when she had finished her shopping, she needed a cab. I think she had walked to where she had gone. She needed a cab, because she had some bags. And nobody wanted to stop for her. And finally this one cab did stop, but he told her she would have to lie down on the seat so nobody could see her in the car. Isn't that something? Isn't that something? And she had to do it, if she wanted to get back to the hotel. But that's the shame of it, honorary white status. And the Indians there were considered in the coloured class. So you had the blacks, which were the black South Africans, and you had the coloureds, which were the Indians and the mixed, the biracial Africans. Speaker 1: That's when somebody forgot that there was color and separation. Speaker 2: Right. (Laughter) It was quite an experience. And I've got to get out my 8 millimeter film and have it transposed so I can watch all that footage, because I took quite a bit of footage. Speaker 1: Okay. Those should be valuable at some point. Speaker 2: I would imagine so, yeah, and all the clippings. And I did taped interviews of some of the people from the Black National Congress, I sure did. Speaker 1: Yeah, the ANC [African National Congress] is what you're referring to, I'm sure (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the African National Congress, I'm sorry. Okay, the African National Congress, um-hm. Story_ID: 303845 Speaker 1: Well, in 1977 when the group [The Supremes] broke up, you said, you could pretty much see it coming sort of? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So what were your plans then? What did you do? Speaker 2: Oh, I was scared to death. I imagine I felt probably like Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Wilson] did when Diana [Diana Ross] said she was leaving the group. You know, what's going to happen to me? What am I going to do? And so Susaye Greene, who had taken Cindy Birdsong's place in the group in '76 [1976], we had a meeting at Berry's [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] house, and he decided we would form what he called a super group. It would be myself along with Susaye and Syreeta Wright. But then shortly thereafter, Syreeta had this huge hit with Billy Preston, 'With You I'm Born Again,' so there went the super group. Syreeta was taking off on her own. So then they said, "Well, what are we going to do with Scherrie [HistoryMaker Scherrie Payne] and Susaye?" So then they decided that we would do an album together. We would write and produce our own album, and that's what we did along with the help of Gene McDaniels-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as co-producer. Susaye and I put out an album titled 'Partners.' Speaker 1: Okay. Now how do you spell Susaye's name? Speaker 2: S-U-S-A-Y-E, Susaye Greene, with an E. But she's Susaye Colton now, Susaye Greene Colton, C-O-L-T-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember doing a background session for [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, he called Susaye and myself. And on the session was [HistoryMaker] James Ingram and Luther Vandross. And I remember Luther was just getting hot then, and he was so excited that he was on this background session with Susaye and me. And he had gotten the 'Partners' album, and he had loved it, and he was just so excited. He said, "Oh, I can't believe I'm doing a background session with you and Susaye." And I said, "Well, I can't believe I'm standing here singing background with you, Luther." And he was just so humble and sweet, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, that's quite a group, with James Ingram. Speaker 2: Yeah, James is bad. I never realized, do you realize he plays the piano just as well as he sings? He is prolific on the piano. I was bowled over at a New Year's gig of 2003, I believe it was. And I was doing backup in Hawaii for my friend David Gest, along with Sharon Perry of the Perri Sisters. And James came in, and sat down at that piano and blew everybody away, after we had done a couple of his hits. I forgot what ballad it was, but I mean whoa, I was blown away. He is truly talented, terrifically talented. And his brother Phillip [Phillip Ingram], Phillip and I did an album together with a local company here that's now defunct, SuperStar International Records [Los Angeles, California]. And I did an album entitled 'Incredible,' and Phillip and I did some songs together, Phillip Ingram. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was fantastic himself. Speaker 1: Now, so after the--now the Quincy Jones album was made by what time? Speaker 2: It wasn't for Quincy. I believe it was for The Brothers Johnson. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: You know, he caught us on a couple of sessions. I don't know if that was the session for The Brothers Johnson. I remember being in another studio for The Brothers Johnson with Quincy. And we did 'Stomp!' I remember that being one of the songs. I can't remember what we did at the other studio; it was over on Beverly Boulevard off of La Cienega [Boulevard]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this takes--now we're like into the '80s [1980s] I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Early '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, did you get with another group, or did you go solo, or did you-- Speaker 2: No, I was basically solo. I had some disco songs that I recorded, 'I'm Not in Love,' which is one of my all-time favorites still to this day. And some guest spots were done by Freda [HistoryMaker Freda Payne], and Mary Wilson, and Edmund Sylvers, who is now deceased, of The Sylvers. And I think Cindy sang on that too, Cindy Birdsong. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's my all-time favorite song for disco. And then I did 'One Night Only,' and that was a disco, too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I played a lot of discos during that time on my own. Story_ID: 303846 Speaker 1: And then in 1986, I had my daughter Shoshana Payne Phillips in '85 [1985], April 16th, on her dad's [Ronnie Phillips] birthday. And actually, it was his idea that we form the Former Ladies of the Supremes in 1986 at the behest of, through SuperStar International Records [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: The Former Ladies of the Supremes? Speaker 1: The Former Ladies of the Supremes, yeah. They came with the acronym, FLOS. And it was Ronnie Phillips's idea, Ronnie Marlon Phillips, who is my daughter's father. He is now deceased; November 1, 2003, he had a heart attack. But it was Ronnie's idea that we form the Former Ladies of the Supremes. And I think he had contacted Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Wilson], and she was interested in just pursuing her solo career. So then we contacted Jean Terrell, and then Cindy [Cindy Birdsong] of course. Cindy and I still remain like this, to this day. She's like my sister. And Cindy and Jean and I started off, and Cindy stayed with us for about four months or so and then she left. She decided she wanted to go into her evangelizing, which she did, and she left us. So, we got Lynda Laurence once again, who had replaced Cindy in The Supremes before. And Lynda and Jean and I toured together as the Former Ladies of the Supremes up until '93 [1993] I believe, and then Jean left. And so now we have Freddi Poole who tours with us as the third voice. She was never a member of The Supremes, but she's a star in her own right, she's a fabulous entertainer. But-- Speaker 2: Okay, it was Freddi Poole? Speaker 1: Freddi Poole, uh-huh. Speaker 2: So it's Freddi Poole-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And Jean Terrell (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 2: No, okay? Speaker 1: Lynda Laurence. Speaker 2: Okay, Lynda Laurence. Speaker 1: It's spelled with a U, L-A-U. Speaker 2: A U, okay. Speaker 1: Lynda's sister sang with us for a couple of years, Sundray Tucker. From '93 [1993] to '96 [1996], Sundray Tucker sang with us, Lynda's sister. Speaker 2: All right. So, you're still touring with them? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. We just came back from Chicago [Illinois] last week. And the weekend before that was Sanremo, Italy. And a couple of weeks before that, I think it was Holland [the Netherlands]. And before that was Budapest [Hungary]. England, we did two weeks in August. We performed here August 27th for the Sunset Junction [Sunset Junction Street Fair, Los Angeles, California], which is our third year performing there. Four years ago, I performed as a solo artist opening for Chaka Khan. And let's see. And then in 2000, Lynda and I did a tour [Return to Love Tour] with Diana [Diana Ross], which didn't unfortunately reach Los Angeles [California]. But we played twelve cities out of the thirty-one days that they had, before it just sort of collapsed. But working with Diana was just wonderful, absolutely wonderful. You know, she has that tag put on her as being a bitch, but she is nothing like that, nothing like that. She was the most caring person, the sweetest person. She was always concerned about us, how we were doing, if we were happy. She's an excellent mother. She would have a car waiting for her, a limo waiting for her after each show inside the arena to whisk her off to the airport so she could fly home and be with her two sons, because she didn't want them to wake up in the morning and she not be there. That's right, that's right. And sometimes they would come on the road with us, Evan [Evan Ross] and Ross [Ross Naess]. And she is a wonderful mother. And Cindy had already told me that, that she's crazy about children, even with her daughters. And Tracee [Tracee Ellis Ross] came on the road a couple of times. And she's a very, very caring mother. I remember even after the tour, she had us invited over for dinner in Malibu [California] where she was staying. And when it was time--after we had dinner and sat down and had a little chat afterwards and she was walking us to the door, she told Evan and Ross it was their bedtime. It was nine o'clock. And they were like, you know, like thirteen or something like that, thirteen or fourteen years old, and they had to be in bed at nine o'clock. But she's a stickler for it. Because she said, "No, because you've got your lessons tomorrow." Because she had the nanny there, the teacher, the tutor there. And she said, "After I walk Scherrie [HistoryMaker Scherrie Payne] and Lynda to the door, I'll be up to say good night to you." Yeah, she's strict. She's an excellent mother, and I really admire her for that. She was a wonderful person. And all that that happened, the hoopla with Mary and Cindy, was very upsetting for her, and even brought her to tears when she talked about it, because she just wanted it to work. And actually it was her tour to begin with, and it was someone else's idea that you incorporate a Supremes segment into it. But it was actually her tour to begin with, and things just got out of control, out of hand, which was not her fault at all. But she bore the brunt of it, and the public just pounced on her once again. For some reason they just have this thing against her, why I don't know. Story_ID: 303847 Speaker 1: Okay. So, the tour [Return to Love Tour] was supposed to do thirty-one stops (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, thirty-one, I think it was thirty-one. Speaker 1: And it only made about twelve? Speaker 2: Yeah, we did twelve out of the thirty-one. Speaker 1: And was it like due to conflict between the--I mean with the-- Speaker 2: Well, actually, TLC [sic.] was the promoter, and SFX [TNA/SFX; Live Nation Entertainment]. And actually what it was, they were really trying to strong arm her [Diana Ross] into doing something she didn't want to do, and coerce her into signing something she didn't want to sign. And she stood her ground and she said, "I'm just one small person facing a big conglomerate, and I'm going to hold out as long as I can." And that's what she did. They wanted to slash the tour in half, as far as personnel wise, and she didn't want to do it. She said, "These are young kids who are out here dancing their hearts out, and I promised them they were going to see Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada]." She said, "I can't do that to them, you know, tell them to go home, bye, see you later." And all these people--she had ninety people working. And she was so proud of that fact, "I have ninety people working." She was really proud of that. And then when things started to fall apart, when they fell apart actually, she offered to do all last five dates for free. "Just let me finish the last five dates, the ones here in California and the last one in Vegas," which would have culminated the tour. And they said, "No, not unless you sign on the dotted line." So-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the other side of the coin. Speaker 2: That was the other side of the coin. The public had no knowledge of all this. They thought it was all because of the negativity with Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Wilson], and so on and so forth. And they didn't realize that all this was going on, all this pressure was on her. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did you do after that tour? Speaker 2: Well, we continued on with the Former Ladies of the Supremes [FLOS]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I mean, it hasn't been all just rosy. There have been some really rough spots when we weren't working as much. And it was really hard, but my faith in God has brought me through. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what our mother [Charcle Hickman Farley] taught us, to have faith. And even though back in those days when we were made to go to church [Bethel AME Church, Detroit, Michigan] and Sunday school--you know, the Bible tells us to train a child in the way he should go, so they won't stray that far from it. And the Bible was right. Because you know, it just hit me in the face, especially when my mother died in '77 [1977]. That was the most devastating moment in my entire life, which I'm sure it would be for anyone, to lose a mother. But that's what knocked me to my knees and brought me back to the Lord. And I'm so glad I came back. Speaker 1: Okay. So your mother died in 1977? Speaker 2: Yes, March 20th of 1977. She had breast cancer. Story_ID: 303848 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I agree with Bill Cosby. I know he got a lot of flak for what he was saying. Maybe he didn't say it the right way, or maybe he wasn't sensitive enough. I never really heard the whole gist of his speech or talk, but so many of these kids, their role models are the hip hop artists. And I mean, that's okay in its place, but we have so many other wonderful people who could be role models. And I'm pretty sure a lot of them are for some of our kids, but so much emphasis is placed on sports and music, because it's in your face every day on TV, and the radio. So I guess that's why the kids gravitate to these models. But it really bothers me when I'm out in public and I hear the language, the profanity like what I'm seeing on some of these stations like BET [Black Entertainment Television] in their music videos. And the girls have on shorts that are three sizes too small, shaking their rumps all in the camera exposing themselves, gyrating like they're going crazy. It's a whole--I know it's a new day. I know I'm probably a dinosaur in comparison, but it seems like the respect has gone. You know, there are a lot of role models who worked and gave blood, sweat, and tears to accomplish tremendous feats in the entertainment industry, even as well as the athletes; they had to pay a lot of dues. These young kids don't know anything about having a door slammed in your face because you're black; not being able to stay in a hotel, a decent hotel because you're black; having to be put out of a restaurant and asked to leave because you're black. They haven't experienced that. There are a lot of people like my sister [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] who helped pave the way for these youngsters to come up. And a lot of tears were shed for these youngsters to enjoy the benefits that they're enjoying now. And back then you weren't getting paid mega-bucks like these kids are now. And what are they doing with it? I hope they're doing something significant to help the community, to reach down and bring somebody else up alongside them. Get an education. They're busy spending so much money on bling bling, and can't even put two sentences together. That's the shame of it, and it's an embarrassment. So if you watch this, you need to get yourself together and get your children together who're coming up after you. Be a role model, do something with your life other than just running your mouth and making a lot of empty words. I get upset when I--because it's really upsetting, it really is. Do something with your life. Look at Magic Johnson. I'm so proud of him. He has put his money where his mouth is. He has done for his community. And I want to know what the rest of them are doing. Maybe they are doing something on the side. Maybe they don't want the notoriety of it; they want to do things in the quietness because they don't want to be front page, "I did this, I did that." Maybe they are, I don't know. If they are, please forgive me, I apologize. But if they aren't, do something to contribute to our race. We need you, we need you. We need the idea of being successful--coming from nothing and rising to super stardom. Other kids need to know that they can do the same thing, and it doesn't have to be through music, through rapping, through just throwing a basketball through a hoop. Opening a book can do it for you, too. That's what we need to be emphasizing. That's what's going to help better our race, and to have pride, self-pride in our manner, in our ways. If I had to come back again, if there was such a thing, I would want to come back as a black woman again. There's something so beautiful about us, about our race. We come in all shades, from black black to high-yellow white. We are beautiful, from kinky hair to straight hair. We have it all, we can do it all, and we need to enforce that in our young kids, that we are not just singers and basketball players or football players. We have Condoleezza Rice, Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell]. We have so many who can make us proud. Was it Mae Richardson, the astronaut? Speaker 1: Mae Jemison. Speaker 2: I'm sorry, please forgive me. Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: Okay. I mean I can just--the list is so--so many doctors who have made strides in their industry and their field. Inventions, so many blacks who have made significant contributions through inventions--the air conditioner, the refrigerator, the traffic light, it can go on and on and on and on. We have made significant contributions to this country, and it's a shame that that's not being emphasized in the schools. Story_ID: 303849 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any significant thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Yes, I wouldn't be as afraid as I was. I would have stepped out more. I know I was my own worst enemy out of fear, not having enough confidence in myself. I would have pursued my education more than what I did; I just sort of took it for granted. And maybe I could have been a doctor and a singer, I don't know; I wish I had pursued that, I really do. That's my one regret, that I didn't do it, that I just fell into--I wouldn't say a trap, I just fell into--I don't know what I fell into. (Laughter) I mean, I'm proud that I do have my degree. I did get my degree, but I wish I had done more with it while I was there. Learning languages, that's another thing. And maybe that's just the American way, you know, traveling so much. And in a lot of countries, we're not that well liked. They think that we're arrogant, as Americans as a whole. You know, we're not that well-liked right now, which is a shame because I love my country. There's nothing like coming back home, this is the best place to be. But as a race of people, we could be doing a lot more for ourselves. There was a time in Detroit [Michigan] when so many of the black businesses in the community, in the black communities, the businesses were owned by blacks. Now, when I go back to Detroit, what do we own? When I go into the black communities, most of the stores are owned by Arabs. The nail salons are Vietnamese. Gas stations are probably Korean, or maybe people from the Arab states. What do we own? We've got to get ourselves together. It's a shame. And the rate of crime for young black men--and I'm not blaming them. Some of them, of course, have to accept the blame. But they're just sort of geared, pushed in that direction. We've got to start making a change. I don't know what the ultimate answer is, I don't have the answer. But we've got to start looking at ourselves and doing self-examination on ourselves. What are we doing wrong? Why these young men are going off in this area of crime? Of course they don't get the same justice either, in the courts. And that's why the prisons are so full. Story_ID: 303850 Speaker 1: What would you consider today, though you're still making it, what would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: I don't know if I have a legacy. I don't even like to think in terms of me personally having a legacy. I think of my sister [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] having a legacy, and that's why she deserves a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. She has truly paid her dues. I've had it sort of easy. I was sort of just put in that situation. Like with the Glass House and The Supremes, it was all just sort of handed to me. My name really isn't as out there as my sister's has been, and is today. I don't really, I don't consider myself a legacy. I'm just, I'm just me, I'm just Scherrie [HistoryMaker Scherrie Payne]. I love to sing, and that's my passion. I write screenplays, that's my passion as well. And I'd like to think of myself as just being a person who gave a lot of love. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A humanitarian, that's what I want to be known for. Speaker 1: Okay. You say you've written some screenplays? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Have they been produced, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but I'm waiting. Speaker 1: Well, what are the themes? What are you writing about? Speaker 2: One is called, 'It Always Rains on Sunday' which is about a black family in North Carolina. It involves incest and a secret that was hidden for twenty-seven years. And another one, 'No Hero to Be Found' is about a group of young teens from eleven to sixteen who are living on the streets of Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], actually under an overpass in what they call, they call it Tent City. They made their own little shacks, and these are all kids who are all runaways and surviving on the streets with dope dealers and murder and mayhem. And I also have another one called, let's see, I have seventeen all total. Oh, 'To Protect and Serve' which is about a young woman who was picked up by the police and brutally violated and gang-raped, and then the cover-up that was done, and how they threatened her and harassed her family and her children. And then I have another one-- Speaker 1: So, you're busy writing. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. I have another one, 'Waiting for Candy,' which is about a group of people living in a small apartment building in Hollywood and their dreams and aspirations, but you know that these are all pipe dreams. And there's this one girl, Passion Flowers [ph.], who wants to be an actress, but she works in a video store on Hollywood Boulevard, and her idol is Al Pacino. And you know from the beginning that she's going nowhere, but she's got this fixation on Al Pacino. But it's a wonderful story of the heart, actually, and how they're waiting--all these people in this building are waiting for the sweetness in life; they're waiting for candy. Story_ID: 303851 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family, you know. What does your family consist of now? Speaker 2: My family? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: My sister, Freda [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] and her son, Gregory [Gregory Abbott, Jr.]; my daughter Shoshana Payne Phillips, and my grandson Shaun Giovanni Hicks; our stepsister Frances Gray, and my nephew Steven Culp, her son. And that's my immediate family. I have cousins still in Detroit [Michigan] and wonderful friends out here, wonderful friends. As I mentioned, Barbara [Barbara Gaines] and Walter Gaines are my best friends. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's basically my family. Speaker 1: Okay. Now before I ask my last question, is there anything I haven't asked that you want to say that's important before I ask the last one? Speaker 2: I really can't think of anything. I really can't think. Can you think of something, Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald H. Brewington]? I really can't think. Probably after you shut off the camera and you're halfway down the hill, I'll say, "Doggonit, I should have told him about this." Um, I really can't think of anything. I think I've talked about most of it. My second family in Detroit, the Doziers, affectionately known as Big Mama--Lamont Dozier's mother--and his sisters Norma [Norma Dozier], Loretta [ph.] and Zelma [ph.], they're like my family, my second family, and my goddaughter Shari [ph.] who is Lamont's niece. I have another niece out here, I'm sorry, goddaughter, Wakia [ph.], who is the niece of Walter and Barbara Gaines. And wonderful friends, I love my friends. I love entertaining, that's my passion. Story_ID: 303852 Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: A woman of God, a humble person, a person who gave a lot of love, a compassionate person. Let's see, a person who tried to do the best with what they had. I can't think of anything else. I just want--humility, that is so important. I've met so many people in this industry who are complete turnoffs, because they were so full of themselves. And life is too short. If you can't help somebody and be of help to someone and make a difference in somebody's life, what's the point? You have no purpose. Because that's what we're really all here for, to help one another and to help improve someone else's condition. Story_ID: 303853 Speaker 1: Okay, this is me, [HistoryMaker] Scherrie Payne in 1961 when I graduated from Central High School in Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 2: Perfect, next photo. Speaker 1: That was me when I graduated from junior high school, Hutchins Junior High School [Harry B. Hutchins Intermediate School, Detroit, Michigan], in 1958. Speaker 2: Okay, next one please. Speaker 1: Oh, that was our father, Samuel Gene Farley, holding Gregory [Gregory Abbott, Jr.] when he was just a newborn. Speaker 2: Okay, next photo, please. Speaker 1: Oh, that's myself and Freda [HistoryMaker Freda Payne] in I think her home, right. And she was holding Annette, our little doggie, our little poodle. Speaker 2: And the approximate date? You don't have to say the day and the month, or even if you just know the decade, like the '60s [1960s] or the '80s [1980s], you know. Speaker 1: That was probably the early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Okay, next photo please. Speaker 1: Wow, that was in Detroit, and Freda and I must have been like around four and six years old on a playground somewhere, probably on the east side. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's me, Scherrie with our father, Frederick Zeke Payne. And that looks like during the time I was at Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] so it was probably like around 1964, somewhere around in there, or '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: That was Freda and myself during the--I'm wearing a poochie dress as they call it. And in the background was our dear friend, Bobby Lucas. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We were in Washington, D.C. when that photo was taken. Speaker 2: Okay, and then this one? Speaker 1: This is up in Idlewild, Michigan, the resort area I spoke about earlier. That's my mother to your left. And that's me holding a little toy gun. The little girl's name was Judy [ph.], I don't know her last name. Her grandmother owned the lodge where we were staying. That's Freda second from the right, and on the right is our [maternal] grandmother, Ada Lee Brack. Speaker 2: Perfect, and what year do you suppose that was? Speaker 1: That must have been like around, probably 1951. Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead. How about this photo? Speaker 1: That's a picture of myself and our father, Fred Payne, and we were at the Pelican Restaurant in Detroit, probably on a Sunday. We had to dress up then. I had on a taffeta dress, as you can see, and black patent leather shoes, I'm sure. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Oh, this is me when I took a photo session when I was with the record company SuperStar International Records, here in Los Angeles [California]. So that must have been like around 1985. Speaker 2: Very good, next. Speaker 1: That's me in Japan with The Supremes. That's [HistoryMaker] Mary Wilson on the left, I'm in the center, and Cindy Birdsong is on the right. We were dressed in the typical Japanese dress, the kimonos. Speaker 2: Right, okay, next. Speaker 1: Here we are, I'm on the left. Cindy Birdsong is in the middle, and Mary Wilson is on the right. And I'm not sure exactly where we were, it may have been Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada]. Speaker 2: Okay, next photograph please. Speaker 1: This was in Idlewild, Michigan again. The little girl on the left, her name is Norma [ph.]. I can't remember her last name, but she lived across the street from us on Atkinson [Street] in Detroit. And we took her with us up to Idlewild. Freda is in the middle, and I'm on the right. We must have been like around thirteen, or twelve and fourteen at the time. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Here we are in Detroit again over at our father, at Frederick Zeke Payne's house--apartment, rather. And my mother always dressed us alike, so this must have been--we look like we're about three and five, or four and six. Speaker 2: Very good, next. Speaker 1: This is our Aunt Mary Julia. Mary Julia Johnson Montgomery [ph.] is her name now. And that's in Detroit, I think. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: No, that was here in Los Angeles, I'm sorry. That was outside of Freda's house. Speaker 2: Next photo. Speaker 1: The next photo is Freda with the prince of Afghanistan. Freda's on the left, and the prince of Afghanistan is in the middle, and our mother, Charcle Lee Farley [Charcle Hickman Farley], is on the right. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Here we are in Idlewild again. I'm on the left. We were sitting on the beach, I'm eating an ice cream cone. And next to me is my mother and one of her closest friends, Mazelle McNorial [ph.], who is now deceased. Our mother is reclining on the blanket. Freda is next to her holding her ice cream cone, and on the right is Mazelle's son, Bobby McNorial [ph.]. Speaker 2: Okay, next please. Speaker 1: Here we are with our mother and father holding us. I'm in Fred's lap, and our mother is holding Freda. And we look like we're probably about what, two and four years old. Speaker 2: Okay, next please. Speaker 1: This is at an affair. That's Freda standing there to the left, and on the right is Lamont Dozier of Holland-Dozier-Holland fame. Speaker 2: And what year is this? Speaker 1: Oh, I can't tell. It must have been, here, it was the late '90s [1990s] or the 21st century probably. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: This is at my daughter's kindergarten graduation. That's her father to the left, Ronnie Marlon Phillips, who is now deceased as of 2003, November 1st. And that's my daughter Shoshana Payne Phillips with the cap and gown on. That's me in the black and white, and then Freda on the right. She went to the French Doll House [French Doll House Preschool] here in Los Angeles. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is my daughter, Shoshana Payne Phillips. That's when she was graduating from high school, from Grant High [Ulysses S. Grant High School, Los Angeles, California]. So this picture was taken approximately three years ago in 2000, the year 2000. Speaker 2: Very good, next. Speaker 1: Oh, this is a birthday party when Freda must have been around two and a half years old, or three years old, and you can barely see her face. She's like the fourth one in from the left. You can see her leaning forward a little bit, her face, very cherubic. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Oh, this is me. I think we were in Fort Lauderdale [Florida] when we took this picture. We call those gowns the creme de menthes. I was a Supreme, I was with Mary and Cindy. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: This picture was taken at an affair here in Los Angeles. That's me on the left. That's Jean Terrell, former Supreme, whose place I took; Cindy Birdsong, my dear friend; and Lynda Laurence, who was also a Supreme, and sings with me now. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: A record cover from a 45 with The Supremes. That's me at the bottom, and Mary at top center, and Susaye Greene on the right bottom. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: That was in Detroit with my mother's club. I don't know if it was her bridge club or a social club. My mother is at the top, far right, and Thelma Mills who is in the center, is still living. She just moved to San Diego [California], and I think she's around eighty-eight years old now, and still beautiful. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Here is when we were doing the tour with Diana [Diana Ross] in 2000, and that's Lynda and I back in New York, backstage with Luther Vandross, God rest his soul. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Oh, and here I am as a little baby. I think I was about one year old. And of course, we know what year I was born, in Detroit. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Here Lynda and I are with the diva herself, and I mean that in a good term. That's me on the left, Diana of course in the middle, and Lynda Laurence on the far right..