 Story_ID: 303614 Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson the interviewer. Neculai Burghelea the videographer, and we are interviewing at August, it's, today is August-- Speaker 2: Twenty-ninth, I think. Speaker 1: August 29th. So, if I could just have you state you name and spell it out for me, please? Speaker 2: Okay. My name is [HistoryMaker] Marquita Pool-Eckert, M-A-R-Q-U-I-T-A, Pool, P-O-O-L, Eckert, E-C-K-E-R-T. Speaker 1: Your date of birth, and place of birth? Speaker 2: Is February 19, 1945, Aurora, Illinois. Speaker 1: And, today's date and location? Speaker 2: Oh, August 28th, New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Twenty-eighth, or 29th? Speaker 2: Twenty--I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Twenty-nine. Speaker 2: August 29th. Speaker 1: New York City. Okay-- Speaker 2: New York City. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Two thousand five [2005]. Speaker 1: And, your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a television news producer. Story_ID: 303615 Speaker 1: Okay. And, we're gonna start with some basic preliminary questions before we get into your oral history. Speaker 2: AKA, journalist (laughter). Speaker 1: Journalist. You are a journalist. So, what's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. Well, I have two, greens, and ribs. Speaker 1: Nice. Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Green. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, there again, I have two, one is Idlewild, Michigan, and the other one is Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: I knew you were gonna say Martha's Vineyard (laughter). And, then the final is your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh, well, something I find myself saying a lot, it's all too much. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Which can either be good or bad. Speaker 1: It's all too good. Story_ID: 303616 Speaker 1: Okay well, we're gonna start. We'll talk about your mother and your father [Mark Jones, Jr.] separately, but we'll start with your mother, your mother's side of the family. What was your mother's name, and if you could spell it out for me? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Jeanne, well, her original-- Speaker 1: Original name. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Jeanne Louise Boger Jones. Jones being my maiden name as well. Speaker 1: And, Boger? Speaker 2: Boger is my, well, grandparents' name. Speaker 1: Okay, and, it B-O-? Speaker 2: B-O-G-E-R. Speaker 1: B-O-G. Speaker 2: And, Jeanne is spelled J-E-A-N-N-E. Speaker 1: And, she was born where? Speaker 2: She was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: You know, I forget--1920. Octo- November 1920. Speaker 1: And, did your mother have any siblings? Speaker 2: Yes. She had one brother. His name was Tom Boger [Thomas Boger, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Older or younger? Speaker 2: Older. Speaker 1: Older brother? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, they grew up in Milwaukee, both of them? Speaker 2: No, actually, they grew up in Aurora, Illinois. Speaker 1: Is that outside of Milwaukee somewhat close? Speaker 2: No. It's not. It's outside of Chicago [Illinois]. It's west of Chicago. Speaker 1: Did your mom ever talk about her life growing up as a kid? Did she ever share any stories about her life in Illinois? Speaker 2: Yeah. Many. Speaker 1: What are some of the ones that you'd like to share with me? Speaker 2: Well, she had a dog, an Airedale [Airedale Terrier] that she was (laughter) very close to that was actually killed one night when she was going out. And, the dog went out after her and got hit by a car. So, that was sort of very sad. And that was in Aurora. That was very sad. She and her brother, my uncle, Bub we call him, even though his name was Tom, were, they were, they lived in this neighborhood in Aurora, Illinois. My grandfather was a local doctor. And, he--so, they knew a lot of people. But, of course, there were also, well, his, my grandfather's whole family, I mean, he had, he had, let's see I think, two sisters and a brother who lived in Aurora. And, he was born-- Speaker 1: What was grandfather's name, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: His name was Thomas A. Boger [Thomas Boger, Sr.], the, the first. My uncle was the second, and then his son, my cousin was--is the third. And, so, my grandparents' home was home at one time or another to just about everybody (laughter) on that side of the family, you know. They had a big house and at different times people came to live there depending on their circumstances and what was happening. My grandmother's [Grace Collins Boger] school was right, sort of across the street, down the end of the driveway, their elementary school. Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: I'm sorry, my mother's school. That (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, your mother's school? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's school. Yeah, it was right, you know, down, they had a long driveway. And, actually the house, the--was on one street, but the end of the property was on the other block--other end of the block on another street. And, across that street was their school. And, so, you know, they used to (laughter), they couldn't get away, they used to go there every day. It was a short walk. And, generally, I think, my mother's childhood experiences, they were, were pretty good. She and my uncle were one of few black students there. There were hardly any until later on in high school when another family, came from Kentucky, moved there. And, and they've, you know, all become friends. They've stayed friends all their lives. But, she--so, I think they went, you know, for their social life kind of into Chicago, you know, under heavy chaperone. Because in those days, you know, you didn't just go. And, my grandmother was very, sort of diligent, about sort of seeing to their social life and see that they were, you know, around the proper people (laughter), off of that. Because she sort of felt like their social opportunities were limited in Aurora, so. And, then, my grandfather who's, like I said a doctor, he, he used to, he used to do that same thing with me. He used to take us around when he'd go to visit, you know, house in those days, they made house calls, you know. And, so, you know, we'd go to farms and all kinds of places. And, I know I used to go with him sometimes to the office and sit there and watch people come and go. And, everything was fascinating to me. Story_ID: 303617 Speaker 1: Where did your grandfather go to school? Speaker 2: He went, he graduated from medical school, Marquette University in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: You know, geez, I don't remember. I think I wrote it down, but I don't-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Don't remember. But, I think I'm pretty sure I wrote it down. Speaker 1: Nineteen fourteen [1914]. Speaker 2: Yeah. I went with him once to a reunion. It was interesting. Speaker 1: What was interesting about it? Speaker 2: Well, even then I could sort of pickup, I mean, he was the only black, you know, there was one other, I think, black person in his class. But, he was the only one at this reunion. And, by this time, you know, everybody's getting a little old and stuff, so. But, it was interesting because he went very proudly. I got the idea he hadn't gone to that many of them. And, I mean, I was young so I didn't pick up everything. I think I was maybe ten or eleven. I remember my grandmother [Grace Collins Boger] didn't want me to wear sunglasses because she thought it (laughter) made me look like a young hoodlum. And, she wanted everything to be very proper, and they were very disturbed that I was wearing these sunglasses, you know, they wanted to make a good impression. But, it interesting because a lot of the doctors I heard them talk about, you know, how much money they were making and everything. And, that seemed to be something they were all quite proud of. But, that wasn't the thing that my grandfather talked about, you know-- Speaker 1: What was your grandfather proud of? Speaker 2: Well, the fact that he, I mean, he saw a lot of patients that couldn't pay. And, so they gave him things, you know, in kind, or you know, he just let them pay whenever they could. Speaker 1: What sorts of things in kind would they give? Speaker 2: Eggs, chickens (laughter), you know, stuff from the garden, corn, things like that. And, so even though he did well, 'cause he was able to support, like I said, all these various members of the family who came and went at different times. He wasn't a really, a rich man. But, he, he somehow, I guess doctors did well in those days regardless, I don't know. And, he was affiliated--it's interesting 'cause at the time that he graduated from medical school, you know, you--there was, you couldn't go to that many hospitals. I mean, they wouldn't take black doctors. I mean, but, because he'd gone to a Catholic school, he could affiliate with Catholic hospitals. So, it turned out that the hospital, one of the hospitals in Aurora [Illinois] where he grew up and where he went to live accepted his--him and his affiliation was called St. Charles Hospital in Aurora. And, so, it just turned out, luckily for him, that way. Because otherwise everybody went to Chicago [Illinois], went to Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] and, you know, and they were, I mean it was all, they were only a couple of hospitals. So, he went there and I remember I used to go with him there as well. And, every now and then I would see him treating patients, you know. Like once he let me watch him set somebody's leg. A friend of mine broke his leg (laughter). And, so, I was able to sit in, if I was quiet and you know, sit still and everything and I watched for like-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --you know. And, I thought oh, my God, I couldn't believe it and then, you know, he wrapped the kid's leg up and everything. I was just--couldn't believe it. But, I use to assist--the nuns use to let me wait for him. I use to wait for him and they all, they use to let me play in the switchboard room. And, I could pretend to be, you know, an operator. They give me a switchboard that they kind of shut down I guess, you know, and I would sit there and plug in-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --(laughter) pretend to be an operator. Speaker 1: Now, did your grandfather go to the high school as well, Marquette High [Marquette University High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]? Speaker 2: No. He didn't. He, he was born in Aurora so, he went to high school in Aurora. I don't know, I don't exactly remember, oh, he went to Beloit College [Beloit, Wisconsin] in Wisconsin before he went to Marquette. So, he graduated from Beloit College in Wisconsin and then he went to Marquette. Speaker 1: Now, did you, what year was your grandfather born? Do you know? Speaker 2: I wrote it down there (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eighteen, 1880-something. Eighteen nineteen [1819], 1815, 1814. Speaker 1: Eighteen--1894. Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-four [1894]. Speaker 1: No, this is the one in your mother's [Jeanne Boger Jones]-- Speaker 2: Tom Boger [Thomas Boger, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty-five [1885]. Speaker 2: Eighteen eighty-five [1885]. Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty-five [1885]. So, did he-- Speaker 2: It couldn't've possibly have been 1814. That was somebody else (laughter). Eighteen eighty-five [1885], that makes sense. Story_ID: 303618 Speaker 1: Did your [maternal] grandfather [Thomas Boger, Sr.] talk about his life as a child ever? Speaker 2: Not that much, really. Speaker 1: What was his fath- do you know anything about your great-grandfather [Calvin Boger]? Speaker 2: He was a farmer. Speaker 1: He was a farmer. So, how--do you know how your fa- how your grandfather-- Speaker 2: I don't. Speaker 1: Had gotten, instill like the knowledge to even want to become a doctor, or who inspired him to do so? Speaker 2: I don't know. But, I bet you my mother [Jeanne Boger Jones] knows. I have to ask her. I don't know. Speaker 1: Was he the first person in the family to go off to a university? Speaker 2: No. Actually, his brother was a podiatrist, and sister was a nurse, and he had another brother, I forget, I forget what he did. But, so, they all kind of were--had gone to college, and done this some area of medicine. Speaker 1: And, did you, did you ever met your great-grandfather, or great-grandmother [Amy Hall Boger]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Nope. Did-- Speaker 2: Well, I did meet my--some of them I did. My grandfather's side, I did not. On my grandmother's [Grace Collins Boger] side I met my great-grandmother [Octavia Lucas Collins] and my great-grandfather [Walter Collins], well my stepfather. Speaker 1: Now, what was the origin? Was everyone black or were they mixed? Speaker 2: Mixed. Speaker 1: Mixed. What were they mixed with? Speaker 2: Indian [Native American], Irish, most, mostly Irish. I think-- Speaker 1: So, this is your mother's-- Speaker 2: For sure, I know that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) parents? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, they came over from Ireland or you said--? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My--actually, no. They, my grandmother's father was Irish, and, so, I guess he came over (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --from Ireland, you know. My grandmother's mother, I mean, she lived in Wisconsin. She was actually an elocution, elocutionist. She used to, she would perform for, you know, like readings. And, in with the Irish dialects, with different dialects and stuff. She was, she was kind of an actress. And, she didn't marry until quite late. And, she married this guy who was kind of--this Irish guy, who was a gambler. And, so, he came and went. And, eventually, and, but, there were--my brother, my mother, there were, let's see, two brothers and her and my aunt, you know, she had a sister as well-- Speaker 1: So, it's four of them total? Speaker 2: Yeah. And so, they all, you know, at one point my grandmother's mother split (laughter), you know, they split up. And, eventually she married someone else, a German man, who was a farmer in Wisconsin. And, he, and you know, then they lived together for, I mean, they were married. And, it's interesting because the record show her--my mother showed me, you know, she, the record show her being his property or, yeah. On, you know, for--they married-- Speaker 1: What kind of property, I mean what--? Speaker 2: I, well, you know, no, I'm sorry, not, I think they called her his housekeeper or something like that. I believe that's what the term was. But, it, so, they, but they, you know, stayed together and lived together or many years in Wisconsin and then eventually they moved to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: And, her mixed was, she was, so she was Irish? Your grandmother was Irish and her-- Speaker 2: And, African American. Speaker 1: Because, because her father, and then, and then black? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So, she, the four siblings were Irish and black and one being your mot--and they, and then your grandmother has your mother? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, you, and your grandmother-- Speaker 2: And, my grandfather, I think there was some Indian, and African American. I don't think-- Speaker 1: But, your grandfather was considered black? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, my grandmother as well, even though she was quite fair-skinned. And, in fact, her birth certificate showed white, on her birth certificate. But, she, she never, you know, she always, I mean, my grandfather was darker than she was, so. Speaker 1: Where was you grandmother born? Speaker 2: She was born in Wisconsin also. Wash- Waukesha, Wisconsin. So, you know, they (laughter) all these places, I mean, there were a fair amount of Afri- there were some blacks and some Indians in Wisconsin around that time. It's not like there was, you know, nobody there. Obviously, there were-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --people there. But, not many, I guess. Story_ID: 303619 Speaker 1: At what point were you, I mean, now coming to your mother [Jeanne Boger Jones] and father, they married and left? Speaker 2: They married, when they married, my mother, they married in, I think it was 1944. And, so, my father was in the [U.S.] Navy at that time. And, so, they met at a friends' house who that friend subley--subsequently became my godmother and, in Evanston, Illinois, because my father was stationed at Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois] in the Navy. Speaker 1: So, what was your father's name? Speaker 2: Mark Jones [Mark Jones, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Mark Jones. And, when was, what's his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born in Indianapolis, Indiana. And, he was born in October, 1920, also. And, so, so, for the first year or maybe even two years, my mother and I basically lived with my [maternal] grandparents [Grace Collins Boger and Thomas Boger, Sr.]. And, my mother worked as a lab, laboratory technician. She graduated from college [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and, and she actually wanted to be a doctor. But, apparently my grandfather thought that wasn't the right--he didn't approve of that. He wanted to spare her all of the troubles, you know, because-- Speaker 1: Because she was--? Speaker 2: A woman, and black, and everything, and so he really didn't encourage her to do that. But, that was something she always wanted to do. And, I think she's always regretted not doing that. But, she became a lab technician. And, she worked in Aurora [Illinois] at a hospital, big hospital called Copley Hospital [Rush-Copley Medical Center, Aurora, Illinois]. And, she, you know, so, and my father was in the Navy and so. Story_ID: 303620 Speaker 1: So before we talk about your father [Mark Jones, Jr.], I want just a couple more questions about your mother [Jeanne Boger Jones]. How would you sum her up as a person? First as a child, as you saw her growing up as a child. And, then a reflection as an adult. How-- Speaker 2: I think she was always pretty serious child. Somehow, I mean, she's a serious person now. So, I think she was pretty serious then too. And, I think she wan- always wanted to be, she's pretty determined. She like, and she can stand up for herself but in a very kind of quiet way. And, so, I guess, you would never describe her as being openly rebellious or anything like that, but just determined to sort of have her way. And, eventually, usually, eventually she prevails, takes time (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Sometimes, she usually prevails. So, I think she was a serious, serious--but, I mean, she like to have fun. I mean, she, she went to, she went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and, and then she went to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. And, so, I think, I think there was some feeling that there was, she was partying too much. My, my uncle [Thomas Boger, Jr.] went to Howard and graduated from Howard, and he went to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] and then he went to Howard dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.]. And, I think my mother followed and I think there was feeling that there was not enough (laughter) serious, too much partying going on. I really don't know why she transferred. I'm not quite sure. But, but she went to the University of Chicago. And, she also went to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] for a year. So, she moved around a lot. She didn't like Northwestern that much, and went to the University of Chicago after that. I think she--Northwestern at the time she went there, black student couldn't live in the dorms or anything and so, you know, she had to live with family friends in Evanston [Illinois]. And, then, and then she went to University of Chicago after that. And, she graduated from there in 1941. I think she probably just wanted to be done with it (laughter). Speaker 1: Did she, did she ever share any stories outside of that about Northwestern and the dorms, about racial issues of the time? Speaker 2: No. That's the only thing she ever said to me about that. But, she, but they had friends, you know, they had a lot of friends in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Of all nationalities? Speaker 2: And, she--well, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mostly black-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As far as I know. I mean, she had white friends, you know. But, but, you know having white friends and then being allowed to participate fully as a black student in the school activities, completely different thing. And, you know, she'd grown up in an environment that was mostly white. So, it's not like this was a foreign experience for her. She was, you know, comfortable, navigating those waters, easily. But, she, but, socially, I mean, you didn't mix. So, you know, she, she had a lot of friends in Chicago, and as did my uncle. But, their social environment was, you know, almost exclusively black. Story_ID: 303621 Speaker 1: What was your father [Mark Jones, Jr.] like? Speaker 2: Well, he, he grew up in a family of eight, eight well, I think it was more. But, I think two, two--he became the oldest because two others died at childbirth before him, so. And, he--in Indianapolis [Indiana]--and, so, he was pretty adventurous. And, he always liked to try things, new things, things that, you know, I don't know, he saw himself as a very dashing kind of guy, I think (sneeze). Speaker 1: Bless you. Speaker 2: I'm allergic to something in here (laughter), I know. He saw himself as kind of of a dashing kind of a guy, I think. He liked to play tennis. He was very smart. He went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. But, he had to leave because he--they couldn't afford it. His family couldn't afford it after-- Speaker 1: So, then what did he do? Speaker 2: Then he joined the [U.S.] Navy. And, he was, I think he worked as a cook or something like that, you know, something that he didn't particularly like. And, he, I don't actually know what made--and, so then when he got of the Navy, he went to Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois]. And, then he went medic- he went to law school [Loyola University Chicago School of Law, Chicago, Illinois]. I not quite sure what decided him. I think, at one time he told me, he was either gonna be on one side of the law or the other, you know, and so, he decided I guess, that it would be better to (laughter)-- Speaker 1: To be a lawyer then to be (laughter) locked down. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, so he did. And, you know, he played tennis. He was always experimenting with food and everything. I remember as kids, you know, he used to always--I mean, I had piz- I was three years old or four years old, I had pizza. I remember it now, you know, gumbo. All these things that we take for granted now, but in those days, who ev- who knew, who ever heard of this stuff. But, you know, he would always--so, I, you know, I learned to eat all kinds of things as a result because he was always bring home these dishes. Speaker 1: Did he talk about this travels? Did he travel the world in the Navy? Speaker 2: He didn't travel the world. But, I remember he went to some places. I'm not sure of all the places he went. 'Cause I don't think he traveled the world, really. He, I think he probably joined thinking he was going to, but in the end I think he didn't. But, I know he went to Hawaii and I know he didn't like it there. We guess-- Speaker 1: And, he didn't like it because? Speaker 2: I think at the time, you know, again, it was segregated or at least his experience in the Navy was such that, you know. He felt, he was segregated anyway. And, so, he said he would never go. I know, I used to ask him, you know, "Dad can we go to Hawaii, (laughter) vacation? I wanna go to Hawaii." He said, "Never going to Hawaii. It's--that's out, we're not going to Hawaii. It's not, you know, we're not going." But, he said it was such a--I knew something had happened. I didn't know what happened but he never talked about it. But, I know that was completely out of the question. Story_ID: 303622 Speaker 1: Did he [Pool-Eckert's father, Mark Jones, Jr.] talk about racial issues at home, at all? Speaker 2: Well, indirectly, because my father was very involved in Chicago [Illinois] politics, very involved. He, when he was in school, and when he was in law school [Loyola University Chicago School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], he also worked for the local politicians. He was, he was a ward, oh, God what do they--an alderman. No, he wasn't an alderman. He was a precinct captain, and precinct captains was basically like campaign, I mean, they were, they were the alderman's lieutenants in the neighborhoods. And, when we moved to Chicago--what would happened was is that my [maternal] grandparents [Grace Collins Boger and Thomas Boger, Sr.] gave my parents money to buy a building in Chicago on the West Side. Speaker 1: Your mom [Jeanne Boger Jones] and dad? Speaker 2: And, so, with that building they bought, they rented out apartments and we had one apartment. And, that allowed my father to, you know, he worked but he also, they made money from this. And, you know, supported themselves and that allowed him to go to school also, same time. And, so, he--that neighborhood was changing when we moved to Chicago. Speaker 1: What was the neighborhood? Speaker 2: When we moved there it was predominately Jewish, and you know, when we left it was all black. It didn't take long. Well, I don't know how long it took, hard for me to really know. But, they--you know I'm not quite sure how long we lived there, we lived in two houses, one, you know, block away from the other. But, I know I went to kindergarten there [George Howland Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. And, then I went to a private school [St. Edmund School; Chicago International Charter School - Washington Park Campus, Chicago, Illinois] in second grade, and then I went back to public school in third or fourth grade, I forget now, fourth grade [William Penn Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. And, then I went back to the same private school in sixth grade. And, then we moved to the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], so. And, then I think I was in seventh grade then, seventh and eighth [Kenwood High School; Kenwood Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], you know, seventh grade, or junior high as it would be known today. But, so, for that period of time, so I guess, you could say in like five years it changed. But, it was-- Speaker 1: But, when you first moved there it was a Jewish-- Speaker 2: White-- Speaker 1: --community? Speaker 2: It was Jewish and Polish. Speaker 1: And, Polish? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, you father was instrumental in this local politics? Speaker 2: Yeah. He was very involved in local politics so he knew people, you know, everybody. And, by the time he left, he was the campaign manager for someone who ultimately--what is his name, Ben [Benjamin F. Lewis]? I have to think about his name. It was--I don't even understand how I'm forgetting this guy's name right now. But, anyway, he was the first, he became the first black alderman. And, on the night of his election, he was in his office and somebody came in and killed him. Story_ID: 303623 Speaker 1: The alderman who was killed, his name is Ben Lewis [Benjamin F. Lewis], and he and my father [Mark Jones, Jr.] were great friends. And, and like I said, he worked to get him elected and he became, you know, the black, the first black alderman of Chicago's [Illinois] 24th Ward. That's where we lived on the West Side. And, so, he was killed that night in his office, shot dead. The--nobody was every found, yeah, they never found out who did it. Speaker 2: Do you remember the night at all? Speaker 1: No. I was in, actually, I was in--it was 1966. And, I was in--could that be right? No. I'm sorry. It was 1962 [sic. 1963] and I was away at college [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], my first year. And, the reason I know about this is because I was reading Time magazine. And, I look in Time magazine and there was, there was this article and his picture. Well, I just was completely shaken up because I know, you know, what good friends they were. And, and, so, I called my dad immediately, you know, and he was quite shaken up about the whole thing. And, they asked him afterwards if he would take Ben Lewis' place. Speaker 2: And, your mom [Jeanne Boger Jones] said, no way? Speaker 1: My father said, no way (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I got the message. However, Ben Lewis was, he did one thing for my father before, you know, he died as a result of this. You know in Chicago how these political machines work. He became, he was, I'm not quite sure how this work, but, he was nominated to run for judge, circuit court judge in Chicago. So, he did that, my father. And, he became, you know, circuit court judge. And, so (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Was he one of the first? Speaker 1: Yes, he was one of the--and, at the time, the youngest, so. Speaker 2: What impact did that have on the family? Were you guy's targets of some sort of retaliation because your father was this black political figure? Speaker 1: Well, actually, it's interesting, 'cause before that my father had been a state's--at that point, you know, he graduated from law school [Loyola University Chicago School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] and everything, and he'd been state's attorney. And, so, there--it was interesting things that would happen. My fath- my father never talked about things, you know, racial things per se, but I remember when he was state's attorney. He's, he, because he knew a lot of people, his friends were a lot of the people who were like union organizers and people like that, in Chicago, Chicago history, you know. And, he nee- and he spent time with these people and they used to come by the house and everything, and you know. And, so, I, so my father was very political, and very progressively political in those days. And, I remember him saying to me, you know, "If, if the police come by and they want to, you know, and they're looking for me and I'm not here, don't let them in." Because, you know, I used to come home from school and sometimes, you know, my mother would be working or something and I'd be home by myself or with my brothers [Marcus Jones and Marvin Jones] or something like that. And-- Speaker 2: What did that mean to you? Speaker 1: That meant that, that you can't trust them. Don't let them in the house. They're not--they're like everybody else, don't let people in the house. It was what we were always told and, you know, we had a latch on the door. But, you know, I was little so I had to open the door, you know, to see. And, yeah, in fact, a couple of times police did come by. And, but, they didn't like try to get into the house or anything like that. But, they were-- Speaker 2: Was their presence enough to let your father know that he was being watched and to-- Speaker 1: I don't know what it meant to him. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I mean, it would've been regarding a specific case. It could certainly been legitimate, you know, I don't know. But, he said, "Just, just don't let anybody in the house." Speaker 2: What were your-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Go ahead. Speaker 1: And, then, yeah, I mean, so, he did--you know, so there were things that happened but not, I mean, I mean, everything had (laughter) you know, sort of racial overtones-- Story_ID: 303624 Speaker 1: I mean, look, I remember when I was a little girl in elementary school, around the same time--well, when I lived in Aurora [Illinois] with, and I was little, two, three, four, and I used to play with the kids in the neighborhood, they were all white. And, I used to play with the boys next door and down the street. I was very good friends with them. They used to come over all the time, and we used to play in the back, in the backyard in the sand pile, or you know, ride around on our bikes or things like that. But, my [maternal] grandfather [Thomas Boger, Sr.] would never really let them--he--they didn't wanna let people in the house. He had a very nice house as I remember it. And, they never would allow strangers in the house. Just, you know, they could come to, they--my father [Mark Jones, Jr.] had, we had like a porch like a side enclosed porch area, you know. And, if somebody like hurt themselves or one of my friends hurt themselves or something and they, they would, you know, "Dr. Boger, Dr. Boger," we'll he'd see them out on the porch, you know. It would be like a, it was porch but you know, he treat it like a separate examining room or something like that, you know. And, I don't ever remember my friends every coming in, in our house, only relatives and, you know, friends of my grandparents. And, good friends, but never neighbors or people like that. And, I remember once, you know, I was, why? Why can't, you know, why can't, you know, as a kid so and so. And, my grandfather just said, you know, "Well, you just never let everybody know everything you have, what you have." And, I, I don't know, somehow that is, I've always remembered that. And, when I was in--it was weird because then when I went to Chicago [Illinois] and, you know, used to go after school to play with kids and stuff, and it was interesting because I had--my friends were, the schools were predominately Jewish and so those were mostly my Chicago, my little friends from school. And, if I, after school if I went to their house or something, it was okay, I could go to their house. But, for some reason they were never allowed to come to my house. Well, their parents didn't allow them to come to my house. So, you know, the kids would come to the door and they went, oh, no, you know, and so my mother [Jeanne Boger Jones] would talk to their parents you know, or she, or she would say to the little girl, "Yeah, you can come in," she'd say, "But, you know, Marquita [HistoryMaker Marquita Pool-Eckert] can't come over to your house until you can come to our house." So, in a way then it was sort of a reverse thing. But, it was like these kids were afraid to come to my house. And, I, you know, it was odd (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: The social mores, you know. Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: It was odd. And, so, I don't--when I was a kid, you know, unless my parents, unless they were friends of my parents, children of my parents' friends, those were the only people that ever sort of came and went in my house. But, neighbors, be they black or white, or whatever, they didn't, you know. And, I remember one time describing my living room to this one kid when we, we'd moved to another house by this time and it was a really nice house. And, I said, yeah, I have a grand piano. And, we had a wall with a big photograph that covered--these people, I mean, they left it, people's whose house, we bought the house from. It was a big black and white photograph of a lake scene. It was really cool. I thought it was really great. I don't think my parents liked it that much. But, they left it there. I loved it. 'Cause I used to go and look, you know, it was like if you had a big digital photograph that covered the whole wall or something and it was some scene that you--I didn't know what it was supposed to be of or what, you know. But, it was--and, so-- Speaker 2: You were telling (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was describing it to this kid, and they didn't believe it. "You do not." "Yes, I do." "You do not." But, you know, so I said, "Well come over, come in." "No, we can't," you know. So, I don't know, it was odd. Story_ID: 303625 Speaker 1: So your father's [Mark Jones, Jr.]--what was your father's parents like? We talked about your mother's parents [Grace Collins Boger and Thomas Boger, Sr.]. And, what were their names? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Your grandmother on your father's side. Speaker 2: Yeah, Pearl Campbell Jones, and my father's name was Mark Elmer Jones, so my father was junior. Speaker 1: And, I'm looking at it here, Pearl Campbell Jones was born 7/30/1899 [July 30, 1899] in Algood, Tennessee. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, I've never been to Tennessee I have to say. So, I don't really know that much about her family. I don't know anything about her family or really or his family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just knew them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, we used, we used to go there-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --in the summer and visit them all the time. Speaker 1: Not to Tennessee though? Speaker 2: No, to Indianapolis [Indiana]. Speaker 1: So, they moved to Indianapolis also? Speaker 2: Yeah. After they got married and move the Indianapolis, and that's where my father was born and that's where all this brothers and sisters were born and raised? Speaker 1: What did they look like? Were they mixed, or just--? Speaker 2: They were pretty dark complected, you know, I think they were mixed with Indian [Native American] if anything, yeah. Speaker 1: And, what-- Speaker 2: In fact, I'm sure that's the case. There was mix of Indian and, and African. Speaker 1: So, did you father ever talk, I mean, did you every have any interaction with the grandparents, you father's parents? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, so, you knew them? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Absolutely. Speaker 1: Just not their families? Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Exactly. Speaker 1: All right. So, what were they like? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What are some stories they told about their lives as (unclear)? Speaker 2: They didn't tell me any (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: No. They didn't. I mean, but, but, they were great. I mean, it was so much fun to go there all the time, you know. And, we'd go there every summer, and maybe another time of year too. But, I only seem to dimly remember the summers. And, you know, because I had lots of cousins because you know his brothers and sisters had kids and everything. And, I was the oldest, so, I could kind of tag along with my--I had one aunt, who was my father's youngest sisters, who's actually my aunt. But, we were only separated by a few years. And, she and I were great friends, you know. And, I used to tag around after her all--I loved her. And, let's see, she used to play with me. And, I remember they had this great basement, and they had a swing in the basement. Now, I'm trying to figure out how big that could've been. At the time, it was perfectly big enough, you know, for me to swing back and forth. And, I remember as soon as we'd go there, that was the first thing, I'd head to the basement on the swing. And, it was just like rope and a board. But, I loved the swing and I could stay on there and play for hours, on this swing in the basement. And, I don't know what else was down in the basement. I don't remember, dimly, what was there, you know. I just remember a lot of stuff. But, I remember there was enough room for this swing and she and I used to play down there. And, some--my grandmother had this great garden. She had a garden. It was beautiful. And, she had vegetable, and she had flowers, I mean, and this was her thing, in the backyard. Speaker 1: So, she was a southern, very southern? Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess. Yeah. I mean, it wasn't a big house, actually. I mean, I think it was three bedrooms. But, they had all these kids and everything, so it was crowded. But, they built this house. And, so, that's where everyone--they built this house and that's where they lived their whole life. They never moved out of that house. And, so, they, he, my grandfather [Mark Jones, Sr.] worked for the post office [U.S. Postal Service]. And, so, and I don't remember if my grandmother ever worked. I think she was a domestic but, I actually, never-- Speaker 1: Never saw her working. Speaker 2: --was conscious of her working, you know. I don't know. I knew sometimes she used to come and go. But, you know, I guess because we were there vacationing or something--I don't know what, she took time off or what. But, I know she was a great cook. That's what I know. Speaker 1: Is that why you like the ribs and collard greens? Speaker 2: Actually, you know what, I never had her ribs. But, she made the most fabulous ham. I mean, I can taste it now and see it. She made a ham every time we showed up, she made ham and, you know--I just remember the perver- table proverbial sort of groaning with stuff. And, so, we always used to have these big family dinners whenever we shown up, you know. Ham with the pineapple on it and all that. I mean, I mean, I can taste it now. And, it's just interesting 'cause my father took that up. And, he always made hams on special occasions, special hams, Smithfield Hams, all these hams, again, experimenting, you know. But, he always made the best hams. And, he was sort of known for that, one of the things he was known for. Story_ID: 303626 Speaker 1: So, because your mother [Jeanne Boger Jones] is one of the founders of Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] African Americans' Genealogical Society [Afro-American Genealogical and Historical Society of Chicago], has she traced back relatives that, that go far beyond your comprehension of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she has. Speaker 1: How far back has she gone? Speaker 2: She's gone pretty far back. I mean, like at least seven generations probably, I think, depending on which branch, I think a little bit more. Speaker 1: Right. But, can you give me like just a few legends, like, people that, oh, this person did this and--? Speaker 2: Well, one person--well, Charlie Hall, Uncle Charlie [Charles E. Hall]. He was a-- Speaker 1: Do you know his birthdate? Speaker 2: No, but-- Speaker 1: It's way back. Speaker 2: --but, I have his dishes. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: He was, he worked in the Department of--in the Census, department of statistics [U.S. Census Bureau] or something like--I'm not really sure what it was called in Washington [D.C.] for Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt]. He had an--at a certain point, he had advanced to the point where he should really have been promoted, but they couldn't promote him because he would be sort of overseeing white people, and at that time that wasn't the way things were done. So, they filled a separate department and, of about, black people, and he was in charge of this department, this branch of the census that dealt with statistics about black people. And, so, you know, he--and he used to write, you know, my mother had all these things that he used to write notes and things, letters, 'cause in those days people corresponded, you know, letters, this and that. There were, you know, columns, social columns about who was where and everything. And, so, he was pretty interesting, living in Washington. And, I have his dishes. I have a complete set of dishes of his. Speaker 1: What are they like, those dishes? Speaker 2: They're Haviland China [Haviland & Co.], very expensive. They are, I think it's a place setting for, I think, I have a elev- I think I have more than eleven, I'm not sure how many more, I'm not sure. But, at least eleven. It's an odd number, you know. So, I don't know if something got lost or exactly what, you know, there for--if it's really twelve and it's not twelve full settings, I'm not sure. But, the, and they have all these pieces of place settings, you know. Ever--I mean, the ramekins, the dishes set, bread plates, the desert plates, the bowls for everything. The ser- plate which would be, what we consider them to be chargers, the ladles, the serv- I have everything. Which I--and they are gold rimed, and so, you know, of course, they never see the dishwasher (laughter). But, you know, they're gold rimmed, eighteen karat gold rimmed, and I have almost the complete set. I mean, there a couple of pieces that got cracked and you know. And, my mother gave me these. And, so, I'd bring 'em out at Christmas, and we'll have a big Christmas dinner, I'd bring 'em out, and, you know, it's a real ordeal because you have to unpack all this stuff. But, I figure if-- Speaker 1: And, they're Uncle Charlie's dishes. Speaker 2: Yeah, Uncle Charlie's dishes. And, so, because they were, you could see they were clearly made for a time--he obviously entertained a lot. And, you could see that he lived in a time when they served in courses and they had people serving because you have so many little plates and dishes for every, every course, now. And, so, you know, it's just an interesting--I love doing it 'cause it makes me feel like, well, it's sort of special, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah, of course. Speaker 2: Something that was happening in 18--1920, I mean these are old. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, so, he's one of the people that we, you know, that my mother has told me about. Story_ID: 303627 Speaker 1: Well, my grandmother--my great-grandmother, Julia Fletcher. Again, on my mother's [Jeanne Boger Jones] side. She, I don't know that much about her, again, Wisconsin, and everything. I don't know that much about her but it's interesting what I--but, we have her lamps. She had these lamps. They're like Tiffany lamps, and she was, I don't know, the great collector of lamps. And, she had these lamps and they are really incredible, old, obviously. And, so, my mother has some, and I have one. I had two but one of them got broken, regrettably. But, but I have one that belonged to my mother's--my grandmother's [Grace Collins Boger] sister, and she gave it to me; my Aunt Louise [ph.]. And, so, and then, then I have a, my grandmother's, my, let's see, my grandfather's [Thomas Boger, Sr.] brother, I believe, I hope I have this right, I'm not sure, who got killed on Armistice Day, World War I [WWI]. And, I have a letter that he wrote with a flower that was pressed, you know. Speaker 2: What did that letter say? Speaker 1: I think, do I still have it or did I give back? I may have given that back to my mother (laughter) for safekeeping. Well, you know, it just-- Speaker 2: What did it say? Speaker 1: You know, he just talked about being over there and fighting hard and trying to do America proud and trying to show what, you know, the colored boys can do, and how, you know, they're--and, and how they really fought honorably. And, really wanted to show who they were and what they were made of, and how glad, you know, he would--the war would be over soon, and how glad he would be to get home to see everyone. Speaker 2: Did he make it back? Speaker 1: No. He was killed on Armistice Day. Story_ID: 303628 Speaker 1: When you were a kid, what are your earliest memories of growing up in, in Illinois? Because you grew up in Aurora [Illinois] as well (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I grew up in Aurora, and I, you know, my first memory of my father [Mark Jones, Jr.] is him coming home from--on leave and-- Speaker 1: Out of the [U.S.] Navy? From the Navy? Speaker 2: Yeah, just, yeah, and he just came home for a couple of days, you know. And, he had, you know I told you he like to try all these things, right. And, so, I remember he brought lobsters and, you know, I don't know, when he brought lobsters. And, I had these pajamas with the feet in them, you know, and a little--and, I remember this lobster on the rug in the living room coming after me. And, me being frightened out of my wits, and trying to go backwards in these pajamas (laughter), with the feet in them, screaming, I remember that and, I remember my father, and, so. And, then, and then I don't know why that seems to be my first memory of my father, which I don't know. Story_ID: 303629 Speaker 1: What do you remember about your elementary school? That, not the-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --the private one [St. Edmund School; Chicago International Charter School - Washington Park Campus, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, the other thing, well wait-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, the other thing I remember is, you see my, we had--remember you asked me earlier where my favorite vacation spots was and I said it was Idlewild, Michigan because that's where our family summer house is. So, a patient had given, a grateful patient turns out had given my [maternal] grandfather [Thomas Boger, Sr.], this is the story that--as I understand it, he--his house. You know, in Idlewild, on the lake [Lake Idlewild] and, you know, at the time, I mean, Idlewild was this black town. They were some real estate people had bought it, developers [Idlewild Resort Company], and they were developing it as a black town, you know, they had this lake and they-- Speaker 1: Were these, were the developers black? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, they divided it up and sold lots. And, so, this was a big thing. And, so, people went, came from Detroit [Michigan] and Chicago [Illinois] and all over to Idlewild. And, so, I remember as a kid getting up in the middle of the night and, you know, 'cause it was long ride then. I mean, it's four and a half hours from Chicago (laughter) today. But, at that time, it was probably more like eight or something, I don't know, seemed like it anyway. I just knew we'd pack for days at my grandparents' house, packs for days. It was so exciting, you know, all these boxes of food and everything that we would take up there, you know. And, we'd take two cars because my grandfather would come back, you know, after a certain time and we'd stay up there. And, and, so, we'd get up and it would be predawn, and, and we'd load everything into the car and everything and it just, I just--and it was exciting but of course, pre-dawn, you know, I've never been a pre-dawn person, but, so, (laughter) even then. Well, you know, lunch, big lunch, everything. And, we'd get in the car. And, sometimes I'd go with my grandparents alone, sometimes I'd go with my mother [Jeanne Boger Jones] or my father [Mark Jones, Jr.], you know, they would come alone or you know. And, so, we would drive up there and along the way there were certain places we could stop; couldn't stop everywhere. Speaker 1: Where could you stop? Do you remember? Speaker 2: I know we stopped in Benton Harbor [Michigan]. Speaker 1: And, what was in Benton Harbor that you could stop at? Speaker 2: Like a gas station, or-- Speaker 1: A gas station. Speaker 2: And, I think we knew people in Benton Harbor also. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: But, you could, generally you could gas up anyplace. Speaker 2: Yeah, but we didn't (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. But you just couldn't buy--you couldn't--? Speaker 2: Well, you, yeah, you didn't gas up, I mean, you wanted to stop and go to the bathroom and stuff, so,-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You didn't wanna gas up where you couldn't-- Speaker 1: At a place you wouldn't use the bathroom. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and there was, so there were certain place where you could go. There were a lot of towns we passed by though that I thought was just great. I couldn't understand why we were pass--let's stop here, you know. Nope. And, we'd keep going and so we had lunch and all this, normally we would stop at fruit stands along the way and things like that. And, but, there were certain towns, like I think--I don't think we ever stopped in Holland [Michigan]. And, which is, you know, kind of along the way. And, I forget, I think Muskegon [Michigan], we stopped. We could stop in Muskegon, but a lot of little towns along the way we couldn't. And, again, you know, looking back on it now, I mean, we'd get to certain points and, and we'd all get out, you know, it'll be like half way. And, there was this, and you know, it would be, oh, we're halfway there and we could stop and eat, and eat our lunch and gas up and do all the things, and then we'd, you know, head out again. And, I mean, we started really early because, you know, you wanted to get there before it got dark, because in part, because you were opening the house, you know, you don't wanna be like trying to open the house in the dark. You don't know what's happened and, over the year-- Speaker 1: Critters, or (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Exactly, you know. And, so, we would--and then we'd ride--we'd, the white town that was right next to Idlewild is called Baldwin [Michigan]. Baldwin has this great, it was sort of the main town, main town where you went for everything. Because Idlewild was basically residentially, well essentially, I mean there was no commercial district in Idlewild except an entertainment district. But, it, so, they had a--there's this--it's still there today, there's an ice cream store called Jones [Jones' Homemade Ice Cream Parlor, Baldwin, Michigan], and that was the great thing. My [maternal] grandmother [Grace Collins Boger] and I would race ahead to go to Jones's to stop and get a soda or something like that, or ice cream as we pulled into town. I mean, that was like the big thing. And, of course, I realize now that was my grandmother's play to let my grandfather go ahead (laughter) and be first to open the house in case there were any critters or anything, you know. By the time we got there, the door was opened and the (laughter), you know, the shutters were coming down (laughter). And, we'd be sipping in the ice cream parlor. Story_ID: 303630 Speaker 1: Now you talked about your town, was it Ottawa [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Idlewild [Michigan]. Speaker 1: Idlewild. Speaker 2: I-D-L-E-W-I-L-D, Michigan, which is still there. Speaker 1: Which is still there. Is it-- Speaker 2: And, we still have a house there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) still a black town? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was the entertainment? You said there was an entertainment district. Speaker 2: Oh, it was a big district entertainment. Speaker 1: What was the entertainment? Who would come to town? Speaker 2: They had two clubs. And, one of them was the Paradise [Paradise Club, Idlewild, Michigan] and one of them was, God what was it called [Flamingo Club, Idlewild, Michigan]? Phil Giles, I forget the name of this--it was like a bar. Not really a bar, but they had floor shows. And, you know, it part of the Chitlin' Circuit, sort of. And, so-- Speaker 1: So, yeah, go, I just also want you to include some of the names of the people that toured on the circuit, if you know them? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I saw Jackie Wilson there as a kid, you see, they had matinees and if you were old enough you could go to the matinees so I, you know, so I saw Jackie Wilson perform there. Barbara McNair, Della Reese [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett], I think Sam Cooke was there, but I never saw him. Lou Rawls. Somebody told me the Four, I don't know, if the Four Tops were there or not. Somebody told me they were, but, some, you know, some of those, sort of quartet people, you know. So, no, it was quite, it was quite the, you know, spot, really in the day, in the '50s [1950s]. It was a town that basically--there were quite a number of doctors there. And, quite a number of people who were very successfully in their day, and certainly successful enough to have a summer house, on a lake. The Jones brothers [Edward Jones, George Jones and McKissack Jones] were there. You know, the Policy Kings, they had a house, right, actually, right near us. Right next door actually. And, (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And, let's see, there was, who was the famous heart surgeon [Daniel Hale Williams], black? Speaker 1: I can't think of his name. I know who you're-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Talking about. Speaker 2: My mother [Jeanne Boger Jones] will kill me (laughter), because they were good friends of the family. Anyway, I'll think of it. But, but, they had a house there. And, so people who, you know, it was a very exclusive kind of a place, you know. Although, as I realize now, you had the poor people who lived there all year round and then you had, you know, the summer people. We were the summer people. And, a lot of people were related, cousins and people like that, you know, so you basically were related or very good friends with people who lived around the lake [Lake Idlewild]-- Speaker 1: Close to you. Speaker 2: And, they were your close summer friends. And, people from, you know, Milwaukee [Wisconsin], from Saginaw [Michigan], from Detroit [Michigan], from Chicago [Illinois], from you know, the Midwest. Speaker 1: So, that basically was the Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] of the-- Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: --of the Midwest. Story_ID: 303631 Speaker 1: We are going to talk about your education, and it starts in Aurora [Illinois] in kindergarten. Speaker 2: Well, actually, no. It start--I actually didn't go to--I went to nursery school in Aurora. But, I went to kindergarten in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We moved. We had moved to the Chicago by that time. I think I was four or five when we moved to Chicago. Speaker 1: What about first grade? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was in Chicago. Speaker 1: Where did you go to school? What was the name of the school? Speaker 2: I went to a public school called, I think I went to Howland [George Howland Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. I think that was my first public school. Again, on the South Side all these streets were--all these schools were off--I went to two school when I was, two public schools there on the, on the West Side. And, they were both off kind of 16th Street, which is a major thoroughfare in Chicago, or was on the West Side (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you remember about the first grade? Any of the teachers? Speaker 2: Yeah. I remember my kindergarten teacher. She was a little short Jewish woman. I really liked her a lot. I forget her name now. But, and, I remember we could to take naps in school. And, I liked her because she called me by my right name. And, I was very good in kindergarten, you know, model kindergarten student (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And I, and first grade too, you know, because I already knew how to read and write. I knew how to write my name-- Speaker 1: From? Speaker 2: My parents [Jeanne Boger Jones and Mark Jones, Jr.] taught me. And, I knew, I--well, I knew the alphabet and all like that, and I was learning to read. Speaker 1: So, why did you switch from public to private? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: After the first grade? Speaker 2: After Howland, then we, we moved a block for some reason after my, my first kindergarten and first grade, we spent (unclear). Then we moved to, out of the building that we lived in to another house that we bought which was on the next street over. Really nice house, big. And, that was the one with the piano and the big picture. And, and that house it was (laughter) a different district, so I had to move. So, let's see now, let me see if I'm remember this in the right order. Yeah, after second grade that's when I did go to this--after first grade I went to this private school, across town, St. Edmund's Episcopalian Schools [St. Edmund School; Chicago International Charter School - Washington Park Campus, Chicago, Illinois], black school, small, Episcopalian. I loved it. I mean, I loved it. Speaker 1: The teachers were at the private school, were all of the teachers black? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were. And, we used to come with several--I used to ride over to the South Side 'cause it was on the other side of town. And, so, my parents and a couple of other parents in the neighborhood who also sent their kids there, we car pooled. You know, every parent had a turn, a week, it was their turn. And one guy's, one father who picked us up, he was a high school teacher at a high school on the South Side, DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois]. So, he would pick us up after school and bring us all home. Speaker 1: What was-- Speaker 2: So, and it seemed like, I don't know, it just seemed so far, you know, going from (laughter)-- Speaker 1: From the South Side. Speaker 2: --one side of town to the other. It seemed far. The thing I always remember in the morning going to school was, 'cause the school's on Michigan [Avenue] and I think 60th [sic. 61st Street] and Michigan, and we used to pass the Butternut Bread Company bakery in the morning, and what a great smell in the morning, you know. Used to perk me right up (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --going to school. Speaker 1: What, how would you described yourself as a student? What type of a student were you? Speaker 2: I was good. I was really a good student. I, you know, I loved school. And, I always liked reading and everything. And, so, I was a good student. I always had good grades. And, I stayed in that school for a year. I think I didn't stay there longer, I think it was the money, I think my parents couldn't afford it. I think at that period of time, I think that was maybe, my father was still in school, something. I don't remember. I don't know the details. I just know I had to leave there. I couldn't stay there. And, I know I was very sad about it because I really felt that was, you know, I was really--I loved that school. Story_ID: 303632 Speaker 1: So, then when we--when I came, then I came back to go to public school again. We still lived on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] so, but then, like I said, we'd gone, moved into this other district. And, so, I went to a school, still off 16th Street, but in the other directions, you know, but. Speaker 2: Where did you go to high--where did you go to-- Speaker 1: In that school. That was really interesting because that was around the time that I had these issues with, you know, whose house--who could come to my house and who-- Speaker 2: And, that's fourth or fifth grade? What grade is this, third, fourth? Speaker 1: That was--yeah, third, fourth, fifth. Speaker 2: Third, fourth, fifth. Okay. Go ahead. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And, do you remember the name of the school by chance? Speaker 1: Yeah. William Penn [William Penn Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: William Penn. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: William Penn Elementary School? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, the, that school, it was very integrated at the point. It was really mixed. Speaker 2: In what year was this? Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Nineteen--? Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, it was really mixed. And, maybe '59 [1959] or something, I'm not sure. And, my friends were Fili- I had, Filipino. I had white friends, black friends, you know, you know, it was a really a mixed school. And, I really liked this school. And, I remember though one year the school got overcrowded and we had to go to school on shift. Meant that, I don't how they did it. I mean-- Speaker 2: They staggered some. Speaker 1: Yeah, basically. You know, so you're go either early in the morning or late in the--and I remember being separate from my best friend who was a Filipino girl, that was the saddest thing for me 'cause, you know, we didn't really--kind of lost track of each other a little bit after that. But, I remember though, the other thing I didn't like about that school was that the teachers didn't always call me by my right name. And, I remember I--going through the entire fourth grade, the teacher never called me my right name. And, I always felt, you know, once or twice I corrected her but after that I didn't feel that I could because she was the teacher, you know, and so, I couldn't tell her my name wasn't Marguerite. And, so, and she, and I always hated that, you know, that was something. At a point, I really began to hate my name because I felt like people didn't know it, and they could--it was too complicated and everything and I didn't understand it. I asked my parents [Jeanne Boger Jones and Mark Jones, Jr.] to change my name and everything 'cause nobody, you know, teachers wouldn't call me my right, right name. And, I also remember getting report cards at that time where I felt like I always thought I was perfect. But, you know, I'd get a like minus or something every now and then, just to vary it, you know, I feel like (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: They, they just decided, oh, she can't, she can't be all that great, you know, and, they would you, you know. Maybe I wasn't, but I felt that I was. And, I didn't understand why sometimes, you know, my grades weren't as good--perfect as I thought they should be. But, I mean, mean, they were largely perfect, you know. I think the grades were E, C, I don't. E was the best you could get, I remember that. And, so, I remember getting E, you could get E plus, E minus, you know, excellent, that what-- Speaker 2: S, H, S, A. Speaker 1: G, E, G, F, and so, good, excellent, good, fair and I don't know what the failing grade was, D or I don't know. Speaker 2: D (laughter). Speaker 1: Didn't do your work, or I don't know. I forget. But, anyway. But, I remember having real sort of being very conflicted about that, you know. And, then if I, 'cause I, if I talked, if I got bored in class and I talk or something like that with my friends, I'd get a minus 'cause I was talking and my attention, I wasn't--it's not that I didn't do the work, but. And, and then I remember also, I had, I was--I started liking boys. I like the bad boys. And, that was (laughter), you know, they liked me too. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: The bad boys, you know. And, but they, they never, so they used to protect me. I don't know, for some reason they liked me. They felt that I--so their friends didn't mess around with me or something, you know, it was always-- Speaker 2: So, these were the bad boys. Speaker 1: Yeah, these were the bad boys. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: You know, and these were, like the coming home from school things where, you know, they'd sometimes, like they would either walk me home, to be sure I got home, or, you know. And, sometimes I remember one time there was, I got into a fight with a girl who I think, I couldn't understand why she picked a fight. I think now because she liked this guy or something like that, that I liked or something, I don't know. But, you know how you always--Friday night, it was like Friday night fights, you know, end of the week they had--there'd be a big fight out of--after school. And, kids would they would fight, you know, from one end of the block to the other, and over to the next block, and the next block. I mean, this was really getting quite, you know. And, so I remember one Friday, it seemed to be my turn, and I had no idea. I mean, I had no idea. I was completely caught by surprise, you know, you'd come out through the gates, and there all these kids standing around and I'm walking through the gates and all of sudden somebody, this girl comes up to me and she starts pushing me around. Well, I was scared out of my wits. And, as a result, I just went completely berserk and I wailed on this girl, and before I knew it (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I don't know, the fight was over. I don't know what happened (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: She went away, the fight was over. No one ever bothered me again. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I don't know what happened. I don't know what I did. I just know that I did lose, you know, 'cause I was scared, you know. And I just, you know, and I didn't see that I had anybody backing me up anywhere. So, what was I to do, you know. And, that was my first and last street fight. Story_ID: 303633 Speaker 1: And, after that, my parents [Jeanne Boger Jones and Mark Jones, Jr.] took me out of that school and put me back to-- Speaker 2: The private school [St. Edmund School; Chicago International Charter School - Washington Park Campus, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: The private school, yeah. Speaker 2: Now, do you remember, at that time were you aware, and I'm just gonna ask this, and you'll know how to answer it. Were you aware of the fact that you were black? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. When-- Speaker 1: Aware. Speaker 2: Okay. When did you become aware of that? Speaker 1: I think, maybe when I went to the private school. I mean, I guess, I always knew. I always knew. Speaker 2: Yeah. But, you know what I mean, in the sense that-- Speaker 1: Oh, I always knew. Speaker 2: People are gonna discriminate against you, or-- Speaker 1: Well, I knew when, I knew, but I didn't underst- I didn't know--I always knew I was different. Like, my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Collins Boger] would take me to, you know, we went to a black church. We went to, you know, your--and, even though my mother's family was very, very, slight skinned, there was never any question about who we were. They were all very fair skinned. And, I remember, you know, like we'd go downtown, my grandmother and I would go shopping for school things and stuff. My grandmother, she was very proper and everything and her gloves and the whole deal. And, we'd go to the department stores, you know, or dry goods or something, you know. And, we'd get in the elevator and the elevator operators were all black and they all, you know, "Good Morning, Mrs. Boger." "Good morning," so and so and so, you know, "Good morning" and I would there, you know, and everything and we'd go, we'd get the best of treatment. And, because it was more, I knew I was Dr. Boger's [Thomas Boger, Sr.] grand, grandchild. And, that's really-- Speaker 2: But, that's in a special sense that you feel-- Speaker 1: Yeah. And, then we, yeah-- Speaker 2: --black, yeah. Speaker 1: And then we went to a black church and everything. But, when I couldn't do certain things with the kids, you know, I, you know, like when I started going to their houses, you know, my--they didn't want me to go to their houses. They--I think, you know, I used to, I think they were afraid something would happen to me, I don't know. The kid--I never--like we used to play baseball outside in front of my house. And, I played baseball with all the kids, street, you know, all the kids on the block in Aurora [Illinois]. You know, after were moved to Chicago [Illinois] I'd come out there, spend the weekends sometimes, you know, play baseball. And, but, then as we got older, you know, things, I don't know, things started, started getting separated. Of course, I also didn't live there all the time either, so. But, you know, my grandmother would sometimes, one of the things used to worry her was that, I'd be outside a lot and I'd get dark. And, she didn't want me to get so dark, you know, and I'd get dark. And, I loved the dark (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I wanted to be dark (laughter), you know, I love dark. Oh, God, she hated that, you know, come in, you've been out enough, you're getting too dark, you know. You know, so, I always knew I was dark, and I shouldn't, and she didn't want me to get too dark. But, so, I guess, I always know, I don't think there was ever a question, you know. It was just, it took on these different--there, I always knew. I was never confused. I never had any thoughts about it. I never did. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I don't remember not thinking that. Story_ID: 303634 Speaker 1: What was life for you and when you, you went back to the private school [St. Edmund School; Chicago International Charter School - Washington Park Campus, Chicago, Illinois]. Now, we you in junior high school? Speaker 2: I was in sixth grade. Speaker 1: Sixth grade. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, you know. Speaker 1: So, you go from sixth grade to what at this private school? Speaker 2: Actually, again, I was only there for a year, and, oh, it was so great. My--'cause I remembered my friends from before. I was basically in the same class with kids that I knew before. There were some new kids obviously. Speaker 1: If you take the kids out of it-- Speaker 2: Oh, I had a-- Speaker 1: What made those schools--? Speaker 2: I had a teacher, my teacher, I-- Speaker 1: Different? Speaker 2: --loved my teacher. I thought she was just the most beautiful, smartest, wonderful person (laughter), you know. Speaker 1: At the private school? Speaker 2: Yeah, at the private school. And, I, and I also was in the choir. So, every Friday we'd have mass and I sang in the choir. And, we, we had, and I remember they had these, I guess it was just before Easter where if you're gonna get confirmed, you know, you had, you had religious classes and you had to learn the Ten Commandments and all this stuff. And, so, we used to take these, have religion every morning, you know, or, for half an hour or something. And, so, the teacher, your homeroom teacher, whoever it was taught you religion, you know. And, basically, it was telling you about what it was to be an Episcopalian. But, my parents [Jeanne Boger Jones and Mark Jones, Jr.] didn't want me to be an Episcopalian. And, I think back now, this was never said to me, but I believe this is true because I memorized these Ten Commandments up and down perfectly. And, one of the things you had to do in order to get confirmed is, you had to go on--after school on like Friday's or something like that, you had to recite the Ten Commandments. And, Father Martin [Samuel Joseph Martin], the head of the school would, you know, you would sit there and, you know, you had to recite the Ten Commandments and he'd ask you some questions. And, you had I think three chances or something like that. Well, I memorized these Ten Commandments, but always when I would get to this one commandment, he say, "Oh, nope, sorry." And, so, somehow incredibly I never got confirmed because I could never get pass the, whatever commandment it was, the fifth, or sixth or seventh, seventh, I think. I believe now that my parents told them, you know, they didn't want me to be kept aside and not go to religious classes. There was--had to leave the room or whatever would, you know, separate me out from the rest of the kids. So, I think they concocted this whole thing that I didn't learn this so I couldn't be--I mean, they weren't nasty about it. But, it was just, you know, "Oh, sorry, no, I guess, you know, you're not gonna be confirmed this year." And, I basically took it pretty philosophically. I was disappointed but, you know, I wanted to be an Episcopalian like the rest of the kids. But, then one of my teachers said something or made a remark, you know, which made me feel like my parents had said, naw, she's not gonna do that. Anyway, so, I never became an Episcopalian, even though I could continue to sing in the choir and this, I never got confirmed, you know. So, (sneeze)-- Speaker 1: Bless you. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Excuse me. Speaker 1: Bless you. Speaker 2: So, anyway at the end, but I loved, you know, that school. That was--I mean, with--they used to let us listen to the World Series during class when, you know, if we were good and we got all our work done. I realize now, the teachers wanted to hear the World Series, so they had everybody, you know, oh,--and, you know, I just I went to the prom, a sixth grade prom there. It was--you know, it was my first date with this boy I had a crush on, you know. And, so, there were a lot of kind of coming of age things there at this school, you know, first boyfriends, first, you know, it was just, it was a very comfortable environment. Story_ID: 303635 Speaker 1: Where did you go to junior high school? Speaker 2: Well, after that I--my parents [Jeanne Boger Jones and Mark Jones, Jr.], we moved from the West Side to the South Side, to Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. And, so, from then on that, you know, so I went to seventh and eighth grade, it was still an elementary school there, Kenwood [Kenwood High School; Kenwood Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], which is now called Kenwood Academy. But, you know, and I think it is a junior high school. But, I went to school there. And, and then I went to Hyde Park High School [Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] from there. So, we basically never moved after that. Speaker 1: How, what was high school, in junior high school and high school, those years like? Were you in student, were involved in student government? Were you--? Speaker 2: Yeah. I wasn't--I guess, I was 'cause I think I ran for, oh, I was--I did a lot of things. And, I did run for, I think I ran for class president in the seventh or eighth grade. I forget now. 'Cause I remember my brothers [Marcus Jones and Marvin Jones] campaigned for me. Somewhere there's a picture, I don't know where it is, of them holding up this sign, you know. I had a sign and my brothers, we had an assembly, you know. And, so, my brothers came up, they're twins, and they're younger than me, and they were in for--like first grade or something, I don't know. And, they each held up the sign and I lettered it and everything. And, they had--I made them say this cheer. "Come on cats rattle your bones, let's all vote for Marquita Jones [HistoryMaker Marquita Pool-Eckert]," that was (laughter) that was it. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: You know. And, I think I won. I can't remember if I won. I don't know. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Honestly, I can't remember (laughter). But, I know I remember that campaigning part. And, then when I, when I was in, and, when I was in high school, I remember campaigning, you know, I was involved in student politics. I never, I may have been class secretary or something once. But, I remember deciding when I was a senior that we had to have a black, it was just a disgrace that we didn't have a black class president. And, that the Jewish kids, in Hy- at the time, Hyde Park there were a lot of kids who, whose parents were, who were teachers also. Not a lot, but some, you know. It had been, again, it was a school in transition. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know. And, so, those kids always got, you know, somehow they were elected the office, the head of the yearbook, the this, the this, the this, you know, they always were that good. And, so, I don't know, I decided that I didn't care. And, that it wasn't right that we had this almost all black class and that, you know, the people that were gonna be president, not that there was anything wrong with them, but I felt like they didn't represent the class. Who were they? And, so, I talked to this friend of mine who lived next door. He was very smart. He was a nerd, you know, really smart. In fact, he went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. He was, he was really smart. But, he was a nerd completely. No, he had no friends. But, he was (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: He was black and he was smart. And, that was the criteria, 'cause they were saying that black kids weren't smart enough to be, you know, to hold these offices, and to represent the class. So, here's a kid who was. So, I went around, took him to class to class, talk to my friends, got everybody going. And, I think he won. I'm pretty sure he won, I think, you know. I mean, he was an unknown (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Unclear). And, I mean, I was involved in a lot of things. Like I was on the yearbook committee and I was in all the various clubs, you know, the language clubs and the, this and that. I did take some advanced classes and some regular classes. That was at the time where they--you had tracks, you know, they tracked you and so there was mix-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --of classes-- Story_ID: 303636 Speaker 1: At this time were you involved at all in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]? Speaker 2: No. I never was involved in Jack and Jill. And the reason why is becau- I had friends who were. And, again, you know, my circle of friends were actually primarily Jack and Jillers, my--but, my father [Mark Jones, Jr.] refused to be a part, I don't know, he didn't like the black, Jack, the Jack and Jill thing. Speaker 1: Because? Speaker 2: I don't know. I only-- Speaker 1: Later years, he told you what? Speaker 2: Found this out later. He never told me anything. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother [Jeanne Boger Jones] only told this to me much later that they, she wanted me to be in Jack and Jill. But, that, we weren't in Jack and Jill because my father wouldn't go along with it. So, I was never in Jack and Jill. Speaker 1: What did you do that was the equivalent of Jack and Jill? Speaker 2: Well, I just-- Speaker 1: Like, did you do like the cotillion, sort--? Speaker 2: I did. I was a, actually, I did come out. Speaker 1: So, talk me through that. What's the process? Speaker 2: Of, being in the cotillion? Speaker 1: Yeah. Because it's a black society thing, correct? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, it was great (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: It was great. I mean, you know, again, I mean, I had already been going to parties with all these people, you know-- Speaker 1: What were the names of-- Speaker 2: It was a small group of people. Speaker 1: The--what was, was it, did it have name? Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: The cotil- the-- Speaker 2: The Links. Yeah, it was the Links. Speaker 1: Links. Speaker 2: Yeah, the Links Cotillion. Speaker 1: The Links Cotil--. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, I actually have those pictures somewhere too. I'm just not, not sure. I didn't bring them. It's reminding me now. But, yeah, you, you had to, every, every week we met. I don't know, somehow you got asked. I don't know how. Speaker 1: How did you get asked? Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: You have no idea. Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: But, you people-- Speaker 2: But, I asked. Speaker 1: You don't solicit to be a part? People invite you? Speaker 2: Yeah, we were--I was invited. And, and I knew most of the girls. This was probably like the second or third Links Cotillion that I was aware of. There may have been others but, this, you know, to my knowledge, you know, at that point, I would only start becoming aware of it, sort of in high school and stuff, so. To my knowledge it was like the second or third one they had. But, I could be wrong about that. And, I knew, you know, basically was in my high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] sort of social set, you know, the parties and everything, that's who were in this Links Cotillion with me. And, so, we would go every week to they, you know, to this Links would have this things every Sunday. We'd have to dress up, you know. In those days everybody dressed up when you went anywhere, very properly, you know, nylons, and little heels and little black dress, you know, gloves and everything. And, occasionally hats too, I think, I'm not sure. But, anyway, and we'd have these little sessions on manners, etiquette. We'd learn to do, to do these sort of dance like quadrilles, you know, these dances, like, the minuet and these things. And-- Speaker 1: The minuet. What else? What other dances did you--? Speaker 2: Well, I--just, no, just, you know, not, you know, not boogie. We didn't boogie (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. You learned to dance like the-- Speaker 2: We knew how to boogie. It was-- Speaker 1: Waltz, and the foxtrot, or, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, right, we had to learn the more refined things. It was time we became more refined. And, so-- Speaker 1: Now, let me just ask you before we go on. Who were the women that were teaching Links? Like the--who were the women--? Speaker 2: They were Links. Speaker 1: They were Links. So, you'd go up in generations and then you, I mean, you become an older one, and then you teach the younger girls these things you've learned--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: As they come up? Speaker 2: And, it didn't mean that we became Links automatically. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: We were just chosen to be in this cotillion. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Okay. Speaker 2: It was basically a coming out thing-- Speaker 1: Okay. Right. Speaker 2: You know, I'm sixteen and-- Speaker 1: They presenting you to society so to speak. Speaker 2: Right. And, it was the same year as my, as I graduated also, so. It was a big year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Performance. Speaker 1: So, they--you'd learn the dances, the manners-- Speaker 2: Yeah. And, and, you know, you'd have lunch and luncheons, and I don't remember what they talked to you about. But, they talked to us about things. I just don't remember what things, those things were. And, we were, we, and you know, how you relate to boys and you'd have your partners and everything. I think the boys were there, too. Or, the boys weren't there all the time, but they were there some of the time. 'Cause at a certain point, you know, you had to, you had a date and you had to learn how to dance these dances with your date. And, you also had to learn how to do these dances with your father, was another thing. So, my father, when I came home and I, I said, "Dad, you know, I can--I'm--they want me to come out. I'm wanna--I'm gonna be--I'm gonna come out, can I," you know, I forget how I put it. And, my father, he said, "Out? Come out, out?" He said, "You're already out. You've been out. You're out all the time. What do you mean, out?" You know, I said, "Oh, dad, you know, I wanna come out." "Well, all right." He wasn't really for it, you know, society stuff. And, but, my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Collins Boger] was insisted, you know, it's like she lived for this. And, so, I remember she bought my dress. And, I had this dress, was very expensive at the time, you know, these white dresses. I guess they were like, almost like wedding dresses, you know, in a way. And, I had long white, elbow length kid gloves, and I forget what else, tiara or something, I don't know. Story_ID: 303637 Speaker 1: It was all very-- Speaker 2: But, this is your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the jewelry, pearls, I had-- Speaker 2: Your [maternal] grandmother [Grace Collins Boger] pushed you, you said. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. She was-- Speaker 2: But, this is your grandmother who had been the wife of a doctor [Thomas Boger, Sr.]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, she had grown accustom to-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: This lifestyle and wanted you to be-- Speaker 1: And, my mother [Jeanne Boger Jones] wasn't a hundred percent for it either, but she, she sort of felt it was a little pretentious and everything, you know, and, so. Speaker 2: How much of it did you mother do at her mother's request? Speaker 1: Probably, she--my grandmother was probably the guiding force in this. 'Cause I don't think my mother would've-- Speaker 2: I mean, but, your--like how much did your grandmother push your mother to do some of the same things? Like, did you mother have-- Speaker 1: Oh, she did. Speaker 2: These social obligations? Speaker 1: Yeah. But, my mother, and she kind of rebelled against that too. I think, marrying my father [Mark Jones, Jr.] was a bit of her rebellion 'cause really she was supposed to be--she was engaged to someone else before, another doctor but--or medical student or something. But, then they didn't get married, and she met my father and he was this, you know, rascal. Speaker 2: Had come from a-- Speaker 1: Totally-- Speaker 2: --working class family and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, and, you know, so. Speaker 2: Couldn't pay for his own school, had to go to-- Speaker 1: That was it. Speaker 2: --like he was-- Speaker 1: So, you know. So, I think there was a little rebellion there. Yeah, but-- Speaker 2: Okay. So, your grandmother's pushing you to do this. You asked your father if you could participate, and he says, I don't--oh, or what, what happened? Speaker 1: He wasn't happy about it. But, he agreed to it. My mother said she, my grandmother said she'd pay for (laughter) everything. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: So, that was-- Speaker 2: But, he has to show up and do this dance with you. Speaker 1: Yeah, and yeah, and so, I think he was, in the end I think he was quite delighted and I think he really enjoyed it, you know. Story_ID: 303638 Speaker 1: The only other thing that he [Pool-Eckert's father, Mark Jones, Jr.] and I ever did together really was, well, we did other things together but we, we played tennis, you know. I used to go with him to the tennis court and retrieve balls, and you know, I used to play tennis. I played tennis 'cause he's, he played tennis from a very young age 'til he couldn't play anymore. Speaker 2: Now, just-- Speaker 1: And, so, we would-- Speaker 2: We're at the end of this tape. But, be--but quick question. Now did your father know like black tennis-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: Athletes at the time? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: That he followed? Speaker 1: Yeah. He was very involved. Because they had a black tenn- black tennis ATA [American Tennis Association] for something like that, black tennis. He was quite--he was a mover and shaker in that. He was quite involved in that. And, they had, you know, tennis clubs. That was his Saturday thing. He and his buddies would get together and they'd play tennis. And, you know, they never really played golf. He didn't like golf that much. He tried. He played a little bit. But, that wasn't this thing. But, tennis was the thing. And, these guys would hang out at the tennis courts on Saturday all afternoon. That was the big thing. If you wanted to see them you had to go down--and, you know, ultimately, they'd bring their kids, their daughters, you know. And, you know, my sister [Julie Jones] ran around and retrieved balls and play--and she met some of her best friends on the court and she became--you know, so, it was sort of a family-- Speaker 2: It's a social, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. But, that was, yeah. And-- Speaker 2: Are we ready to change? Okay. Speaker 1: But, he--so we didn't do that many things. The only other thing I did with him, I used to, after I took my music lessons in high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I used to take guitar lessons, I would go to his office and wait for him to take me home after, you know, on Saturday afternoon. And, he'd be in his law office and he--you know, his law partners and they'd be doing, you know, discussing cases, drinking, and playing chess. Story_ID: 303639 Speaker 1: Two things about tennis. It's a relatively white sport. Well, not today, I'm saying, you, we said off-camera that it was a country cub--club sport. Speaker 2: So, it started out that way but, you know, I mean, people played and my father [Mark Jones, Jr.] played it in the [U.S.] Navy. Like, maybe he learned it there, I don't know. He played it in Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], when he went to Tuskegee as a freshman, so they played then, you know. I mean, don't forget, I mean, just because all these things were segregated, I mean, there are--everything was segregated. I mean, football was (laughter), everything was segregated, you know, so, that didn't mean you didn't play, you know. And, so, he played, he liked, and he had friends who played. And, I know all his friends played. I remember this. Just-- Speaker 1: You were--go ahead. Speaker 2: I guess, well, I don't know if all his friends played. Speaker 1: But, you were telling me also that there was a separate tour, so they got to see-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Like, Althea Gibson and Arthur Ashe. Speaker 2: Yeah. They had all these tours and they would go around from city to city, different people and, they had tournaments, you know. So, it was another sort of social way of people getting together, you know. So, maybe one year like for a week everybody would go to Cincinnati [Ohio] or everybody would go to, where ever the tour, where ever they decided to meet, you know. And, people would come from all over. And, they'd go there and they'd play and they had tournaments. They were all amateur, you know, 'cause it was an amateur sport at the time anyway. And, so, you know, they, they all played and, you know, you know, got together and it was like a week or ten days of playing tennis, and hanging out and everything. And, and, so, competition was fierce, you know, they--cups, and competitions and everything was fierce. Story_ID: 303640 Speaker 1: So, you shared tennis with your father [Mark Jones, Jr.]. Also, your father did the cotillion [Links Cotillion]. And, I asked you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, under duress. Speaker 1: Under duress. And, I asked you about the importance of that organization. How-- Speaker 2: The Links. Speaker 1: The Links. Do you feel that those events were important? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, they were. Speaker 1: How important, I asked or--if they were important at all? And, then you revealed that you, today, are a member. Speaker 2: Yeah. But, I mean, for me at the time, it was just something that--it was like a coming of age thing. Every girl wants to feel special, you know. Sometimes it's, it's your senior prom where it's your most special moment. And, sometimes, you know, it's something else, like today, you know, coming of age. People always have these parties, you know. Not people always, but many people do have coming of age parties. When, when you become sixteen, you know, it's a symbol that you're, you know, becoming a young woman and everything. And, so, it impresses upon you that you, you're, that you're growing up and you're becoming a young lady now. Which for me was especially important because I was quite the tomboy. So, you know, this was my first real, what would--no, it wasn't my first real dre- it was first, my first dress like that. But, I mean, I had gone to-- Speaker 1: It was your coming out. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You came out. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, so, I think that all of these rituals, the ones that Links do, the ones Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] does, all these rituals that these organizations have, I think are very important. Being-- Speaker 1: Because. Speaker 2: Because they let you know you're special. They let you know that you have responsibilities, that you're growing up, that people love you, that people have high expectations of you, you know. You, you're, you know that you're (background noise) supposed to be somebody. Speaker 1: Sorry. Continuing the importance of those organizations, Jack and Jill, Links. Speaker 2: Right. I think they're all very important because they do, they let you know that you are somebody and much is expected of you. They also do things for other children and families who are not their own. And, they let--and the idea is to introduce them also, to provide them with opportunities, information, expose them to things that they may not, you know, ordinarily be exposed to. They all have, you know, a very strong sort of service component. And, that is the purpose, you know. I mean, it comes from back in the day (laughter) when people, you know, believed in, you know, all for one and one for all in this very sort of solidarity kind of, you know, up, you know, uplifting the race and all of that. It was very important and that's when most of these organizations started. And, the people who were the successful black professionals of that day knew only too well how difficult it was. You know, to achieve and to arrive at anything and to make anything of yourself. You know, they are the ones who came through this whole segregated society and, you know, with basically trial by fire, you know. And, so, they were the ones who had to create their own parallel society and their own, you know, social life and, their own community life. And, those were the days when everyone, since, since everybody live--you know, everything was--housing was segregated, neighborhoods were segregated, everybody lived together, you know. You, you, it was very important to try to be su- everybody knew everyone. Story_ID: 303641 Speaker 1: It was very important to try to help people, help everyone. People believed strongly in that. It didn't just, you know, originate in the '60s [1960s], which people sometimes used--at that time, led to think that it did. But, it didn't. And, so, these people who went to college, worked while they went to college, you know. My [maternal] grandfather [Thomas Boger, Sr.] worked on the railroad. And, I'll give you, this is one of my, this is an example of what some--he faced. He worked on the railroad as did many people in the summer, you know, made his tuition. So, this one year, he was about the graduate, it was his last year at Marquette [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. And, he was taking in a goo- and he was taking an exam and he had studied and he was doing real well. And, I don't remember the exact details of this but, I do know that the guy next to him copied his paper. Okay, so, now you've got two papers, the same answers. Well, the feeling was that there was no way that my grandfather could have done this well and done all this by himself. So, he must have copied from this guy's paper. Now, he knew it, other people knew it, people knew what happened. They told my grandfather--they couldn't prove that he had copied because they gave him another test, you know, he passed again, you know. They couldn't prove they didn't copy. She couldn't believe it. So, they agreed to let--they didn't kick him out of school. This was his last year. They decided they weren't gonna kick him out of school. They decided he could repeat the year. So, the other guy graduated. My grandfather, who was about to marry my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Collins Boger] and everything, went back to the railroad, worked another summer, made his tuition, came back to Marquette, took another year, repeated a year, and, and graduated. I mean, so, you know, (laughter) I mean, and that wasn't even probably the worst story. But, that was just an example of how, you know, the difficulties that people had to face in that, in those days. And, so, yeah, they're gonna be special, you know, they went to church dressed up. Why? You know, because they could go to church on that day, dressed up, to show, you know, not only how successful they were, but you know, how glad they could be that they could, you know, be there and have that day, and show, you know. That's how they expressed their religion and their, you know, their faith. And, so, so, I'm all for any and all rituals that make our people feel special, whatever they are. I'm all for that, because, you know, 'til this day the rest of the world gives you that negative feedback, you know. And, so, you really need the support of your family and friends, and your community and your, you know, to help you face this and face it down. And, to tell, and, you know, you have, you need somebody else telling you, you know, that you are, you know, good. And, you are worth something and people do expect a lot of you, and that you can do it. And, to give you that confidence when in--the rest of world is telling you, in the face of it, no you're not. Story_ID: 303642 Speaker 1: Because this is an oral history and I know people are gonna look at this a hundred years from now, and we're in 2005, I want you to express, and we won't stay on it long, but you feel that we're still getting negative feedback. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: From the greater society. Speaker 2: Yeah. We do (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In 200--, and we do. And, I just want you to rattle off maybe two or three examples that you think exist right here today that possibly shouldn't because we've come so far. Speaker 2: Well, I don't think we've come that far. I mean, I really don't. I mean, yes, there are laws. But, you know, don't forget, you know, segments of the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] are set to expire (laughter) this year. You know let, and, you know, and so, why is that? I mean, why isn't it just an amendment? Why is it an act that has to be renewed every ten years or twenty years? I'm not actually sure how often it has to be renewed. But, I know it's up for renewal this year. Why is that? You know, just look at the drugs. I mean, our community was decimated by drugs, and our community was the first community to be decimated by drugs. I mean, it was sort of okay because it was, you know, everything was relegated to the ghetto and the black people. And, coincidentally at a time when there was a lot of social activism, and idealism, and legislations, and success, and all of a sudden, you know, drugs kind of permeated the community. Miraculously, incredibly after all these years. How did that happen? I mean, how, how, you know, how did that happen? And, it was allowed to happen. And, it was directed there. And, to this day, we're suffering. But, now, of course, you know, you can never contain these things. So, it's not only the black community that suffers, you know, as a result of that. You know, everyone suffers. So, obviously that was, you know, a mistake. And, I don't know--you asked for a third thing. Speaker 1: Okay. That's okay, two's enough. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Two's enough. Speaker 2: But, yeah-- Speaker 1: So,-- Speaker 2: So, so I think, so, I think it's very important. I mean, it's very important and it's very difficult to, to, I mean, you know, why do we need affirmative action? Why would we have it if everything was so perfect? Why would we have affirmative action, you know? Obviously, it's needed. And, so, you know, yeah, we have to struggle for our opportunities-- Story_ID: 303643 Speaker 1: This is a great segue to get us to BU, Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Which is where you went to school. Speaker 2: I went to school at BU. Speaker 1: Freshman year, you enroll. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), I'm enrolled in freshman year. I was, I was, I only picked BU because I, I didn't wanna stay in Chicago [Illinois]. I didn't--I wanted to be away from Chicago. And, they were--it was very, at that time, it was being--it seemed like a very prescribed kind of environment for me, you know. Speaker 1: Which meant? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I knew certain--I was, I was afraid if I, if I went to college there, I would never see another part of the country. I would never get to know other people, and would always be, you know--I'd marry someone from there and I'd be there. And, that would be it, you know. And, I really wanted to see more of the world. So, I said I should go away for--to school, not in the Midwest, you know. I did apply to schools in the Midwest, Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], you know, I did apply. But, but, I wanted to actually really go somewhere else. I also applied to a school in California, Pomona [Pomona College, Claremont, California]. I was accepted. But, I decided that was too far. In the end, I decided that was way too far. And, so, I went to Boston 'cause that was the other place far away that I had applied. And, I had a friend who went there. And, so, I thought, okay, at least I know one person there. And, I didn't even know that person that well, but, you know, we were friends. And, so, I said, okay, I'll go there. And, it turned out, and again, this was something--it turned out that my mother [Jeanne Boger Jones] had an old college friend who lived in Boston [Massachusetts]. So, that was okay, because she could look out after me. And, so, I'd never even saw BU until (laughter) my first day there. So, off we went, my mother and I, to Boston. And, you know, it was really interesting. I can remember driving through the streets of Boston. And, you know I'm from Chicago where in the Midwest the streets are wide, and boulevards and everything. Boston, the streets are narrow and winding, and cobblestone. I couldn't get over it. I just thought, my God, you know. It's a tiny place and, and so, I thought, oh, good thing I don't have a car here, because I didn't have a car at home, you know, never drive here (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: You know. And, and so, I went to BU. And, the other good thing about BU was it felt--it was in the city, you know. I didn't wanna go to any sort of farm kind of place, rural environment or anything. I wanted to be in the city. And, so BU had it as well. And, so, and there were other schools. I didn't realize the extent to which this would turn out to be such a great thing. But, I knew that there were other schools around there too, and close by and stuff, so. So, yeah, I, I loved going to school there. It turn out to be really great. The one thing I do remember my first weeks there, I remember walking down the street and seeing black people and saying hello, and they never spoke. I thought that was so unfriendly. I couldn't understand that. So, I quickly learned that, you didn't just speak to people. In Chicago, you spoke to people, you know. You passed a black person, hello. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: You know, it's what you did. But, they didn't do that there (laughter). Yeah, I mean, eventually, you got to meet everybody. There weren't that many there, people there who were black. But, there were a few of us. Speaker 1: How many were there at the time? Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember now. But, I believe there were something like, I believe it was less than twenty. But, like eighteen or something. I don't know, I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Now, were you-- Speaker 2: And, most of those people were from New York, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) city people. Speaker 2: Boston area. Yeah. Most of those people were from the East, so. Speaker 1: Now, at that time-- Speaker 2: Washington, D.C. And, and it turned out to be some other people in my class who were also daughters of my mother's college friends. A small world. Well, you know, it was a small world. Story_ID: 303644 Speaker 1: How much did you participate in the activities at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], extracurricular activities? Did you pledge? Did you-- Speaker 2: I didn't pledge, interestingly enough. I was, I was-- Speaker 1: Well, with only twenty black students (laughter). Speaker 2: I know. But, you didn't have to because it turned out that the fraternities and sororities were citywide. So, they were black fraternities and sororities, the Delta's [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] and the AKA's [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] and the Ques [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] and the Alpha's [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity]. So, they were, they all, you know, so the, so the members of those fraternities and sororities attended all the different schools. Like Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] or, you know, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], or Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or, you know, Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or where ever they were, Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts], you know. They were all Northeastern [Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts], they were all from all those schools. And, actually, well, much of the social life was sort of surround--was basically organized around the fraternities and sororities. And, so, you know, you went regardless of whether you belonged. And, you know, your sophomore year, you could pledge. And, I wasn't sure, I can't remember if it was your sophomore year or your junior year. I guess it was your sophomore year, I'm pretty sure. But, anyway, so, I thought about it in my sophomore year, almost pledged my junior year, and, and ultimately ended up not doing it. At that point, it didn't seem like it was necessary and these people were all my friends. And, then I had some friends in each one, each--and also, you know, things being what they were, I think I was dating some of their boyfriends. So, (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --a little worried that things would take a bad turn. And, I was really worried about that-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --actually, I was worried about that a lot. And, so, (laughter) I thought well, maybe I won't. I'll just save myself a lot of aggravation and embarrassment. And, I was also worried that, you know, my grades would go down. You know, because I already had a pretty active social life. Speaker 1: What type of student were you at BU? Speaker 2: I was an average student until the end then I became a better student. I mean, I really, 'cause then I mastered the sort of mix of what courses to take and things. So that, you know, my grades could be good, and, and what I liked, what I did well. You know, I wrote papers well. Multiple choice questions, I didn't like, you know, things like that. So, so, I had, you know, the right mix and so my grades ended up being okay at the end. In the beginning, they were just very average. Be--in, you know, because, you know, you get to school, you're on your own. God, I went out-- Speaker 1: You're away from home. Speaker 2: --every night. And, suddenly discovered I had to cram for exams, you know. I realized, early on, you can't live and study. And, I decided to have a life and so I did a lot of things. I mean, I didn't just go to parties, but I did a lot of things. But, there was a lot to do. Boston [Massachusetts], you know, things--places to go, things to see. Story_ID: 303645 Speaker 1: You finished Boston [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], and you, what did you, and what--go ahead. Speaker 2: Yeah, in four years there was a-- Speaker 1: In four years. Speaker 2: --point at which I thought I wasn't gonna stay there, because I didn't quite understand--I was so lonesome at one point that I used to-- Speaker 1: Lonesome for? Speaker 2: Chicago [Illinois], and everything, you know, I got very lonesome and didn't understand. I thought, why did I come all the way out here, you know, all these people in, you know, I didn't understand why I was there. Education was useless and everything was pointless and I really just wanted to go home, and I remember-- Speaker 1: And, do what? What would do had you gone home? Speaker 2: I don't know. Just go to school, I don't know. Just be there, you know. But, and I remember at one point I was so lonesome that I used to--I disc--in Boston [Massachusetts] the, some of the radio stations, AM radio stations would go down at night; they'd go dark at night. But, then other frequencies would come to take their place. So, you could hear--I discovered one night in my room that I could hear the White Sox [Chicago White Sox] baseball games. And, so, and but, this would just be really late and, you know, my roommates would be asleep. So, I'd take my radio and put it under my covers, next to my ear, and just listen to Jack Brickhouse call the White Sox baseball games. I didn't know what I--it wasn't really--it was just the sound of it. And, I used to go to sleep to that sound. And, you know, I mean, I, and, but, then I decided that I should finish because, you know, my father [Mark Jones, Jr.] said, "Okay, but, you know, you have, you have, your brothers [Marcus Jones and Marvin Jones] coming along. So, if you don't finish now, then you could back and you could work and you could decide to finish whenever you want to, but then you'll be paying for it." So, I thought, oh, (laughter) this isn't gonna be good. And, if's hard now, it gonna be harder then. So, I sort of knuckled down and, you know, finished. Speaker 1: What did you do between, you didn't go directly to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: No. I, I came-- Speaker 1: So, you graduated Boston. Where did you move to after that? Speaker 2: I went back to Chicago. Speaker 1: Went back to Chicago. Speaker 2: And, spent the summer working at the Chicago Tribune. Speaker 1: What did you do at the Tribune? Speaker 2: I worked in the want ad section, the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because-- Speaker 2: Classified ads section. Speaker 1: You didn't major in journalist at BU? Speaker 2: No. I didn't. Speaker 1: What did you major in? Speaker 2: I majored in sociology and psychology. It was kind of a double major. I just--the psychology things, I didn't, couldn't do the one course where you had kill animals, mice and things. I just, that was too much and so, since I had so many of the same course I switched to sociology, wouldn't have to do that (laughter), you know. Speaker 1: And, what were you hoping to do once you-- Speaker 2: I had no idea. I had absolutely no idea. Speaker 1: What did you wanna do? Speaker 2: I didn't know. Speaker 1: You didn't know. Speaker 2: No. And, in the summer I had been working in City Hall [Chicago City Hall, Chicago, Illinois]. My father got me job in City Hall with the other politicians' kids, you know, we used sit-- Speaker 1: During each summer you went home? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You would work at--? Speaker 2: I'd work in City Hall. Speaker 1: At City Hall? Speaker 2: Outside the marriage license bureau. And we'd fill out, voters registration cards, and I don't know, mail them, I don't know. It was a very like clerical things that could have been done in ten minutes today with a computer, but we all had jobs, you know. We all sat, it was like in rows. It was like a little classroom right in the center of the hall, right outside the marriage license bureau. And, we could see people coming and going to get married and, you know, justice of the peace. I saw Mahalia Jackson come with her husband to get married and a few other people, you know. And, so, and I remember being there when they first started the first of the demonstrations, you know. They, they would march around City Hall and stuff. But, it was the first like early, early labor civil rights kind of demonstrations also. It was interesting. I remember picketing at one time. I forget what I--something to do with Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company], I think. I remember picketing and then coming and bring my sign (laughter) in City Hall and coming in and putting it down next to my desk and going to work, you know, (laughter). Speaker 1: What were you picketing for? Do you remember (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was something about desegregating Woolworths or something. Desegregating-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --something. We were always des--in those days it was just about desegregating-- Story_ID: 303646 Speaker 1: That's good you bring that up. How active were you doing your summers off in the Civil Right Movement? Speaker 2: Well, again, you know, I was a li- young. I remember wanting desperately to go to the March on Washington. But, my parents [Jeanne Boger Jones and Mark Jones, Jr.] wouldn't let me go. Speaker 1: But, you were eighteen, nineteen? Speaker 2: I--no. I was seventeen I think, sixteen, seventeen, sixteen. I forget. But I remember wanting to go to that and my parents saying no because they were worried, you know, that something would happen. My father went. My mother didn't go, you know, my father went with a whole bus load of people and everything. But, I wasn't allowed to go. So, I remember, I was glued to the television set, you know, watching this. And-- Speaker 1: What'd you think about it? Speaker 2: Oh, I was just, I couldn't move, you know, I was riveted. I just couldn't believe it. Speaker 1: Okay. This is a good point. You were--at what point did you realize that people stood up for what you believed in? Speaker 2: Well, around that time also, and I'm a little fuzzy on exactly what years, where I was in these years, civil rights marches workers started coming to Chicago [Illinois] to raise money. And, and they would come to people's homes, you know, my friends parents' homes and they would have these--they'd come and they'd talk. And, sometimes, I remember like Harry Belafonte was a big fundraiser of this. I remember he'd come through and he'd talk, and he'd, he'd sing, or he do something. And, you know, and I remember one time my best friend, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to my best friends' house around the corner. God, it was just unbelievable, I mean, just unbelievable. And, then I remember when some of the civil rights' workers would, would, you know, come too. I mean, they'd come in a group, you know, and, and they'd sing. And, their voices were just, I just, it was chilling. And, and then they'd tell stories of what was going on and I just, just, it was just, I couldn't believe it. I mean, I just was, both frightened and, it was just stirring. I just couldn't--because frankly, I mean, I hadn't experienced any of these things. I've never been to Mississippi. I don't think I've, yeah, I have been once. I never, yeah, I've never been to Mississippi. I had never experienced--I didn't know any of this. You know, my parents spent their whole life trying to keep me from experiencing anything like this. I mean, and, so, while I had experienced some what I thought, you know, were, at that time I could recognize racial bias, you know. Driving in my father's car and getting stopped by the police and stuff like that, you know, who are you and what--and, I used to--it was really-- Speaker 1: Snippy. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. And, my friends would be like, "Oh, stop. Stop, you know, and they would, who does he think he is. We didn't do anything, you know, why are they stopping us? What's the problem?" I was really, you know, but, it was just, I don't know, me being smart. But, so, I began to know, you know, hear about these things and I read Jet and all that, you know, and so, I knew about these things. Not first hand. So, to have these people come, and then to hear about the civil rights workers and the things they did. God, I, I just, was just completely, I didn't know what--and then when I went back to college [Boston University (BU), Boston, Massachusetts] and, and I used to watch on the news, you know, the civil rights demonstrations, the dogs, the hoses, everything, oh, God, I just was, just--it gives me chills now to think about it really; couldn't believe it, you know. And, then we, then we, we would have these Freedom Schools in Boston [Massachusetts]. 'Cause again, Martin Luther King went to BU, you know. So, he'd come a couple times and speak in the Commons [Boston Commons, Boston, Massachusetts] big rallies and everything. And, people would go and give money and stuff. And, I remember teaching in some--we'd have these Freedom Schools and we'd have to teach something, you know, for the rural neighborhood kids and the local churches, and you'd do that once a month or something, you know, and, that a little bit, and, so, you know. So, gradually, I began to be more aware and get more involved. Speaker 1: And, when you saw the march on TV, you said, you were glued, riveted. It was riveting. Speaker 2: Oh, I just couldn't believe it. I was just, and I wanted to be there. But, couldn't be there. Speaker 1: What about it was most astonishing for you? Speaker 2: Just a sea of black faces, you know, and then hearing everybody speak. I cried, you know, I mean, it was just unbelievable. What they were saying, and singing, you know, Mahalia Jackson. Oh, God, you know, (laughter), the whole thing was just, gave me chills, you know, just to see the whole things. I sat in the den in our house the whole day, morning 'til night, 'til the end. Watched everything from beginning to end. Just, I don't think, I just didn't leave. I sat there, you know, you know. Story_ID: 303647 Speaker 1: We were at the Chicago Tribune, your summer off (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --between graduation [from Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Because that was the, I got the job by myself, you know. I mean, I didn't, I was the one job I'd ever gotten, that was the one thing I've ever gotten that my parents [Jeanne Boger Jones and Mark Jones, Jr.] hadn't arrange for me or anything. So, I, and I worked there. And, I was really good at it too. They wanted me to stay, you know, but I had promised these friends, my friends from college that I was coming to New York [New York]. Speaker 1: To do what? Speaker 2: Well, just come to New York. To be in New York, you know. And, so, I, I, at the last minute it was sort of a choice between buying a Mercedes-Benz and coming to New York 'cause I'd saved (laughter) my money. And, you know, and they were, and so, I got on the phone to tell them I wasn't coming and they were like, "Oh, come on, you know, you gotta go, you gotta come, you know. We're here, we're gonna be here, you know. So, me--you know, you said you were coming, you can't break your promise, you know. We need a--," of course, they needed a roommate and everything, so. So, at a last minute, just as I as weakening, and my parents--this how much I know they didn't want me to go because they were actually gonna let me buy this car, which I seen advertised. I worked in the classified ad section in the Tribune, saw this car advertised and, so, I wanted this car. And, so, I knew they didn't want me to go to New York 'cause they were gonna actually let me buy this car, you know. So, a used Mercedes-Benz, I mean, please. I mean, (laughter) cha-ching, cha-ching. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) But, and, so, so, and so, I went to New York. And, they didn't--I know my mother was really sad and really nervous about the whole thing. But, she didn't stop me. You know, she didn't say don't go or anything like that, she let me go. And, so, we know, we cashed in all my savings bonds that my [maternal] grandparents [Grace Collins Boger and Thomas Boger, Sr.] had been saving for me and all this stuff, you know. And, this was one of, it's a part of my seed money for New York, you know. And, I came to New York. And, you know, to look for a job. Seek my fortunes were. And-- Speaker 1: And, what type of work were you looking for? Speaker 2: Anything. Well, you know, my mother was telling me, "Oh, you can be a social workers, you can be a teacher," or whatever. So, I went to a hospital to see if I could be a social worker and I don't know somehow that was so bureaucrat, you know, and I went in my Benz. This is the other thing, I would always go in my best suit, gloves, everything. Well, we wore gloves in those days, I was--and, you know, so, I don't think the hospital social worker thing wasn't happening. Then, I went to, what else did I do? I applied for, oh, yeah, I applied for a job. I went to Pan Am Building [MetLife Building, New York, New York]. I decided I wanted to be a flight attendant. That would be something I could do. Again, I went in my best blue suit and everything, my gloves and everything. And, I went up and I remember going to this sort of, I guess it was receptionist desk and everything and going there, filling out this form. And, somehow having the feeling that this was never gonna happen and they were never gonna call me. And, I bet if I had looked back, I would've seen that they threw my application in the trash. I just bet you. 'Cause it, you know, I bet you. And, my roommate, my college roommate had become, subsequent to that some months later, almost, yeah, some months later. She was from New York also. She applied for, to be a flight attendant at United [United Airlines]. She became a flight attendant, you know, and she was very fair skinned, you know, you couldn't tell. Speaker 1: Right. She could pass. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And, so, she became a United flight attendant. But, they weren't hearing--they were not, no. Story_ID: 303648 Speaker 1: You worked at Time Life? Speaker 2: Yeah. I applied a co- oh, I remember and I went to Alexander's Department Store. I thought, oh, I gonna work in a department store. I went to Alexander's Department Store. I gonna work in--there was a job in personnel. So, I went there. And, this was in the Bronx [New York]. Bronx, first of all. And, I got there again, you know, presenting myself as my, in my best. And, it was complete pandemonium. I mean, it was just chaos, it seem to me, in this store. I mean, it was chaos. And, this guy that I worked for, first of all, I was thoroughly insulted that he kept me waiting (laughter), I mean (laughter), where was I, you know. And I filled out this form and everything and the guy came eventually and we met and he liked me, you know, I guess. And, I filled out this form and I said, if I could ever just get out of here and find my way back to my apartment, I'm never cam- coming back up here again. This is horrible. It was loud, and people were pushing carts everywhere, and oh, it was just chaos, you know, department store. And, so, anyway, and then I--my father [Mark Jones, Jr.] took me to meet one of this friends who worked as an illustrator. One of his friends from Indianapolis [Indiana] he grew up with, one of his boyhood friends. He and his partner had a studio down on 5th Avenue and 42nd Street in this short building, which has since been torn down. And, they used to illustrate shoes. They drew shoes for department stores, like Lord and Taylor, and Saks [Saks Fifth Avenue] and everything. They drew, you know, the ads, they drew, they drew, shoes. Their specialty was shoes. And, I think they made a lot of money doing it. And, so, he asked his friend who, you know, to--did, did he know anyone, where could I work? The guys said, well, I have a friend who works at Time Life and he was in the editorial department or something. And, so, I'll set her up with an interview there. So, I went there and I met this man. Only saw him one time. And--Ben, I forget what--he was one of the editors there. I forget his last name, Ben Shapiro [ph.], Ben, I forget. And, so, he got me a job, you know, in those days, you know. So, but, between the time I got that job and this guy from the Bronx called me back from Alexander's, you know, offer you this job. And, I forget how much money it was. But, I didn't care. I woul- I thought, you know what, I can't work there (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I can't work there. And, so, no matter how much it was. So, I said, no. And, the guy kept raising, it raised, he raised it, you know. They offered me seventy--seventy-five dollars a week and became ninety dollars a week. All right, all right, all right, ninety dollars a week, come one. Well, what do want for Christ sake, come on, you know. And, I said, well, sir, thank you very much but I don't think, that's not for me. I'm not gonna do this. He couldn't believe it. He just couldn't believe it, that I would turn this job down. And, so, I thought, I, but, I thought--I didn't have the other job. I just knew I couldn't be there and I was really hoping--'cause at that point, I'd gone to the Time-Life Building [1271 Avenue of the Americas, New York, New York]. I sat outside, I looked at this building and I said, this is where I'm gonna be. I love this place. This is where I'm gonna be, just could tell. And, yeah, they called me back in another week or two weeks or something. And, I said, yeah. They offered to come down. Are you (unclear)? You wanna come down? And, I did and filled out all the forms, and I had a job. And, so, that's how I started working there. Story_ID: 303649 Speaker 1: What moved you, or what drove you to decide to go back to school? And, then to indeed go into journalism at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, after--I worked there [at Time Life] for maybe a year and a half. And, what I did was research. But, it was basically kind of clerical serve things. And, it was, you know, great to work there. I mean, it was great. I mean, you could see, you know, I saw all the photographers come and go. I went to--and, I was in photography, at that point photography had become a hobby of mine. I'd always taken pictures as, even as a kid. But, now, I was getting serious. And, so, I could go to the lab, I could get my films processed in the lab. I could get film, friends there, and they would process 'em, you know. So, it was great. And, and, I met these photographers, legendary. And, I worked in the picture department. And, my boss was a black woman. And, that was just, you know, she was just great. I, we be--we're still fast friends 'til this day. And, so, you know, but, even working there it was great, you know. You didn't have to be there until ten o'clock. I mean, it was publishing, you know, you didn't have to be there 'til ten o'clock. You had an hour and a half lunch hour. You left at six promptly, you know. I mean, and, and they had these great Christmas parties and stuff and, you know, Time Life was quite plush in those days. And, I met [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks, you know, and I mean, it was just very heady. But, then I realized that I wasn't gonna get far there and I wasn't gonna make that much money. And, I needed more, some more money, you know, at that point. You know, I wanted more money. And, I realized, the only way to do that is to get promoted. But, I realized that women there were only doing certain things and they weren't getting promoted. And, even if they were, I wasn't getting promoted. And, I said, well, I'll go to school. So, I, you know, I'll go to college. And, then it was a question of whether I was gonna go to law school like my father [Mark Jones, Jr.] or go to journalism school. Journalism and law were similar except journalism was a year and you didn't, you weren't in the library all the time. I knew that that library thing was gonna be a killer. I just knew it. And, so, 'cause life was too interesting, you know, life was too interesting for me. So, I applied to the journalism school. And Time Life had this program that they would give scholarship to, a promising black journalist or something, young student. But, I only found out about it because I read about it in the Time Life newspaper, FYI. They had already awarded it to somebody. I can't believe it. I, you know, I had no idea. They didn't like tell their employees. I wasn't a thing they offered their internal employees. They were offering it to stu- the guy who won it was a guy who came from Norfolk State [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] or something, you know. I couldn't understand what that process was. But, I realize now that the, the guy who was the head of the program had been at one time the president of the United, United Negro College Fund [UNCF] and so, somehow that's how, you know, that was the--how it all evolved. But, the point was that they didn't offer it to any of their employees there, which I thought was a--and I let that be known. I thought--because I had applied and I had been accepted but I didn't tell anybody, you know. 'Cause I didn't know what I was gonna do. My father said, "Oh, you can go there, but I'm not paying for it. I can't afford to pay for you now, to go there. You know, you had your four years, and now I have your brothers [Marcus Jones and Marvin Jones] and, you know. If you wanna be a journalist, just go be a journalist, why do you have to go to school for that?" So, he, you know, wasn't really very sympathetic. I mean, he came to New York [New York] and met, and, we had dinner. "Dad," as he and I always did on these important matters, you know. "Dad," like could I get an apartment and all? You know, I would present my case to him and he would say, "Yes, yes, yes, yes, no," (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And, so, anyway, I told my boss. I said, "Listen, I got accepted at Columbia. I'm going to Columbia." Now, I was, you know, I'm going to Columbia. They had this things for black students. They didn't offer it to anybody. They didn't offer it to me. I want a scholarship too. I need the money. I'm working here, you know, I was--so, they had a situation, you know, on their hands and stuff so, basically what they agreed to do was let me work part-time, any hours I wanted to work, part-time. They'd pay me half my salary. My boss, you know, she said, "You can come in after school and just work for, 'til--for four hours." And, so I did. You know even though Columbia didn't encourage you to have jobs while you were there at the time, so I--but, you know. So, I, I kept my job. Turned out to be a great thing, better than I knew. Speaker 1: Because? Speaker 2: Because at the end of my year at Columbia, went back to work. And, all--everybody (laughter) else was running around trying to get interviewed and trying to--actually some of the most promising students were trying to get to Time Life. I was already working there. So, that actually turned out to be a good thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A good-- Story_ID: 303650 Speaker 1: So, you worked at Time Life for how much longer before you, because-- Speaker 2: About six to eight months. Speaker 1: Eight months. And, then you went to CBS? Speaker 2: Six months. No. Then I went ABC. Speaker 1: ABC. Speaker 2: They thought I was crazy. I went to Time Life, they gave me a little more money. They actually gave me twelve dollars a week more. You know, I had a master's degree now. And, that got me twelve dollars a week more, and I still wasn't a writer. 'Cause at that time, all the women were researchers. The men were writers. Later on they had a class action suits and the women became, could be writers too. But, at the time, you know, it's publishing, it was very stratified. So, it was gender as well as, you know, and I worked--besides at the time, I worked with all these rich people. They--these kids, they--these people, they were all rich. They had yachts. They had houses in the Hamptons [Long Island, New York]. They had famous last names. They were rich. They didn't need the money. They just, it was just something they did, you know, publishing, or something, publishing, you know. But, I mean, I was trying to get my own apartment, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Real, real life concerns. And, I--when I was at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] I discovered television. That's when I learned, that's when I discovered television. Speaker 1: How so? Speaker 2: They had a, you know, everybody had to take, kind of had a, like a general curriculum, everybody took a little of everything. But, you sort of focused on the thing that you concentrated on. The thing--since I figured magazines, that's what I knew, that's what I, you know. So, I was gonna be a magazine writer. Except that in the, in--somewhere in there I discovered photography. I became really, a photography--that was my, I was really into photography. I wasn't good at radio. And, I wasn't interested in the legal parts of it, law. I was so glad I didn't go to law school. And, I, and I, you know, and, so there was a section, there was a course you would take for four weeks or where if you, the, if you weren't into the--like the print people could take broadcast or any other thing you wanted to. Broadcast people could take print and like that. So, I took television. I said, oh, this looks like fun. Well, 'cause I really didn't think I was learning that much, you know, and so I thought--and I got into TV, the TV section. We'd put on a newscast every night and there were, you know, they were crews. You have to learn how to use the camera, the sound, and you had to used, you were with basically a crew and everybody kind of rotated jobs, and you had a project and everything. You had to learn how to edit and everything. I was in heaven. I never went back to any other thing. I just, you know, I wrote my paper and I did the class documentary. You could either, if you were in broadcasting, you could do a documentary or if you were in print you were supposed to write a paper. Well, I did both. And, that, that was it for me. So, but, at the end of the year, I didn't have a TV job, you know. So, I went back to Time Life. Besi- I had an obligation to do that as well, anyway. And at that point, I had cut my hair off, I had an afro and everything. They were like, well, Marquita [HistoryMaker Marquita Pool-Eckert], they were-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --(laughter) telling me I look like Mary Macava [ph.], you know. Anyway, so, I, you know, worked at Time Life and while I was there, I started looking for jobs. Speaker 1: And, how did you get to ABC? Speaker 2: Well, that, you know, somebody, I mean, I don't know, actually, I don't remember. But, somebody told me. You know, it--at that time, they were just starting to let blacks into TV because the year before-- Speaker 1: What do you mean let blacks into TV? Speaker 2: Well, the year before had been somewhere--well, I graduated in '69 [1969] and I forget when the riots were, but they were around that time, before. And, in Harlem [New York, New York], you know, and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--and I remember I got my camera out as soon as I heard this. And, I went whipping up to Harlem, right around, these reporters who, I thought they were, you know, veteran reporters trying out, they'd just been sent out there too. Now, I wasn't sent out there, you know, I was just--went there. And, I met these people and boy, you know, I had no idea these people existed. Even though I knew all these people from Harlem. I knew basically knew the peo- knew a lot of the people, you know. I knew a lot of the people. And, so, I thought, well, this is very exciting, you know (laughter). And, so, I just, I began to realize this was the kind, you know, this was what I wanted to do, you know. Story_ID: 303651 Speaker 1: As a result of the riots, the TV stations needed people to cover them and like that. So, they started, you know, hiring people. So, when I got out of college, I guess that was '68 [1968] with King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], so, it--and, so, when I got of college, BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], no, sorry, when I got of Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] in '69 [1969], I graduated in '69 [1969], and then I started looking around. It was like word of mouth, you know. It was like, okay, they're looking for--they have a black show over here. PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] is starting a black show. CBS--ABC is starting a black show. They're looking for people. And, the publicity department is looking for somebody, you know. I don't know, I don't know how I knew but, I went there and I worked. But, it was word of mouth, you know, it was just like a networking thing. You'd call up people, "Hello, I'm looing, I don't know, but, you know, so and so told me to call you 'cause," you know. And, so, I, I got a job in their network publicity department [at ABC]. So, I was the press rep for the soaps. One of the press reps for the soaps. Had to put out these press releases, today, you know, on 'One Life to Live,' blah, blah, blah (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Well, you know, and, and I was joining the union, and that was a good thing 'cause it was a union job. But, all the people around me were tired and burnt out, you know, they were, they didn't like their jobs. And, they lived for the year when they could go to the big press junket thing and all that. But, I couldn't go 'cause I was too low on the totem pole, and I wasn't sure I wanted to go anyway. I mean, I wanted to go but, you know. I was very sensitive to, you know, I was at the point where people would be making passes at me and stuff like that. And, you had to be like very discreet about saying no, and all this so. And, so, one day I get a call that they were looking for an associate producer, an assistant producer or something like that for this show called 'Like It Is.' Speaker 2: 'Like It Is'? Speaker 1: Yeah. And, and ABC was kind of the WABC news division [WABC-TV, New York, New York] and, so. But, the only thing was, it was local and not network, you know, ABC. And, it was a per diem job not a staff job, and not union. So, and it was less money. So, I had to think what I wanted to do about that. But, I just decided that I would take the job because that's what I wanted to do. And, so, I went over there and interviewed and everything, a small little staff, black staff. We were in a room about this big, four desks. And, I got that job. And, I stayed there for a long time. I was per diem for four years. And, ultimately, I ended up producing the show in the end, you know, just at the very end for a few months. But, in between there I also, I worked, I worked there for a while and then I--I don't know why I left there. I think I left there because they hired a guy--they brought somebody in over me, who was a guy, who hadn't--didn't have the experience I did and, he was idiot, I thought. And, you know, and he was over me. And, I wasn't making mon- you know, like this is ridiculous. So, I left. Speaker 2: But, before you talk about leaving, did the content on the show have any impact on your life outside of the show? Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Because, 'Like It Is' was it like, I mean, 'Like It Is' is still around today. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Was it the same sort of--? Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --program? Speaker 1: --only more so. Speaker 2: Only more so. Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Because we, I think we had more money in those days (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, it was still Gil Noble? Speaker 1: Yeah, it was still Gil Noble. We had more money in those days, you know, and we could do anything we wanted to. They just didn't wanna hear from us, you know. We were always getting--doing things, agitating. Story_ID: 303652 Speaker 1: What kind of sh- when you--we'll just go to your producing days [at WABC-TV, New York, New York] at the end of, when you're at the end of your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I produced all through because-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I learned--I had a great boss. Gil [Gil Noble] wasn't the boss then [of 'Like It Is']. There was an executive producer and he was great, and, and I learned so much from him. I mean, I learned a lot from him. And, it was an opportunity for me to really use my, to really develop the skills, the things that I learned in school [Columbia University, New York, New York], you know. It was like a lab. I cou--you know, we, we had, I mean, it was our job to represent the community. So, we could do anything, anything. And, we did do anything and everything. I mean, we'd do all these stories, you know, Ocean Hill-Brownsville [Brooklyn, New York], which was one of the stories that I covered when I was in journalism school. We did, you know, we did there--I remember doing a story about what's now we know of as imminent domain, and I guess it was that too. In Brooklyn [New York] where the housing authority was like raising all these--buying people--they weren't even buying, they were just taking over people's houses and selling them. And, and I remember I did a documentary about this, actually. It was my first documentary. It was an hour. It was really great, I think. And, people were just--couldn't believe it. And, about, you know, these old people who had lost their homes. And, you know, they were just, were taking, they were just taking blocks and knocking down these homes and building, well, projects in effect, you know. And, this was BedStuy Restoration Corporation [Bedford Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation, New York, New York] and like, you know, in the early days when, when in Brooklyn there was a lot of, you know, the poverty--it was a lot of wheeling and dealing with the money and stuff. And, me, you know, I was a crusader (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: So, I remember going to interview the head of this--the guy who was the head of this particular housing program, and he couldn't believe me. I sat there and I felt like--I accused him of stealing, basically, I did. In not so many words, but, and I put him on television too. And, I remember the, also the community would come to us with stories and they would march right back in the newsroom. The newsroom was like, they're back there, you know. They were just afraid of (laughter) people who'd show up, you know, (sound) back there, just go. And, they'd come into our office and, you know, we'd have to deal with, with them, you know. And, sometimes it was frightening, and sometime it was, you know, because they were--could be menacing and threatening, you know, they--you know, these people 'cause they had their, I don't know. I mean, they were the community but--and, I remember one time Sunny Carlson [ph.] brought in Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton]. He was boy. He was the boy preacher. And, he brought 'em in. He sat down just like you're sitting now. And, he wanted us to meet him and everything. And, he said, "One day this boy is gonna be somebody," you know, he says, "He's gonna be a big leader of the community right now, you know, he's a boy preacher." I think he was like eleven or something. I don't know, maybe he was fourteen, but, you know, he was young. And, I remember one time--I mean, things happened. I mean, the wildest things happened. I mean, I remember we used to every year pretty much we'd have Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] come. And, then Stokely Carmichael and Mirima Makeba, and we'd do these shows and she, she would, she would sing and he would pontificate. And, he would invariably say something that would offend the Jews or something. And, God, the switchboard would be lit up and we would be taken to the, you know, carpet the next day, you know. The next--you know the show was on Saturdays so Monday, you know, invariably, you know, we, we would be chastised roundly for allowing such a thing to happened. And, the BFCC [Black Film Critics Circle] and I don't know, just, you know, it was just, you know, so Stokely whenever he came to town he got us into trouble. But, basically Gil would just let him have his say, you know, for an hour. And, he would never challenge him, you know, and he'd make us say all these outlandish things and Gil would, you know, egg him on (laughter). Story_ID: 303653 Speaker 1: I remember one time this was a big thing. I was actually the first person to ever put [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis on television. Angela Davis was a fugitive and she had been caught and it was right before Christmas. She'd been caught in New York [New York], and it was right before Christmas. And, they had her down at the Women's House of Detention [New York Women's House of Detention, New York, New York]. And, it was around the holidays. I remember it was like New Year's Eve or something. And, you know, we were getting ready to all go out, and into the office walks Joe Walker. Joe Walker was the editor of Muhammad Speaks. Joe Walker says, "I've been to the Women's House of Detention. I have Angela Davis speaking for ninety minutes on this tape. And, I have, this is an audio tape, And, I'm giving it to you to put on television." And, I thought, well what, you know, I thought, oh, my God, well we have to do this right away, you know, because anything could happen between now and then. He said, "The only condition is, you can't cut, you can't edit anything." Well, these were in the days, we didn't ed- you know, everybody was gone. I was basically there. It was me, I was the only one. My boss was gone. Everyone was gone pretty much. I was getting ready to go. And I thought, Angela Davis, you know, I have to do this. So, we did decide, okay. Gil [Gil Noble] wanted to do it, you know. I didn't know Gil--I guess, Gil was there. But, at the time Gil wasn't a boss, he was a news, he was a reporter who hosted the show ['Like It Is'], you know. He didn't, he didn't really have the show as he has it now. And, so, honestly, I can't remember who said yes to it, but, if anybody. But, I know I decided to do it. So, I took the tape and I went up the stairs to find the editor, and I said, we're thr- that's not--we're doing this now. So, I didn't realize what, it was, involved, you know. All I know is, is that I spent that night with this editor who wasn't our regular editor, 'cause our regular editor was on vacation, with this other guy who was basically not a good editor, you know. He was--and, his job was to slice up the movies and put commercials in. That was kind of what he did. And, Ange- all of a sudden this Angela Davis thing comes up and this was real fire, hot button thing. He didn't wanna do it. Nobody wanted to do it. I had to actually make everybody--I had to go, I had to or--get tape from the archives so we could cover this. So, I was like ordering tape, which was a big thing, you know, from the archives. But, we had access to the archives. Nobody really quite knew what I was doing, you know. But, I was ordering all this tape. And, so, you know, first we transferred her tape and then we would just cut pictures to--and, it was just, I mean, it was really, if I looked at it now, it would be horrible, you know. Because it was basically, she'd talk about the streets and then whatever street, you know, (laughter) and she'd--so I didn't even--it was just terrible. But, we couldn't cut it, you know, that was the agreement, we couldn't edit it. And, so, this guy was trying, this editor was trying to claim that he didn't really know how to edit. All of a sudden, he couldn't edit, you know. You know, the union editor who'd been there for thirty years suddenly couldn't edit. Thanks to my Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] journalism school training where I learned how to edit, I remember studying this. I said, "Okay, it's twenty-four frames a second. This has gotten be, the picture has gotta be twenty-four frames ahead of the sound," or I forget which way that, you know, I may have that backwards (laughter). But, I think that's right. And, then, I said, okay, and I would count, one. He said, "Well, I don't know." And, I would count and I'd say, okay, you cut here, and you cut here. You splice this to this. I want this to this. And, I had--I went through this entire hour like this. This guy claiming he couldn't edit. I mean, you know, he, he--that's, and I wasn't a great editor, but I knew the basics, you know. Unfortunately, I didn't have a lot of picture, I mean, I had picture, but not--and, I remember going downstairs at one point to get some stuff I had ordered from archives. And, it was getting really late and everything, and everybody was gone. And, it was me and this guy and somebody else, you know, they had the light news but this was--and, I mean, you laugh now at the whole idea of putting together an hour and five hour, you know, an hour of show in five hours, it's ridiculous the idea of it, but I didn't know it was ridiculous. I remember coming back upstairs, and I, I'd been all dressed up 'cause I was going out partying and everything. And, so, I remember coming back upstairs and somebody had put little American flags on the stairway all the way around and the way that I--up the stairs and into the editor's room, the little American flags. Story_ID: 303654 Speaker 1: Well, and so, you know, that night, I mean, we [at WABC-TV, New York, New York] finished really late that night. It was after midnight, New Year's gone (laughter). And, I mean, and fortunately, I mean, I made sure that every splice held, everything was, you know, I checked everything. Because we were basically--I don't know if we didn't, this was a live show ['Like It Is'] I think. I can't, I think. I don't remember the details. I remember Gil [Gil Noble] and then he had Joe Walker on and then we showed this film. And, so, you know, nothing could happen, you know, you couldn't be in a situation where you were--something happened. You know, you were rolling this and it was on live and it was on the air, or something. And, so, we--and nobody had cleared this. I mean, not the new record, nobody had seen this, nobody had seen it 'cause we finished after midnight. Nobody had seen it. Nobody knew she [HistoryMaker Angela Davis] was said, nobody knew anything. Oh, God. Did, you know, I mean, there was hell to pay (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: The next day. Thank God-- Speaker 2: But, tell me what, tell me some of the things she said. Can you remember any? Speaker 1: No. I-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I can't remember. She talked about being, you know, being on the lam, you know, hiding. She talked about George Jackson. She talked about being caught. She talked about, you know-- Speaker 2: What impact did that have on you? What you were doing that night, staying past New Year's-- Speaker 1: Yeah. That was-- Speaker 2: The American flag. Speaker 1: That was incredibly exciting to me because I felt I was really doing something. I mean, nobody had heard--this woman was a fugitive. My friends were being mistaken for Angela Davis, you know. I mean, everybody who looked anything--you had an afro, which everybody did in those days it was like, people were getting stopped and I mean, it was a frightening time. And, I don't know, I think we were accused of being Communist or, certain I know I was. And, it was--I didn't even know, I mean, it was (laughter), so I was thrilled. I mean, thrilled to have done that. And, I actually, you know what, I know there were repercussions and you know what, I don't remember them. I don't remember what they were. I don't remember what people said to us the next day. I remember people were very upset, you know, the next week and everything. People couldn't believe that this happened. I think the news director probably got called on the carpet because all of a sudden, you know, this appeared on this channel even if it was Saturday morning and they had no idea, you know. So, and, not only was it Angela Davis but it was the behest of Muhammad Speaks, I mean, please. Story_ID: 303655 Speaker 1: I mean, things happened to us [at WABC-TV, New York, New York], you know. And, I remember learning about standing up and telling our stories. I said, well, this is what we, you know, we're here to do. And, you know, I remember one time the Internal Revenue Service [IRS] came. We had Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] on the show ['Like It Is']. And, one day, a few--like a week later or something, these guys showed up in the office and flashed their badges, FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. And, they wanted to see--I was in charge of paying, I'd pay the bills among other things. I did everything on that show. I did, I learned to do everything. And, one of the things I did was I paid guests. So, I realize now they were trying to get him on--after Stokely on--he was living in Africa, anyway. But, they wanted to see the forms that we used to pay him. I don't know if they wanted to see where he was--I don't know what they were--look, they just wanted to see the forms. You know, which had everything, social security number, the address that the checks went to, where he went, you know, like that. They wanted to see all that. And, I wouldn't let them see it. And, you know, I mean, they went past the guards, they went past the news director's office, they went straight through the newsroom. They're in the back (laughter), you know, these guy came in and they were basically kind of menacing and threatening, you know. And, they wanted to see, and I wouldn't let 'em see it. And, I was said, "Why, what did they do?" "Well, we just wanna see." "Well, what is it you wanna see?" well, you know? They couldn't, they weren't--I don't know what they wanted to see. And, they were on a fishing expedition basically. You know they knew where he was. He was in the country. He knew, they knew where every--he knew they knew that. So, what were they--what did they wanna see? And, then they, they said, "Well, and what's your name, and what's your--." I mean, then they were getting like personally intimidating, you know. And, they said, "Well," I forget what they said, but it was sort of implying that they were gonna look into my--and, I said, "Well, fine. Go ahead." And, they, they left their cards in case there was anything we thought of that we wanted to tell them. Only, you know, I don't know, I never heard any more, I never heard or saw them again. Story_ID: 303656 Speaker 1: But, I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What would your dad [Mark Jones, Jr.] say about, when you report this stuff home to mom [Jeanne Boger Jones] and dad, these things are happening, what were his responses? Speaker 1: I don't think I told them. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All this stuff because-- Speaker 2: But, did you tell them about the [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis, what you'd done? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. You know. Speaker 2: What did he think of-- Speaker 1: Well, they were, you know-- Speaker 2: Did he think you were a hero or you're crazy, or? Speaker 1: I guess. You know, I don't remember. I don't remember what they thought. But, I know they were very proud of me anyway. I knew they, they were. And, I would, you know, I mean, we did all kinds of things. I mean, everything wasn't always that, you know. We did plays. We did stuff with [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee. I mean, we--Malcolm X, I mean, you know-- Speaker 2: You covered the community. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was just, you know. And, so, that kind of ruined me for television. Because I thought that's what television is supposed to be. First, I learned about television by watching the civil rights, you know, everything. I used to watch as a kid in Idlewild [Michigan]. I used to sit and watch, I remember watching the convention, the first televised convention. I remember watching the Democratic Convention. Why would anybody do that? Why would a kid do that? But, I remember staying, and the sun was out. I was sitting in the living room watching the Democratic Convention. I couldn't--I was riveted. I couldn't take my eyes off. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: So, I, so television, you know, it was just something that I was just drawn to, you know, really. And, I, and I was ruin like I said, you know, for television after that. Because I always felt that I got into it and I believed that you could be and should be an advocate. That's what I thought, you know, that's why we were there. That's what we were told that's why we were there, you know. We don't have anybody telling stories about people of color, you know, so, we need some people of color, and so, that's how we got there, and that's what we were supposed to do. And, that's what I try to do to this day. That's what I believe I'm supposed to be doing and that's what I always try to do. I do other things. I've done many things, but I always believe in doing that. Speaker 2: Where did you go after you left Gil [Gil Noble], or 'Like It Is'? Speaker 1: I went to Channel 13 [WNET-TV]. I worked there-- Speaker 2: PBS [Public Broadcasting Service]? Speaker 1: PBS. I worked there for a year. I went back-- Speaker 2: Well, that was the, well, I mean, you went from like black to white. Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I know. But-- Speaker 2: What was that experience like? Having come from-- Speaker 1: I didn't like it at all. Speaker 2: Because? Speaker 1: I didn't understand them. I didn't understand how they worked (sneeze). Speaker 2: Bless you. Speaker 1: They had a system, I don't know, I did some--you know, I did a couple of stories there. I went there as a producer/reporter. Then people would call me with stories that I couldn't put on the air (laughter), at PBS, you know, from my 'Like It Is' days. And, then I, at one point they thought they were gonna put me on the air. So, we were gonna have this consumer show, me and this other guy who, another guy who was--we were to be co-host. He was another producer/reporter. And, so, keep in mind the way I did this whole thing, this was a whole period where I took a leave from WABC [WABC-TV, New York, New York] to work at PBS, because I'd saw Geraldo [Geraldo Rivera] do it. 'Cause Geraldo had done it. And, I thought well, if he's one of their stars and he could work at PBS, then I could work at PBS. And, then, so, I didn't have to ask anybody, I was freelance. So, I didn't ask anybody anything, I just went and did it. And, then, so I worked there for a while. And, then they always have these budgetary things. And, what I didn't realize is that people go, you know, in the summer people, they went off the air, and re-runs and they stop paying people. And, I didn't understand all of that. And, then--but, I did after I got there. And, then I went to work, oh, and then a new guy came, a new producer came and-- Speaker 2: At PBS? Speaker 1: Yeah. And, he fired me basically. Well, he told me, he said, "From what I'm paying you, I could, I could pay--I could hire two freelance producers, so you're out." Story_ID: 303657 Speaker 1: Then I got a job at, with another friend of mine who had a production company who was doing a PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] show and I worked there for a while. So, I basically was juggling these shows. And, I was making a lot of money too, at the time, because (laughter) I leaving, I was this, and overlapping with that, and. And, so, then I was gonna go back to ABC when I got fired from PBS, I don't know, I don't remember all the details now, it was all quite confusing. They let me, you know, they were gonna have me back and I stayed there for a while. I worked there for a while for about four months or so. And, somewhere also, in the interim there, I worked for United Negro College Fund [UNCF] for one year, one year. And, then I went back to television. I went back to 'Like It Is.' And, then, then while I was at PBS in the middle of all this confusion, and all this--'cause it was all freelance, you know. So, it was a lot of overlapping of jobs and freelance. And, I thought that's how television was, you know, that's what I expected, and I thought okay, this'll be great, you know, jump from one project to the next. I had been really lucky. I had no time, but I was making a lot of money. I remember one day walking down the street coming from ABC going to PBS and going to Channel 13 [WNET-TV] and going from Channel 13 to this guy who had this production company and I was working on his project too, which wasn't in production yet but, and I stopped at Burger King. It was a Burger King there and I stopped and got a hamburger and these fried onion rings or something, which I liked at the time. I remember walking down the street and the burger was steaming and I was eating and I was trying to figure out what I was gonna do next. And, I was eating, and weaving, and walking and I thought, this is bad. Something is wrong here. This is just, just a few too many things on your plate. And, a few months after that, I get a call from, somebody at CBS. And, CBS was looking for somebody to work on their morning news ['CBS This Morning'], which is their 'Early Show' ['The Early Show'] now. So, they called me and interviewed me-- Speaker 2: I'm listening. Speaker 1: And, then I didn't hear anymore-- Speaker 2: But, but that look on my face is because, it was, now, they were just looking for someone, not specifically a black woman? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. No, they were looking for a black woman. Speaker 2: They were look for a black woman? Speaker 1: Or, a man, yeah. But, they wanted somebody-- Speaker 2: But, someone black? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, I had a friend over there-- Speaker 2: So, that's what I wanted to ask. But-- Speaker 1: No. that's what-- Speaker 2: I just didn't think they would-- Speaker 1: That how it was in those days. They were looking for somebody black-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and you're the person. You been--you've come highly recommended. I mean, they had already checked me out before they called me. I mean, that's how few of us there were, you know. So, I went over there and I was interviewed and everything. Then, I didn't hear from them anymore. So, I figured--I didn't know what happened. But, I never did hear from them for months. And meanwhile, you know, I had been fired from this one show. I think they can--I was either fired from this one show, and then they killed the show. I can't remember now. But, then--it was called '50 First Date.' [ph.] And, then, they were, you know, cha- just changing their programming and everything and then this consumer show didn't work out bec- that they wanted me to host with this other guy because, number one, I didn't think I was that good on camera. I was just nervous, you know. And, number two, Bess Myerson wanted the job. She needed to be, you know, consumer whatever, so, she got this job. She had--the whole show ended up being built around her, you know. And, so, I, I, then I, there was a show, another show called 'Assignment America' and on that show there were four correspondents. I forget who they all were. But, it was a show that, you know, they were just--Channel 13 at that time, and still relatively late even now, there were very few shows, very few production companies, you know. It was all very select. And, you really couldn't break into the system, you know, you couldn't. I mean, there were certain people who produced the shows and that was that. And, sometime their production company produce three or four shows and that was that. So, this one person had a production company that produced this show. And, one of the correspondents on 'Assignment America' was [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou. So, I was assigned to Maya Angelou. I think it was Maya Angelou, Studs Terkel, and I forget who else, two other people. And, I was assigned to Maya Angelou. And, you know, I remember we did this one show before I left with her interviewing James Baldwin out in California, it was wild. It was wild. But, after that, they called me, again. Speaker 2: For the same CBS morning-- Speaker 1: CBS called me. Speaker 2: --program? Okay. Speaker 1: They said--yeah, this was like eight months later or something. And, said, "Do you remember us?" And, I said, well, yeah. And, they said, "Well, we're ready for you now," you know. "We want to come, if you're still interested, we'd like for you to come over and talk to us," you know. It turned out they had lost the position in the budget. And, it turned out that one of my advocates over there was a man name Tom Bettag. Tom Bettag who's now, who was recently executive producer of Night--'Nightline' and--but, he'd been our senior mentor, class advisor. Every class, journalism class has a class advisor. And, he had been our class advisor. So, he knew me. And, so, he was dispatched to talk to me about what it meant to come to CBS News, and did I think I was ready for it? Speaker 2: What did it mean, and what-- Speaker 1: Well, he was saying to me, you know, there a lot of people who think that you can't handle this. You know, a lot of people who don't think a black person should be doing this. And, so, you're gonna be facing a lot of, you know, it's gonna be hard. And, so, do you think you can do it? And, you know, so, I said, yeah, kidding (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But, I understood, you know, I mean, he was telling me, you know, this is gonna be no picnic, no day at the beach. And, and, you know, so I was sort of--satisfied them that I could do it. Story_ID: 303658 Speaker 1: So, was Bryant Gumbel on that morning show ['CBS This Morning'; 'The Early Show']] at that point? Speaker 2: No, he wasn't. He didn't come 'til years later. Speaker 1: Okay. So, there were no black people on camera, but they had-- Speaker 2: No. Right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some working behind-- Speaker 2: They had a few. Yeah, they had some working-- Speaker 1: A few working behind the scene? Speaker 2: Behind the scenes. But, I actually didn't think I would be there that long. I mean, I said, yes, because my experience had been ap- 'Like It Is' had been my longest experience. And, then I had all these other short, shorter experiences. So, I didn't think that I would be there that long. And, so, I said, yeah. And, they promised me that I wouldn't have to work a night all that much. Year and half later of midnight, of midnight to eight (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --shift. Eventually, I got off that shift. And that, you know, I learned a lot there, doing that, working there. But, I didn't really think--and in fact, I met someone there at the time who'd been there five years, black guy, who'd been an associate director. He said he'd been there five years. I couldn't believe it. I never heard of such a thing. At first of all, he didn't look that old. I thought that was--meant he was old. I mean, I just had no idea, no concept, five years. It seemed like an eternity. I couldn't believe it. And, so, I applied. I really wanted to make movies, I decided. So, I dec- so, I applied to American Film Institute [AFI, Los Angeles, California]. And, just the way I'd applied to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], you know. I applied to American Film Institute, and they accepted me. So, my plan was to--you know I was married at this time. My plan was to, when my things were--and my plan was to leave CBS and go to California and go to the American Film Institute. I was gonna make movies. I had no idea how I was gonna support myself or anything. And, my husband [Stephen Pool] and I were--I realize now, you know, sort of this was--I knew that if I went there, he probably wouldn't come and I didn't know what would happen. But, I wanted to go to California. I was going. I was a career girl. And, I hadn't told him yet that I was leaving. And, just, like maybe two weeks before I was gonna tell them that I was leaving and going to California, they called me in and they asked me if I wanted to work on the 'Evening News' ['CBS Evening News']. Now, this was a big deal, you know, because that was Walter Cronkite, you know. And, after all these night shifts things and everything, they wanted someone, you know, again, they needed (laughter), they needed somebody black on the 'Evening News.' Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And, so, I felt well--and because my contract wasn't up, you know. I mean, it was like a three year cont- this was two years. I'd been there two years. And, so I thought, okay, what does that mean? I said, well. They offered me more money. It was almost twice as much money, and it was Walter Cronkite. Wow! I thought, well, if AFI wanted me now, they'd want me after a year. I'll work for a year for Walter Cronkite. Why not? And, that was it. I never (laughter) went to AFI and I'm still at CBS, and Walter's gone. Speaker 1: How long did you work with Walter Cronkite? Speaker 2: It was a couple years I guess. I don't remember exactly, but-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --two or three years. Story_ID: 303659 Speaker 1: Did it have any impact on you that you were like, affirmative action? Like affirmative action was working on your behalf [at CBS]? Like they needed a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I thought that-- Speaker 1: --in a positive way? Speaker 2: --was perfectly fine. Speaker 1: Okay. Good. Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought great, you know, I'm there. I mean, because I knew that you weren't gonna get a job any other way. Because at that time, again, you know, it was like we were fresh off the riots, fresh off of completely segregated, nobody, you know. I don't even know if it was considered affirmative action at the time. It was just, you know, we're looking for a black pe- I mean, I don't if it had that formal name. I don't ever remember hearing that name, that word, those words at the time. I just know they were looking, they'd be looking for somebody black. That's how we all got jobs at that time. That's how everybody, at that time, got jobs. Speaker 1: So, at some point, Dan Rather comes on board-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to take over. Does that have any effect on you, on what you're doing? Speaker 2: Well, in a way, no, not really. I mean, because the way things were structure on the 'Evening News' ['CBS Evening News'], you know, I was a field producer. I mean, first I was an associate producer and then I was a producer, and then became a field producer. And, we basically, I wasn't in the studio all the time. I mean, you know, I didn't work directly with him, you know. There were people who did, the executive producer, the senior producers, the writers, it was very stratified, you know. I mean, it was a small group so, I was known, we were known, and you know, you did these stories. And, sometimes you did stories with them. I mean, I did a couple of stories with Dan and, you know, early on like that. So, but, you know, they didn't want me there. They-- Speaker 1: Were you the only black woman there? Speaker 2: Yeah. And, they didn't want me there. They didn't think I could do it, and they didn't want me there. Executive producer was nasty to me. But, as I realize now, they were always all nasty to each other on a certain level. I mean, some people were gentlemanly but, you know, their thing was yelling, you know. It got to be six o'clock, and time for everything to come together and the daily MO [modus operandi] was for the executive producer to turn red, and go ballistic and start screaming at people and, you know, panicking and everything. And, so, I thought that's what they, I don't know (laughter), so I didn't take it-- Speaker 1: That was the nature of his, yeah. Speaker 2: First time I went in there, he wouldn't--he never spoke to me. You know, they didn't speak to me for a long time. There was one guy who was kind of in charge of me, and he would send me the tape or do little things, you know, or tell me to come up with something. Or, I mean, they didn't want me there at all. But, over time, you know--and then I wasn't sure I wanted to be there either, you know. And, learning, you know, I made a lot of mistakes and, you know, I'd just, you know, and then I would, I don't know (laughter), it was just, it was a struggle. And, they tried to fire me. What they did was--actually, one guy did get fired, he got moved to another show. What, they, what they did do, the way they would work is they'd start a rumor. Then somebody would come to you and say, "Gee, are you all right? I hear that you're, you know, that you, you're gonna be fired or something." Well, you hadn't heard that, you know, but somebody would come and tell you this. And, so, when--I got tired of hearing this one day, so, I went to, I figure what's the worst could happen, you know, I'd get fired, you know, go back to one of my other jobs, I don't care. So, I went to the executive producer, you know, and I said, look, I hear that me, this person, and that person, that you, that you wanna fire all of us, you know, and I don't understand why, you know, and we talked and everything and I said, well, I think you're wrong. And, I'm, and you know, I've done all these things. I can do them and I'm a good producer and blah, blah. And, he said, "Well you know you're the only one of all of them who came to me about this." 'Cause he said, "Yeah, I did say that." I said, "Well, why didn't you tell me? Why you telling all these other people? Why--what is," you know. And, he said, "Okay, I'm gonna give you a chance." I said, "You'll be glad you did." Story_ID: 303660 Speaker 1: So, you worked-- Speaker 2: One of many times. Speaker 1: --with Dan Rather [at 'CBS Evening News'] for? Speaker 2: For, since--for thirteen years. Speaker 1: Thirteen years. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, then from, I mean, I--there so many stories in that relationship I would assume. Speaker 2: Well, I mean, you know, I mean, there were things that happened. I can't remember all the things, I mean, I have to really think, you know. Because the way it worked is that, you know, as a producer you're assigned to correspondents. So, for instances, I worked for a long time with the economic correspondent, Ray Brady. He and I were a team, you know, I worked with him for a long time. And, then, you know, you--different correspondents, different beats, different things. And, I remember doing some series, like the first series, I did a series on the black family ['The Vanishing Family - Crisis in Black America']. That was the first Emmy Award I ever won. Speaker 1: And, what year was that? Although I have it here, that's 19-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Seventy-eight [1978], '70 [1970] something like that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No. That can't be right. Speaker 1: Eighty--I mean, I'm looking. It's-- Speaker 2: I don't, I can't remember. Speaker 1: I remember, right--seeing it. Speaker 2: It's there somewhere. But, I--no, that can't be right. It's gotta be '80 [1980] something, that I won that. Eighty-three [1983], I think the first ones I, I-- Speaker 1: It was '83 [1983]. Speaker 2: --won were '83 [1983]. Yeah-- Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-three [sic. 1987]. Speaker 2: I won a couple of 'em that year because it was a big year. Speaker 1: So, that was the, 'The Black Family - A Dream Deferred' [sic.]? Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, and-- Speaker 1: You won an Emmy Award for that one? Speaker 2: Yeah. And, that was, that was really exciting, 'cause I wanted to do that story about the black family. And, it was the first time I'd ever really done a big--that was a four part series and it was for 'Evening News.' And, it was the first time ever got a really black story for the evening news. It was a big deal. Speaker 1: Who was the family? Speaker 2: It was a family that was having a family reunion in--where were they? I guess, it was Mississippi. But, I can't remember now exactly. Speaker 1: What was the dream deferred? Speaker 2: Well, this was a big story and the idea was is that this was big story, this was a big family and by virtual it was a big family, and they were having a family reunion and everything. Everybody had, you know, you took the statistics at the time, you know, and you could see everything in this family, you know. Because it was generations, it was people working, people out of work, out of wedlock babies, you know, all those things. So, that was, it was kind of a non-nuclear family, do you know what I mean? That was the idea. And, I was showing that the extended American famil- the extended black family, it was an extended black family. And, everybody was struggling, you know, but everybody was together and everybody helped each other and it was close despite the fact that people came and went. There were uncles, there was this, so it may look like there was not a nuclear family but in fact there was a very cohesive type group and they were--so there was my take on it. You know, it was kind of an answer to all the negative things about the black family that were coming out at the time. And, I, and then-- Speaker 1: You also won an Emmy in that same year for the bombing of Beirut [Lebanon]? Speaker 2: Yeah. I went to Beirut. I was, I think for five weeks (laughter). I wanted to go to war. I mean, you know, I was, I wanted to go to war. I wanted to go--well, I didn't want to go to war, I wanted a foreign assignment. And, this was just before the holidays and nobody wanted to go there, and it was dangerous, and the [U.S.] Marines had been killed. It was like a week after I went there. A week after the Marines were killed, and it was very dangerous. And, but, I wanted to go. And, I talked to, in fact the person who sent me there, I think it was Howard Stringer was the--at the time and I said, Howard, I want this forei- he said, "Okay. You wanna go? Foreign assignment, fine. Go to Beirut." They thought I was gonna say, no, I think. I thought I was gonna say, no (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: But, I didn't. So, I went there. Oh, my God. That was wild. I had no idea what I was in for. It was very exciting. Story_ID: 303661 Speaker 1: This is our completion interview on tape number eight [sic. seven]. If I could just have you state your name again. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Marquita Pool-Eckert. Speaker 1: And, todays' date? Speaker 2: This is September 12th, right? Speaker 1: Twelfth. Speaker 2: September 12, 2005. Speaker 1: Two thousand five [2005]. Story_ID: 303662 Speaker 1: We were talking off-camera and I know we left off with your Emmy Award in '83 [1983] with the bombing of Beirut [Lebanon], the program you did on that. But, actually, I wanna move forward a bit, just because it's on your conscious now. I wanna talk about New Orleans [Louisiana] and we will work our way backwards, and you as a black journalist. The impact this is having and what you feel about it as it's happing today in 2005. So, if you could just give me a brief history of what has happened, who has been displaced, and what your feelings are about it? Speaker 2: Well, you know there was a hurricane. This Hurricane Katrina, which lay waste to New Orleans, and surrounding area, Mississippi, and the Gulf Coast. And, New Orleans, the center city, basically, in the area where many poor or low-income people, black people lived, was decimated. And, so, well, first it was a hurricane and the hurricane passed over. Remember that? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: The worst, they thought the worst of the hurricane was over. They felt they'd dodged a bullet. It was supposed to be a category five, turned out to be a category three, or maybe not even quite a three. Next day, everybody came out. The sun was out. Everybody thought, oh, my God, thanks God everything was fine. And, all of a sudden they notice that the water started rising. And, in fact, as it turns out, according to The Wall Street Journal, at one point it was rising by a foot every twenty minutes. So, (laughter), suddenly, you know, everyone went from relief to sheer panic when they realized what they were being faced with. That the levees broke, and that the water was coming in because as we now know if we didn't know before, New Orleans sits in a kind of a basin, protected by levees on both sides. And, the water from Lake Pontchartrain just, you know, was--has been, was held back by these levies. And, so, when the broke, which everyone knew, they would eventually break, just poured into the city and, and people were totally unprepared. And, they hadn't left and those who, you know, they told people to evacuate for the hurricane but many people sort of didn't head their warnings. And, so, then when people did decide that they wanted to evacuate it was really kind of too late for many people. They couldn't go. There was nowhere to go and nowhere, and no means by which to leave. Because basically everybody who had the means, i.e. a car, was gone. And, the evacuation plan that they had in place sort of presumed that people would leave by car or perhaps by public transportation. But, of course, you know, no one in their right mind, no airline in their right mind is gonna put their airplane down in the middle of a, you know, a hurricane, you know. So, there were no bus--no planes, no buses, no any of those things available to people who didn't own their own cars. And, so, people just holed up in their houses and hoped for the best. And, when the hurricane passed over and didn't do, you know, did some damage but not as bad as people thought. Then everybody was relieved. And, then all of a sudden when, when the floods came, people were completely unprepared. Story_ID: 303663 Speaker 1: What impact will this [Hurricane Katrina] have, you feel, on the black community in New Orleans [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Well, you know, one of the things that happened was, is that, you know, when you saw the pictures and you saw all the black faces, people just desperate for any kind of sanctuary anywhere. And, then of course, you know, they sent them to the Superdome [Louisiana Superdome; Mercedes-Benz Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana] and the Convention Center [Ernest N. Morial Convention Center, New Orleans, Louisiana]. And, the each--in each case, or just, people were just out on the roadways, just waiting, you know. I mean, and in each case, you know, even though it was promised that help was on the way, or it was hoped that help was on the way, the help didn't arrive until way, days and days later. So, people of course were, had no food, they had no water, they had no electricity much of the time, they had not police protection. I mean, it was a terrible, it was anarchy, complete and utter anarchy. Speaker 1: So, with all of that going on, people are now, or their rumblings behind the scenes of rebuilding New Orleans. Speaker 2: Well, it's not rumblings. I mean, every--people want to rebuild. I mean-- Speaker 1: Peo- okay. Speaker 2: You know, you could, I mean, look that's one of the biggest ports in America. And, the Gulf [Gulf of Mexico] is one of, you know, our--one area that supplies our oil. It's the way in comes into, you know, into the states through the Gulf. And, so, it's really not a question of, if it should be rebuilt. It should be rebuilt, rebuilt from, just as strictly from an economics point of view. But, culturally also, is another matter. Because, you know, New Orleans is the heart of a very special kind of culture here in America. And, a very special mix of, you know, Creole and French and Indian [Native American] and, I don't know what all else. And, this culture, its uniqueness came about because all these people were thrown together. They all lived together in this community. In this, you know, one big sort of human gumbo pot as it's been described. And, so, the concern is that when the area is rebuilt, which generally people believe that it will be, there are certain considerations. For instance, its turn out New Orleans for poor black people wasn't really all that great. I mean, people were unemployed or underemployed, low skilled jobs, they had no--their social services were minimal. And, there was a very high crime rate. And, so, so, with all of these things which come with a sort of, sort of, you know, the social pathology of poor cultures. I mean, that's kind of what you get. And, so, the concern is that if New Orleans is rebuilt, how will it be rebuilt and for whom will it be rebuilt. I mean, will it be a new, it'll be a different world, you know, a new and improved New Orleans. But, what does that mean? I mean, people have lost their homes. They've lost their treasures. They've lost their cultural treasures, their family treasures. They've lost--there are no jobs there. There are no schools there. People are disbursed. They've gone, you know, to Texas. They've gone to other parts to Louisiana. They've gone wherever it is that they've had, have relatives. Speaker 1: Let me ask you-- Speaker 2: So, they have disbursed. So, the question is will they come back? How can they come back? They don't have the means really to come back. And, if they get jobs in these places, why would they come back? They have no homes (laughter), and they have no proof that they had homes, you know, I mean-- Speaker 1: They have nothing. Speaker 2: They have zero, there's nothing to come back to. And, so, the question is, what will happen, you know, to this culture as it's disbursed, you know, throughout, you know, American, really? I mean, will it come back? Will people come back together? Will the spirit of, you know, New Orleans bring people back together regardless, you know, insurmountable odds? Some people think it will. I think it remains to be seen. Speaker 1: As a black journalist, do you think there questions that should be being asked about what's happening in New Orleans that aren't, by the media? Speaker 2: Well, I think the media is by in large done a pretty good job of asking-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the questions. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, the media seemed to know more, at one point, than the federal government. I mean, and, so, I don't, I don't right now have any criticism. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, when you, when you read the stories of how difficult it was to communicate, you know, even between--with the law enforcement agencies, the difficulties they had with communicating with each other, it's incredible, you know. So, I think that the news media has done a pretty good job of shining the light on this biggest disaster. They--I mean, this is--they say that this is a bigger disaster. A bigger toxic waste site than Love Canal [Niagara Falls, New York]. You know, I think that is really something that is gonna have to be focused on. Because as someone said, yes, they're clean everything up. They're sweeping everything away. It'll all dry out, and people forget about the fact that, you know, they'll be rebuilding perhaps on the site of a toxic waste dump. 'Cause right now that's what it is. And, so, that could have sort of very serious long-term consequences health wise. And, I think that, and they think that, you know, people will get bored with the story and go away and won't ask those questions anymore. And, then, all of a sudden, you know, something will turn up and people will wonder, you know, well, how did this happen? So, you know, I think that is among the more serious questions, really, to be, to be looked at and followed. Story_ID: 303664 Speaker 1: I'm going to continue this trend of the oral history. But, we're gonna keep stepping a little back in time. As a black journalist, what was your, your reactions to the 2000 presidential elections? Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter), well-- Speaker 1: Were a lot of black people in Florida disenfranchised? Were-- Speaker 2: Well, the evidence seems to show that that's the case. I mean, yeah, they were. Yes. They definitely were. Speaker 1: So, do you have any comments on it from a journalist's point of view? Speaker 2: Well, I just think that, you know, I think that, again, you know, I believe the journalist raised the questions. I think the questions were asked. I mean, it's not the journalist's job to lead the revolutions, it's the jour- (laughter), it's the journalist's job to ask the questions of both sides, of all sides. And, so, yeah, I do think that--I mean, and so it is important that the reporting be done, you know, very diligently. And, sometimes it's really quite difficult to get access, to get, you know, access to the people who actually really knew the story for a variety of reasons, you know. It's difficult to get people to, to talk, to tell their stories. And, but, I think that, yeah, I think that people asked the questions, I think they did. Speaker 1: I'll ask you about two more incidents and then we will step back to '83 [1983] and the Beirut [Lebanon] bombing. The next one I wanted to ask you about was the, the Rodney King incident, and the L.A. riots [1992 Los Angeles riots]. And, that was in, in the '90s [1990s], I'm not actually sure of the year. I can't remember. But, what was talked about in the newsrooms? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's interesting because I think, if you remember, that who--it was, the incident was sort of touched off because somebody had some videotape. It was an amateur videotape of Rodney King being beaten up. And, when you th- when you think about it, that is sort of the beginning in a big way of kind of the democratization of media, you know. Because it was a, it was an amateur, you know, guy who was just rolling the tape, and he had the tape, you know. And, there were no other cameras there, which is why, I guess, the police thought there were no other cameras there and so they felt safe in doing that. I mean, certainly, you know, if they'd been followed around by camera crews or something like that, they wouldn't've done it, you know, I guess, on camera, you never know. But, I think that this whole trend toward, well, I don't know another way to call it other than democratization of media. I mean, technology has made it possible for people to do all kind, to do all kinds of things. They can write and they can say what they want. And, they have an audience, and they can find an audience. And, they can, and, you know, the audience who is interested in hearing, hearing what they have to say, is, is out there. And, I think that it's good in the sense that it keeps information from being concentrated in very small circle very, you know, very small hands. The hands of the people who own quote unquote, the media. But, at the same time, it also raises the questions of veracity. I mean, at a certain point, you have to trust that people are--professionals are doing their jobs. And, you have to trust the information, you know, that they disseminate. You have to trust that's good information, and if you don't, I mean, certainly, again, anybody can ask pertinent questions, you know. Anyone can ask the questions. I mean, and in this culture where media is--it influences everything. I mean, it influences the outcome of things. It influences everything, whether intentional or not. It's, it's good to have people to be able to sort of, I mean, look this guy with the Rodney King video, he said, "Look what I've got." He took it somewhere and said, "Look what I have." It shows up on television. All of a sudden people are appalled. All of a sudden people are demanding answers. All of sudden people are deman--you know. So-- Speaker 1: It's like your [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis tapes (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, yeah. I mean people think, you know, the impact is there undeniable. Now, supposed somebody says, "Those tapes are fake," you know, I mean, that didn't happen, you know. Its how could, no one, it's just fake. This guy was, you know, I'm sure there are people who thought that. And, what am I doing? Oh, stop doing this? I'm sure there're people who thought that, and who questions, you know, the veracity again of the material. So, that I think is something that is really--well, it's just gonna continued to be a questions that's gonna continued to be raised. Because people who disagree with you are gonna question, you know, your sources, question your veracity, et cetera. And, I don't think there's any answer to that. I mean, it's either, it's either--because many things that we know to be true, people still don't believe. Speaker 1: Stepping (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like evolution (laughter). Speaker 1: Like ev- (laughter). Stepping one, stepping further back in time, and I'm not exactly sure-- Speaker 2: Can't go further back in time than evolution (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now- Story_ID: 303665 Speaker 1: But then Rodney King, before Rodney King there is another big media sort of a black media story. And, I wanna get--have you comment on it, and that was Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: What did it mean to have that played out on TV for black Americans? Speaker 2: Well, see, I don't think you can have it both ways. As black Americans, you know, you want success. And, so you could, you could argue that, that having a successor to the black [U.S.] Supreme Court justice, who's also black, it's a certain measure and indicator of successful, sort of. Someone recognizing the importance of the black community and that the black community should be represented. And, so, you could argue that that's a certain level of success and with that comes this kind of exposure. I mean, it doesn't happen in a vacuum. It would happen to anyone. I mean, you know, if that was anyone's story, they would've, it, that whole story would've played out. It was happens that this happened to be a black man and so, I think that (background noise) (laughter). I think that, I mean, it was unfortunate. It was certainly unfortunate. It as certain embarrassing. I mean, you always want people who are in the public eye who you, who are considered representatives of, you know, black America, you want them to be perfect. I mean, we have so few, we want them to be perfect. But, you know what? No one's perfect. And, and, when I say that this is not--I'm not making a judgment about, you know, whether or not I was in favor of Clarence Thomas, which I was not. But, you know, I'm really not even making that judgment-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I'm just saying that-- Speaker 1: And, that not, yeah, I'm not asking you to. Speaker 2: That it's just, you want the, yeah, you want someone to be--you want it to be perfect, and it isn't. And, so, it was embarrassing. And, but, it brought up a lot of other issues. That again, you know, it's interesting, whenever you try to sweep these issues under the rug, they always have a way of coming out at the worst possible time. And, so, again, you know-- Speaker 1: What issues came out of that, they say? Speaker 2: Well, you know, the--you know, sexism, you know. Sexual harassment in the workplace. These were all issues that, you know--and, and they dealt with it by trying to discredit, you know, Anita Hill. As if, you know, she was trying to sabotage America or something like that, you know. I mean, yeah, she was sabotaging somebody's agenda, you know. Yeah, but, I don't know, I just don't know. I don't think it was proven that this was some sort of put up job that, you know, that someone put her up to it so that this, so that he would be discredited so that he wouldn't be confirmed. But, I don't think that that's ever been established that that was so. I mean, so she just, you know, as a matter of her conscious, spoke out. And, I think it took a, it was a--and I think it took an incredible act of courage for her to do it. And, there was nothing in it for her. And, look what happened to her. I mean, she seems she's fine-- Speaker 1: What happened to her? Speaker 2: Well, she, she, she's--I mean, first of all, she was subject to a great deal of sort of public abuse, scrutiny, unprecedented scrutiny of her personal life. Untru- you know, lies were told about her. And, and, she--I mean, ultimately she went back and someone, you know, ineffective (laughter), degree and I guess, I don't know, you know. And, and she's teaching and she seems to be fine. But, I mean, to have had to, to say--and, she had to know, she had to know once she did that, that she was letting herself in for just an incredible amount potential, you know, abuse and some, and she took it. Speaker 1: Last questions about that. What did race have to do with their story, Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill, from your perspective? From the way it was covered? The way people saw it in the media? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: What did race have to do with it? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I mean, here you have two black people and so, some people felt, I mean, it depends on how you were looking at it. Some people felt that Anita Hill should never have done that because it's a black man and it's embarrassing and, you know. And, Cla- and other people felt that Clarence Thomas was not the appropriate person to have that job, because, just because he was a black man. He didn't share Justice Marshall's [Thurgood Marshall] opinions and philosophy, and judicial philosophy at all. In fact, he was total opposite that. So, a lot of people felt he wasn't qualified. But, they, they looked for somebody black who, you know, who didn't represent the black community in terms of his, his views. And, so, they felt that he was not, you know, the right candidate for the job. And, so, I, I mean, everybody had a different sort of way of viewing it through this prism, you know. And, certainly, like I said, if it had been a white justice or, you know, person from some other ethnic group and, let's--or Japanese. And, then a Japanese woman came and said, don't--you know, and sort of accused him of sexual harassment. The issue was sexual harassment, really more than race, I think. And, I think that it just became almost more of a circus, you know, more sensational because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Speaker 2: Because the people were black. Speaker 1: Quickly tell me, do you know how it all came about? Can you, in a nutshell, He--she accused him or something or-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What was the historical reference is that he was being confirmed and then she accused him of sexual harassment. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, that was--that's the end of the story. And, then it took on the life that we saw in the media. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 303666 Speaker 1: Back to nineteen--I wanna actually do, I'm gonna keep going back so, in like '88 [1988], or in '84 [1984] and '88 [1988], you had the opportunity to produce the Democratic and the Republican Conventions. What does that mean? Speaker 2: Well, I, basically I was covering the Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] first presidential campaign. And, which was an incredibly exciting experience. And, I mean, it was probably one of the most, one of the most exciting things that I've ever done, journalistically. And, it was, because, don't forget, remember the Time magazine cover with Jesse Jackson on the cover and the headline was, "What Does Jesse Want?" I mean, that was really interesting. I mean, it's like, what does he want? I mean, the man is running for president (laughter), it's like what does Jesse want? So, that was, that sort of sums up, you know, how America was looking at it. I mean, they just couldn't believe that, they just couldn't believe it. Here's this really charismatic, really basically brilliant, political tactician, and people (laughter), they just didn't know really how to take this and what to do with it. And, then, the other question for journalist was whether or--because what they did was, they assigned black journalist. I mean, the whole campaign everybody practically, not the entire, 'cause actually I worked with two correspondents. And, and one of them was a white correspondent. So, every person assigned to the Jackson campaign was not black, except that the press corps for him was overwhelmingly black. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And, so-- Speaker 1: So, that's-- Speaker 2: You know, because-- Speaker 1: That's news. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I mean, yeah, yeah in a way--yeah it was. And, then there were questions about whether-- Speaker 1: But, let me, before you go on, why was it, why do you think it was that most of the people assigned to cover him were black? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's just, I think they didn't take him seriously in the beginning. I think they didn't think he would go the distance, which he did. And, you know, there, there was a kind of a--there's always a hierarchy and in--within any organization, you know. And, so, that the front runners get assigned the correspondents who are, they, or you know, high, highest up in the organization. Because it's quite likely if the front-runner, if a certain candidate wins then the, then the reporter whose been covering it, that person goes to the White House [Washington, D.C.] too, so, you know. It just kinds of, that's how they did it. Speaker 1: The hierarchy in this. Speaker 2: And, so, and so, I don't think they really thought--and they, and again, and they didn't, it took, I'm sure the news division by surprise too. Like, what? And, so, it was an opportunity. It was an opportunity for--I was done, you know, I, I really, I said, look, I have to go on this campaign. I'm going. I have to go (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --on this campaign. You have to assign me. And, they did, you know. And, so, everybody wanted to be on the campaign, everybody black, I think. At least, you know, if not full-time certainly part-time. I mean, you wanted a taste of it, you know. Because, because, well first of all, there weren't that many of us at that time, you know. So, that's the other thing. It's not like, now there're many more, I think. But, there were not that many of us. And, so, it was an opportunity, you know, for us to, to cover, to cover a campaign if you didn't have the chance before, you know, you could get on this campaign. Story_ID: 303667 Speaker 1: And so (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me hear what you're saying. So, possibly you would not have had the opportunity to cover another campaign because you were not in the hierarchy of people that would be assigned to cover that candidate? Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, I did-- Speaker 2: And, he [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] provided an oppo- a greater opportunity for black journalists to function in this role? Speaker 1: Yeah. He did. He did. And, so, then the questions became--well, his candidacy did. Speaker 2: Right. Yes. Speaker 1: He personally, yes, I guess. But, you know, and so, then the big questions that was asked became, can you be--are you black first or are you a journalist first? That was the questions, we were all asked, one way or another, at one time or another. You know, can you be black, can you be, can you be objective? Can you be fair, if you're black and your candidates black? This-- Speaker 2: Well, I wanna hear. Speaker 1: This came about because of, you remember, he made this remark, this very undiplomatic remark about New York [New York] being Hymietown. And, a black journalist [Larry J. Sabato] wrote about it in The Washington Post. Speaker 2: Who was that journalist? Speaker 1: Oh, God, I forget his name. This was, oh, I just, I just can't remember his name, but he was one of the, and he, you know, he became one of the editors, the city editor of The Post, Washington Post. It'll come to me, but I can't really stay on it. He wrote about this. And, so, you know, they were looking for anything. I mean, you know, newspapers--like they did with Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. Like they do, I guess, you can say with almost any sort of candidate. They have, you know, they, you have an investigative reporting team that sets out to find whatever it is they can find out about the candidate and, you know. And, so, they were really trying hard to find stuff about Jesse as he became more and more popular. And, people weren't talking. Whatever they knew, if they knew anything that, they won't talk. So, then, this came out. And, people were mad. And, a lot of people were angry. They felt, some people, some people felt that this shouldn't've been reported. That is was said in the--it wasn't said in a public conversation. It was said in a private conversation to aides, and something, you know. It wasn't like he made a speech and said that or anything like that, and it wasn't intended for public ears. And, so, people felt that this was a betrayal of, you know, the confi--confidence and that, that this is not a thing that should've been brought out publicly. And, that it was gonna destroy, you know, his campaign, and it basically almost did. Story_ID: 303668 Speaker 1: Yeah, Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was--anyway people were completely at odds about this. The press corps was really mad at him for doing it [calling New York City Hymietown]. See, one of the things that, that one of the dynamics that happens when you are part of a candidate press corps is, is that you either hate them or love them. You, you know, you hate them if they're not good. And, if they make mistakes and, or make stupid mistakes, or say things that you, you know, that are just--you don't like them. Because, you know, you hear the same speech over and over and over and over, and you, and you, you know, you come to know them intimately pretty much. I mean, in the sense that if they, you could tell if they're having an off day. Or, if they give the speech and it's a slight change. And, you listen to see if they're--that means they're changing their position on something, you know, that they, and you know. And, everybody's always trying to get, you know, private time with the candidate so they can, you know, get something they can write about that everybody else, you know, doesn't have. And, oh, you know, so, there's a lot of, you know, very intense sort of rivalry among the press corps. But, you also want your candidate to do well. You don't want them to make a fool of themselves, you know. You want them to be somebody that when you show up and your, your candidate shows up, you know, you--well, you want them to do well, you know. You don't wanna feel like you're following an idiot, you know, you, you, you know. And, so, whenever something happens and they stumble and they fall, you know, it's a matter of big grave concern. Because, you know, you don't want that but then you don't like them for doing it, you know. And, so, so this was really basically a terrible faux pas, you know-- Speaker 2: On whose behalf? The journalist [Larry J. Sabato]--? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --to write about it, or Jesse Jackson-- Speaker 1: No. One is--that he-- Speaker 2: --to say it, in privately to someone? Speaker 1: Well, he never should've, you know, he should've been more careful and he should've said it. And, if he felt--that's kind of what people thought. But, then people thought--but, then you could take the argument, well, if that's what he thought, that's what he should say, because that is what he thought. So, I mean, you know, you can't control that. I mean, this is, this is someone who's a brilliant man, and he speaks well. He knows, he knows, he knows how to speak his mind. And, if that's what he thought, that's what he thought, you know. So, it was a mistake. I mean, it would--but nobody would argue that it wasn't a big mistake. Because it resulted in, you know, people stopped giving him money, you know. He had a lot of, you know, support, I guess, from, from--well, you know, he was a really good fundraiser, you know. He's always mana- he's always managed to, to find the funds, you know. And, so, but, this caused, you know, this alienated a whole segment of the community. They sort of thought he was doing a thing and that we're willing to support him. So, he lost, you know, a lot of money as a result of that. And, that meant that it sort of, whenever that happens to a campaign, you know, it changes the whole campaign. Their tactics, everything, what's available to them to do, where to they, you know, where do they go, what do they say. I mean, it just changed a lot, it changed his campaign. And, and actually, I don't think he ever really fully recovered from that. Although--because everywhere he went, he had to explain it, you know, apologize for it. It was a preface, you know, for, for, for, you know, for everything. Speaker 2: But, let me just jump in here. Because if everywhere he go--he had to explain it, you mean, he not necessary to the journalists because they were all black-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: And they--he had to explain it to? Speaker 1: To, to his audience. Speaker 2: To his audience. Speaker 1: Or, he was introduced-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Or, he had to apologize, or he had to react to it. Or, people were told to ask questions, you know, day after day about, you know, something having to do with that. I mean, it just was, just hammering away at him. So, you know, he'd come out and he'd have message for the day. But, the first thing he had to do was get out of the way, you know, the last disclaimer about, you know, his remarks, and then he could move on. I mean, it was just, it was really diff- you know, I don't think he ever really fully recovered from that. I mean, he, I mean, obviously he recovered enough because that was the, con- that was the convention [1988 Democratic National Convention, Atlanta, Georgia] where he spoke, you know, on the stage, so electrifyingly. He gave that speech that spellbound the entire country really, that speech that he gave that night. And, so-- Speaker 2: Can you remember some of the things he said in the speech? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) I can't. But, it was, it was just electrifying. It was the perfect speech. It was perfectly delivered. It was perfect down to, it was perfect, you know. And, that was what they gave him, you know. You know they're always steeling and so he got the opportunity to address the nation in primetime for an half an hour or something like that. And, people were talking about that speech for weeks afterwards. Story_ID: 303669 Speaker 1: So, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wanna just talk some about the atmosphere that was surrounding his [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] election from the journalist point of view because there--it was an opportunity for all these black journalist to be working on the same story. So, did that create an opportunity for you to talk amongst yourselves in, in ways about the story, that story that perhaps you wouldn't if it were a broader story where you were one black journalist with ten other white ones? Speaker 1: Well, yes and no. You see, everyone had their own--it's a very competitive situation. There was us--I tell you who else was on that campaign, Gerald Boyd from The New York Times. He was a reporter, he was a reporter on that campaign. [HistoryMaker] Juan Williams was a reporter on that campaign. I got to know Juan. Juan was always leaving this bags, and we were always taking his bags for him. Juan, I'll take your bags-- Speaker 2: Where is he now? Juan's at PB--? Speaker 1: At NPR [National Public Radio]-- Speaker 2: NPR. Speaker 1: Yeah. And, and other places, you know, he's--and, Juan used to, you know, have this thing where, you know the print reporters, you see, the print reporters and the television reporters had slightly different requirements. In other words, if you're the candidate and I--you, you come out of a--and I go and I talk to you, pri- you know, you--let's say you're just coming out of a meeting and I go up to you and I start talking to you. And, and, soon it becomes clear that I'm actually interviewing you, you know, 'cause I start taking notes, all right. And, and you know, and you have your microphone and, you know, your recorder and everything. The television people can't stand that because what happens is, is that the print reporter will write something and it'll appear in the paper the next day, that this remark was made. And, in fact, the remark was made off camera. Because, you know, the cameras were all lined up, you know, and the mics were all set and everything for the candidate to come out and make a statement with regard to whatever the issue is and whoever he's been meeting with and everything. And, it--for television, of course, it's only good if it's on camera. If it's not on camera, it's no good. I mean, you know, (laughter) I mean, it has to--it's show and tell, you know, it's TV. And, so, and so, the print people always felt like the candidate played to the cameras. And, the television people always felt like the print people were always taking the candidate aside and getting, you know, these little scoops and things and asking these questions that everybody else didn't have access to. And, then it would appear in the paper, and then you know, you'd, you know you'd get a call. But, what about this? You know, like I don't, when did he say that? You know, we were with him all day long. When did he say that? Then, you realize, oh, yeah, that's when he was off in the corner, you know. So, so, there is a lot of competition, you know, among the media entities, you know. Which is after all what you're--so, no, you know sharing any information, I mean, yeah, you have good friends, you make good friends. And, you do your job, and, and, there are, I mean, there are certain ways that you cooperate. I mean, 'cause when I was sort of one of the big organizers of that, that particular campaign when, when I was on that part of the campaign. I would try to organize things so that people--everybody had a fair shot. For instances, you know, I'd say, why are we running, running after him, chasing, you know, him with our cameras? When, you know, it's dangerous, you don't get good video. It's not, you know, it's just, it doesn't make any sense. Why not, well, since we're all waiting, line up all the cameras, put the mics, you know, down in front, altogether in the same spot? That way, you know, it's not like somebody over at the far end of the room is getting the video and somebody over here is, you know, is getting the audio and nobody's hearing and it's not, you know, rather than have, you know, a hun- fifty, sixty people chasing after the candidate, why not just set it up so the candidate comes to us? You know, that took a lot of doing, you know, (laughter) and it was, I mean, and it worked most of the time. But, it really took a lot of doing to just get everybody to see, to organize, to see there was some of that, 'cause the press, you know, everybody, it's a free for all. Speaker 2: Before we move away from that story, do you--the questions I that posed, are you--are you black or a journalist first, excuse me. Are you black or a journalist first? And, I'm asking you just to speculate. Had you been in that position, would you have written about that comment? Speaker 1: I really don't know. I don't know. If he said it publically, I wouldn't have a doubt. Saying it privately, honestly, I don't know. I just don't know. Speaker 2: You had the oppor-- Speaker 1: But, I mean-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you could argue that anything like that is fair game, and it's your job, you know, to break news and let the chips fall where they may, and he said it, so. Speaker 2: Or, you could say-- Speaker 1: It's your job. Speaker 2: I'm black and he's our first black, he's our black hope and that was in confidence and I'm gonna keep--that's not news. Speaker 1: You could do that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You could that. Speaker 2: I mean, in either way, you're correct. Speaker 1: You could argue it either way. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Either way, you're correct. Speaker 1: And, I don't know. And, I, I didn't (laughter)-- Speaker 2: It's just what you--how you're feeling that day. Speaker 1: Well, I guess. I mean, it's a tough call. It's a tough call. And, it, and it gave rise to, you know, all kinds of debates for days and days and days. Speaker 2: Well, then also, probably, I mean, it has something to do with what you wanna do with your career also. That's definitely newsworthy and that's breaking news and to hold that, it's, it's a nugget. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And, perhaps it'll send you places that you wouldn't have gone-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --without having reported what story. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 303670 Speaker 1: You had the opportunity in '84 [1984] also to work on the Africa, African Famine in Sudan. Speaker 2: Yeah. I did. Speaker 1: Were you being assigned these stories because you were black, or you happened to go to them and say, I wanna cover-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --these stories beca--? Speaker 2: I asked to cover. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I asked to go there. I asked to cover that story. And, yeah, it was, it was, again, you know, one of the more, one of the most amazing things I've ever witnessed, really. I went with a camera crew (laughter), I was the only wom--you know, I went with a camera crew. I went to Sudan three or four times. Speaker 1: What's it like, Sudan? Speaker 2: Well, it's not, it's kind of a--(pause) when I went there, you would, you would see women working, you know, in the offices and everything. And, so-- Speaker 1: And, this is 1984? Speaker 2: Yeah. So, it didn't seem to be the kind of society that really oppressed women per se. Even thou- you know, Muslim society, but most--you know, people are working. I mean, yes it--so, it was, but, you know, the men are sort of all, I mean, there's no question (laughter) about women being equal in, in the way that we think of it was women being equal. That's not the way it happens there. It's not their culture. It is, it was in transition when, when I was there. It was starting to become--I mean, this group the Muslim Brotherhood [The Society of the Muslim Brothers], you know, which were students who were fundamentalist, you know, Muslims, Islamic organizations who believe in Sharia law. They, they were starting to take over on the university campuses and, you know, in the government. It wasn't a democratic government by any stretch of the imagination, you know. They, they--to give you an example, one day there'd be cigarettes and you'd go on, you know, you'd go on a trip out to desert, you'd come back the next day, they'd be no cigarettes. Because it had something to do with taxes, and the tax, and I don't know. I don't remember the details of it. But, then they'd be none, anywhere, nowhere to be found, for several days. Then all of a sudden, they'd come back. Same thing with water. There'd be water of a certain kind, you know, you'd, you always had to buy water when you, when you, you know, you had to basically take your provisions with you when you left Khartoum [Sudan], 'cause there was nothing. I mean, there were villages and things but you after all were going to cover famine and so, you know (laughter), so there wasn't a lot out there. And, so, when you--so, you take a case, a case of water with you, and you'd come back, and that water would be gone. They'd be--that water wouldn't be there anymore. There'd be some other kind of water. You know, water with a completely other label on it. And, I--and you'd wonder, you know, who was the power to just sort of decide? Today, we're selling these cigarettes, tomorrow they'll be no cigarette, but then there be cigarettes in a few days, but they're be called something else. Today's there's water, but it's only this kind of water. You come back three days later, that water--people look at you like, it's if, as if you asked for, you know, Perrier and then you came back and they had Dasani. And, you, and you--oh, you don't have any more Perrier? And, people look at you blankly and say, Perrier, what's that? And, you say, well, it was just here. Well, no. You want water it's Dasani. So, I mean, really, you know, the kind of, you know, society that someone had absolute control. Story_ID: 303671 Speaker 1: --You got off the plane [in Sudan] for the first time, and you, and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Well, you had to-- Speaker 1: With you camera crew and you were exposed to-- Speaker 2: Well, they went through everything. They went through all your luggage, searched you luggage, everything, you know. And, and of course, it took you a really long time to get visas. It would take weeks to get actually, get a visa approved. They'd know you. You'd go every day over there to the-- Speaker 1: How did you cover the story? What were some of the things you covered when you got there? Speaker 2: Well, oh, interesting, on one trip, we actually were looking for John Garang. And, we, we were in, we went to Kenya because that was the way into the Southern Sudan at this particular time. And, and they had an office there. And, you would, you know, go see them and their guy would be (laughter) sitting there at the desk, and yes, yes, and you'd say who you were and present your credentials and everything. And, you, you know, wanted to go and, and speak with Dr. Garang and yes. Okay, we'll let you know. And, you go back the next day, and the next day, and the next day, and you'd go back for days, and they decide, you know. And, so, you had all these journalists hanging around hoping that, you know, they'd say yes. So, this one particular day, they took some journal--they took a group of journalists who had arrived before we arrived. We woke up and they were gone to meet General Garang. They were not heard from for a good, I think it was six days. No one heard from them. No one knew where they were, where they went, anything, nothing. People were getting worried. Something happened to them. There was a, you know, Washington Post [The Washington Post] reporter, and AP [Associated Press] reporter, I think Reuters and somebody else, I forget, that went. Well, it turned out that they took them in, in a, you know, in a truck to cross the border and into Sudan and into Southern Sudan near Juba [Sudan] which was the area where he was at the time. And, they rode around (laughter), and around, around, around, in circles. I mean, they drove 'em through--you know, when you, when you go on these places, on these treks there, I mean, you go and nobody knows where you are. You don't know where you are. I mean, and you just have to rely on the people who are taking you and hope that, you know, rely on the kindness of strangers. And, so, they came back. I mean, eventually they came back. I mean, people were getting really worried. There-- Speaker 1: Well, six days-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah. Speaker 1: --you know. Speaker 2: And, their newspapers hadn't heard from them. I mean, it's not like they were calling in, you know. But, these, we, this was before cell phones, so it's not like, you know, they weren't calling in. And, so, I mean, and so people thought something had really happened. People were beginning to think they'd all been killed. And, it turned out that they rode them around, around, around, around, around, they, you know, so that they wouldn't be followed or--and, you know, he was always changing locations. And, he was, you know, he was, he would be moving around always. And, so eventually, I think they, they met him for like an hour or something like that. And, he talked to them and then that was it. They were taken back on these military trucks. Back again, on this, you know, circuitous route, through the jungle and all around and around. And, eventually they were brought back and sort of dumped on the doorstep of their hotel, you know, in Kenya. They, they were back in Nairobi [Kenya]. I mean, it was wild. And, so, we were told to kind of not to do that, you know, don't do that. Don't go there. So, we went to, I mean, we, so we went to Sudan. Story_ID: 303672 Speaker 1: We did go to places where people were starving [in Sudan]. We went to camps. Speaker 2: What were those camps like? Speaker 1: Oh, they were incredible. They--I have pictures. I actually, I do have a lot of pictures I took of tho- of that. The camps were in the middle of the jun- in the middle of the desert. Nothing there. They set up the camps kind of near a town, if possible. Speaker 2: Now, who were setting up the camps? Speaker 1: The, like, relief, you know, Catholic Relief [Catholic Relief Services], or-- Speaker 2: Red Cross [American Red Cross]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Red Cross. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, the, you know-- Speaker 2: Amnesty [Amnesty International]. Speaker 1: --they had these camps. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Amnesty International, yeah. Speaker 2: So, the camps would be set up in the desert? Speaker 1: Yeah. People--they would make, if they didn't have tents, which frequently was the case, because people would just start migrating to where they thought was water, or they thought was food or something. They'd bring their animals and everything until they had to sort of start eating their animals, and you know. And, they would usually settle somewhere outside of town, not in towns. You don't want all these thousands of people in town. The minute there was food anywhere, you know, it had to be near enough to a place where the relief agency could get the food, truck it to where ever it should be and, you know, and set it up. And, they didn't want, you know, the town to be overwhelmed by refugees from other places. So, they usually set them up outside the towns. And, the, in most cases, people had--they made shelters out of sticks and twigs. And, you know, torn fabric or whatever, you know, to keep the sun out, like that. So, really it looked like people were living in almost like nests, you know, like nests, like you know, little stick, they--just like huts of sticks and twigs. And, but, usually, these camps were well organized. They had routines. They had sys- you know, things that they would do, routines that they would follow so the people could get fed in an orderly manner. Eventually, they would try to inoculate them against diseases, you know. If the camp was there long enough and people were settled there long enough, they would try to inoculate them against diseases. One of the things I saw, I'll never forget, was people, you know, we--I woke up, I went to the camp, I woke up in the morning and went out to see what was happening. And, people were all lined up to get their morning ration of food and then after that all of a sudden everybody started splitting up into these groups. I thought, well, what are they doing? And, men would be on one side, women and children would be on another side. And, they'd all go into these groups and they'd sit down. You know, like what are they doing? And, you realize, you know, it's some kind of class or something or something. Turned out, that they would have school. They would find the people among them who could read and write, do arithmetic, whatever. And, they would sit down in the middle of the desert. Somebody would have maybe a little chalkboard or something like that, and they'd all sit there and somebody would teach school. They would have school, class. Wom- you know, women and children of all ages, men of all ages. Just you know, but, and you, you'd think to yourself, my God. You know, here these people are in the middle of the desert starving, no food, no nothing, and what are they doing? They're wanting to read, you know. They're learning arithmetic, they wanting to, you know. It was the most amazing thing. Because I could never understand why the kids were always asking for pens. You know, you'd go, and they'd run up to you and they want, you know, gave them, sometimes you'll give 'em a t-shirt or something like that. They'd want pens, and you couldn't understand--or pencils, you could understand why. And, the reason, that was the reason. Pencils were incredible prized. (Sneeze). Speaker 2: Bless you. Speaker 1: Excuse me. Speaker 2: Did, did you, did anyone write about that, or cover that as journalist? Was that a story? Speaker 1: Yeah. I think we did. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I think we did. Um-hm. Story_ID: 303673 Speaker 1: 'Let it Be.' What was 'Let it Be'? Speaker 2: Oh, well, that was a--what year was that? Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987]. Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987]. Yeah, that was, again, you know, like another Africa fit--you know, another African political famine story, you know. It's, it's just--I mean, it seemed like, it turns out that, as we know now, which we didn't know before--and again, you know, that's another case where, you know, you were asking me before about the impact of the media and press on things, you know, what did I think about that. Well, you know, the world would never have known, the Western world would never have known about these famines. Which it turns out, happened sort of with some irregularity there. But, we didn't know that. And, when we saw these images of people walking, you know, leaving their country in search of food, falling by the wayside dying on the road on their way from place to place, people were--couldn't believe it. People were horrified. Peop--you know, people were--that's when everyone got mobilized. And, so, the 'Let It Be,' that was part of that whole people mobilizing, we should probably do something to try to feed people, and you know. I mean, I went to Ethiopia. I went to Sudan, and I went primarily those places for, for this. And, you know, you just can't believe the resiliency of people, how they could survive. How, how do they survive? How do they survive? You know, it's just, it's just an unbelievable thing. Speaker 1: So, I guess, all of these events, or all of these stories that we've talked about on your career stories happened when you were with Dan Rather in the 'Evening News' ['CBS Evening News'], everything should have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they did. Speaker 1: Were you the first African American woman to be a producer on that show? Speaker 2: I was, actually. Speaker 1: In what year did you join him? Speaker 2: Well, I actually work--I went there in '70 [1970], I think it was '78 [1978] I worked on the, on the 'Evening News.' And, at that time Cronkite [Walter Cronkite], it was like his last year or so, or something. So, Dan came after that. And, I really, I can't remember exactly what year again, this was '80 [1980], but I'm not sure, I think, not sure, or '79 [1979] or '80 [1980]. And, so, what'd you ask me? Speaker 1: You were, 1980, just how did you get to Dan Rather, the year? Speaker 2: Well, I had, I had worked, I was working on the morning news ['CBS This Morning'], which now is called 'The Early Show.' And-- Speaker 1: So, you worked with Bryant Gumbel? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Was he there at the time? Speaker 2: No. It was before. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Before. I don't think he was on that show. Oh, yeah, I'm sorry. He was, but this was--he came later and he came like really later. Speaker 1: Now, we were talking before and you said you were getting these opportunities 'cause, because people would say, we need a black woman-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: For this. Did someone say, we need a black woman on, producing on the 'Evening News' with Dan Rather? Speaker 2: Yeah, they did. Well, they had a guy who was a producer who was leaving the 'Evening News.' So, it was for health reasons or something, he was leaving. He went to work on another show. And, so, they wanted someone black, you know. And, so, there I wa--you know, I was on the morning news and people knew me and I guess they thought I could do it. I don't know if they thought I could do it. In fact, they didn't think I could do it. I mean, let's be honest. They didn't think I could do it. But, I was there and, you know, I was the one that was there. So, they brought me up through the ranks as it were. Actually, before my, before my contract expired, you know, they, they moved, you know, already, they said, oh, you know, they offered me this other deal to go to the 'Evening News.' So, I, you know, I had no intention of, I didn't think I--when I went to CBS I never thought I would be there this long. I had no intention of being there this long. It just wasn't anything that I contemplated. And, so, because, and at the time I had been accepted at the American Film Institute [Los Angeles, California]. And, I was gonna go there and I was gonna be--make movies, is what I wanted to do. I decided. But, then this opportunity came along and I thought, well, goodness, you know, I really can't pass this up. This is a real opportunity, you know, to work with legend, work--you know, I mean, so, so, if I'm gonna--if I'm here and it's being offered to me, I might as well take advantage of it. So, I, I did. Story_ID: 303674 Speaker 1: We already spoke about you working on the CBS News ['CBS Evening News'] with Dan Rather. But, just to go back, we--I wanna ask how did the African's treat you as a woman? Speaker 2: Well, you know, they were confused because--so, which actually it worked to our advantage because as a producer, I was, you know, I basically had the final say over what we were gonna do. And, this actually worked really well. When, you know, we'd go to towns--first of all, when you, when you go to these places, you have to present your credentials. And, they have to give you credentials which allow you to operate in the area. And, you have to tell them where you wanna go in the country. And, you know, and if you wanna go somewhere else that you haven't requested, you have to go back a request permission to go to that place. And, then you have to wait actually, until that permission comes. Because if you don't have their permission, you could all the way, you know, for miles, you know, days really, somewhere 'cause nothing is close, out in, out into the desert and get there and to this village or somewhere. And, if you don't have the approvals and the stamps and the, you know, the okay and everything, you're out of luck. I mean, they won't let you operate, you know. This little guy will sit at (laughter) the desk, you know, with his full military, you know, epaulettes out to here and everything, and tell you, no. Sorry, but you can't. And, so, you, you be like, but, we've traveled, you know, all day, and we've, and you know gas. And, when you travel in these countries, you have to carry your extra gas and carry your extra water. So, you actually have, maybe like three vehicles together, just to go somewhere. And, so, it's a big undertaking 'cause you're hiring all these vehicles, the drivers, you're provisioning them, you're filling them with gas. I mean, it's thousands of dollars, so you don't take any trips until you're sure about where you're going and what you could do when you get there. And, so, you know, but you always have to go when you get there and present yourself. And, and then--otherwise people won't talk to you, you know. It's, no, it's nothing like, just, oh, you're just gonna wander out and start talking to people. It just doesn't happen that way. And, so, they, you know, and so, then they look you or me, and they don't know, they can't quite get it together. Of course, I'm in Western dress and I'm dressed, you know, not like their women dress, but I'm dressed, you know, you know, in Western clothing, slacks, you know, for one thing. And, shirts and things that--so, I look, you know, to their eyes, I'm dressed like a man, you know. But, it's obviously that I'm, well in the worst case, yet, I seem to be--have some say over what's going on, you know. And, so, we used to always work this, you know. And, fortunately, I travel with a camera crew real--who could speak several languages, you know. And, who would also--knew the area and they would stra- you know, know how to negotiate. And, so, then they'd talk to, and they come back to me, and they say, okay, just a minute I'll have to go and see if it's okay. And, you know, this would be totally confusing to them. And, they'd come back and they'd talk to me and I'd sit over here in the corner and watch the whole process. And, I'd sit apart, you know, and then I'd say, I'd say, yes or I'd say no, we can't do that (laughter). And, then they'd go back and they talk to the guy, you know, and so, we--it really worked, I mean, for reason it really helped us, you know, just because it was so confusing to people. Story_ID: 303675 Speaker 1: I remember one time, though--I mean, you did have to be careful, 'cause I remember one time we went up to this town way up in, it's an incredibly beautiful place, near the Red Sea, called Suakin [Sudan] in-- Speaker 2: Can you spell that for me? Speaker 1: No. I can't rem- S-O-U, I mean, I think it was spelled on the map like it was pronounced. It's S-O-U-K-A-I-N [sic. Suakin] or something. But, I could be wrong about that. But, it was--this town right on the Red Sea and just incredibly beautiful town. Part of it was ruins. They'd been a battle there and they left the ruins, they left the ruins from the battle and just moved over, you know, and built--rebuilt the town next to, next to it. And, so, we, we went to this place and, we went to the market at night. And, I used to love, I loved to go to the mar- that's my favorite place, my favorite thing to do wherever we go. Is to go to the market. You see everything. You see what people are selling. You see the women. You see how--you basically see how people live. You see what they eat. You see what they crafts are. You see what their spices are. You see what their division of labor is. You see what--you just, it just, you see everything right there in the market. So, we went there and we went at night. And, the, the guys went off into--I wanted to go see the beads and the jewelry and the spices and everything. And, they were going into the dry good store, was in effect the dry good store to get whatever. And, and to the pharmacies to see if they could get, you know, things they couldn't get (laughter) in America and, you know, in their countries. And, actually, I happened to be with a crew that was a Greek crew. So, they would--and so, all of a sudden I looked around and I found out I was by myself. And, I wasn't sure which door they'd gone into. And, so, I was standing there and all of a sudden I felt like people were staring at me. And, if they hadn't noticed me before, they noticed me now. There I was looking completely foreign, like some apparition, I sure to them, you know, who dropped from, how did--and the guys were nowhere. And, I was standing there by myself and I was starting to get quite nervous because the men, you know, they would gather around. And, they'd stare at you and then you don't know--I mean, I've had, I have had some, had has some people come at me, you know, to--not to hurt me. But, just, they just surround you 'cause they just didn't understand, you know, what you were or who you were. And, they just, and they would just surround you. And, so, I was frightened out of my wits quite frankly. Because there I was in the middle of nowhere from my--you know, I hadn't know, no one would ever know. I mean, if I pointed to you--this to you, I mean, you could just disappear. And, I was there and nobody else was there. And, I didn't know--and I was afraid if I went into a store and it wasn't that store that they went into, then when they came out, they wouldn't see me and they'd go somewhere else. And, then I would have no idea and I would never know for--should I stand in there and wait for them or should I--I didn't know what to do. So, just as I was starting to really get nervous because, they were, you know, people were starting to turn around and like, and they start to move closer to you and everything. And, you know, you just don't know. And, you can't speak with them. So, I thought, oh, my God, here I am in the middle of the night, in the middle of nowhere, by myself with these (laughter) people, I can't speak their language, they, you know. And, if you show fear, that's the wrong thing to do too. But, you don't know, and all of a sudden, the guys came tumbling out of the store, you know, like, come on. Are you ready? And, I said, oh, yeah, I'm, yeah, I'm ready to go (laughter). I thought oh, my God, (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So, you know, you have to kind of stick together. As, as a woman you can't, you know, there's certain things you couldn't do, you know. You know, you're not supposed to--you just have to wear long sleeves, and again, you know, as a woman. But, then I didn't have my head covered. I mean, I'm looking like a Western man, you know. You have to really watch yourself in most situations, you know. Because you just don't know. Are people relating to you in a friendly way? You just, you just can't be sure until you're sure. Story_ID: 303676 Speaker 1: What was it like when you actually moved into, like from the 'Evening News' ['CBS Evening News'] to CBS Sunday, 'Sunday Mornings' ['CBS Sunday Morning']? Which is kind of a magazine show. Speaker 2: Yeah. It is a magazine show. Well, what happened was that I was on the 'Evening News' and I was--this was around the time of Tiananmen Square [Tiananmen Square protests of 1989]. I was supposed to go to Tiananmen Square [Beijing, China] and, you know, at the last minute they decided, yeah, we should send people in. And, everybody wanted to go, and I was--I really wanted to go to Tiananmen Square. Okay, so, I had, I had a talk with my boss. He said, okay. I said, okay. There's just one thing I really have to do, you know, and I'll let you know. To--it was like you were gonna go get that, they were get it on tomorrow or the next day, you know, you have two days to get ready to go. And, but I had to do one thing. I had a doctor's appointment and I had to check this out. It was something, you know, wrong. So, the next day I went to the doctor, was examined, they biopsied me. It turned out I had breast cancer. So, you know, that was like, complete, I mean, no one ever expects that. I mean, I knew there was something but I, you know, I just wasn't, knowing, I've never been sick, I've never been sick. No one, I mean, how could this even happen? It was just an impossibility to even contemplate, you know. So, then the doctor said, well, you could probably go (laughter), to China for a few weeks, 'cause, you know, it'll just be a few weeks. And, it's probably not gonna make a difference and everything. But, I thought, oh, my God, you know, wait a second, you know, I've just been told that I have this potentially fatal disease, and I don't know, I didn't know what to do. So, but, I decided, I thought about it, and I decided that, well, I just couldn't go there. That I just had to really deal with my health first, so. I went back to work and I said, look. I called him, you know, from the doctor's office 'cause I was completely thrown and I was crying, you know, and I said, look, you know, I just found this out and so I can't go. You have to pick someone else. So, that was really traumatic. Speaker 1: And, that was 19--? Speaker 2: That was '88 [1988] or '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: Eighty-eight [1988]. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, you know, I just, I stayed here and I got trea- I actually worked, you know, sort of part of the time after I had surgery. And, I came back and had chemotherapy and radiation. And, I actually worked, you know, during that time. I mean, so, I wasn't traveling that much, obviously, you know. I didn't have the strength to really travel. I could work here but, I couldn't really travel. And, besides I had to be there every other day or what--so, after, it was after that that this, soon after that, that this position on the Eve- on 'Sunday Morning,' you know, they were looking for a senior producer. And, I knew the executive producer because I'd worked with her on 'Evening News.' And, so, you know, it seemed like a good idea because it would be less traveling, completely different job, really interesting, less travel (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, your health is why you walked away from-- Speaker 2: Well, I'd been there for a long time. Speaker 1: But, I mean, during the type of work you'd been doing. You'd been to Africa, you've been to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, you'd been all over the world. Speaker 2: Right. And, traveling, you know, frankly, I mean, travelling was become a little onerous, you know. I was trying to--I was getting married or I was having a relationship, I guess, or something. And, to my current husband [Knut Eckert], you know, we were dating and everything. And, so, what would happen is, is that I'd go on a trip and I'll say, okay, it maybe be for a week or two weeks or something like that. And, if it was foreign trip and sometimes it would be three weeks, or then four weeks (laughter). And, so, I was like, okay (laughter), this isn't working. And, so, so, I wanted something that was, you know, not gonna be, that was gonna be more predictable and, you know, or more of a routine. And, so, so, and this was 'Sunday Morning' was like a great show and it's, it was a promotion and everything and so I, I, you know, I really wanted to do that. Speaker 1: Were you the first, were you the first black woman in that position as well, that had worked on CBS in the mornings? Speaker 2: Yes. I was. Speaker 1: And, you're probably the--still the (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, excuse me. Yeah, I was, now that you mention it. Story_ID: 303677 Speaker 1: I wanna talk now about the, the way, sort of in modern day, I want you to speak to me about what a newsroom looks like. And, I'm talking about color. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: What do we make up in the newsrooms? What percentage do we make up? Speaker 2: Well, it's growing, you know. I can no longer claim to be the only, which is a good thing. And, you know, and so, and I'm not the only one who's a senior producer, they're others. And, so, in that sense, it's really, it's really starting to, to change. Throughout the ranks really. I mean, keep in mind that the structure is sort of like a pyramid, you know, so as you get closer to the top there're fewer jobs. And, so, of course, you know, that means that the competition for those is fierce. And, you know, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Have any of us every, what, like as we get closer to the top of the pyramid, how many black people are up there in the news, in the med- in your end of the news industry? Speaker 2: Oh, not many. I mean, not many. But, there are some. I mean, there are some-- Speaker 1: Who are they? Speaker 2: Well, you know, for instance, I'll give you an example. There's a guy over at ABC named [HistoryMaker] Paul Mason. I actually don't really know that well. And, that's another thing. It used to be that you knew everyone. You knew everyone. Speaker 1: Everyone period, or everyone black? Speaker 2: Everyone black. Everyone black. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: You knew everyone black. Now, I see people I don't, I have no idea who they are. I see them (laughter), you know, on a daily basis coming-- Speaker 1: And, that's because the numbers are growing? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Good. Speaker 2: Yeah. Right. And, I mean, for years that was never the case. Up until recently, I would say up within two, within maybe like the past five years or so-- Speaker 1: But, there's no one black over you? Like, your bosses are black? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And, your bosses' bosses are black? Speaker 2: No. No. Speaker 1: So, you are at-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --the top of CBS's ranks? Speaker 2: I mean, in the upper--I'm sort of in, yeah, in senior management I guess you could say. I guess, that's how they--what they call. But, you know, there's a senior producer on, on 'Evening News' ['CBS Evening News'] who's black. Which is a huge thing because-- Speaker 1: Why is that a huge thing? Speaker 2: Well, because I remember when I went to--when I first--even though they asked me to go to 'Evening News,' when I first got to 'Evening News' they really didn't want me there. They had to take me there, you know, but they didn't want me there. And, so, they didn't really treat--they didn't wan- didn't invite me in, you know, to the club and didn't really treat me that well. They weren't friendly, you know, had two, three actually, executive producers tell me at diff- on different occasion as they came and went on 'Evening News,' that ma- perhaps I didn't belong there, perhaps I'd be more comfortable somewhere else. Speaker 1: Where else did they think you'd be more comfortable? Where had most black people--? Speaker 2: Well, there was nowhere. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Nowhere else. It was just anywhere other than there. And, that maybe I should go there or something, or where ever it was. But, but actually, but I didn't and actually eventually all of that kind of went away because I was good at what I did. So, even though they were, I felt, you know--I don't know if they were trying to intimidate me or they just were just, I don't know. You know, but they, you know, I just would sit there and do my job. And, so, there, eventually, I mean, there was nothing--I didn't make mistakes, or any more mistakes than anyone else made, you know. And, so, eventually that kind of went away. But, but there are other senior, black senior executives as well. In different, you know, different shows, different departments, there are. And-- Speaker 1: Which is new. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Relatively new. Speaker 2: Yeah, relatively new. It wasn't until we started (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And being new-- Speaker 2: I mean, don't for-- Speaker 1: We're in 2005. When, when did you start to see a change? Speaker 2: Well, don't forget, you know, for instance, [HistoryMaker] Johnathan Rodgers, you know, Johnathan Rodgers? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: He lives in Washington [D.C.], Maryland. I first met him when I first came to New York [New York]. He worked at Sports Illustrated, and I worked at Time, and we met, you know, then. And, he became a, he--so, he sort of gravitated more to the business side. So, he became an executive producer of 'Weekend News' ['CBS Evening News: Weekend Edition'], and he became an executive producer of 'The Early Show.' And, then he left and he went to be a, let's see, I think, well, he went several places, you know. He was, he was a president of something at Discovery Channel. And, then, you know, and now--anyway, all I'm saying is that he--so, he sort of gone to start up cable, you know, operations and he's heading those. It's just a job that he would never get, and he could never get at--when he was there at CBS. Speaker 1: What was his name again, Johnathan Rodgers? Speaker 2: Johnathan Rodgers, yeah. And, then, there's this guy I was telling you at ABC named Paul Mason who is the senior vice president of 'News' ['ABC News']. And, so, in charge of, you know, a number of the ABC news, network news shows, and special events and everything. I don't really know him that well, but-- Speaker 1: And, but, you said that his, that he was in a unique position because you were about to tell me something about Paul Mason, before we went on, you said Paul Mason, is-- Speaker 2: Well, he's, he's probably the highest-ranking black person now in network television, I think. So, there, you know, all I'm saying is, is that there are people who are scattered about in different positions and, you know, it depends on what, you know, people come and (laughter), people come and go-- Speaker 1: People come and go. Speaker 2: Go like any other-- Story_ID: 303678 Speaker 1: What it looks like on the other side of the camera. What we're seeing as far as newscasters. Speaker 2: Well, again, you know, for instance we, you know, we have [HistoryMaker] Russ Mitchell, who anchors sometimes. And, when we, then we have other correspondents. Speaker 1: On 'CBS Sunday Mornings' ['CBS Sunday Morning']? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Actually-- Speaker 1: Because I've never seen a black person host on that show. Speaker 2: Yeah. He's only done it a couple of times. He's basically a weekend news anchor. So, sometimes you know, if Joe, Joe Harsch [Joseph C. Harsch] gets away, then we have different anchor substitute. Speaker 1: Although, I absolutely love that show, nothing about it feels black (laughter). Speaker 2: No. I mean, no (laughter). But, naw, I mean, you know, we had, you know, of course you have Ed Bradley [Edward Bradley] and '60 Minutes.' And, you have--I mean, so, so there are, I mean, certainly more people in front of the camera than there are behind the camera, certainly for su- you know, in terms of higher management ranks. There are quite a few people who are, you know, desk assistances, associate producers, you know, producers, there are. Speaker 1: So, as you see, as you're a senior producer for, let's talk about some-- Speaker 2: So, you, I guess, what I'm saying is, so you may not always find yourself being the only one. You may not be the only. Speaker 1: Anymore. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, when did that, when did you see that change happening? Speaker 2: I would say within the past five or ten years, it began to happen. Speaker 1: And, what, what are the reasons for it happening? Speaker 2: Because, when you let people in, in entry-level position, you know, they start, I mean, it takes time, you know. You don't just sort of decide you're gonna be in television and decide you're gonna be in the top spot, you know, it takes time to get, to learn your job. And, it takes time to get, to have people know you. And, it takes time for, you know, for, it just takes time for you to get, you know, to rise through the ranks. And, of course, I mean, look, you're not gonna give, you're not given necessarily preferential treatment, necessarily. You know, people are not gonna push you along necessarily. No one pushed me along, really. Speaker 1: No one? Speaker 2: No. I don't know. No, I don't recall that. Every--there were a couple of people who were helpful to me. But-- Speaker 1: Who were those people? Speaker 2: There was woman who's still a vice president of CBS News who was helpful. Speaker 1: Is she black? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. What's her name? Speaker 2: Linda Mason. And, there were people, you know, and the current president of CBS News who I actually--this is an interesting thing. His name is Andrew Heyward and we shared an office together as producers on the 'Evening News' ['CBS Evening News']. And, I had a--I just knew one day that he was gonna be president of CBS News. I just knew it. You could tell. Speaker 1: How could you tell? Speaker 2: I don't know. I just knew. Speaker 1: Come on, how could you tell? Speaker 2: No. Well, you just, I just knew. Speaker 1: What about him made you know that he was gonna be president of CBS News? Speaker 2: Well, for one thing, he wanted it. He wanted to do that. And, and he pursue--he was actually quite aggressively pursued, you know, his promotions. But, they also identified him as, you know, someone who like a rising young-- Speaker 1: Has that potential. Speaker 2: A person who had that potential. And, so, I mean, I mean, nothing changes, I mean, in terms of how you're treated or how you, you know. So, you get certain assignments, you know, you get certain-- Speaker 1: But, you were telling me, you shared an office with him. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, now he is president of CBS? Speaker 2: Right. And-- Speaker 1: What's your relationship like with him now? Speaker 2: We're friends. We're friendly. And, and he's helped. He's helped. Speaker 1: What do you think-- Speaker 2: But, you know, again, don't forget, you know, one of the things about this job and you could say this about probably most jobs, is that, you know, if you're not good at what you do, it doesn't hel- it's not--it doesn't help people and it doesn't help you if you get sort of promoted or pushed beyond your abilities too fast, too soon, whatever. I mean, you could argue that in our case, in the case of black people, it's too little too, too slow and too little, and I wouldn't argue that at all. But, you know, no one, it's the kind of thing where people are not gonna stand in your corner, if they don't think you can-- Speaker 1: Do the job. Speaker 2: Do--yeah. Story_ID: 303679 Speaker 1: What do you think is the, the purpose of--and you're, you are a member of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ], what do you think should be the purpose of organizations like that? Or, what is the purpose? Why are you a member? Speaker 2: Well, I think, one of the great things they do is that they help people get jobs. I mean, they have this big jobs fair every year, where recruiters come. And, I think it's incredibly helpful to young journalist to talk to people to see--I mean, it's perfect. You know, you know, how somebody's come to you and they're look for a job and when you do it that way, they come to see me and then they go somewhere else. They call someone else and they set up an appointment and they go see that person. Then they, you know, go see--and this could take weeks. You could go to the NABJ, one shot, and you could see as many people as you can schedule appointments with. And, if they're there to recruit, you know, and if they have jobs, they're, you know, you could find out more there in that one (laughter) weekend, you know, than you can, I mean in a year. It could take you a year to find out. I mean, because the contacts are there, you know, how you always get referred. Well, who's the person I should see there? Well, who should I talk to about this program, and what that name? Well, they're all there. They're all there, the people that you should see. Speaker 1: Have you benefited? Did--have you ever benefited from, or you didn't, well, you were always employed. Speaker 2: No. And, I, I--they didn't really have that, when I was--they didn't have that kind of jobs fair when I was first getting started in television. They didn't have that. They didn't have that many black journalist to have a convention in the first place. I mean, and so (laughter), you know, there was no grand recruiting thing. It was just-- Speaker 1: Do you think, well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Word of mouth, you know. Like, they're looking for a black pro- you know, they're looking for a producer over at--it might not even be that they were looking for a black person. But, you know, most of the time that was the implied thing, you know. Why were they calling me as opposed to someone else, you know. So-- Speaker 1: I'm gonna stop for a moment and just--this just a little shine I'm gonna take off. You could keep rolling if you want to. I'm gonna do it quickly. Speaker 2: So, no. I, I never actually had the benefit of that, but I have met many people, counselled many people. I've been, you know, you go there and, you know, all the networks, they have booths. And, so, everyone, all the black employees go and staff the booth. And, you know, there are producers and are on air, you know, reporters and, you know, people who com- you know, everybody who's who go to NABJ. Speaker 1: I've seen Rene [Rene Syler] at the CBS booth. Speaker 2: You have to do your time-- Speaker 1: Every year. Speaker 2: At the booth. Right. And, you have to do your time. And, and, it's very interesting to see how much more qualified young people are today coming into this business. I mean, it's night and day, really. Unbelievable, how, how well, you know, how much more qualified, I mean, it's just by virtue of the nature of the evolution of journalism education is really like. And, it's just an incredible thing to see. I mean, there many more people than the system can absorb quite frankly, I mean-- Speaker 1: And, why is that? I mean, and, because I read an article where, and I don't know, but I read an article talking about the industry moving far slower than, than what the population was reflecting. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well-- Speaker 1: So, why can't the industry absorb, there are--there no jobs? Speaker 2: No. I mean, there just not as many jobs as there are people who want them. And, you know, nobody's gonna leave, rollover and leave just because you wanna be there and you want their spot. I mean, they're just not. And, so, you know, you just have to wait 'til there is something. And, yeah, there's a lot of nepotism and there's a lot of just like there always has been and I'm sure there always will be, and a lot of preferential treatment and it's really good to know somebody. Because if you don't know someone, you know. You may, I mean, you may be just as good as the next person. But, if the next person's parents are friends of, you know, you may not have the edge, and, so, you know. One of the really good things now is the intern programs. They're really good. Really important. I mean, they've become much more important to students today. And, I've, you know, I've had several interns who've worked with me who've ended up being full-time employees at CBS. Story_ID: 303680 Speaker 1: We were just talking about the value of an internship. If you would just make that summation again on camera? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, it's critically, it's really, really important today. It sort of again, part of this kind of evolution. When I was--came out of college, there were no internship. You just found a job and tried to do it, you know. And, today students are more prepared. They know more. It doesn't mean that the jobs are necessarily--you may, you may come to a position knowing more. But, you know, of course, in most cases, the jobs are still the same. And, but, it, it's just incredibly important for helping you understand what goes on at the place that you think you would like to spend your time working. I mean, it can be or not, you could discover that you don't like the thing that you thought you liked, you know. Television you can discover may not be for you. And, that is equally valuable time spent, because, you know, who would want to go to school and train for something and then discover in the end that after you've spent three or four years doing it, you didn't like it after all, you know. So, I mean, internships are really, really important, just to help you understand. And, help you understand the variety of jobs. People come to CBS, and they think I wanna be and on camera, I wanna be a reporter. Well, when they leave, they may decide, well, you know what, I actually don't--I can be in television without having to be an on camera, you know, an anchor person. I could be an artist. I could be a lawyer. I could be in sales. I could be in advertising. I could be a producer. I could be a cameraperson. I could be an artist. I mean, there're just so many things that you could do. All those things you could do there. Half the time people don't even really realize that all those things--they think one thing. They see what they see on television and that's what they think it is. That's--and, and it's so much more than that. And, so, and I think it's true with any sort of line of work. It is really important to really go and test the waters. And, and it's just an incredible opportunity. And, now, also when you go to find a job, people look to see what your internships were, you know. So, they wanna know what you did. What are you doing with your time in the summer? What are you--how are you spending your time? You know, it gives them, you know, so people care about that. Story_ID: 303681 Speaker 1: So in our final stage we'll talk and then we have to go back and plug in a couple of names that we left off before. But, when you look back, what stands out most for you in your career? Is it the Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] story? Is it the famine in Africa? What stands out most for you? Speaker 2: Oh, you know, I don't know. You know, each of these stories was just a really special and unique experience. And, I, I really look, I mean, I even went to Germany and interviewed the host--the Iran hostages when they, when they came out, you know. I mean, there just so many things that have happened over the course of my career that--people I've met, things I've seen, places I've been. I don't know if I could pick one thing. I honestly-- Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important? Speaker 2: Well, that's one of the things I've learned, you know, history is incredibly important because people forget, you know. And, even television is, you know, what they, in sort of a cliche term, called the first draft of history. But it's true, you know, it's, you know, which is why it's always so important to try to get it right the first time. Because what you say gets repeated and repeated and people make decisions based on what you tell them. And, so, his--you know, history repeats itself. People forget. And, I just think it's just incredibly important not to let people forget. And, and the reason that I, I guess one of the reasons why, in the end, I decided that I found television so appealing, and I didn't even know it at the time, was watching the Civil Rights Movement come alive because of television. I mean, that was the turning point in America, which, you know, many people would just assume nobody had heard about, seen, or knew about. But, thanks to television, it changed everything. Speaker 1: What about those, what are some of the images you remember seeing that had a big impact on you through--? Speaker 2: I remember sitting in the dorm and watching, you know, people getting beaten, people getting, you know, hosed, you know. I remember the Selma March [Selma to Montgomery March]. I remember all those things and sitting there just transfixed. I just couldn't believe my eyes, you know, that this was stuff that was happening in America. Which had it not been for television, how would I know? How would anyone know? Who would know? Story_ID: 303682 Speaker 1: What do you want to be remembered for? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered for telling people--giving people information, telling them things, telling them stories, telling them about people that they need to know about, telling them about things that they need to know about. Things that they may not know they need to know about. And, doing it in such a way that, you know, is interesting and compelling. And, and I want to also be--one of the things I've tried to do throughout my career always is to shine the light on black people in the best way. And, that I think is really, really important to do. And, I'm proud to say that I've done that. Story_ID: 303683 Speaker 1: This is my parents' [Jeanne Boger Jones and Mark Jones, Jr.] wedding photo. This is, you know, they, they got married in, let me think now, 1944. And, so, that's they're wedding photo. My father was in the [U.S.] Navy. Speaker 2: That's my grandmother. Her-- Speaker 1: Can you give us her name again? Speaker 2: Yeah. She was born Grace Camille Collins [Grace Collins Boger] and she married my fa- my grandfather Thomas Boger [Thomas Boger, Sr.], so Camille Boger is her name. Speaker 1: Grandfather, Dr. Thomas A. Boger. Speaker 2: Do you know what year the photograph was taken? Speaker 1: Thomas Abraham Boger. You know, there might be--look on the back. Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965], 6/5/65 [June 5, 1965]. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-five [1965]. Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Speaker 1: And, he died in 1967, so. Speaker 2: This is your grandfather? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Next please. Speaker 1: So, this is my gra- and these, these are my mother's parents. So, this is my grandparents' house in Aurora, Illinois where so many members of the family lived at different times. And, where I actually was born out there and so that was the first place that I, I lived while my--with my mother while my father was in the Navy. Speaker 2: Next, please. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my grandfather after he's been fishing in the lake in Idlewild, Michigan where we had a summerhouse. Speaker 2: And, this is a picture of me at--I'm not quite sure how old I am. I maybe four there. Speaker 1: Where? Do you know? Speaker 2: Yeah. In our apartment in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: This is me at, I think, like three months or something, or maybe six months, I don't know, with my paternal grandfather, my father's father, Mark Jones, Sr. Speaker 2: Next, please. Speaker 1: And, this is me slightly younger with my mother's father, and my grandfather from Aurora, Illinois. Speaker 2: This is a photograph of me with my--am being held by my great-grandmother, Octavia Collins Eisenhart. And, my mother is sitting slightly behind her, she's a little obscured and, my grandmother who's sitting in the front. Speaker 1: Next, please. Speaker 2: This is me in my grandparents' yard in Aurora. I believe it was probably around 1963. I was in college [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], a sophomore. Speaker 1: Next, please. Speaker 2: You know how I know? Speaker 1: How? Speaker 2: The dress (laughter). Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me with my brothers, twins, Marcus [Marcus Jones] and Marvin [Marvin Jones]. I believe I was either six or seven, and they look to be about a year old. So, I was probably seven. Speaker 2: Next, please. Speaker 1: This is my high school graduation photo. Speaker 2: What year? Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-two [1962]. Speaker 2: This is a photograph of me with my mother. I was, I don't know, a couple of months old. This was sent to my father when he was in the Navy (unclear). Speaker 1: So, this is me in--talking to some of the Iran hostages who were released. This was in Wiesbaden, Germany. And, in July, I think, I can't remember the exact date actually, sorry to say. But-- Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980], 1980 is correct? Speaker 1: Yeah. Can I lean forward here? I just wanna see something. Speaker 2: It says '85 [1985]? Speaker 1: Yeah. 19--so, 1985. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is me with my husband on his sixtieth birthday in our backyard in New Jersey at a party that I threw for him. Speaker 2: What's your husband's name? Speaker 1: Knut Eckert, K-N-U-T, Eckert, E-C-K-E-R-T. Speaker 2: And, this is me in my office at work, at 'CBS Sunday Morning.' Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: Nineteen--I think, '98 [1998] or '99 [1999] maybe. We're always behind the times, I don't know. Speaker 1: This is me speaking at Paul Quinn College [Dallas, Texas]. I was invited to speak. Every now and then I'd speak. Speaker 2: Do you know the year? Speaker 1: I don't remember it. Look on the back it may say. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. This is me on my wedding day. Speaker 2: What year? Speaker 1: May 21, 1988. Speaker 2: This is me at work again in the scenic design shop talking to one of the scenic designers, Debra Bryant. Speaker 1: This is me getting an award at Columbia University [New York, New York], Alumni of the Year Award. And, despite what the date says, it's not that date. Speaker 2: It's not '93 [1993]? Speaker 1: No (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: No. It's one of those camera's with the date things that was always wrong, so. Speaker 2: This is me with my husband's brother, husband and his brothers. Speaker 1: Can you name them? Speaker 2: Yeah. Should I point to them or just name them? Speaker 1: Well, left to right, or right to left. Speaker 2: Well, see, that's the questions who's left and who's right? Speaker 1: Well, it's viewers, so it's ours. Speaker 2: Okay. So, oh, yeah, that's right (laughter). Okay, to the left, our left, is his oldest brother, Ditmar Eckert [ph.], we call, called Diddy for short, Ditmar Eckert. And, then me of course, and then my husband, Knut Eckert, and then his younger brother, Elk Eckert. And, it is Elk, E-L-K. Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me and my brothers and my sister [Julie Jones], the four of us. Marcus is on the left, Julie is next to Marcus, Marvin in the red tie, and then me, when I was blonde. Speaker 2: This is a photograph of, again, of my husband and I on our wedding day, getting married in our backyard. My father actually performed the ceremony, so. Speaker 1: And, that's a photograph of me and my husband, again, I believe that's in the '80s [1980s] just judging by (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Judging by? Speaker 1: The mustache, his mustache and my hair. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And, this is a photograph out at the National Tennis Center [USTA Billie Jean King National Tennis Center, New York, New York] at the U.S. Open of me and my sister, Julie. Speaker 2: And, this is the last one. Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me on the morning that--at breakfast, we went to brunch actually, before I was to check into the hospital for breast cancer surgery..