 Story_ID: 261785 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Observing is [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Judy Pace-Flood. J-U-D-Y, P-A-C-E, F-L-O-O-D. Speaker 1: Now do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: Pace (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right and what is your date of birth and place and birth? Speaker 2: You must be kidding. With one of those, you must be kidding. You must be (laughter)-- Speaker 1: This is for history. This is for history. Speaker 2: Okay you got me choked with that question. Los Angeles [California]. Born and raised in Los Angeles, California. Speaker 1: All right and no, no date of birth? Speaker 2: Well, I've been here for a while. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Okay, not even the date? Speaker 2: I'll give you June the 15th. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: June 15th, 1942. I'm a true Gemini. Speaker 1: Okay, and briefly what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Right now? I am a retired woman, having a fabulous time, but in another life I was a mommy, a housewife, an actress, and did all of those things. But, right now I'm a retired woman and I have fun doing and creating events. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what I do, yes. Speaker 1: All right and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is--I thinks it's March the 28th, is that correct? I think it's March 28th. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The 29th. Speaker 2: The 29th, thank you (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, March the 29th. Speaker 2: It's March the 29th, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Right now we're in the fabulous Hilton [Los Angeles Airport] hotel at the [Los Angeles International] Airport [LAX] in Los Angeles. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 261786 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management requires me to ask. Speaker 2: All right, all right. Speaker 1: They're kind of a warm-up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yeah I do wild red Alaskan salmon. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color? Is it wild red (laughter)? Speaker 2: It's hot fabulous fuchsia and magenta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, summertime when the sun stays up until nine o'clock at night, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Maui [Hawaii]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not really, but probably while we're doing this interview it might come out, but not just one that I always hook onto no, no. Story_ID: 261787 Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Edward Pace] side. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side of the family. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Kitty, K-I-T-T-Y, Pace, P-A-C-E. Speaker 1: Now, what was her maiden name do you know? Speaker 2: Griffin. Speaker 1: Griffin okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her place of birth is Jackson, Mississippi, and she was born in 1921. Speaker 1: Okay, and what, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How, how far back can you trace the ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: On my mom's side of the family I can trace back to my great-grandfather who was a Native American on my mom's side, and that's about as far back as we can go on my mother's side. Speaker 1: Do you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And my--pardon? Speaker 1: Do you know what group he was a part of or what, what, what-- Speaker 2: He was Cherokee. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, okay and, and you were-- Speaker 2: On my father's side? Speaker 1: No, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh not yet, okay, all right. Speaker 1: Now your mother's side, now you, you can go back that far all right. He was a Cherokee living in Mississippi? Speaker 2: He was living in Mississippi. He married my, which would be my great, great-grandmother, and then there was my mom's mother and then my mother. I know it was Mr. Griffin, my mother's father, was also from Jackson, Mississippi, and he was a tailor. That's what he did. Speaker 1: Okay, okay-- Speaker 2: And my grandmother she was a seamstress and dress designer. Speaker 1: Okay, now are there, are there any stories that are handed down through your family about what life was like in Mississippi in those days? Speaker 2: Not so much on my mom's side. Most of them were on my father's side. My-- Speaker 1: Can you think of any on your mother's side? Speaker 2: My mom left Jackson, Mississippi, when she was fourteen, and she said she was never going back there again and guess what, she never did. Story_ID: 261788 Speaker 1: Now is there a story attached to why they left? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's on, it's my mom [Kitty Griffin Pace] and my dad [Edward Pace]. My dad when he was eighteen he went to the train station [in Jackson, Mississippi] and said, "How far from here can you go?" And you know most of the, through the Great Migration everybody was going up to Chicago [Illinois] or going to New York [New York], but he said that just was not far away enough. He wanted to get as far away as the train would take him, and they told him Portland, Oregon, and he said give me a ticket. Two days later he was on that train, because he said he felt if he stayed in Jackson, Mississippi, this is in the '30s [1930s], the early '30s [1930s] where when you walk down the street in Mississippi and a white woman would walk by you would either have to get off the sidewalk or turn your face to the wall. You, you had to always move off the sidewalk when a man came by. You couldn't just turn your face to the wall. I mean you were just, he said you just couldn't be a true person, and he felt like he was going to kill somebody. It just had him in a rage, and he did not want to raise a family there or live there. He wanted all of his family to get out, and so he hopped on that train and made it all the way to Southern California 'cause they had to change trains and it was gonna be a stay over and he asked if there was, where was the colored side of town and they told him, "You can go on downtown," and he said he got off the train and the porter told him where to go, he can go to Central Avenue or go downtown L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and walk around, do whatever he wanted to, just be back here tomorrow morning and he said he started walking around, he didn't have to get off the sidewalk and he's, he walked into a restaurant he said it was [F. W.] Woolworth [Co.]. He went into Woolworth, got something to eat, he said he thought he'd had died and gone to Heaven. He never did leave Los Angeles [California]. He just stayed there, sent for my mom and my sister Jean [Pace], the one who's married to [HistoryMaker] Oscar [Brown, Jr.] and then they went on this great campaign of bringing all the family members to Los Angeles on my mom's side and my dad's side. We always had an aunt or an uncle or a cousin or somebody staying in our home. Speaker 1: What's your father's full name? Can you give us his full name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Edward-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Pace. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Nineteen thirteen [1913]. Speaker 1: And was he born in Miss--in Jackson? Speaker 2: In Jackson, Mississippi, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: February the 3rd, 1913. He passed away a few years ago. Story_ID: 261789 Speaker 1: I wanna go back to your mother [Kitty Griffin Pace]. Did your mother talk about growing up in Jackson [Mississippi] and what it was like for her? Speaker 2: Yes, she hated it. She hated it. She, she did not like country life. She did not like the farm. She, she, she said she knew in her heart she was a city girl and that's what she wanted. That's what she wanted to be, and she loved pretty clothes and she loved to dress up and she liked to, there wasn't things she wanted to do, there weren't things there that she wanted to do in Jackson, Mississippi, and she said she had to always--she went to a Catholic school and which she was a Baptist and the nuns would get on her every Monday when she'd come back to school 'cause they would hear she was at the Baptist church, but my grandmother wanted her in the Catholic school because that was where the best education was and she just didn't did not care for it at all. She really didn't. She just wanted to get out of there. She wanted to go to the big city (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, now what did, what did her side of the family do for a living? What did they-- Speaker 2: Well, my, as I said my grandmother and her husband was, he was a tailor and she was a seamstress, dress designer, fabulous costume maker, just really wonderful, and that was a skill my mother also had and she used that skill here in Los Angeles [California]; that's what they did. Story_ID: 261790 Speaker 1: On my father's [Edward Pace] side of the family, my father's father and--grandfather were cabinet makers, cab- furniture makers. They made furniture, skilled furniture makers and that's what they did and they, his uncles owned a cleaners, a colored cleaners, in Jackson, Mississippi, called the Paris Cleaners. There's a shopping mall in Jackson, Mississippi now named after my uncle, Mr. Paris, he married into the family. That was a very, they had a chain of cleaners there as the years went on, on my father's side of the family. My father did a, wrote a book many years after he retired, and he was able to trace our family back to 1786. Speaker 2: What's the name of the book? Is it-- Speaker 1: It's just called 'The Pace Family' (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, so it's like a-- Speaker 1: It's a family book. Speaker 2: --in family document that-- Speaker 1: It's a, right where he went and did all the research and got all the information and found out some incredible things about our family, and we're all to add to it and send out additional information as things happen within, within the family. Speaker 2: Okay, so he was able to trace the family back to 17--what was it? Speaker 1: Seventeen seventy-six [1776]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm sorry 1786. Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1786], all right, and well is there anything that you remember from that that you can share with us about you know? Speaker 1: Yeah, my father was able to trace the family by, well it just kind of stopped when it got to the plantation in Jackson, Mississippi, and a man named Mr. Moody [ph.] was a plantation owner and he had, just a common known story, a black woman as his, as his, as his woman and he, of course he had a wife, but they had five children together there on this plantation. There were three boys and two girls, and after Mr. Moody passed away his wife sold all of the children, all of the children because they were like 18, 19, one was 13. My father's (unclear) his father--great-great-great grandfather, he was sold to a man who took him to Oklahoma, so that she didn't just sell them like locally, she sold them and made sure they were sent off in all kinds of directions. Speaker 2: One might think that she didn't like 'em (laughter). She didn't like the idea of them you know. Speaker 1: He, he went to Oklahoma, and the man bought him at a very high price because they had all been taught to read and write. Story_ID: 261791 Speaker 1: And when he [Pace-Flood's great-great-great-great grandfather] got to Oklahoma he was, he was a slave still, but he, it was when they were--the mail was just starting to come and the Pony Express or whatever way they were getting mail across the country, he was the post, I guess you would call him the postman because he could read the mail and sort the documents to send them on to the, to the West Coast, continued on to San Francisco [California] because he could read and write, and that's what he did. And so the man made a lot of money off of him. So, one day he just started walking and he walked all the way back to Jackson, Mississippi, and tried to find the rest of the family, but he never did; couldn't find anyone, couldn't find, they were just all, all gone and then from there he continued as a free man and the it was you know, they just continued as a family. So, my father [Edward Pace] always found that very, very interesting. Speaker 2: That is an interesting story, yeah. Speaker 1: He just, he couldn't find his mother, couldn't find his sisters, couldn't find his brothers. It's just like they all just went into an abyss. Speaker 2: They allowed him to remain free? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah he did because I don't know how long it took him to get back from Oklahoma to get back to Jackson, Mississippi, because he was, he was walking. I don't know what dangers he went through trying, I mean that had to have been extremely dangerous. He could have been just, but he looked like he was white, (laughter) so that was part of the advantage he looked like he was white, and he could read and write. Story_ID: 261792 Speaker 1: Is it Los Angeles [California] in the late '30s [1930s] is that when they were (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Early '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: Early '30s [1930s]. Speaker 2: Early '30s [1930s] right at the beginning of the [Great] Depression. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, through the '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In Los Angeles, there weren't many black people out here, it just really wasn't, not that many. Speaker 1: Do they tell stories about what it was like when they, you know when they first got out here? Speaker 2: Well, just about everybody lived around, can I say, Central Avenue. That was the hub of, of Los Angeles was the Central Avenue area. My dad [Edward Pace] played a saxo- my dad played a saxophone and a trumpet, and he got involved with the bands and the clubs and all of those sorts of things and the nightlife of Los Angeles, and of course working probably two or three different jobs at the same and you know in the daytime. I can't ever remember my dad having just one job. He always had maybe two, always at least two jobs, so my mom [Kitty Griffin Pace] could stay at home. Speaker 1: Okay, okay now do you have in, now how many, well how many siblings do you have? You've got, there's Jean Pace, we all know who was married to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have-- Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr., and we, she's well known, but. Speaker 2: I have, there's, there's Jean, who's the oldest. I have a sister Betty, Betty Pace who's an executive with the city of Los Angeles, and I had a sister named Johnnie Mae [ph.] who is passed away, and I have a brother who was a fabulous artist, and he passed away, and then there's me. I was the youngest. I was the youngest girl. So, it was five of us. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was your brother's name who is the artist? Speaker 2: Edward Pace [Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Edward Pace who is named after my father, Edward Pace, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 261793 Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory? What's the first thing that you remember? Speaker 2: I've got one of these crazy memories. People call me and ask me what happened, what happened in the room, who had on what. I could--a crazy memory I have is, I know this is like one of my first memories, I can remember being in my crib in our house and there was, there was a big window and when the cars would go by it would make shadows of the bars on the crib go across the ceiling. You understanding what I'm saying. The lights would shine in and the, the crib would, would move, and I was telling my mom [Kitty Griffin Pace] I guess--she says there's no way you could remember that. I said I remember that. I could describe the room. I could, the window, there was double doors, there was the kitchen, there was--we moved out of that house when we, I was maybe about a year and a half. I could, I, that's one of my first memories is, is that house and a big turtle in the backyard. It was right at 43rd [Place] and Avalon [Boulevard, Los Angeles, California] across the street from the Wrigley Fields [Wrigley Field, Los Angeles, California], was the big baseball stadium there. So, that's one of my very, very first memories. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 261794 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh (laughter), I grew up kind of, how could I say, I was telling you we moved out of that house when I was like a year and a half and then we moved into a lovely neighborhood that was, that had a covenant over it where you couldn't sell property to a black person, but everybody was selling property to a Caucasian person and then the Caucasian person would quick deed it over to you. These were old, old, antiquated laws that had been there. There was a community around Sugar Hill [West Adams Heights/Sugar Hill, Los Angeles, California], around Western Avenue where the Golden State [Mutual Life] Insurance [Company, Los Angeles, California] Building is now. Do you know? That whole neighborhood was a very, I guess you would say today, a very upward mobile black community, men working in the aircraft plants. Those are my memories, living in a nice house and great backyard or a good front yard, and lots of friends and good Christmas gifts and just my mom [Kitty Griffin Pace] was at home and my dad [Edward Pace] would come home in the evenings and big sisters who looked out for me and, and my little brother [Edward Pace, Jr.] bothering me and my grandmother would always come and do all the cooking, just good old meals and going to church on Sundays and getting on the red car in Los Angeles [California]. There used to be a red car. We actually had a mass media transportation system here at one time, going to Santa Monica [State] Beach [Santa Monica, California] and just having good picnics (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like a sub, it was like a streetcar. Speaker 2: It was a streetcar. It was called a red car. You could ride everywhere in Los Angeles on the red car, and be with my grandmother and just, just, just be with my family and all my aunts and uncles and cousins who were all busy coming out, coming out to Los Angeles. We had a house, but there were two other houses on the property, so there was all, always some relatives living in the other house and then the house in the back and, and it was like one big compound almost, just, just fun. I look back at my childhood and I think I was an extremely blessed child, really, really blessed child. You know when I started working as an actress everybody had all these horror stories about their childhood. I didn't have any. I felt like dang what a boring childhood. No, my daddy didn't beat my mom and he didn't get drunk. He didn't do any of that stuff, you know, so I had a really, I, I really did. Story_ID: 261795 Speaker 1: Then we moved from that neighborhood [West Adams Heights/Sugar Hill, Los Angeles, California]. We moved from that neighborhood and we moved to the Westside, the Westside of L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: How old were you when you moved to the Westside? Speaker 1: I was in the second grade [at Marvin Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And everybody was asking my mom [Kitty Griffin Pace], "Why are you taking those kids out to the country? I mean, you shouldn't be taking them way over there," 'cause the Westside was, how can I explain the Westside, the Westside was all white. It was all white and all Jewish and so, and we were then in, I was in a grammar school where me and my brother [Edward Pace, Jr.] were the only blacks and the only Christians. Everybody was Jewish. We would even stay home for Jewish holidays. A pretty neighborhood, but it wasn't as much fun as the old neighborhood. Speaker 2: Okay, with all your relatives living around you. Speaker 1: No, there were no relatives living over there-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --No, no. Speaker 2: Now did your relatives continue to live in the old house? Speaker 1: They continued to live in that neighborhood. We sold that house and bought the house on the Westside right off of La Cienega Boulevard, and we lived between La Cienega and La Brea [Avenue], which was on West Adams [Boulevard], which was considered a very premier address at the time. In fact, I've lived my whole life between La Cienega and La Brea (laughter) even when I moved away from home and went to Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] I was still between La Cienega and La Brea. It just seems to be my stomping grounds. Story_ID: 261796 Speaker 1: That was, it was interesting going to school in that, in that kind of environment and I went through grammar school with the same group of Jewish kids. Speaker 2: Now what was the name of your school? Speaker 1: Marvin Avenue Elementary School [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: Okay, now did you go through your whole grade school? Speaker 1: My whole grade school, uh-huh-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and also on to junior high school with the same group of Jewish kids, and-- Speaker 2: What was the name of your junior high school? Speaker 1: Louis Pasteur Junior High [School, Los Angeles, California]-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) watching my, my Jewish little playmates when we got to--I didn't know this happened, but I, I watched it happen right before my eyes, as we went into the seventh grade we're all going on our break and then everybody came back from, to eighth grade all the girls had had nose jobs and everybody had gotten their hair straight, all my little girlfriends with the curly hair, they didn't have curly hair anymore and they had little, little noses, mostly the girls. Some of the guys, but mostly the girls and it was like a rite of passage or something. It was like, oh everybody in the eighth grade looking at everybody's new nose and your hair is straight and da, da, da, da. So, it was, it was interesting, but by the time you get to junior high you know you was thinking about going out on dates and having a boyfriend and, and then when those sorts of things start to happen we kind of get left out because that was not the era where the black girl and the little white boy were running around going out and hanging out together. That just was not happening. Story_ID: 261797 Speaker 1: How were you treated in those years in that neighborhood [Westside of Los Angeles, California]? Were there any other black families in that neighborhood or anything? Speaker 2: By the time I got to the sixth grade, another family moved in and she was in my class and she was, she was there for a while and she hated it and her mom took her out. And she went back to her old, because it just wasn't that much fun, it just wasn't. It wasn't. I did not enjoy that part of my, my education at all. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: And I would never ever put my--I never would put my children in that kind of situation where I hear parents say sometimes, "Oh, my child was the only white one--only black one in the school," or "They're the only one that--" I always tell them, you need to do something about that. They're not having fun. It's just, you don't feel like you belong, you just don't. Speaker 1: Okay so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you're a happy kind of a person we can tell so far you know and you, but you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I, I think if I hadn't had that core of incredible family support and my personality had already, you're already, already pretty much who you are by the time you're seven, you know, you're in good spirit, or you're a happy person, you know, the kind of--and my family were very up, you know, lots of noise and lots of fun, and lots of, that kind. My dad [Edward Pace] loved to talk and loved to play music and so my surroundings at home were always on, on a high, high level, but my mom [Kitty Griffin Pace] realized what was, you know that would happen and we were all able to go to an integrated high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California] where there were Asian people and black people and Jewish people, but we still were the minority. It was like 80 percent Caucasians and, and then the others were the Asians and us black children. But, it was very, it was all very middle class and there weren't any problems. Most of the kids' parents were professionals, doctors, lawyers, and school teachers, and the black kids' parents were doctors, lawyers, and school teachers and entrepreneurs and shop owners and things like that, so it was all a very professional environment, as many times you'll see where you have integrated schools sometimes the minority children are those who have less, but in this environment the Asian kids, the black kids, and the Jewish kids were all pretty much all on the same economic level, living basically in the same neighborhood. Story_ID: 261798 Speaker 1: Are there any stories about, about, specific stories that you can tell us about being in school in those days? Were there any teachers that tried to help you, any friendships you made, or any times when you, I mean, you say as a general rule it wasn't a lot of fun. Are there any specific bad stories about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, [Susan Miller Dorsey] High School [Los Angeles, California] was fun when I got to go to the mixed-- Speaker 1: No, I'm talking about grade school [Marvin Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] before-- Speaker 2: Oh grade school? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh no, no, not at all, unh-uh, nothing, no. I don't even think I could remember the names of the people I was in grade school with except for the black girl who came, and her name was Sandra Kengi [ph.] and I still know her to this day. In fact, we were out together a couple of months ago over at the Getty Center [Los Angeles, California] having a good old time, went to see a play, so no I don't remember-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --any of those folks. Speaker 1: So, what were you like when you were a little girl, I mean what did you like to do and, and what were you interested in? Did you have any heroes or idols or? Speaker 2: Oh, those kinds of questions, huh, did I have any heroes? I liked movies. I liked the movies, and I liked music. I, I just loved musicals. We didn't live too far from MGM [Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios, Culver City, California; MGM Studios, Beverly Hills, California]. I just-- Speaker 1: Oh the studios? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were, we could, we could get on our bike and ride over to MGM, and we weren't far from [20th Century] Fox Studios' back lot 'cause it was all right in Culver City [sic.], the Westside [Los Angeles, California] was right at Culver City [California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I liked music, and my sister Jean [Pace] we, we loved to put on shows. My sister, Jean, also went into the entertainment industry. That was one of the things we liked to do was, was put on a show. Speaker 1: Now she went on to become a professional singer. Speaker 2: She went--right, singer, dancer, yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and then-- Speaker 1: You are the same, I mean are you the only two in the family that, well you got a brother [Edward Pace, Jr.] who's an artist. Speaker 2: Who is an artist right. Just me and Jean and, and then my mom [Kitty Griffin Pace] when we became, when I went on, got into high school since, and my brother was in junior high, when my mom felt that she could go and, and express herself, and she opened a lady's boutique [Kitty's Boutique, Los Angeles, California] that became very successful where she designed for Tina Turner and the Supremes and, and the different groups. And she did all of my sister's costumings and for [HistoryMaker] Nichelle Nichols from 'Star Trek,' and she just had a very--it grew rapidly and from one small shop to a larger shop and then a larger shop, and that was fun time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was really fun time. Story_ID: 261799 Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: My high school was called [Susan Miller] Dorsey High [School, Los Angeles, California], Dorsey Dons--was a very, I feel (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dorsey what I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Dorsey, Dorsey, Susan Miller Dorsey High School. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, Dorsey High School-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and, and you had--off camera you were telling us about some of your classmates. Speaker 2: Oh some of my class, some--Dorsey High I think was so very unique because it was a very, it was integrated with Asians, blacks, and a large population of Jewish students, and, as I had said before, they were all pretty equal. They had a lot of students whose, Jewish kids whose dads were doctors and then you'd have the black kids whose dads were doctors and lawyers, too. One of my good friends in high school was [HistoryMaker] Marilyn McCoo from The 5th Dimension, and Marilyn's mother [Mary Ellen Holloway McCoo] was a doctor and her father [Wayman McCoo] was a doctor. Out of Dorsey High came Congresswoman [HistoryMaker] Diane [E.] Watson from Dorsey High, Congressman Julian [C.] Dixon from Dorsey High. These are black people, of course, who were during that era that me and my, my sister with Diane Watson, my older sister. We have, the president of our school board--black--from Dorsey High. Most of the people who I was in high school with, the blacks that I know, they all became very, pretty successful people. Professors at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and professors at [U]SC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], and just--we were that--this first group of the '60s [1960s]. We graduated in 1960, and we were that first adult group of young people who came out of high school marching right into the Civil Rights Movement with all of the things and all the wonder that was going to happen during that era, expecting all those good things because we were going to do more than our parents had done, and, when you think about it, the kids I went to school with and what their parents had done was remarkable because they had to come marching out of the '30s [1930s] and through the [Great] Depression and through the Second World War [World War II, WWII] and on into that whole, the '50s [1950s] as everybody was trying to get ahead, trying to get ahead, trying to get that education and it was the kind of school that there wasn't no question about if you were going to college, there was only where you might go, and then that was limited. There was Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and that's where you were going. That was pretty much it. Story_ID: 261800 Speaker 1: Little old me I wanted to be in show biz (laughter), so. Speaker 2: Now when did you first have the idea of being in show business? Speaker 1: In the movies, sitting there looking in the movies. Looking at Lena Horne and Ethel Waters and looking at Lana Turner and looking at Rita Hayworth, looking at these fabulous dancers and personality and these great production numbers and taking dance classes and singing in the house and making up stories and playing the parts with my sister Jean [Pace]. That's where, where it came from and my mom [Kitty Griffin Pace] letting us make costumes 'cause we could all sew. We, we did that. The skill that my [maternal] grandmother had as that dressmaker seamstress my mom had it and she also passed it on to us, so entertainment and clothes and all that kind of thing, dressing up and having a good time. Speaker 2: Okay, now you said that you could ride your bike over to MGM [Metro-Goldwyn-Mayors Studios, Culver City, California; MGM Studios, Beverly Hills, California] or [Twentieth Century] Fox [Studio]'s back lot. Speaker 1: Fox's back lot was, how can we say, down the street and over the road and there you were at Fox back lot. It's--(laughter) and when I got older I did a film there with Billy Dee Williams on that back lot. Speaker 2: Is that 'Brian's Song'? Speaker 1: No, it was, it was called--I did 'Brian's Song' with Billy Dee Williams, but we also did another called 'Lost Country' or 'Lost Island' [sic. 'Lost Flight']. We were supposed to be on an island we're all lost. This was earlier in our careers, and the new did 'Brian's Song' years later (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Brian's Song' okay, but, but is there, do you have any stories associated with going over to those lots and what you, what did you actually see when you were over there? Did you see any of the stars? Speaker 1: We would, we could go over, we could sit on our bikes and we could watch people go in and out, that's what we could do, and we could look through the fence and we could see stuff going on back there and that's what we could do, 'cause it was a quick ride. It was a real quick ride. Speaker 2: Did you see anything that was memorable? Did you see anybody that you recognize or? Speaker 1: No, no, not really. It was just that you could see the hub and the movement and this being pulled around 'cause you could look right through the gates. If you go to MGM now, you'll see the gates, but they now have walls behind them. Speaker 2: Now I've often wondered how, and I, I've heard that there is a black-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --community near these, some of these studios and I often wondered how people that live in, in what people perceive as Hollywood feel about movies being made right in their neighborhood or in their community. I mean did you have a sense that's where the movies were coming from, from these places or did--? Speaker 1: No they weren't, they weren't shooting in our community. I mean they, they were, the, the studio was not, was in the community, but they weren't like out shooting on the streets of the community. Speaker 2: I, I realize that-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --but how did people, you know, I just wondered how people, you know, felt about you know being right at the source of all this entertainment that seem to dominate everybody's thinking, you know. Speaker 1: I'm trying to think of the little guy who lived on my street who had been in the 'Our Gang' comedies because that studio was even closer than, than MGM. We could get there in a minute. Hal Roach Studios [Culver City, California] was just-- Speaker 2: Those were all, all the 'Our Gang' comedies-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --were shot at Hal Roach Studios. Speaker 1: Right, right and that was just a few blocks away. That was a quick ride. Speaker 2: One of your neighbors was a veteran-- Speaker 1: He lived, it was like a block away, the one with the little piece of hair that stuck straight up. Speaker 2: Alfalfa, [Carl] Switzer, Switzer yeah. Speaker 1: Alfalfa, right, right, but now while I was there, but he had, that was kind of the rumor of the--"So and so lived down there, you know the little guy from the," he lived in the house down the street. Story_ID: 261801 Speaker 1: So was church a big deal when you were growing up, too? Speaker 2: Oh gosh, church was all day. Church was not going to church and then coming home from church. My grandmother lived right across the street from the church, and on the weekends we would go to our grandmother's house and we'd spend the night and we'd get up do Sunday school and after Sunday school we'd do regular church and then after church there was always a church social something like dinner or something, then you would get maybe three hours break and we'd go to the movies, then we'd come back for midnight service. So, church was all day long. Speaker 1: Come back for a midnight service? Speaker 2: Meaning it would be the night (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Night, nighttime service. Speaker 2: --nighttime service, come back for the nighttime service. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the name of your church? Speaker 2: First Baptist Church [ph.] on 43rd Avenue [sic. 43rd Street] right off of Central [Avenue], right down the street from the Bill Robinson Theatre [Los Angeles, California]. Church was here, theater was right at the corner, so we could run down to the theater see the movies and then make it back before it got absolutely dark, go inside, fluff up, and go back to church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then, then we would go home, so church was rather important. Sang in the church choir. Story_ID: 261802 Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California] did you, were you involved in a lot of clubs and activities in high school especially around-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --entertainment stuff? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, dance class that was my favorite was my dance study classes and of course choir and never, we could, us black kids we never could get into the drama class. We just never got into the drama class, but we did all the singing and all the dancing, but no drama. Speaker 1: Yeah, the drama for black people raises a lot of sticky issues right? I mean, in those days. Speaker 2: You had to audition to get into, oh God I think his name was Mr. Pearlman's [ph.] class, and I don't think we just ever auditioned quite up to par because it was always a very white class. It was, it was a very white--no one was in there. Even [HistoryMaker] Marilyn [McCoo] couldn't even get in there. Marilyn McCoo couldn't get in there, so we were all in dance class and singing and doing dance productions and things like that. That was like my favorite thing and of course the, the design class for fashion and all that I enjoyed, and then there was an organization I was a member of called, I'm sorry called Les denos [ph.] Foundation and Les denos-- Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: Les denos. Please don't ask me, that's forty years ago. I think it's a word somebody made up. Speaker 1: Did you, do you remember any way that it was spelled? Cause we have transcribers trying to do this (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it was L-E-D-D-E, nos, N-O, I think it was a sign of Spanish with a little, one of those little things over the top of the, of the-- Speaker 1: Over the O? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Les denos. Speaker 2: Les denos. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Les denos. Little snobby little group of little black children and we thought we were just the cuties and the hottest little numbers in town. Just always had to be dressed. We were just a bunch of little snobs, that's what we were. Snobs within this, we, we get a group of girls who in order to join you had to like go through this whole thing of being a member and you have to be voted in and all that sort of stuff, but I guess when you're in high school that's what you kind of do, don't you? You do those in out kind of group, you're, in, you're out, you're in, you're out. Luckily I was blessed I was in because I think I would have been awful to have come from the Jewish junior high [Louis Pasteur Junior High School, Los Angeles, California] where you're absolutely out, then come to the environment I'm just dying to get to and would have been on the out, but luckily I was embraced and taken in. My friend Marilyn McCoo was a member of Les denos, Joyce Crosslin [ph.] who is now a principal in Atlanta, Georgia, and Gail Swan [ph.] who is now a professor at, a tenured professor at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] in psychology, and Gail Smith [ph.] who is at [U]SC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]. She is in the English department. Most of these ladies have become very accomplished women who were this little group of women who--we just had fun. Most of the mothers were school teachers of most of the girls and fathers some were doctors and most of them lived in very lovely homes, so it was, it was a fun time. Story_ID: 261803 Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: Look, I was lucky to get out of high school. I think I was traumatized by [Marvin Avenue] Elementary School [Los Angeles, California] from the second grade on while I was sitting there with all those Jewish kids. I hated that part of school. I loved everything else. Oh I was, I was, I was not a disruptive student, I did my best, but I just would have rather been off taking a dance class or singing or, or, just doing something else. Speaker 1: Were your grades okay? Speaker 2: Oh my grades were horrid, just awful, just awful, but when I became an adult I found out what part of my problem was: I'm dyslexic, absolutely dyslexic, but they didn't know what that was at that time, you know. On the reading skill and retention for reading score up here, just off the charts. Comes to spelling forget it. All those little letters they move around, they wanna go do their own little dance, I'm taking them putting them into pretty designs, not spelling the words properly and they just, they just were baffled by me. "If you read, you have to be able to spell. How can you not spell if you can read and you can retain everything," (unclear). I never, I hated it. Loved history, though. I'm still a history buff. So, if you wanna say what was my favorite subject, it was my favorite subject to open my big mouth and ask questions the teacher didn't wanna know. Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: Well, why did, why did they do that to the Indians [Native Americans]? I don't understand that, that, I don't know, what do, how come they had the slaves? I don't understand that. What do you mean they were okay? It was just things about our history that I just always felt there was this big blanket of cover up, just all over this and the images of people fighting the [American] Revolution. It was like, well, how, what, it was confusing. And to this day, I love history and I love all the under-stuff, all the stuff they didn't want to talk about, and all the things that now are coming into the open, which would have made history class so fun, more interesting than the stuff they were giving you. But, it was what they weren't saying that just made me want to know, and I think it was like I was always writing the script or writing the story or listening to these different roles and I could imagine the--the explorers and coming to the country and, and spreading diseases and (laughter) I just, I just found it just amazing. Story_ID: 261804 Speaker 1: Were you exposed to any alternative history, any black history in-- Speaker 2: Are we talking the '50s [1950s] here? No, that, I don't even think they had that phrase yet, alternative history or black history. No, that did not exist, no we learned (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There were some materials available, but you'd have to get them outside of school. They wouldn't be in school more or less. Speaker 2: No, my black history came from my family. That's kind of, my dad was just a brilliant man. My dad [Edward Pace] would read the encyclopedia like he was reading a novel. We had just many different collections of encyclopedias in my home. He just, he moved knowledge. He was just a, he was just brilliant, he really was and part of, after--evening was not like someone reading you your story book. My dad would come home and he would read the newspaper out loud to us, and I would learn all about [President Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower and what was going on in the Korean War or what was going on here and what was going on there and I to this day I have to read the paper every day, like what's going on in Washington [D.C.], my soap opera. Speaker 1: Now, was there a lot of discussion in the family about the Civil Rights Movement and what was going on? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I said my dad escaped from Jackson, Mississippi, oh yeah, very, very much so. Not just discussion, but participating, participating in what was happening on Central Avenue [Los Angeles, California] when they boycotted the, the dime stores there when they would hire you. You could come in and eat, you could come in and shop, but you weren't hired and, and changing that whole street to be a more inclusive street. I mean, my dad was very, he was very much involved. I was--and so was my mom [Kitty Griffin Pace]. They were just, they were always very much aware, of, of things like that. Story_ID: 261805 Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California] did you get a chance to perform at all at any event, I mean, other than church, I mean did you get-- Speaker 2: In, in school. We had productions in our school, dance productions, musicals, so yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we did and we would-- Speaker 1: --you couldn't get in drama, you couldn't-- Speaker 2: You could not get in the drama, no there was-- Speaker 1: But you could dance and sing. Speaker 2: We would do our own, we would have our own, our own shows, yeah and, not, not, it would be the school's production with the, with all of the Asian kids and the black kids and the Jewish kids. It was just the drama department that was like an elite, exclusive, "No, don't come over here," and, and if you did you never go in, so. Speaker 1: Okay, did you think when you were in high school, I mean what did you think you would, you would pursue as a career when you were in high school? What were your thoughts? Speaker 2: Well, I was, I had started working. I always worked with mom [Kitty Griffin Pace] in my mom's store [Kitty's Boutique, Los Angeles, California]. I would do, do, create and do the shows for her fashion shows, so I was working as a model for my mother, and we would do shows for the different women's organizations around the city [Los Angeles, California] for the charities and I would do the shows and I wanted to be a model and sure enough that happened. My girlfriend, [HistoryMaker] Marilyn McCoo, mother [Mary Ellen Holloway McCoo] was a member of an organization called the Lullaby Guild who put on the Ebony Fashion Fair every year. Speaker 1: The Lullaby Guild? Speaker 2: Lullaby Guild-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who put on the Ebony Fashion Fair, and they were having auditions and so Marilyn called me and told me and she said, "I think you should go, you, you should go," and so I did, and that's how my modeling, professional modeling career started. Speaker 1: So, you were chosen to be in Ebony Fashion Fair? Speaker 2: I was the first black person chosen from the West Coast to be with the Ebony Fashion Fair. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have to travel nationally then with [Eunice] Johnson is that where--? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: And how old were you when this happened? Speaker 2: I was eighteen years old. Speaker 1: Had you just graduated from high school or had you-- Speaker 2: We had just, it was the year after we had graduated from high school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and all of my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You graduated in '60 [1960] right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Sixty [1960], okay. Speaker 2: And all of my friends had gone off to college, everybody had gone off. I--and Marilyn had stayed in town. She had gone to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and I had gone to [Los Angeles] City College [Los Angeles, California] because my mom said, "You're going to college." I'd wanted to be a model, and I wanted to be an actress, so when Marilyn called me because Marilyn was going to have to go back to school and she knew I didn't want to go back to school and I went for the audition. Story_ID: 261806 Speaker 1: And I went for the audition [for Ebony Fashion Fair] and they were auditioning girls here in California, in Los Angeles [California], and auditioning girls up in San Francisco [California] to find someone from the West Coast 'cause they had never had anyone, and they selected a girl from the, from San Francisco and selected me and then they flew us both back to meet [HistoryMaker] Mr. [John H.] Johnson for him to make the final selection, and excuse me, Mr. Johnson selected me to be in the Fashion Fair. Now, I'm only 5'5", that's short, that's a short little model, but I was selected and then went back to New York [New York] and went for the three weeks to do your fittings and all that, so it was a very exciting time for me to be going off to travel with the Ebony Fashion Fair. It was, it was very exciting. Did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Had, had you had any professional training involved? Speaker 1: Right, I was doing, yes my sister Betty [Pace], my older sister Betty had worked as a professional model, and she trained me. She did a lot of shows. She was just, my sister Betty was just gorgeous. She was very tall and long and lean and just an absolute beauty. Just as my sister Jean [Pace] is an absolute beauty, and she had pursued a professional modeling career, and she did print work and things like that and so she taught me and then I would do that with my mom [Kitty Griffin Pace] with these shows that we would do and that's how I had just luckily knew what I was doing when I went for the audition for the Ebony Fashion Fair. Speaker 2: Well, do you have any stories about the Ebony Fashion Fair? Speaker 1: Oh, I went for, excuse me, that was my first time to New York, very first time to New York and here I am going in grand style with the Ebony Fashion Fair staying in this fabulous hotel with all the other models. We're all coming, they're coming in from all over the United States and meeting all these beautiful women and these fabulous people from Johnson's publication [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois]. It was just like, like a fairy tale and in New York, and you were like the toast of the town, here comes the Ebony Fashion Fair models, and we're just the toast of the town and being fitted and working with the designers and you're doing all that for about three weeks and then you start to go on the, to hit the cities. Well, I'm the youngest one, so I couldn't go to a lot of the bars and they would be trying to sneak me into the bars 'cause I was just a kid. So, we'd do two shows out of New York. I think it was in Baltimore [Maryland] or might have been--I think it was Baltimore. Went down to Baltimore to do a show and then we went somewhere in New Jersey and did, did a show. Story_ID: 261807 Speaker 1: And I get a phone call from Mrs. [Eunice] Johnson, the Mrs. Johnson, and she's going, she's telling me how sorry she is that they'll have to send me back home because I look like a little girl dressed up in my mother's clothes. "You're a lovely little model, but you look like a little girl in your mother's clothes, and darling you just, you just look like you got in your mother's closet," and I did. I looked like a kid prancing around in her mom's grown-up clothes, and they put me on a little plane and sent me back home [to Los Angeles, California]. Now you know that was crushing. You go off just being grand and then you're sent home. Speaker 2: So, so you were only out about how long? Speaker 1: About maybe a month, about a month and you gotta come back and face your friends and they've given you a going away party, and you're off on your big modeling career, and here you are back and they're in school and you're not in school because you took that break. But, about three weeks after I was home I get a call from [HistoryMaker] Mr. [John H.] Johnson, and he tells me, "Not to worry, next year we're gonna have you back [for the Ebony Fashion Fair]." I'm like, yeah right, uh-huh, right. So, they called me again and sure enough they did. And what they had done they had clothes especially designed for me with a more youthful flare to them, and I was the young model in the young clothes that a young nineteen, twenty-year-old person would wear and I did the whole show for them and then it, that, that was really a fun, fun time with Terri Springer, all these legend models and being with them for you know a good six, seven months, so that, that was, that was fabulous and seeing the whole country, just traveling all over the country it was just, it was great. Speaker 2: Did you have a favorite place to visit when you-- Speaker 1: I lived everywhere. Some of them had been on, done the tour before, a number of times and so we would get to a city and I'm like, "I need to go, let's go on a tour, let's, let's go, go see this and let's go see that," and they were like, "Oh, [HistoryMaker] Judy [Pace-Flood], just, just go, let us know when you get back." So, I would be out there with maybe one or two other girls who'd never been anywhere before, and we would just be out there having a good old time. We'd take ourselves on tours and go see whatever was going on. I wanted to see everything, and we did. We just, we just would go and we would do it. And it was Johnson's publication [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] who recommended me to Columbia Studios [Columbia Pictures], so. Speaker 2: Okay, now these were the days, too, I might point out, correct me if I'm wrong, but most people, most young black people had never, in fact most black folks in the neighborhoods unless your parents had a whole lot of money hadn't been on planes or gone very far-- Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: --and so it was a real big deal. Speaker 1: It was a big deal. Speaker 2: You're part of the first generation to actually get out there and see the world (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I got, with the flight I took to go see Mr. Johnson, the editor of Ebony--of Ebony magazine was like a big deal. You're going to go-- Speaker 2: Was that your first plane ride? Speaker 1: That was my first plane ride was to go see Mr. Johnson to meet him, so that was like a big deal, you know, and then to go to New York [New York] we're talking '60s [1960s], '61 [1961], '62 [1962], so that, that was, that was an exciting time for me; it really was. Story_ID: 261808 Speaker 1: And my dad [Edward Pace] was just so proud. My dad was so proud. He worked for Douglas Aircraft [Company] then, and so many black men did get those good jobs with, with the aircraft, in the aircraft industry and-- Speaker 2: And that's, you know, [Ezekiel] "Easy" Rawlins novels you know, I mean, the Easy Rawlins novels he's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes about Southern Cal [California], yeah. Speaker 2: --he's an aircraft, he works at an aircraft plant most of the time, you know, a detective you know-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --those, yeah, Walter Mosley novels. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: That, that kind of accurately-- Speaker 1: And they were here. Speaker 2: --describes-- Speaker 1: They were here and really it took many families up into that comfortable level of being, you know, that middle class level. My dad was, was a lead man for Douglas Aircraft. He was the first black lead man. He had twenty men on his team, and they were all white, and my dad worked for Douglas Aircraft for thirty-four years and he never missed a day at work, not one day. He said, "If I miss today, I might go there somebody else might have my job." He had an interesting team, because this was when they actually, he was, they would actually get inside of the plane and put the pieces together. We're talking late '50s [1950s], in that timeframe, and they worked in a team of a normal-sized man and a midget, so he had it, he was the lead man to this, these twenty men where you had a partner, you and your midget and the midget was small enough to get into the spaces because they were now starting to build the jet planes and the, some of the planes they were building were the ones that they would be testing and that's how they work. And my dad had, his partner was a black little was a guy named Mitch and as a kid that was like just the funniest thing. Here comes Mitch the midget, so it was a very unusual kind of space because he was--he was doing the, it's called a propulsion, the motor, the engine, that's what he put together, his team put together, and they would get into all those little spaces and put all of those things together with, and my dad knew every instrument, every nut, bolt, whatever went into that plane my dad could name it, tell you what it was for, where it went. He could tell you if they no longer used it. He could tell you when they stopped using it. He could tell you when this new one came on board, where it came from, why they changed it. He was just brilliant, 'cause if he wasn't he wouldn't had that position, and he maintained that position for I think about twenty, twenty-five years. Story_ID: 261809 Speaker 1: Now you are with [Ebony] Fashion Fair. How, how long did you stay as a Fashion Fair model (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I traveled with the Ebony Fashion Fair through the year that they called me back, the next year they called me back to be the young, the young person. It travelled with them for the one season, and, and then they were having this search for some, for a black to go under contract at Columbia Studios [Columbia Pictures] and I went out and it was through Ebony magazine and I went out and auditioned for it and I got a contract to Columbia Studios. Speaker 1: Now this is 1963 or '62 [1962]? Speaker 2: This is not, would be '60 [1960], '60 [1960]--I was in college [Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California] '60 [1960], '61 [1961], then I didn't do the Fashion Fair, so now we're into '62 [1962], '62 [1962], '63 [1963]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yeah, '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Okay for Columbia Studios. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And that's not one of the ones that close by you, right (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, it was in--it's right in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not in the, it was not in the [San Fernando] Valley [California]. It was in Hollywood, a very traditional studio, Columbia Studios and Screen Gems. Speaker 1: Okay, so what did this deal consist of? What did you, would you get a chance to try out for a part in a-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --movie or TV show? Speaker 2: It was a, the contract started off with a role in a movie, so it was a nice role in a movie with some other young women who'd come from all over the country. It was like this big contest, and everybody had a contract and then from there I was able to do almost all the TV shows they had on the lot at the time from the-- Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the first one, yeah-- Speaker 2: Oh, the name of the movie was called 'The Candy Web' ['13 Frightened Girls']. Speaker 1: 'The Candy Web.' Speaker 2: 'The Candy Web.' Speaker 1: And was this a made for TV movie or-- Speaker 2: No, it was, it was a feature film. Speaker 1: --a, okay. Speaker 2: It was a feature film. Speaker 1: Who was, who was the star of that? Speaker 2: We were. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We, we girls. We were the star. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There was no star. It was all about these girls who were diplomats' daughters, and we all lived in this fabulous school for girls and we were always getting in trouble and somebody had murdered somebody and then somebody else had killed somebody. We were solving the murder, and that's what it was. It was--(coughing)--there was no--(coughing)--excuse me. William Castle was the producer of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He went on to produce things like 'Rosemary's Baby' and films like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was always doing scary films. Speaker 1: Now was this a scary movie or? Speaker 2: It was a scary movie. Speaker 1: Okay. Was the monster some kind of a sticky (laughter)-- Speaker 2: No it was, it was a killer. It was a monster-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --a man who was in the school was, was killing our parents and things like that and trying to kidnap us and all that sort of thing. Speaker 1: And all the girls were cute right? Speaker 2: Everybody was cute. Speaker 1: Okay. I get it. Speaker 2: Everybody was cute. I was the little chocolate cute one. There was a little Asian one. There was a little girl from France. There was a girl from Australia. Everybody was cute. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a nice way of entering into that profession--(coughing)--in that manner. Story_ID: 261810 Speaker 1: Then I was able to do the television shows there [Columbia Pictures]. Speaker 2: Now what--can you name some of the shows that you appeared on? Speaker 1: Um-hm. 'Bewitched,' '[The] Flying Nun,' oh God let's see 'Bewitched,' 'Flying Nun,' 'I Dream of Jeannie.' Oh God, you got me going way back. I'm thinking, I'm thinking. Oh good, I can't, I can't think of anymore. There a lot--was 'Batman' on that lot? I think 'Batman' was on that lot or was that on Twentieth [Century Fox Television]. Speaker 2: 'Batman,' you, you did that one, that's, that's like-- Speaker 1: That was-- Speaker 2: --nineteen sixty [1960] [sic. 1966] Speaker 1: That's, that was later. That was when I was over at Twentieth. Speaker 2: Yeah, a little bit later yeah. Speaker 1: I'm trying to think of some--those--like I did two--I do remember I did two 'I Dream of Jeannie's.' I did about two 'Bewitched' playing different roles, playing the secretary, then playing something else and then just little, little parts on those shows-- Speaker 2: Okay now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Different, different ones. Speaker 2: Now, so you played, you played like secretaries and what, what other kind of--just-- Speaker 1: Secretaries, the nurse, always had lines though. You were supposed to be there even when you didn't have lines so you could see and know what's going on. I'm really racking my brain. I'm actually in my mind's eye going down my, my old, one of my old resumes. I'm just coming up with blanks right now darling, I'm sorry, but-- Speaker 2: Those were the days when we-- Speaker 1: --we, we'll, I'll, we'll get back to it,-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --let me just think about it 'cause it will come to me. Speaker 2: Those are the days when my grandmother would actually open the back door and tell us there's colored on-- Speaker 1: Oh well yeah. Speaker 2: --so we could go and see what it was and we didn't, sometimes we didn't recognize who it was, but we were thrilled to see another black person on there. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Exactly. Did a couple of pilots, did a pilot called, with, oh not (unclear)--what was the comedian's name, oh he's passed away now, but it was about this, this pretend African tourist trap in Africa who everybody was really hip, but we would all pretend like we were like Africans out selling little pottery and stuff and take all the tourists' money. It was like a pilot for a sitcom that was going to cap, and then I did another pilot for them called (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was this George Kirby or? Speaker 1: George Kirby-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --thank you, thank you. It was with George Kirby, and then I did another pilot called 'Oh, Nurse!' where we were all nursing students and all the things that we would get into. These are pilots that didn't sell, but, but I was working on those, things like that. Story_ID: 261811 Speaker 1: So you stayed pretty busy it sounds like. Speaker 2: Well not busy, busy, busy, but for that era in that time that was busy. Speaker 1: There weren't any shows that really, I mean, well Bill Cosby's 'I Spy' that was one of the first (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did Bill Cos-- Speaker 1: --TV shows that-- Speaker 2: --I did 'I Spy,' yep. Speaker 1: Yeah, they featured a black actor in a major role-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right and then, and-- Speaker 1: 'Julia' with [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll I think was on. Speaker 2: That wasn't on yet. Speaker 1: Okay, that wasn't okay. Speaker 2: That wasn't on yet. They hadn't come up yet. Speaker 1: That was '68 [1968] I think with 'Julia.' Speaker 2: No, it was earlier than that-- Speaker 1: Was it. Speaker 2: --but it didn't happen. I then went over to Twentieth Century Fox [Television] and was put under contract there and did 'Peyton Place' and-- Speaker 1: Okay, did you do 'Batman' before 'Peyton Place' 'cause (unclear)? Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: I think you were in the first episode of 'Batman,' I believe. Speaker 2: I did a couple of 'Batman's.' Small roles, but. Speaker 1: The very first episode the Riddler gassed you I think, right? Speaker 2: I should remember that--(coughing)--I was like one of those, yeah little roles like that. That's what they have us doing. You're under contract, you're gonna do a little role like that and yeah and then I did another one where it was with Batman and I had to take him into an office and I had to tell him which way he had to go in the office, but you'd be there all day for maybe two days when you'd do something like that, so that was fun. Story_ID: 261812 Speaker 1: When I did 'Peyton Place,' it made--with Glynn Turman and [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee. We were the first black family in drama on television. Speaker 2: Now, you all were all supposed to be related, you and Glynn Turman and Ruby Dee (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, Glynn Turman--Ruby Dee was Glynn Turman's mother on the show, and they, I was not of Peyton Place. I had met Glynn when he was, had come for vacation to Harlem [New York, New York], and I followed him back to Peyton Place and I was pregnant and claiming that he was the father and I was the first evil little black bitch on television, came there and moved into their house, and that was one of the most enjoyable, fun roles I had ever played, 'cause I'm playing a fourteen, fifteen-year-old who is just flipping off to everybody and talking back to Ruby Dee and telling her what to do and I'm living in her house and just--they hadn't had a person like that on TV, especially on 'Peyton Place' before and, and blackmailing Glynn because I had something else on Glynn, then making his mother think he was the father of my child. Speaker 2: But he wasn't, right? Speaker 1: But he wasn't and guess what I wasn't pregnant either (laughter). So, she was just this little, and she was running from the police that's why she had come to Peyton Place. So, I had women in department stores hating me. They'd see me and just, "Girl, you need to leave that boy alone. You just need to leave that, you, you should be ashamed of yourself." Ah, it's, it's a role, you know, it's a role (laughter), but that was fun and that was a fun lot [Twentieth Century Fox Television]. I so remember the lot because on that lot--let me go back real quick, real quick. When I was with Columbia Studios [Columbia Pictures], the only black person on the lot was me and the guy who had a shoe shine parlor who had been there for a hundred years. We were the, I'm talking in the buildings, on the lot, carrying the cables, doing the light. There was no-- Speaker 2: You're not just talking about actors, you're talking about period right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I, I said carrying the cables, pushing the camera, doing the lots, sound, office, secretaries; it was nobody on the lot. There was the guy who had a shoe shine parlor that was next to the, the executives' commissary, and he had been there forever and he was just so thrilled to see me. And when I would see him and walk by he would just smile and do the wink and just, just; it was nobody there. When I got to Twentieth, which about maybe three years later, a little over three years, maybe two and half years later, on the lot with me was, of course Glynn Turman and Ruby Dee, but in the next sound stage there was [HistoryMaker] Denise Nicholas doing was it 227? Speaker 2: 'Room 222.' Speaker 1: 'Room 222.' Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: She was there, and two sound stages away was [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll doing 'Julia,' and we were all on this lot together. I think that's the first time that had ever happened you had three main characters in three different shows on, on, on Twentieth Century Fox lot (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this is, now we're around 1967 now I guess right? Speaker 1: No, we're about maybe-- Speaker 2: Not, not quite. Speaker 1: --maybe '66-ish [1966], maybe '65 [1965], '66-ish [1966] right in there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because then in '67 [1967] I'm doing, doing, start doing some comedy things and it could, it could be right in that edge, right, right in that edge. Speaker 2: I believe 'Julia' came on the air in '67 [1967], the fall of '67 [1967] [sic. 1968]. Speaker 1: Sixty, '66 [1966], '67 [1967]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: We were all there together. Yeah, we were there together, so that was a very unusual time, yeah and that's about three years later from my '63 [1963], '64 [1964] at Columbia and then three years later at--yeah that's about right. Story_ID: 261813 Speaker 1: It was wonderful. I remember the night that 'Julia' aired, the night that it aired on national television, premiere show, and then lunchtime we're all in the commissary and when [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll walked in everybody stood up and applauded, everybody in the room. There was only me and Glynn [Turman] and [HistoryMaker] Ruby [Dee] were the only, and I think [HistoryMaker] Denise [Nicholas] and the other guy who was on the show with her, they were there, but that whole commissary stood up and applauded 'Julia' because that was quite a milestone when that show came on, the lead being this-- Speaker 2: It was, it was the first time-- Speaker 1: It was the very, very, very, very first. Speaker 2: --a black woman starred in her own TV show. Speaker 1: Her own sitcom where she was the main start. Like me, Ruby, and Glynn we were a part of an ensemble, but we were the first black family in drama on television. Speaker 2: Okay-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --so well what happened next? Now you, now how long did your 'Peyton Place' run? Speaker 1: We were there for about a year. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: About a year and then I went over to Paramount [Pictures Corporation]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, there was other things in-between. Story_ID: 261814 Speaker 1: 'Peyton Place' and Paramount [Pictures Corporation]. I did a lot of stuff in-between there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Oh was that before or was that after. I think that was bef- it was before--I forgot I did, I did 'The Dating Game.' Remember 'The Dating Game'? 'The Dating Game'--I did 'The Dating Game' when it was an--when it was an afternoon show. It was like a daytime game show. I did two of them, and-- Speaker 2: You did two of them? I-- Speaker 1: I did two, daytime-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --two, they liked me. They had me come back twice, so I did it twice, daytime. You know my grandmother could sit and watch me on--on a game show at daytime. My grandmother in Jackson, Mississippi, she was too thrilled. Well, the show was picked up to go night, going to go and have, be a nighttime game show and they asked me to come and do the premiere show, which I thought was really nice. So, I did the premiere show of--of 'The Dating Game' and it premiered on a Thanksgiving night, and I was the bachelorette asking the other, those three bachelors, you know the way, you know the way the show works, okay so-- Speaker 2: They, they sit on the stools and Speaker 1: Yeah and-- Speaker 2: --whose that Chuck, who, I can't think of his name. Speaker 1: Hillary, Chuck. Speaker 2: Woolery. Speaker 1: Willary, Woolery, Hillary. Speaker 2: Woolery I think, yeah-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --Chuck Woolery. Speaker 1: This was, this was right after Columbia [Pictures] and--this is in between Columbia and Twentieth [Century Fox Television], I think, that's, I think that's where it fell. Anyway on the show one of the bachelors was Willie Mays, so Willie Mays was the bachelor, one of the bachelors and I, you know they put the earphones on you so you don't know who anyone is. But, the interesting thing that happened is that when it was time for the show to air, they advertised the fact of who was going to be on the show because by then the game has already been played, and Curt [Flood] saw that Willie Mays was going to be on the dating game reading somebody's TV Guide or the newspaper and all the guys said they were gonna watch, so they watched, and that's when he saw me was on the dating game with Willie Mays and he said he thought he had seen the prettiest little chocolate girl he had ever seen in his entire life and that night he got busy trying to find out who I was and where I was. He found out that I was with the William Morris Agency [William Morris Endeavor] the next day. He called the William Morris Agency, got my agent, Sy Marsh, told Sy Marsh who he was, Sy was a baseball fan, and so Sy thought that was just a great idea. "Yeah you should, you should meet [HistoryMaker] Judy [Pace-Flood] and take Judy out." He just thought that was wonderful. So, he gave Curt my number. I'm still living at home with my parents [Kitty Griffin Pace and Edward Pace] at this time. I'm still at home. And he gives Curt my number and Curt calls me and tells me, "I'm Curt Flood, and I play baseball," and blah, blah, blah, blah, and I asked him I said, "But what do you do for a living? You play baseball, what do you do for a living? What do you do?" Speaker 2: You had no idea? Speaker 1: I had no idea, none whatsoever. Story_ID: 261815 Speaker 1: And the show ['The Dating Game'] aired on, in Thanks- for Thanksgiving night, so that's wintertime, so they're not playing ball. So, he [Curt Flood] continues to call me and I don't know, I don't know you, I don't go out with strange people. I'm calling Sy [Marsh] asking him why he gave him my number, and he's trying to explain to me who Curt Flood is, blah, blah, blah, blah, so I didn't go out with Curt. And he started sending me baseball cards, newspaper articles, photos. This goes on until spring training, then he's calling from spring training. By then, my dad [Edward Pace] finds out and so him, him and my dad strike up these conversations when he calls. Then he calls my dad when, when the season starts and he tells my dad when he's gonna be in, you know, in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. My dad is like, "We need to go see this Curt Flood. You need to, he's getting, we can come go see the game." I still didn't know who he was. So, this goes on all the way until the World Series time, which is like almost a year he's been keeping this up and my dad sees all this stuff he sends me, he's been sending me, so my dad said, "You really need to go out with this young man and that's what you need to do." So, he calls and I tell Curt, "Okay, I'll--we can go out, but we have to go somewhere public because I don't know who you are. I still don't know who you are, and we have to have a chaperone." So, he gets World Series tickets for my family and his father [Herman Flood]. So, he calls back and he says, "Is Dodgers Stadium [Los Angeles, California] public enough, and if your father and your mother [Kitty Griffin Pace] and my father go is that enough of a chaperone," and what are you gonna say? I said, "Well, yeah okay that will work," and that was our first date. Speaker 2: That's a, that's a, what a story. Speaker 1: (Laughter) He came--so it was from Thanksgiving of that year all the way to the spring, you know, until the World Series 'cause the [Los Angeles] Dodgers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause they were, yeah to Dod-- Speaker 1: The Dodgers in the World Series. Speaker 2: --the Cardinals [sic. Baltimore Orioles]. Now he was playing before the-- Speaker 1: No, he wasn't in the World Series. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was the Dodgers who were playing-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in the World Series, and so he came out to Los Angeles [California] to take me to Dodgers Stadium and then we just started dating and that had to have been, I think that was '67 [1967] or '66 [1966] when that, that happened around in there, yeah, so that's how I met Curt. Speaker 2: Okay that's-- Speaker 1: He's a very persistent young man. Story_ID: 261816 Speaker 1: Now you were married to a guy named Don Mitchell at one point. Was that before Curt [Flood] or, you met Curt, or that-- Speaker 2: That was, that was--I dated Curt for almost four years we dated. I was with Curt when he went to Puerto Rico. I went with Curt to Puerto Rico when he went to address the, the [Major League Baseball] Players Association in regards to him presenting what he was gonna do with free agency. So, I was with Curt during that time and when he was going through the court situation and when he went to Majorca [Spain] and then he went to Denmark just to get away. I went over and stayed with him in Denmark. I couldn't do a lot of that 'cause I was, by then I was doing a TV series of my own. We're like four years later and so I was with him during that time and then Curt exiled himself from the country for five years. He went away to Majorca, Spain. He did not come back. In fact, we didn't even know where he was, and after about a year the gentleman you're speaking of, Don Mitchell, and I started dating and then I married Don. Don was the actor who was on the 'Ironside' TV series with Raymond Burr. Speaker 1: He would wheel Raymond Burr, yeah, right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, he was his aide. Series ran forever. By the time the series was over, I think it was eight or nine years, he was an attorney and a detective. He started out as Raymond Burr's aide, and he went to college on the show and he became a lawyer and then he became a detective, so, and finally he was carrying a gun and solving crimes on the show. So, the character evolved as we evolved in that eight year period in, in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: As a people. Speaker 2: As, as, as our people. So, and both of my children [Shawn Pace Mitchell and Julia Pace Mitchell] are, are by Don. So, I have two children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah and I was married to Don for a number of years and Curt was in Majorca for almost five, five years or so. Story_ID: 261817 Speaker 1: In the meantime you were, you were still making movies and doing TV shows (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. I was having a good old time. When I look back, sometimes when you're young you don't know just what--how lucky and how blessed you are not until you kind of turn around and look back and say oh that was really cool. That was really nice. There were some things I had, I had, had, had bothered me about just what was considered pretty or not pretty or who was to be pretty and who was wasn't supposed to be pretty and who shouldn't think they're cute and she can't be cute and one was if you had dark skin you were just not supposed to even be thinking that you were supposed to be the leading lady. There was no way you were gonna be the leading lady and there certainly was no way you were going to be the one who, who was the sexy one or the one that everybody just thought was the hot number. That was not gonna happen. If you weren't Lena Horne's color or Dorothy Dandridge color or even--if I go forward--a Jayne Kennedy or Ms. [Halle] Berry's color you just weren't gonna to, to have that kind of-- Speaker 1: Now this is significant because in fact I was talking to, I was talking to [HistoryMaker] Paul [Brock] about that before you came out that you were one of the first dark skinned sisters to get leading roles and how important that was, I mean for-- Speaker 2: Oh that was so important. Speaker 1: To so many people, the majority of black people as you well know are dark, you know, they're-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --not light and the ma- the range of pretty people in our race goes from you know it could, could be anybody as long as they're pretty, but it's, it's, but Hollywood and the black community had decided that you could, you had to be light to be considered-- Speaker 2: Pretty. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But we all know that this is not, not true, but it was evidence from Hollywood-- Speaker 2: But, I don't know. Speaker 1: --to, to, I guess, do you think it was because of the Black Power movement and people saying black and beautiful in the late '60s [1960s] that's the thing that-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --that changed that? Speaker 2: I think part, a part of me not being in an environment when I went through grammar school [Marvin Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] and [Louis Pasteur] Junior High [School, Los Angeles, California] where I didn't constantly have that in my face that only fair-skinned girls (coughing) excuse me, thought to be pretty and dark girls were to go sit in a corner and be quiet. I never had that in my face, and in my family if you were pretty, you were pretty and most of the people in my family were, were brown people, were like my color, so there wasn't, there just, there just wasn't. So, I didn't know that dark people weren't supposed to be considered attractive--not like, found out, I mean you know eventually those sorts of things you become aware of. Story_ID: 261818 Speaker 1: And then I think within our community we also had put a very narrow, narrow range of what was supposed to be pretty and what was supposed to be attractive, so if you are taught that you would never even pursue doing something or going in that direction. I wanted to be the leading lady. I wanted to be the, the Lena Horne. I wanted to be the pretty girl, the one the men were chasing after. That's what I wanted to be. I wanted to be the, that's who I wanted to be. I wanted to be the heroine, that's what I wanted, and my mind was set on that and modeling helped me acquire that kind of feel about myself. I was a Pepsi[-Cola; PepsiCo] girl. I did all the Pepsi ads. Face was all on the billboards, all over the, all over the country. I was Johnson [Products Company] hair products girl and dark girls weren't doing those kinds of ads. They weren't being, you know, the hair commercials, I mean the hair ads and the, the big face blown up on the billboards. You didn't see dark girls doing that, so my little chocolate face was on these billboards when somehow or another the agents thought that I was cute or something because they, they would hire me and I would go out, I'd tell my agent [Sy Marsh], "I want to go out for those kinds of things," so I didn't, I didn't hold that back, and I always had to encourage one of sisters and my mom [Kitty Griffin Pace] to, to encourage me to do that. So, when the opportunity came for a film like 'Three in the Attic' I got a three picture deal with American International Films [American International Pictures], and there was a nude scene in that film and it wasn't a black film. I was the only black person in the film. It was, it was with Yvette Mimieux and Christopher Jones and we were on location for about two months shooting this film. Speaker 2: That was about 1970 or? Speaker 1: No, it was around '68-ish [1968]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --sixty-eight [1968]. It could have been, maybe '67 [1967]. It could have been right around in there. It was, it was after [sic. before] I'd done 'Peyton Place.' I hope I don't have it flipped. It was after I'd done 'Peyton Place,' and I was just so happy, so thrilled that they had me in and I tested for the role and I got the role. I was the happiest child because I knew it would be the first time that it was a dark brown woman being the love interest of a Caucasian man with another Caucasian woman with Yvette Mimieux, and we were playing equal roles, so I was, I was quite thrilled with that. Speaker 2: I think it was three women that, you know-- Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Jennifer [sic. Maggie Thrett], oh God I don't. Jennifer Luxton [ph.], Jennifer--I can't think of her name. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Pretty brunette girl. So, I was happy to do that and then that, we did another, I did another film ['Frogs'] for American International and then I did another film for American International, and in all three of those films they put me in the prettiest costumes, made sure I was the most gorgeous thing there. They always wanted me to be sassy and, and sexy and that had not happened before. Speaker 2: You were the most gorgeous person in the movie (laughter), but how, now how did your-- Speaker 1: And, and, and-- Speaker 2: --family feel about these nude scenes? (Unclear). Speaker 1: Well as my grandmother said when somebody, when her church was telling her that, about my nude scene and my, my butt was, they had by butt was shown. It was my butt. It was a profile of my butt. That was the nude scene. You know like you'd see women walking around now at the beach. It was the profile of my butt on a bed and that was the nude scene with a blanket draped across one leg and all you saw was like okay butt, then that was it. And my grandmother said, "Well, I think it's cute, but I've seen it already," (laughter). So that was my grandmother's comment-- Story_ID: 261819 Speaker 1: One of my main objectives in, in being--entering the business is that I wanted to, to, move that color thing out of the way. I just, move it out of the way. Speaker 2: Well in those days, you know, all of a sudden we had you, we had--Abbey Lincoln starred in a movie. Speaker 1: But Abbey was not the sexy one in the movie. Speaker 2: Well in 'For Love of Ivy' she was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was a darn good actress. Speaker 2: --she was the, she was a-- Speaker 1: Fabulous actress, fabulous actress. Speaker 2: --yeah she was, she wasn't-- Speaker 1: We had Pam [Grier]. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah later on, but we had like black women in movies playing the lead that weren't-- Speaker 1: Yeah, weren't there before. Speaker 2: --real light. They weren't, they weren't the lightest ones that we could find-- Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: --that was, that was the point I was trying to make. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Which is this is an era when that, that happened and it's-- Speaker 1: Which was really different. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Really, really different because I didn't have, hoping, but you never know what, what life might bring you, you know, but it, it, I was happy that it happened that way. I was able to do that. Speaker 2: Okay, and-- Speaker 1: Bring another, another image there. Speaker 2: Now, we haven't, we mentioned some of the other movies off camera like 'Three in the Cellar' [sic. 'Three in the Attic'], 'Frogs.' Speaker 1: For American International [Pictures] I had, I had the three picture deal with them after, with them, 'Three in the Attic' with Yvette Mimieux and Christopher Jones and, and then 'Frogs' with Ray Milland and myself and (coughing), excuse me. Speaker 2: Who were the other two black people? Speaker 1: Oh wait a minute and Larry Hagman. We did Down-- Speaker 2: That's '3 in the Cellar.' Speaker 1: That was 'Down in the Cellar' [sic. 'Up in the Cellar']. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Right, and the other two blacks in the movie-- Speaker 2: In 'Frogs.' Speaker 1: --I cannot remember their names. They were very small roles, but they were there for maybe about a week and then we were there for like a month. I, I just cannot remember. Speaker 2: It was about killer monster frogs? Speaker 1: Yeah, it was about, it was about little bitty frogs who were killers. Yeah, and they play that thing all the time, just, there all on DVD now. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Yeah, they all are. Speaker 2: Do you still get residuals from the films? Speaker 1: Yes, thank you Jesus (laughter). Yep, even from my 'Peyton Place' and my 'Batman's.' Speaker 2: That's, and 'Batman' is quite pop- is popular on cable. They show it all the time yeah. Speaker 1: I, I'm just, I'm just happy, feel blessed. Story_ID: 261820 Speaker 1: Now what came next after 'Frogs,' after the American International [Pictures] contract? Speaker 2: 'Cotton Comes to Harlem' [sic. 'Cotton Comes to Harlem' (1970); 'Frogs' (1972)]. Speaker 1: All right now this, from what I've heard, now you tell me, but from what I've read and I saw the movie several times-- Speaker 2: Oh did you. Speaker 1: --people think this is your, your, the best role that you, that you had I guess and with the most exposure. Did you think so? Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was a big hit that's one of the things. It was the number one movie in the country when it came out, and this was like against just the regular movies, so it was a really big hit. I think that was one of the--it, it was a big hit. It showed the studios that folks will come to the movies to see black folks all in leads, and it was then after that we started to have the other black movies. It was 'Cotton Comes to Harlem' that was the, really the first one. Speaker 1: Okay. I know we, I've had to debate some people which was the first one, but that, that was a big hit. Speaker 2: It was a big hit. I know some people try to say-- Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis-- Speaker 2: Ossie Davis directed, Raymond St. Jacques and Godfrey Cambridge and just some-- Speaker 1: Calvin Lockhart. Speaker 2: Calvin Lockhart with his handsome self and it was just, it was a big production. I mean it was a big movie, and it was a long shoot, and it was just, it was, it was fun and it was, with Ossie there directing it had an incredible, comedic quality to it and people loved it and they laughed and they hollered in it and it was just, it was just slick and it was fabulous and I was just happy that I had the opportunity to work with these people. Speaker 1: Based on a novel ['Cotton Comes to Harlem'] by Chester Himes-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --a black writer. Speaker 2: And they did two more after that, so it was-- Speaker 1: 'Come Back, Charleston Blue' [based on 'The Heat's Back,' Chester Himes] I think. I don't know what the other was. Speaker 2: The other ['A Rage in Harlem'] was with Robin Givens. Speaker 1: I can't think of the other-- Speaker 2: Robin Givens and [HistoryMaker] Bill Duke and, I, I can't remember who played the two-- Speaker 1: 'Come Back, Charleston Blue' was one of the sequels and there was-- Speaker 2: It was a second one. Speaker 1: The second one was-- Speaker 2: And the second one, and it was directed by a black director, too. It was directed by Mark Warren directed that one, and then they did one more with Robin Givens, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was, that was a fun, fun time. Speaker 1: Now what role did you play in 'Cotton Comes to Harlem'? Can you describe your role for us? Speaker 2: She [Iris] was a little bitch. That's what she was, just a little bitch. She was the girlfriend of the gangster. She was the girlfriend of Calvin [sic. Reverend Deke O'Malley]. She was the one who tricked the cop into putting the bag on top of his head by enticing him into her, into her bed. She was, she was the, the mobster's girlfriend, that's what she was, the hustler's girlfriend living a high and fabulous life off of the sins of theft and conning and all those dangerous things. So, that's who she was, and she was a fun little child. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She got beat up and all those sorts of things. Speaker 1: But, so, you were only in one of those movies right or were you--okay. Speaker 2: Just the one. Each time they had a different person play that, it was a different woman in each one of those films. Story_ID: 261821 Speaker 1: I don't want to get to 'Brian's Song.' That's in the '80s [1980s] isn't it, 'Brian's Song'? Speaker 2: Nope-- Speaker 1: In the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: --'Brian's Song' was in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Brian's Song' was in the '70s [1970s]. 'The Young Lawyers' with Lee J. Cobb, the series. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's a television series and-- Speaker 2: It was a movie first. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We did a movie with Lee J. Cobb and then they liked the movie so that they wanted it to be a series, so we did that. Speaker 1: What year is this? Can you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, I think we're talking about maybe '69 [1969], '70-ish [1970], maybe '70 [1970], '71-ish [1971] around in there is when that was going. Yeah, but then there was a lot of stuff. It was the 'Mod Squad's' ['Mod Squad'] and all the sitcom shows I did. 'The Jeffersons' [sic.] and the 'Sanford and Son' and Mama--'That's My Mama' and 'What's Happening!!' and all those, all those shows. Speaker 1: You were guest stars on a lot of these shows. Speaker 2: Yeah and then the 'Medical Centers,' ['Medical Center'] just--I was blessed. I worked a lot. I was-- Speaker 1: Okay I-- Speaker 2: --really, really blessed. Speaker 1: I remember that I saw your picture in Jet I don't know how many times or in the newspapers. I mean you were really, you were out there, yeah. Speaker 2: I was, I was having a lot of fun and enjoying the fact of being able to work in the craft that I really, really felt that I was blessed to be able to be a working actress. Speaker 1: Well your-- Speaker 2: Be a working actress. Speaker 1: Your parents [Kitty Griffin Pace and Edward Pace] must have really been thrilled because here they got Jean Pace is singing with [HistoryMaker] Oscar [Brown, Jr.]-- Speaker 2: Jean's on Broadway-- Speaker 1: --and she's on Broadway, yeah. Speaker 2: --with, with Oscar and I'm making films and-- Speaker 1: Is that 'Joy'-- Speaker 2: She did 'Joy,' yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Which was a big, big hit and then travelling all over the world with him. And she was a fabulous performer, just fabulous. She loved singing. I loved acting, but we both loved dancing and little things. I, I did nightclub work before. I did the Playboy Clubs and things like that. But, my absolute (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you would sing and (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, my absolute favorite, favorite role I ever did was not in a movie it was in 'Guys and Dolls,' the Broadway show 'Guys and Dolls.' They did an all-black version of 'Guys and Dolls' at the Aladdin Hotel [Aladdin Resort & Casino; Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino] in [Las] Vegas [Nevada] and it opened there, their amphi- the, not their amphitheater their theater for the performing arts that the Aladdin had built. It was like a six thousand seater in Vegas, and it was so interesting when the call went out for this Broadway production because they brought the, the director, I think it was Billy White [sic. Billy Wilson] from New York [New York] who directed the 'Guys and Dolls,' the black version, with [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume had, had the lead. The same directors, the same choreographers, the same costumers, everything came to Vegas to do the black version of 'Guys and Dolls.' Had seventy-five people in the cast starring Leslie Uggams as Sister Sarah and me as Adelaide and [HistoryMaker] Adam Wade as Nathan [Detroit], no Clifton Davis as Nathan Detroit [sic. Sky Masterson] and Adam Wade as the, the other character lost me, but that was, 'cause that's the most incredible comedic role ever written, the role of Adelaide, the showgirl, and that was the first thing everyone said when I said, "I wanna go out for that." "You can sing?" "Yes." "You can dance?" "Yes, most certainly can, just let me get to the audition, let me just show you what I can do." So, I just went there and sang and danced my little heart out and got the role and we went there for a six-month, a six-week run and we stayed for almost six months at the Aladdin. It was, it was really a nice time. We had a break in there, then we came back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now what year was this, this is--? Speaker 2: This has to be like, this was after I was married [to Don Mitchell]. I was married and had my first daughter [Shawn Pace Mitchell], so we're talking maybe '73 [1973], but that's my all-time favorite role is Adelaide from 'Guys and Dolls.' Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: 'Cause it was comedy. I always wanted to be a comedian. Story_ID: 261822 Speaker 1: So, did you feel that you didn't get enough comedy roles? Speaker 2: No, there weren't any comedy roles, there just weren't. Now they're every, there everywhere, but when I was doing it you just, there were not that many comedy roles for black women. Speaker 1: Have you done a lot of theater, I mean, I mean in those days could you get, could, could you do theater you know? Speaker 2: Well, I had done that part of learning my craft here in Los Angeles [California]. You do the, the theater pieces. You do the non-equity shows. I did all of that and studying, and studying with Lillian Randolph and I, I worked out there to learn my craft and you do that. That's where you learn is on stage even if there's no one in the audience. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was there, were there like strong black theater groups here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] in those days? Speaker 2: No, no, no. There was one black theater group [Negro Arts Theater] and that was formed by Joel Fluellen, actor Joel Fluellen. There weren't a lot of theater groups. There were some, but there was not, not like we have today. We have a wealth of theater happening here in, in Southern California. No, they didn't exist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. New York [New York] was the place to go if you really wanted to do theater, but I wanted to do films and television, but to learn your craft you, you have to start with that core of theater, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I, I, that's where I studied. Speaker 1: All right so now have we talked about most of the pieces in the '70s [1970s], I mean we got to-- Speaker 2: I, no but we don't have to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause there was a lot of episodic-- Speaker 1: All right, all right. Speaker 2: --television and a lot of episodic roles and the, he 'Mod Squad's' ['Mod Squad'] and the things like that, so no just episodic television did a lot of that. Story_ID: 261823 Speaker 1: Now you stopped performing in 1986 I think it was? Speaker 2: I stopped performing after I had my second child, my daughter, Julia [Pace Mitchell]. I have two daughters, a daughter named Shawn [Pace Mitchell], my oldest, and my daughter named Julia, and after I had Julia when Julia was about maybe three or four years old I realized I couldn't figure out how you're supposed to do all this stuff, have a husband, have a house, have children, go to PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings, do this, do that, and it's not like everybody was running and knocking on my door. I was still working, but I, it was, I didn't know any other way of raising my children except for what I had seen my mother [Kitty Griffin Pace] do and I was, I was, it was lucky, I was lucky enough that I was able to be at, at-home mom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that's what I did. Speaker 1: Well, you're right all that stuff is tough to do and people do wonder how folks do it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was not gonna be a crazy lady. I-- Speaker 1: A lot of people, you know, hire somebody to do those things and they stay on stage anyway and you know. Speaker 2: Well yes if--I think it's quite possible that and, and you see that a lot. You see it a lot today. There's more, well there's more work there for, for black women to do today than there was when I was working. I mean, I'm sure you can go on an interview every other day, but when I was working it was not, those opportunities were not there. You had, if you had to be at an interview you had to be there. If you wanted to go on location, you had to say, "Okay, I'm gonna go and do three months over here, I'm gonna go and do two months over there." Perhaps if I had not have reached a lev- a certain level of success, I might have just continued and continued, but I was quite satisfied. I figured let me raise my children while they're in their, until they maybe hit ten or eleven and then I'll you know come back and see what I could do. Speaker 1: Well a lot of people probably wondered what happened to you. Can I ask you that? Speaker 2: Well, I was home with my children. Speaker 1: You're not, you're not 300 pounds or anything-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --you're not strung out on any substances or anything-- Speaker 2: No, I'm just a happy child. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I have two absolutely magnificent, my children are magnificent, do you hear me. They are just fabulous. My daughter Shawn is an attorney, just recently passed the California Bar [Examination]. I had, I waited, I was late when I had my children. I didn't, I did not believe in being married or having children in your twenties. I don't think anyone should ever have a child before they're thirty and no one should get married before they're in their thirties, and in those days people thought I was crazy when I would, 'cause I, I was saying this when I was still in high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California]. I always felt people should know who you are and be a responsible parent by being able to take care of yourself before you think you could bring another life into the world because if you do to me that's premeditated child abuse and my friends didn't even want to hear all that stuff, so I just believed in getting married what they considered late. So, I didn't get married until I was in my thirties. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my, my second daughter just made it here. Story_ID: 261824 Speaker 1: You were married to Don Mitchell until what-- Speaker 2: (Coughing) Oh, excuse me again. I was married to Don for almost fourteen years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, we were married a long time. Speaker 1: But during the same period of time Curt Flood had disappeared in Majorca [Spain] or-- Speaker 2: Curt Flood was in Majorca. Speaker 1: Yeah and nobody really knew where he was. Speaker 2: Nobody and his mom [Laura Flood] used to call me asking me where he was. I didn't know where he was, so that was kind of overlapped him leaving going to Majorca and then Don came into my life and then we got married and we had children [Shawn Pace Mitchell and Julia Pace Mitchell]. I got married, bought a house, had children, and, and just. I was a mom to my two daughters, and I didn't pursue an acting career. I just pursued chasing them around. My other, my youngest daughter, my little Julia, she just recently got her master's degree in performing arts, and in the last six months, six months ago? Yeah, well in June, she got her master's degree in performing arts and she went to New York [New York] to have a New York actor's experience and her first booking was 'Law & Order.' She had a wonderful role in 'Law & Order.' She just did the Dave Chappelle show ['Chappelle's Show']. She did an off-Broadway show where she got wonderful reviews. She is now in Ashland, Oregon doing the Ashland Shakespeare Festival [Oregon Shakespeare Festival]. She's signed for the season, and I'm like yes I have a working actress as a daughter, 'cause that's all she ever wanted to be was an actress, that's it. That's all she wanted to be. She got her undergraduate degree at, at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in performing arts and then she went to the National Conservatory of Performing Arts [National Conservatory of Arts, Washington, D.C.] and got her, her master's [degree] and then my daughter, Shawn, who's my attorney she, too, got her undergraduate at Howard University in communication law and then she came back to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to get her, her law degree 'cause she's going to be going into entertainment and sports law. So, I'm just really happy with both of them, and on Friday I'm leaving to go to Ashland to see my daughter make her stage debut in 'Ma Rainey's Black Bottom' and August Wilson is going to be there for opening night, so she's super talented. She's supper talented. She, she wrote a play her first year out of Howard. She took a year break between graduate school and undergraduate, and she wrote a play called 'Hills Above the Hood' [Julia Pace Mitchell]. It was about growing up in Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California]. Are you familiar with Baldwin Hills? Speaker 1: Yeah I know it's here in California (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's in California. Baldwin Hills is like a community of your upper middle class, upper middle income or high income blacks who live in the community called Baldwin Hills where the average home is maybe 500,000, a million dollars now, and it's this very kind of tight knit community there and it's in the hills above the hood because all around is like just good everyday people, and so she wrote a play, a play about growing up in Baldwin Hills and she was nominated for five NAACP Theatre Awards for best playwright. She directed it, best director. She choreographed it, best choreographer. She starred in it, and with her ensemble, and best playwright. See she's super talented and had a really good run, and then she went off to, to get her master's degree. Story_ID: 261825 Speaker 1: When you look back on this, I'm sure you think you made the right decision and did the right thing, you know-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --but you, but do you think, I mean, I always, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it wasn't-- Speaker 1: --when I was saying before that a lot of people hire these jobs out and stuff you hear a lot of bad stories, too, about how people's kids are not, in trouble and, I mean did you, I mean-- Speaker 2: It wasn't anything like, oh, should I do this or should I do that or should I do this. It was like, oh, let me go do this, and then this just became more, and more, and more, and more, and more of what you do. Speaker 1: That was the imperative when you, when you, once you had children [Shawn Pace Mitchell and Julia Pace Mitchell] that to be, to be their mother. Speaker 2: I--right. I enjoyed all that stuff. I enjoyed all the cheerleading and the shopping and the school and on this committee and that committee. Let me go make the hotdogs and how much money did we raise and did we sell the tickets, and I liked all that stuff. I mean, I truly enjoyed it. I was in teenage land for almost ten years because my daughters are five years apart, so I was the one--I've had sixteen cheerleaders in my house for a week for cheerleading camp just, I liked all that stuff. Well prom, well good we can go shop for a prom dress and fashion. When my youngest daughter went off to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], they bought me a little brown Barbie doll and told me, "Mommy, you can go dress her up now 'cause we going off to college," (laughter) that's it. (Coughing) I truly enjoyed, I, I just did, but I, and my kids would say to me, "Mommy, you need to, now we're off to college you need, you need to go, you need to go back to work. You need to just be, be an actress, go get"--now they've seen my films and they really understood what I had done and they wanted me to go back to work, and I would say, "Yeah, if Spike Lee calls me or Sidney [Poitier] comes knocking on the door, Mr. Poitier, tell him I'm in here, I'll gladly go back to work," but I'm not out there running around knocking on doors because I did not have that, as you say, that heat in your belly to do that. I had already done that, and I truly enjoyed it. So, the day after my daughter gets her letter that she's passed the California Bar [Examination], 'cause that's the hardest bar in the United States, and we're celebrating and having a good old time. So, the next day I'm coming in the house and she says, "Mommy." "Yeah, yeah." "Spike Lee called." I said, "Oh, Spike Lee called?" "Yeah, and he said to call him because the casting director called, too, and she said that he wants you to come do his movie and so you'd better call 'cause you said if Spike Lee calls you would go back to work, so you need to go call and here's the number." Sure enough Spike Lee had called. Sure enough he wanted me to come do this movie. He had a role he wanted me to do in his movie, and at first I'm talking to the casting director like, oh well what does he want? She says, "Well we wanna just send you the script over to see if you wanna do it, 'cause Spike wants you to do this role." So, I did Spike Lee's film last year, so. Speaker 1: That-- Speaker 2: The one called 'Sucker Free City.' It, it was for a TV--it was for a television series, but the final production came out so well they released it in the theater. So, he was quite happy with it. He really was. He's a sweetheart. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's just a sweetheart. Story_ID: 261826 Speaker 1: We gotta get back to the Curt Flood story. Speaker 2: Yeah, well Curt came back into my life (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did he resurface? How did he resurface? Go ahead. Speaker 2: Curt came back into my life in this manner. Excuse me. I was going through a divorce with Don [Mitchell], and the divorce was final. About three weeks after the divorce was final from Don, I get a call from a Steve [sic.], a Mr. Black [ph.]--I'm not giving you the correct first name, but I'll give it to you in a minute--from Mr. Black who is a screenplay writer, and he tells me that he's writing a screenplay on Curt and Curt had told him that we had been dating during the time that he was going through the reserve clause action and that we had dated for about four or five years, and he wanted to talk to me about that point in time. Speaker 1: Now, let me just pause here and could you just take us through this step-by-step because people are going to be watching this tape-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they wanna know, you know, what happened and, you know, I want you to tell us like what happened with, what was the reserve clause problem-- Speaker 2: Oh, all right. Speaker 1: --and why did he, well why did he end up out of the country and all that in the first place? Speaker 2: All that stuff? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay when I was dating Curt, this is, this is in the '60s [1960s] and he challenged Major League Baseball [MLB], but in fact he challenged all of sports and this is the way this, it happened. Baseball had received a very special clearance, a very special congressional wavering of the fact that they were not considered a business, which meant they did not have to operate in the normal manner that every other business had to operate. They were special. There were things that they could do that no one else could do, and one of the main things that they could do is that they could sign you to a contract for your entire life. When you sign the contract with a team, you were with that team for your entire life, and they could pay you what they wanted to pay you. You could not go and say, "Hey let me go over here and see if the [New York] Yankees or the [Los Angeles] Dodgers might want to use my great talent." Speaker 1: Which is what, what is popular today players shop themselves after three years. They sign a three year contract and then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly. Speaker 1: --they shop themselves around-- Speaker 2: Exactly-- Speaker 1: --for the highest-- Speaker 2: Exactly, ex-- Speaker 1: --bidder, right, but you couldn't do that then. Speaker 2: You could not do that. You could not even, you could not have a representative. You couldn't have an agent. You had to go in and the manager would say, "Oh this year we're gonna pay you," blah, blah, blah, and there was nothing you could do about it but take the blah, blah, blah, whatever it was they offered. You had no, you were a slave. So, Curt was with the St. Louis Cardinals for almost fourteen, maybe thirteen years and had been in three World Series, had two World Series rings. Story_ID: 261827 Speaker 1: He [Curt Flood] has two World Series rings and he had seven consecutive gold gloves, which is the highest award you can receive in the world of baseball because it is only voted on by, when he was playing, by your peers. So, he had seven consecutive gold glove--gold gloves, and he had been the captain of his team [St. Louis Cardinals] and he was just a premiere all-star baseball player making (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was one of the greatest center fielders to play baseball. Speaker 1: Oh, one of the greatest center fielders on the cover, on the cover of Sports Illustrated as the greatest center fielder in baseball. He had the longest record of errorless games ever. It lasted for twenty years. He held the record of errorless games. He still holds the record of consecutive errorless innings played. No one has broken that today. He was an incredible premiere ball player of his time. He was on the highest paid team in baseball. Their salaries outranked all the other teams. Just a dynamic, incredible player and bright and intelligent and fabulous artist, portrait artist, museum quality work, just magnificent and that was my boyfriend. I'm making movies, and he's playing Major League Baseball [MLB]. Speaker 2: And a renaissance man to boot, I mean an artist. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I, I forgot about him being a painter, too. Speaker 1: And also a musician, played a fabulous guitar and the piano. He was just a genius and he, he's in 'Cotton Comes to Harlem.' He's in, he's in 'Three in the Attic.' He would come out to where ever I--he's in, he's in '[The] Young Lawyers.' He is in crowd scenes in all of those movies. He would come out to wherever I was on location. We were two young people just living an incredible unexpected life in the '60s [1960s] that you never would have thought would happen when you were being raised in the '50s [1950s]. You just, you just would not have, and we were just having a wonderful time. And then they traded him, and he did something that athletes don't do. He said, "I'm not going." In fact, he wrote the most incredible letter to the, the commissioner. I have the letter if you'd like for me to read the letter. It's a fabulous letter. Speaker 2: Well, just synopsize it for us, and we can include it in the material, but-- Speaker 1: It, it's--the gist of the letter was that, "I am not a piece of property to be bartered or traded against my will, and I'm not going to Philadelphia [Phillies]." That was a monumental statement for someone who was at the very top, the very, very, very, top of their game making incredible money, and he refused to go. Speaker 2: What he's really saying in essence is that an athlete is not a slave. Speaker 1: "I'm not a slave," and he said that. Story_ID: 261828 Speaker 1: He [Curt Flood] makes this statement in this letter (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: --you know basically he said, "I'm not a piece of property," basically. Speaker 2: Exactly and, and he was making it be known to all other teams that he was available to sit, the gist of, "I'm here and I'm available to talk to anyone as to who might want," you know to-- Speaker 1: To negotiate. Speaker 2: Exactly. He said he knew that that day was going to happen, the day that he was going to be traded, but he was a very unique ball player. He went like almost straight from the minor leagues [Minor League Baseball] to a team and stayed there. Most guys bounced, you know, would bounce around. He was with the Cincinnati Reds when he first went, but with the minor league. But, with the major league, he was only with the St. Louis Cardinals, and that's considered, that was his family. Him and Bob Gibson, hall of fame picture of Bob Gibson, they had been roommates since Curt was eighteen years old. I mean they were now at the point where they were big stars and they were separate, but that was like, like his, his closest soul person was Bob Gibson. They had gone through the minor leagues together. So, then all of a sudden now you're gonna just be uprooted and you go over here and you go over there, and he just said, "I'm not going," and lucky for Marvin Miller. Marvin Miller was the executive director of the [Major League] Baseball Players Association, and he had come from the, from, from labor of heading the [United] Steelworkers, so he was a hard-nosed, bright, incredible "Let's get these--let's get you guys on the map because you're like little wimps," 'cause baseball was, they were just like little wimps. They just, they didn't have agents. They had no power. They did nothing. So,-- Speaker 1: We're not just talking about black players, we're talking about all of baseball players, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, there weren't that many black ones. Speaker 1: Yeah, we're talking about all baseball players (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All the baseball players. Speaker 1: So, he, he stands up-- Speaker 2: All of them. Speaker 1: --really for everybody. Speaker 2: He stands up and I don't think that it's unusual that a black man would be the one who would stand up because Curt is a very intelligent person and always very much aware of what's going on in the world and who would feel more in regards to slave than a black man telling you where to go, where not to go, I can't take my talents and take them where I want to take them. That was all part of the Civil Rights Movement. What Curt did was part of the Civil Rights Movement. He's the, he is, the guys call him the Rosa Parks of sports. "Come on, I'm not getting off this bus, I'm sitting down. We're not going." That's, that was the energy that was behind what he said. Speaker 1: But there was a price to pay for that wasn't it? Speaker 2: It wasn't, at the time you're not thinking of the price because you're not thinking that you might have to pay the price. You're thinking this is America, you know. Curt said this is America. I root, I rooted for the Indians [Native Americans]. This is America, you know. This is where justice is and this is not just. Any idiot could see this is not just. We're the only people in the whole world who can't go out and, and, and, and get away from a contract that you sign when you're seventeen years old-- Speaker 1: Renegotiate your--yeah. Speaker 2: --that you are, are tied to for the rest of your life. That's just, and that's because [U.S.] Congress had given baseball these special considerations. Story_ID: 261829 Speaker 1: I had done another '[The] Dating Game,' and I was in Copenhagen [Denmark] at the time, and I was gonna come back through from Copenhagen and spend a couple of weeks with Curt [Flood]. All of this kind of happened quickly. When I get to St. Louis [Missouri], he says, "Oh, you're gonna go with me to Puerto Rico because we're going to the [Major League] Baseball Players Association's meetings," and we were like at his house for a couple two days and he was practicing what he was gonna say to the guys when he gets there and we fly down on the plane and I said, "Why do they have the meetings in Puerto Rico? Why do you guys meet in Puerto Rico?" "Because they don't speak English there, and the owners can't be there to hear what we're talking about." So, that's why they would go to Puerto Rico. And so we went to Puerto Rico and that's where I met Marvin Miller and Richard [M.] Moss who was the, the attorney for the Baseball Players Association. He's still, he's still, he was still a close friend of Curt's until the day Curt passed away, and he's still a good friend of mine. He's just a good guy, Richard Moss. And what happened then was that the Baseball Players Association, the players voted to back him unanimously in his fight with the reserve clause, 'cause he couldn't go do it by himself. He still needed the attorneys and the money to pay the attorneys, and all of the legalities that he had to go through. He couldn't just walk out there and go hire an attorney and do this. He had the association there to back him. Sometimes people forget that, that the players, and then those players had to go back to their team and most of them wound up not being the team rep [representative]. Just, you know that's just what it is and, and that's, that's how that whole process started. He got Arthur Goldberg, former [U.S.] Supreme Court justice, to be his attorney, but at that time Goldberg he was going to be running for the mayor [sic. governor] of New York. I think it was the mayor of New York during that same time, and the wheels just started moving. It started in New York. The court process started in New York as it worked its way onto, onto the Supreme Court [as Flood v. Kuhn, 1972]. My brother-in-law, [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr., he went to court with Curt every day. That's before we were, he was married to Jean [Pace], or I was married to Curt, but he was there with, with Curt in the courtroom every day. He was there when Jackie Robinson came in and testified. It was a very upheaval of, of a situation with what happened with Curt, with that whole sit, that whole legality of the reserve clause. Story_ID: 261830 Speaker 1: During the [U.S. Supreme] Court portion [Flood v. Kuhn, 1972] of it, the players didn't come out. The players weren't there. They were fearful. They were really fearful. Jackie Robinson testified for him [Curt Flood]. One player testified against him, one of the players. Speaker 2: Who was that? Speaker 1: I'm going to tell you his name in a moment. He wound up with a fabulous contract on NBC, a sportscaster. God I see his face. Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: [Joe] Garagiola [Sr.] Speaker 1: Thank you, Joe Garagiola (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Joe Garagiola okay. Speaker 1: Joe Garagiola testified against Curt. A funny thing, Joe Garagiola's son [Joe Garagiola, Jr.] is now a sports agent, but anyway (laughter) he testified against Curt and it was funny because there had been this battle that Jackie Robinson and Joe Garagiola had gone through when they were playing ball. I think it was Joe Garagiola who had spiked-- Speaker 2: Jackie Robinson. Speaker 1: Jackie Robinson a couple of times, and they always had this kind of tension thing happening. So, the fact that they would wind up him on one side and Jackie Robinson on, on the other was, Curt thought it was just a very interesting and a thrilling situation when Jackie came into the courtroom and, and he did testify. There was, there was just so much hate that was going on at that time towards Curt from people who just could not possibly understand, how could this Negro child not be happy that he's making over $100,000 a year playing [Major League] Baseball. Most people would give their first born to be out there playing baseball and winning World Series rings, what is wrong with this fool, what is, what. They just could not understand it, and when you would try to explain it to someone they still didn't, couldn't understand it. It's like so if you work as a plumber and you sign with this company to be a plumber and for the rest of your life you're gonna be with that company to be a plumber and if you wanna go work somewhere else they'll tell you where to go and also tell you how much you can make no matter how skillful you are. Speaker 2: They can make sure you're not a plumber anymore. They can tell you, you don't have to be a plumber, be something else (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, you just, just go back and cook, you know cut sugar cane, if you came from the Dominican Republic, as they would tell the guys. You just go on back and cut sugar cane if you don't want to take this salary or as Curt was told one time, one of the things you don't do as a baseball player you never ever, never, never discuss you salary with another baseball player. That's just was engrained in them when they would come out don't you just, you just, that's, don't do that, and they didn't, they didn't. But, this one guy they had been in, they had then become friends and they're sitting in the general manager's office and waiting to go in and sit across the desk and have him tell them what, what they're gonna make that year and white guy gets up and he goes in and he says he comes out a little while later and he's just smiling ear to ear and he puts the number of hand, you know, fingers up as to what his salary was, and Curt said and that was the salary I was making right now and I had Gold Gloves and batting .300 and this guy was just sitting on the bench probably you know, so he said he went in and the general manager [Red Schoendienst] had his contract all made out already and said this is what we think you should have, and he said, "Well that's the same thing you gave me last year," and he went on and said what he had done and the guy told him, "Yeah, but we have to paint the benches and we have to paint the bleachers," and blah, blah, blah, and, "This is what you're gonna get," and, and then he said, "What--" for lack of the guy's name, he says, "But, but Billy Bob [ph.] just walked out of here, and he's making the same thing I'm making and he doesn't have any Gold Gloves. He doesn't have this," and the general manager said, "Well, Curt now you know it takes more money for white guys to live than it does for black guys to live, or colored guys to live." So, that, "It just takes more money," and that was the end of the conversation, because you had no, there was nowhere you could go to fight. You didn't have an agent. There was nothing you could do. Story_ID: 261831 Speaker 1: Actually, and studies have shown it costs more to be black because you get discriminated against in most areas. Speaker 2: When, when Curt [Flood] went to St. Louis [Missouri], this is kind of when they were talking about black guys need more money than black guys or white guys need more money than black guys, when Curt first went to St. Louis [Cardinals], his first year there, you're going to, you need a place to stay, right what do you do you play baseball or you wanna do what, you want me to give you an apartment for six months. I don't think so. Couldn't find anywhere to live, and there was a black, one black guy on the team who had been with the Negro league [baseball], so he kind of took Curt under wings and helped him find a place. So, he was happy just to get a place for like I think it was nine months, not a three year lease or two year lease or a year's lease, just for the nine months. He said it was really nice. It was a nice room and everything, and he said there were a lot of pretty ladies everywhere and he said during the week and it was quiet. He said then the weekend came, and he said there were more people running in and out of this place and there were pimps all out in front and he found out it was a brothel. His first year with St. Louis he was in the brothel with his teammate because it was nowhere for them to live. Nobody would, you know-- Speaker 1: He and Bob Gibson? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Bob. Speaker 1: I wasn't Bob. Speaker 2: It wasn't Bob. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His name was Tiny Sand [ph.] or Sand Tiny. He was an old Negro league player. Curt said he drank a little bit too much and he was just trying to be helpful. He said he got out of there in about six or seven weeks he was out of there. Some other black people in the community came to his aid and helped him find, find, to find a place you know, but there was--that was part of his, that, that fire that he had in regard, regarding that reserve clause and the way he had been treated in the minor leagues [Minor League Baseball] when he was in the South, which was just horrific, absolutely horrific. Most people kind of had the feeling that after Jackie Robinson everything was okay. The guys still had to live in Ma, Ma Puckett's [sic. Ma Felder] house and couldn't be with the team and no, they couldn't go in the showers and in one particular town, I think it was Dunnsville, Virginia, or Dunnsville, oh, I have to look at my note. In this particular town in the minor leagues, a black man could not go in the clubhouse, could not go in the clubhouse and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is the locker room where all-- Speaker 2: The locker room. Speaker 1: --the players dress. Speaker 2: Where all the--he could not go in the dressing room or where the showers were. He could not go in there. White men and black men could not undress and dress in the same space. Story_ID: 261832 Speaker 1: So outside the locker room up against a window that you could look into the locker room they had built a tin, corrugated tin shed that was just enough space for a stool and it had some fabric across the front and it had one, two sides corrugated and the other side was the wall of the clubhouse where there was a window that he could look into, and he just had a stool in there and that's where he had to dress with a dirt floor. He said he was just stunned. He's, he was eighteen years old, and he's out there and that's where he had to be. So, he would come, he couldn't stay with the guys. He's staying at somebody else's house. Usually it was the mortuary manor, or the dentist, whoever the wealthiest black person in town they would stay with them. So, he says this particular day they had a double header, gonna play two games, and in the Minor League [Baseball], you only have one uniform, so you play the first game and you would then take off your uniform 'cause it would be soaking wet, it's summertime, and you would, 'cause you're minor leagues you don't have people really taking care of you. You take off your uniform and they would throw it in a dryer and they would dry the uniform and if you wanted to take off your, your socks and your underpants and wash them out yourselves and then you could throw those in the dryer and they would, they would dry them. Okay, so he's sitting out there and he's soaking wet and he's looking in the window and he sees that other guys are taking their uniforms off and they're throwing them in a pile, a big pile, where the guy is gonna take them and put them all in the dryer or whatever else they washed out they're gonna put in that pile and put it in the dryer. So, he takes his uniform off and he says he can't wash his, his underwear and his socks, but he doesn't want to put them back on wet, so he throws, all of his stuff, he throws it through the window and it hits the pile. He says as soon as it hits the pile he hears this loud scream like a, just a screeching loud cat screaming and it's the clubhouse man. He's about twenty years old, and he said he's having a fit and he's cursing Curt [Flood] out for throwing his stuff in there and he goes and gets this long broom handle that the, the straw, broom straws had been taken off and at the end of it was a nail and he takes the nail with the, on the, on the long pole and he carefully picks Curt's underwear and his uniform out of this pile, get's somebody else to hold the big brown bag, and he puts, carefully puts it in the bag so he doesn't have to touch it, takes the bag, takes it to a taxi outside, and sends it to the colored cleaners. He could not put the black man's sweat and uniform in the dryer with the white man's clothes and then proceeded to tell him not to do that again. Now, Curt is sitting there naked in this dirt floor on a stool tin corrugated shed, said it's like, like a sauna in there 'cause it's tin, the sun is hitting down on it and he's just sitting there and then his teammates don't say a thing. None of the teammates say a thing. So, it's a double header, so their clothes get dry. They get their uniforms on, they go out on the field. His stuff's not back from the colored cleaners. He's sitting there naked waiting for his stuff to come back from the cleaners. Well, everybody can see that the little black boy is not on the field, and he's holding up the game. He said they could hear them calling him all kind of names and a jigaboo and alligator bait and just, just, just fuming at the mouth because he's holding the game up. Finally, the people come back from the colored cleaners with his stuff, he gets dressed. He said he will never forget how he had to walk on that field with them throwing garbage, screaming at him, calling him every name, nigger in the book you could possibly hear and he's got to go out to center field and have his back to these people. He said he got so enraged that that year he broke every record. He became the most valuable player. He won the most valuable player award. He won everything. He said those records stood for a long time. He said he just took all of that hurt, and he decided he wasn't gonna ever cry again because he's a kid. He was just a kid out there, born and raised, I mean not born in Oakland [California], but raised on the West Coast, and he said people are trying to explain to him what was going to happen, but, but he said he hadn't, there was no way they could tell him the depth of the hate that was there. Story_ID: 261833 Speaker 1: Just to reflect on that Oakland [California] experience, now he was part of a group of athletes, a legendary group of athletes who all went to the same (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Incredible athletes. Speaker 1: --high school [McClymonds High School, Oakland, California] right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Tell us about that? Speaker 2: He was--Oakland was a baseball town. They loved baseball. He was with the Police [Athletic] League. He, everybody in the community was involved in baseball with premiere training done to these, for these young men. A man by the name of Sam Bercovich who was the multi-millionaire of the community family sponsored leagues and became very involved with the Vada and Vada Pinson, Frank Robinson, Bill Russell and Curt Flood. They had been playing ball together since they were like seven or eight years ago in these different-- Speaker 1: These were all all-stars solely considered-- Speaker 2: Incredible hall of fame-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --all-stars. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Vada and Curt had started playing baseball together when they were seven years old. They met Frank when they were like seven or eight, and they were all there playing together. All went on to the same high school together and out of that high school you got the first manager of a major league team, Frank Robinson. You got the first man, black manager of a baseball team, Bill Russell. Speaker 1: Basketball yeah. Speaker 2: I mean basketball, I'm sorry-- Speaker 1: Yeah, coach-- Speaker 2: --basketball coach-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a player coach right. Speaker 2: --was Bill Russell, and you had Vada and Curt wound up together in the outfield with the St. Louis Cardinals these two kids who had grown up in the '40s [1940s] talking about, they're gonna play Major League [Base]ball together. I just think it's just, just an incredible story. Speaker 1: Both of them were all-star ball players. Speaker 2: All-star, Gold Glove winners, I mean Frank broke--hall of famer, incredibly talented people. They were all signed by the same scout [George Powles] for Cincinnati [Redlegs; Cincinnati Reds], and they all went off to the minor leagues [Minor League Baseball] together. You just had some very talented people coming out of California and out of that Oakland area. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sam Bercovich now owned, was one of the owners of the Oakland Raiders and is still [sic.]. He called Curt and Vada his sons, and they just always remained this incredible friendship. His people owned a fabulous furniture store [E. Bercovich Furniture Company] in, in the Oakland area, owned it I think for maybe fifty, fifty, sixty, seventy years. They were like the wealthy family and when the story I was telling you about when he was, he went on, that, that anger just made him go and win all of the, the awards and everything that town [Thomasville, North Carolina] decided they were going to give a big party because they won, they won the, the league, they won the championship [sic.]All-start, Gold Glove winners, I mean Frank broke--hall of famer, incredibly talented people. They were all signed by the same scout for Cincinnati [Redlegs; Cincinnati Reds], and they all went off to the minor leagues [Minor League Baseball] together. You just had some very talented people coming out of California and out of that Oakland area. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sam Bercovich now owned [sic.], was one of the owners of the Oakland Raiders and is still. He called Curt and Vada his sons, and they just always remained this incredible friendship. His people owned a fabulous furniture store [E. Bercovich Furniture Company] in, in the Oakland area, owned it I think for maybe fifty, fifty, sixty, seventy years. They were like the wealthy family and when the story I was telling you about when he was, he went on, that, that anger just made him go and win all of the, the awards and everything that town decided they were going to give a big party because they won, they won the, the league, they won the championship. Story_ID: 261834 Speaker 1: So the town hadn't won in a long time. So, they're [High Point-Thomasville Hi-Toms team] all on the bus and Curt [Flood] has this one suit on and they get to the place and everybody, he's gonna be the most valuable player award and all of that and they get to the hotel and the guy at the door tells him he can't come in. Told him, "You--I'm sorry you can't come in. We don't serve Negroes in here." Speaker 2: Now he's the most valuable player but he's still-- Speaker 1: He's the most valuable player, and the coach says to him, "I'm sorry, Curt, but you're gonna have to go back on the bus, and I'll accept your award for you," and the team and the coach went into the hotel and left him on the bus. He said one of the guys did come back and bring him a program and showed him his name was the most valuable and showed him his name where he had broken all these records. So, he's sitting there on the bus. He said about ten minutes later this white man comes yelling down the bus, "Curt are you in there, Curt are you in there," and Curt was like, yeah, where the hell do you think I am. He says, "Come on, you're coming in here with me, come on you're coming in here with me." He says, "I can't go in there." He said, "Come on you're coming in here with me." Guy gets him off the bus, walks him into the hotel, the doorman moves out the way, walks him in, takes him up to the front table. The man is Mr. Thomasville, Thomasville Furniture [Thomasville Chair Company; Thomasville Furniture Industries]. He owns the whole darn town. Most of the people in the town work for him. He and Sam Bercovich in Oakland [California] are friends. Tom own- Sam Bercovich owns the big furniture store [E. Bercovich Furniture Company]. He had told this guy to watch out for Curt when he got to Thomasville [North Carolina], and the guy had been watching out for Curt. So, he introduces Curt. The guy goes up and introduces Curt and says, "He's done this for our team and he's done that for our team and this is the first time we won the championship [sic.], and it's also the first time a black, a colored person has eaten dinner in here, and it won't be the last time a black person eats dinner in here," and that's how he integrated the grand ballroom and he was able to pick up his own award. And this man had been looking out for him. He said about two months after he had been there the car rental place or a car place came and bought him a car. He said every month after that he got five one hundred dollar bills, and it was this guy 'cause Sam Bercovich from Oakland had told him to look out for him. So the town hadn't won in a long time. So, they're [Cincinnati Redlegs; Cincinnati Reds] all on the bus and Curt [Flood] has this one suit on and they get to the place and everybody, he's gonna be the most valuable player award and all of that and they get to the hotel and the guy at the door tells him he can't come in. Told him, "You--I'm sorry you can't come in. We don't serve Negroes in here." Speaker 2: Now he's the most valuable player but he's still-- Speaker 1: He's the most valuable player, and the coach says to him, "I'm sorry, Curt, but you're gonna have to go back on the bus, and I'll accept your award for you," and the team and the coach went into the hotel and left him on the bus. He said one of the guys did come back and bring him a program and showed him his name was the most valuable and showed him his name where he had broken all these records. So, he's sitting there on the bus. He said about ten minutes later this white man comes yelling down the bus, "Curt are you in there, Curt are you in there," and Curt was like, yeah, where the hell do you think I am. He says, "Come on, you're coming in here with me, come on you're coming in here with me." He says, "I can't go in there." He said, "Come on you're coming in here with me." Guy gets him off the bus, walks him into the hotel, the door man moves out the way, walks him in, takes him up to the front table. The man is Mr. Thomasville, Thomasville Furniture. He owns the whole darn town. Most of the people in the town work for him. He and Sam Bercovich in Oakland [California] are friends. Tom own--Sam Bercovich owns the big furniture store [E. Bercovich Furniture Company]. He had told this guy to watch out for Curt when he got to Thomasville, and the guy had been watching out for Curt. So, he introduces Curt. The guy goes up and introduces Curt and says, "He's done this for our team and he's done that for our team and this is the first time we won the championship, and it's also the first time a black, a colored person has eaten dinner in here, and it won't be the last time a black person eats dinner in here," and that's how he integrated the grand ballroom and he was able to pick up his own award. And this man had been looking out for him. He said about two months after he had been there the car rental place or a car place came and bought him a car. He said every month after that he got five one hundred dollar bills, and it was this guy 'cause Sam Bercovich from Oakland had told him to look out for him. Story_ID: 261835 Speaker 1: It was just some of the terrible things that happened to him [Curt Flood] when he was in the minor leagues [Minor League Baseball], just some of the unpleasant things that, that happened to him when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you, do you think, I guess we have to think that perhaps all these bad experiences you know as a young baseball player, and he wasn't the only one that went through it. Speaker 1: Oh no. Speaker 2: Frank Robinson and (unclear) went through it. Speaker 1: Oh, all the guys did. Speaker 2: All the, the whole, all Willie Mays-- Speaker 1: All of them. Speaker 2: --they all with through similar experiences, but do you think that-- Speaker 1: (Coughing) Excuse me. Speaker 2: What was it about Curt Flood that made him, you know, stand up to that, that, that [reserve] clause from-- Speaker 1: I think it was his parents [Laura Flood and Herman Flood]. His parents had just incredible character, very much so in regards to being, standing up for your rights and-- Speaker 2: 'Cause you know one is tempted to think that the rest of them went through that and somehow it's a civil, there's a whole struggle to get into it that would make them all maybe do what he did, but they didn't. Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: It was him. Speaker 1: --and the white guys didn't either. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They didn't either. He comes from where the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] started down the street, Black Panther movement, out of Oakland [California]. His mother and father were very forward people in regards to standing up for your rights and, and character and seeing the right and the wrong and, they were just really incredible parents. Curt came out in a very wonderful way. He had a brother, Carl [Flood], who didn't quite manage to, to stay on the right, on the right, the right road. Curt says he, Curt would, would say it was Carl who really got him traded [from the St. Louis Cardinals to the Philadelphia Phillies]. It was Carl, his brother Carl. Carl had spent most of his life, almost more than half of his life in jail. Curt said he robbed three and a half banks. He got caught on the last bank robbery and was in jail for a number of years and then he got out and he was supposed to be reformed and Curt had him come to St. Louis [Missouri]. And Curt is a big star now and he got him a job and put him in his business and he's gonna help him get on his feet. Curt is at the clubhouse in a game and, they're in a game and one of the coaches come and they say, "Mr. [Gussie] Busch wants you on the phone." Like you mean the Mr. Busch, and it was Mr. Busch, the owner of the team and the owner of-- Speaker 2: Busch Beer. Speaker 1: --Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] beer and he said everybody, and everybody was like Busch on the phone. Busch doesn't call people let alone during the game he's gonna call Curt on the phone and insist on talking to him. So, he goes to the phone, he says, "Hello?" And he says Busch is yelling, just yelling, "How dare you embarrass and bring this up on this team, you stupid," dah, dah, dah. "You bring that fool to this town. Do you know what he did? Do you know what he did?" "What, what?" "Your brother, your brother just robbed the jewelry store, and he's on the news and they're telling him that (unclear)--," and just went bananas. What had happened, Carl tried to rob a jewelry store. In robbing the jewelry store, just by chance police were in the area, also just by chance a television news crew was in the area. They catch the, the chase, the police chasing him, the police with the gun in his hand, him talking to the police telling them to, "Just go ahead and blow my head off, I don't care," cursing and all of this on tape, and they had been running it on the news and Mr. Busch was livid because it was all Curt's fault because they weren't saying Carl Flood, they were saying the Curt Flood of the St. Louis Cardinals, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, you know, that kind of thing. Speaker 2: Brother, his brother, but Curt Flood's names all, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah and you could see everything. I mean how often are you gonna rob something there's gonna be police there and the camera crew, TV news crew all at the same time. Speaker 2: You think it was a set up? Do you seem to think-- Speaker 1: No, it just was by chance and it was the same television station that did the team. Speaker 2: That covered the team-- Speaker 1: That covered the team. Speaker 2: --for the City of St. Louis. Speaker 1: Yeah. It was just some of the terrible things that happened to him [Curt Flood] when he was in the minor leagues [Minor League Baseball], just some of the unpleasant things that, that happened to him when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you, do you think, I guess we have to think that perhaps all these bad experiences you know as a young baseball player, and he wasn't the only one that went through it. Speaker 1: Oh no. Speaker 2: Frank Robinson and (unclear) went through it. Speaker 1: Oh, all the guys did. Speaker 2: All the, the whole, all Willie Mays-- Speaker 1: All of them. Speaker 2: --they all with through similar experiences, but do you think that-- Speaker 1: (Coughing) Excuse me. Speaker 2: What was it about Curt Flood that made him, you know, stand up to that, that, that [reserve] clause from-- Speaker 1: I think it was his parents [Laura Flood and Herman Flood]. His parents had just incredible character, very much so in regards to being, standing up for your rights and-- Speaker 2: 'Cause you know one is tempted to think that the rest of them went through that and somehow it's a civil, there's a whole struggle to get into it that would make them all maybe do what he did, but they didn't. Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: It was him. Speaker 1: --and the white guys didn't either. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They didn't either. He comes from where the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] started down the street, Black Panther movement, out of Oakland [California]. His mother and father were very forward people in regards to standing up for your rights and, and character and seeing the right and the wrong and, they were just really incredible parents. Curt came out in a very wonderful way. He had a brother, Carl [Flood], who didn't quite manage to, to stay on the right, on the right, the right road. Curt says he, Curt would, would say it was Carl who really got him traded [from the St. Louis Cardinals to the Philadelphia Phillies]. It was Carl, his brother Carl. Carl had spent most of his life, almost more than half of his life in jail. Curt said he robbed three and a half banks. He got caught on the last bank robbery and was in jail for a number of years and then he got out and he was supposed to be reformed and Curt had him come to St. Louis [Missouri]. And Curt is a big star now and he got him a job and put him in his business and he's gonna help him get on his feet. Curt is at the clubhouse in a game and, they're in a game and one of the coaches come and they say, "Mr. [Gussie] Busch wants you on the phone." Like you mean the Mr. Busch, and it was Mr. Busch, the owner of the team and the owner of-- Speaker 2: Busch Beer. Speaker 1: --Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] beer and he said everybody, and everybody was like Busch on the phone. Busch doesn't call people let alone during the game he's gonna call Curt on the phone and insist on talking to him. So, he goes to the phone, he says, "Hello?" And he says Busch is yelling, just yelling, "How dare you embarrass and bring this up on this team, you stupid," dah, dah, dah. "You bring that fool to this town. Do you know what he did? Do you know what he did?" "What, what?" "Your brother, your brother just robbed the jewelry store, and he's on the news and they're telling him that (unclear)--," and just went bananas. What had happened, Carl tried to rob a jewelry store. In robbing the jewelry store, just by chance police were in the area, also just by chance a television news crew was in the area. They catch the, the chase, the police chasing him, the police with the gun in his hand, him talking to the police telling them to, "Just go ahead and blow my head off, I don't care," cursing and all of this on tape, and they had been running it on the news and Mr. Busch was livid because it was all Curt's fault because they weren't saying Carl Flood, they were saying the Curt Flood of the St. Louis Cardinals, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, you know, that kind of thing. Speaker 2: Brother, his brother, but Curt Flood's names all, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah and you could see everything. I mean how often are you gonna rob something there's gonna be police there and the camera crew, TV news crew all at the same time. Speaker 2: You think it was a set up? Do you seem to think-- Speaker 1: No, it just was by chance and it was the same television station that did the team. Speaker 2: That covered the team-- Speaker 1: That covered the team. Speaker 2: --for the City of St. Louis. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 261836 Speaker 1: What happened to him [Curt Flood] as a result of his stance [Flood v. Kuhn, 1972], I mean, was it, did it, did all the players unite behind him and everything turned out fine? What, what happened? Speaker 2: I--no, the [U.S.] Supreme Court told him he had to get an answer from [U.S.] Congress because it was Congress who had given these special privileges to [Major League] Baseball, and Congress was going to have to take them away. He only lost by one vote [5-3 decision] because justice, I think it's Black abstained [sic. Justice Harry Blackmun wrote the majority opinion], and the justice [Lewis F. Powell, Jr.] who abstained from voting who was on Curt's side said he had to abstain because he had a large number of shares in Anheuser-Busch [Companies] and in fact once he revealed that, Marvin Miller didn't know that, Richard [M.] Moss didn't know that. They didn't know that until after the vote. He should have removed himself-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he should have recused himself (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before, long before the vote ever came in, so they found that very interesting. They still don't know to this day when he got it, when he acquired it. They, they don't--you ask Richard Moss that today he still doesn't know when he (unclear) all of this stock from Anheuser-Busch. Story_ID: 261837 Speaker 1: So, one of the things that happened was that once he [Curt Flood] did that, [Major League] Baseball was extremely annoyed. You don't sue that many millionaires because to own a baseball team you are a money person, and the baseball team--everybody's, you know, you can shake a tree in, in, in New York and millionaires will fall out, but you only can shake a tree and maybe one will fall out who owns a baseball team, so you just, you gotta a very special little thing here. You are with, rolling with the, the, the big guys. You are very privileged you own a baseball team, and you were very, very wealthy. Now this person is now getting in my pocket? You know you're getting in my pocket. These are very well-connected people. Curt tell--one of the things that happened to him is that he got a call from, he calls him R.J. [ph.], got a call from a man named R.J. and R.J. he was wondering how R.J. got his phone number because he had changed his phone number about three or four times already because people were bothering him so. How did R.J. get his phone number, but R.J. was telling him about different people they knew together, and he wanted, he was talking about the owners really bad and he wanted to help Curt with his case and, "I'd like to meet you and can you meet me at the so and so restaurant," very fancy restaurant and he's just really putting down the owners really bad. And of course Curt wanted to hear that, so Curt said, "Sure, I'll have dinner with you," 'cause he knew they knew a lot of the same people. So, the next night they're supposed to have dinner, Curt goes to the restaurant, the guy is not there. Guy doesn't show up, so he stays for a while and sees some other friends and then he comes on back home, gets in the house and as soon as he walks in the house he gets another phone call and the guy tells him to go downstairs to his car, look in the trunk. So, Curt says, "Go downstairs in my car and look in my trunk?" He says, "Yes, you need to go downstairs in your and look in your trunk. Come on, I'm down here, come on downstairs." So, Curt goes downstairs and he looks in his trunk and there's a large briefcase in his trunk, and the trunk's not, the briefcase is not closed. The briefcase is open, and it's full of hundred dollar bills, tied and wrapped hundred dollar bills. He says he thinks there had to have been at least maybe 200,000 in there, 250,000. He said it scared the absolute hell out of him because the guy wasn't out there, nobody was out there, so he says he just closes his trunk and gets the heck out of the garage and comes back up to his apartment, and he says as soon as he walks into the apartment the phone rings again. As soon as he walk--like somebody is watching him. He's like he feeling, he says am I paranoid? How do they know when I'm coming in and when I'm leaving, when I'm not leaving? So, he picks the phone up and it's, it's this guy again, and Curt said he went off on him and blah, blah, blah, blah, you know, "You're not buying me out. I was already making 100,000. This is not what this is about," da, da, da, and the guy starts laughing. He says, "Well we just wanted to see if it was about the money," and Curt says he hung the phone up. And of course he went back downstairs, and he said it was gone. He says to this day he doesn't know how they did because he lived in an apartment where the garage is locked. He had changed his number four times. He didn't--said, either maybe he did when I was at the, at the restaurant, but I don't know how he got my trunk open, but I mean you can get a locksmith to do anything. So, that was one of the things that really scared the hell out of him. Story_ID: 261838 Speaker 1: When he [Curt Flood] had that--the suit [Flood v. Kuhn, 1972]--he had a year off, and then the Washington Senators [Texas Rangers] asked him to come and play with them. This was before the judgment had come down, and he, you know, he conversed with the [Major League] Baseball Players Association and with the, the attorneys and they said, "Oh yes, that's fine, you can go. If you wanna go and play with the Senators and they're offering you, you know a certain amount of money," and they were because know you haven't played for a year and of course funds are getting low. So, he goes and he plays with the, with the Senators. He really only played for about three weeks, but he did go to spring training [Pompano Beach, Florida] and he said it was--a year off just could make the most difference. His body was just always used to being in perfect, perfectly tuned. But, he did go and he played with the Senators, and he said he went into, to, into the dressing room clubhouse and in front of his locker was this big black wreath sitting in front of his locker. He said, and all the guys were kind of like chuckling like aha, you know (unclear), you know, whoever else was there they were all kind of like chuckling and he was, he said he got so paranoid because you just don't waltz into those clubhouse. You cannot get in there. That's like Fort Knox [Kentucky]. You don't get into Fort Knox. Who, who got that in there. He says he was so paranoid. He's like, is somebody trying to, getting ready to kill me? I mean, I know I'm about to cost people a lot of money. You know, people get killed for less than, you know, for a few, few grand, now he's about the change the whole business of, of, of sports. So, he goes and gets dresses and he goes out on the field to play, and he says that whole time he just felt just looking and seeing is something trying to, gonna shoot me or were they gonna kill me, whether, you know people were angry. So, he gets dressed after the game and he goes to, back to the hotel, and in his hotel there's a note, a handwritten note, he said written with, written in pencil and it's on his bed and it says, "You're out," with a big exclamation point next to it. He said, he, they, somebody was, he felt someone was going to kill him. He was costing people too much money in changing the whole system, and people were angry. He left the, he left the stadium [Yankee Stadium, New York, New York] and went to the airport and that's how he got to Majorca, Spain. Story_ID: 261839 Speaker 1: He [Curt Flood] left [the United States] fearing for his life, and he stayed there for five years and it was while he was there that the results from the [U.S.] Supreme Court came down [in Flood v. Kuhn, 1972]. But, Curt's a very resourceful person. While he was in Majorca [Spain], he bought a bar and restaurant and right outside of Majorca is where America has a [U.S.] Navy yard there or a Navy camp there, so all the guys in the Navy were there and Curt Flood, Major League Baseball player has a bar and, oh, Howard Cosell, Curt's good buddy, sent Curt tape equipment and would send Curt all of the fights, so the bar became the big hangout for all the folks in the Navy and he just was very successful while he was in Majorca so much so, so successful that in Majorca you would own a bar, you can keep it open anytime you want, but during the twenty-four-hour period you have to close the bar for one hour. One day he didn't close it until fifteen minutes into the hour it should have been closed. He called--the S.S. [sic. Guardia Civil] came in and took over the bar, gave him forty-eight hours to get out of the country, and that's when he came back to America. Extremely interesting situation. Howard Cosell went over there to visit him there too. He was there. It was a fabulous little place. It was just--the Rustic Inn it was called in [Palma] Majorca, Spain. He, he had to leave the country. He got out of the country, and when he came back the reception was a little different. People had a better understanding of what he had done, and he became a newscaster for the Oakland A's [Oakland Athletics], and he became the commissioner of sports for the City of Oakland [California] and, and was very loved in that city. In fact, right before he passed away, I'm so glad they did this, right before, the year before he became ill, about three years before he became ill, the City of Oakland named their new sports complex after him, the Curt Flood Sports Complex [Curt Flood Field, Oakland, California]. It's a fabulous park with baseball diamonds and soccer fields and soccer fields, baseball diamonds, a clubhouse and it's right on the water [sic.]. It sits right across the freeway from the stadium [Oakland Coliseum, Oakland, California], the baseball stadium there. And he was the happiest child to have this town name their new sports complex after them. So, he was very loved in that, the Oakland area, I mean that was a very, very high point while he was here. But he-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --he changed the way they do business in the world of sports. Time magazine in their millennium issue of Time magazine they named the ten most influential athletes of the millennium, and it was only ten with Jackie Robinson and Pele and Michael Jordan and Muhammad Ali, and Curt Flood, Babe Ruth, it was the, Mickey Mantle were the ten most influential men in sports, and Curt they said was the man who changed the way they do business in the entire world of sports. Speaker 2: He did indeed. Speaker 1: He just completely changed it, he really did. Story_ID: 261840 Speaker 1: He [Curt Flood] passed away in? Speaker 2: He passed away in '97 [1997]. He passed away in '97 [1997]. He became quite a father. After we got married, he was quite a father to my, my two daughters [Shawn Pace Mitchell and Julia Pace Mitchell] who just absolutely adored him, 'cause he was so clever in the way he did things. The first time he met my two daughters he invites us to come to [Las] Vegas [Nevada] because he doing a card show, card show and the signing show, and we, we get off the plane and at the airport for the MGM Grand hotel [Marina Hotel and Casino; MGM Grand Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada] is the big sign and on the, you know, those enormous signs is Curt Flood's name, and my daughter said, "Is that the Curt Flood we're coming to see on that sign?" "Yeah." Well you didn't tell us that." So, they were like who's this Curt Flood? And he sends the car to pick them up and he had us come at the time that he was going to be in the grand auditorium when all the lines were there and everyone lined up to come and see him. So, my daughters walk in and they're like, "Well what are they doing?" And I'm explaining, "Well they get the baseball and they get him to sign the baseball and they buy the ball, and that's what they do, and they sign the bats." And it was Whitey Ford was with him, so Whitey Ford and Curt Flood, and my youngest daughter said, "So what does that mean?" I said, "You have his autograph and then it's valuable." She said, "Well how valuable?" "Well, you buy the ball for so much and then once it's signed it might be worth, you know, two hundred, three hundred [dollars]." She said, "What?" This is my little one. My daughter has about over 1,000 autographed baseballs. She started collecting baseballs like you would not believe. She's been doing it forever. She has baseballs with Muhammad Ali's signature. She has one with [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton's signature. She has a baseball with Rosa Parks' signature. She's just--baseballs. It was like, "Wow, I take this and then I go and get it signed and it turns into money?" So she was about, maybe seven or eight years old when she first met Curt, so he made quite an impression on my daughters the first time they met him. Speaker 1: Well this is a story that's gonna be unfolding for some years this baseball, signed baseball collection of your daughter's I guess, right, that's-- Speaker 2: I guess she'll just take them and toss, cash it in and make her first movie, I don't know, but she has been--when she figured out ways to know who the athlete, all-star athletes were when we would go on the, on the legends games all over the country. We would always go with Curt, and all the legends would be there and she would come back with autographs signed, balls from these different men and we would say, "How did you know who to ask to sign the ball?" She says, "Well, all the athletes have name tags that are written real nice, and they're all written by the same hand. Everybody else's name tag is just all different hands, so what you gotta do is look for the name tag that's written with the same hand and then you know that's a star." (Laughter) I said, "That was clever," and it worked every time, every time. So, she loved baseball. She played major league base- she played little league ball. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 261841 Speaker 1: Tell me now, what are your future plans? Do you plan to do more performance now or are you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're sounding like my daughters (laughter). You really are. Speaker 1: So you did a Spike Lee movie ['Sucker Free City'] last year, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did a Spike Lee movie last year. I think I'm gonna just be rooting and enjoying watching my daughters' careers as they just take off in what they're doing, my little daughter Julia [Pace Mitchell] and my daughter Shawn [Pace Mitchell] as, as they continue in their careers. I mean, but again if Spike Lee or Sidney [Poitier] come knocking on my door or you know or Wesley Snipes or any of those guys I'll lovely happy to go out there and go to work, and I'm just enjoying, I'm enjoying seeing all the black faces on TV. I don't care if they could act or they don't act or they're great or they're not great. I'm just happy they're all there because every Caucasian you see in a movie and every Caucasian you see on television is not a great actor. They're not. They're just out there working and journeymen. I'm just, I'm, I'm so enjoying this. I really am. I look at the good shows. I look at the bad shows. I just went to see 'Diary of a Mad Black Woman.' My daughter would say, "Mommy, will you keep it down please." I'm just having the best old time just laughing and having a good time and watching people I've known over the years who have worked hard, especially behind the camera to be producers and writers and, and to achieve and, and to get those positions and have hit movies coming out. I, you know, I'm talking about, we're talking mid-century here. I started my career mid-century. Story_ID: 261842 Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite black performer or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --producer or director? Speaker 2: I have an absolute, absolute favorite black performers. My favorite, favorite black actor is [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee. I'm just using the word actor, Ruby Dee. My favorite, favorite all-time performer, performer I mean performer, performer is Lena Horne. Nobody could perform like Lena Horne. She'd just raise an eyebrow and people would fall out. I just--an incredible performer. I'm talking about those that I watched as a child how they became my favorites when I was a child. Those, those are, are two of my favorites, and of course Mr. Sidney Poitier can do no wrong, just absolutely no wrong. Those are the people I fell in love with and, and watched, and I'm just so happy that they were the kind of people who had not only the talent in front of the camera and the talent on the stage, but they just had incredible dignity and such character and such morals and just a wonderful lifestyle and just impeccable role models with Ruby Dee and [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and the elegance and the--no scandals on them over the years no oops, oops I ran over the guy 'cause I was a little drunk or I was just taking a little puff of this or I was just doing that and I don't know why these people keep picking on me saying I'm doing this and yeah I take a few pills. You never heard anything like that about these people or their lives or their (unclear), just in--so I'm glad I selected fabulous people to admire 'cause when you're a kid you don't know. You just pick the one you like. You just don't have all that other information. Story_ID: 261843 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Oh Lord, Lord, Lord. I have really one that I think is the abso- I feel is the absolute downfall of our community and why we're so dysfunctional at this time. I think we're extremely dysfunctional and that is the abandonment of our women and children by our men or our males within our community. And I don't think it's been addressed. I don't think it's been talked about enough. I think it's, it's, it is the main problem. When we hear people say, "What's wrong with these children?" Well, hello, nobody is raising them. "What's wrong with that boy? Why is he just going around shooting people?" He has no images. He has no male role models. Nobody cares for him. Nobody loved him. Nobody gave him any value or worth. Can't, you just don't sprout up like just in a void. I think I'm, it's almost become almost a badge of great courage if you're a woman and you say, "Well I don't need a man and I'm raising all nine of these children by myself." I say no women should be organized when men abandon them to make men come and take care of their responsibilities, and we don't do that and no one's talking or doing anything about it and men feel no shame and women feel no shame when they, even would date a man who has abandoned his family and his children. I don't understand that. I wouldn't touch a man who has done that with a hundred foot pole. But, we have women who do that. There's such a low in our morals today. There's no, there's no adoring or adoring of our women. No one adores the black woman or sings great praises of her or how fabulous she is or how wonderful she is and what a great mother she is and how I'm going to love her and take care of her as a father and a husband. That dialogue just doesn't seem to ring in our community anymore, and I think that's why we're so dysfunctional. And that's one of the areas I think we need to address, we have to address, as we well we're gonna live here and fight the gangs. Well, how about fighting the men and getting the fight together to help the men wanna be with their boys and the family so that we can not have to go out and fight the gangs. So, that's my biggest--75 percent of all black children born in America today are born to single mothers. That's like a whole new experiment happening with the human race because that's not what the human race and that's not how we evolved. We evolved as a man, a woman, and children, and children receive something special from each one, not a void situation and so it's like a whole new experience where you have a woman raising children and then that child, girl child, will go and raise a child and there's no--it's thrown us off. It, it gives me chills. Story_ID: 261844 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this, to this point, and you've got more to do I would think, is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Any major thing that I would do differently. I might have had maybe another child, might have had one more kid. I like kids. Would have liked to have had a little boy, but I couldn't design one of those. I mean today you can you just go in and put the sperms and you fix it and you plant the egg and you can get you a little boy. I would have loved to have done something like that. I would have liked to have had maybe a situation that I see the young talent today having when you see them controlling their productions and controlling the product. I think I would have loved to have done that where you can, when these young talented persons can sit down today and say, "Oh, let's do a movie about da, da, da, da, da, oh yeah we'll get so and so and blah, blah, blah can do the music." That didn't exist when I was in the business where you had people behind the camera and in front of the camera controlling what was going to be put on the screen. I just love that. I just think that's wonderful. I would have loved to have done something like that, but I was not of that era--me and [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee and the Cicely Tyson and the Diahann Carrolls [HistoryMaker Diahann Carroll] and the Pam Griers. We were not of that era as we are now and I, and I'm just so enjoying watching these, these talented people do that. That I would have loved to have done 'cause I have some ideas for some plays and some movies and you know that would have been just wonderful. I'm hoping my daughter will be doing that, my daughter Julia [Pace Mitchell] will be doing that and my daughter Shawn [Pace Mitchell] will be controlling all the, the other factors. So that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that is, that is something I really would have loved to have done within the entertainment world. Story_ID: 261845 Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, as in front of the camera, on that screen I hear it in my ear when I'm out and about: "Brown girl, chocolate brown girl image on screen, not seen that before, oh she's sexy, oh she can act, too. Oh, this is different. Oh I think she, oh yeah that's good." I think that's part of my legacy, and I can do comedy. I think changing the image, the color that was accepted as what was supposed to be considered pretty or desirable I would say that's part of my legacy. In the last, twice just last week, I'm introduced I'm getting an award and I'm introduced as, "This was the Halle Berry before, before there was one. This is, [HistoryMaker] Judy Pace[-Flood] was the first one. She, she was Halle Berry. This, this is the one." I'm at a party the other night and I'm being introduced, "She was Halle Berry long before there was Halle Berry." This are two different situations and then the one guy says, "Which movie was it for you?" He says, "That 'Three in the Attic' was mine--that was the one for me." I'm finding out that the young guys are now renting my movies. They're getting the DVDs. They're--'cause these guys, the young men are coming up to me now, and I don't know if their dad told them or who told them or maybe it's like, like a fad or something. I don't know. I think that's, that would be part of my legacy, and I think part of my legacy is, is Curtis, me and Curt [Flood], actor, me, the actress and Curt the ball player. Part of my legacy is gone. Don Mitchell, Don was the second black man in, in a series ['Ironside']. I mean he's--Greg Morris was the first [in 'Mission: Impossible'], then Don was the second. I think that whole era, that mid-century, '60s [1960s] era was, was part of my legacy. Story_ID: 261846 Speaker 1: And one thing I'm very proud of is an organization I formed called Kwanza Foundation in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Now this is important and I, I, you know, I've heard about this, but I didn't have the notes about it that you formed it. Please tell us about this (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm, I am the founder of-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Kwanza Foundation. Kwanza Foundation is, was, was an organization made up of women within the entertainment industry who were my friends. I, there was a--two situations happened. When you're an actress and you're working a lot and your image is out there people come to you to help them raise money to do things. "Come, come let's raise this money," or, "Come let us put your name on the invitation. We're raising money to go build a hospital or raising money to take care of people in Africa." You never know what the heck happened to the money. You're out there helping them raise money. You don't know what's going on with the money, so I felt that if a group of women who were in the industry got together and if everybody wants us to help them raise money, if we all got together we could really raise some funds to help or community. So, the second thing that happened is that there was an article, a front page story on Ebony magazine and it just bothered me because the story was images of different black actresses and they were saying how they all hated each other and how jealous all the actresses were of each other, and that was so untrue. My best friends were women within, within the business. So, formed Kwanza Foundation, did it within about three weeks just making phone calls, calling Isabel Sanford and Esther Rolle and my old buddy [HistoryMaker] Marilyn McCoo and [HistoryMaker] Marla Gibbs and Jayne Kennedy and Pam Grier and Beverly Todd and Lillian Lehman and [HistoryMaker] Nichelle Nichols and just, [HistoryMaker] Mary Wilson, just this cadre of working actresses within the business and we came together and we formed Kwanza Foundation. Story_ID: 261847 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: One thing about Kwanza [Foundation] it really pulled together an absolute fabulous corps of women and who are all still just tight buddies. We might have ever really all gotten to really know each other well, but that's, and that's been over thirty years. Speaker 1: There's a great image and I've seen the photos at events and in Jet magazine-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and in Ebony, Essence and stuff (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah Kwanza Foundation and everyone was saying that won't work those girls just hate each other. No we didn't. We did so much stuff. We helped black fetal monitoring machines. We've fed people. We, we just did a lot. We gave a lot of money away. We really did. Speaker 1: Now do you have any relationship at all to the founder of Kwanzaa, [HistoryMaker] Maulana Karenga, as he, do--? Speaker 2: No, but I do know him. I do know him yes, but we, we loved the name. We spell it a little different. He has two A's at the end. We only had one A. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: 'Cause we, that was, we just loved the name, we really did. Story_ID: 261848 Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not asked you that you think needs to be discussed--you know? I know we can't cover everything. Speaker 2: Oh, well I'm sure there is, but I, I'm not like target. I mean if you had something that you, you wanted to ask. We kind of covered, covered a lot of ground. I'm looking at the people who are coming along now and those who are in the past and are still there. We talked about Curt [Flood], you know there's a lot of things I wanted to say about Curt. We're trying to get, we want Curt to be in the [National] Baseball Hall of Fame [and Museum, Cooperstown, New York], I know that. I definitely want him there. They keep saying his numbers are too low, but they keep factoring in the year that he, he came back to play when he only played for three weeks. So, that's just gonna pull your numbers down. They need to remove that out of the equation 'cause he had incredible stats. So, I'm hoping Curt will eventually make it into the Baseball Hall of Fame because Baseball Hall of Fame is not just about what numbers you made. It's about how you affected the game-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Exactly. Speaker 2: --and how you improved the lives of the person within the game. I can't think of anybody who's improved their lives more than Mr. Curt. Speaker 1: That's a good point. Speaker 2: I mean not only just their lives, but probably two or three generations back will still be enjoying the fruits of somebody making what ninety zillion million dollars a year, so I think he's, helped improve the lives. So, that's one thing I would really like to see. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): When do the old timers consider Curt again? Speaker 2: Well you know what happened the first time the baseball players, the famers they're called, took over major league, took over Cooperstown [New York] before it was just the writers who voted. Well, now it's the hall of famers who vote for those to come into the hall of fame. All right so they got together to vote and they did their vote two years ago. They just do it every two years, so it should be coming up I think this year. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: They voted and guess how many got in to the hall of fame the first year the players voted? Speaker 1: I don't, I don't know. Speaker 2: Do you know? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I don't know. Speaker 2: I think two were-- Speaker 1: Zero. Speaker 2: Zero, no-- Speaker 1: Zero. Speaker 2: Really. Speaker 1: Maury Wills didn't get in, Stan Musial, not Stan Musial, oh God the one who, home run hitter. Roger Maris didn't get in. Curt didn't get in. I mean it was just this list (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know Ron Santo in Chicago [Illinois] was (unclear)-- Speaker 1: --of luminaries who just didn't, just didn't come, didn't measure up. No one got in. So, I don't know what will happen. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I've got a pretty good relationship with Michael Wilbon. You know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And you know, I've got [HistoryMaker] John [H.] Johnson. So, you know, (unclear), even if we have to do it pro bono. So (unclear) Michael can do something. Speaker 1: That would be fabulous. And of course I want the Curt Flood story told-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in film because I think it is an incredible story, a magnificent American story. Story_ID: 261849 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: How would I, would I like to be remembered. God, that could be such a, you could give such an arrogant answer if you just opened up your mouth and told the truth. Well I wanna be remembered as just a fabulous actress who just was, just incredible and looked like this most magnificent person on stage and she as an Academy Award-winning mom and she just was, just dynamic. She had Kwanza Foundation and she cared for her community. She cared for her children [Shawn Pace Mitchell and Julia Pace Mitchell], and she took care of her mother [Kathy Griffin Pace] and she liked her sister. I mean you could just, just me. Just me and on this journey that I had here in life, and I'm always amazed with my journey because I don't know if I was supposed to be here or I might have--was supposed to be here, I mean, the fact that I opened my mouth and said I want to be an actress and people look at you like huh, how you dark little child gonna be an actress. I'm here and I'm happy, and I have fabulous children and I've had two wonderful marriages [to Don Mitchell and Curt Flood] and I think I've, I've had what many woman might not ever have. I've had two men love and adore me and care for me and love and adore my children, or our children. And I've had incredible parents and wonderful siblings and magnificent friends who I've had forever. I just feel like I'm, I'm just a blessed person. I just, I just do. That I had a career and I went for it and wasn't afraid to fall down and go boom, just get back up and keep on moving. But, I still feel that way. Right now I'm doing different, smaller things that entertain me and bring me joy. People are always coming to me to help them do parties and events and fundraisers and things like that, so I do that with a business partner I have Beverly Todd who's an actress also, but we do it more for fun. It's just fun and hanging out and having a good time, but we give, able to give something back to the community. So, how would I like to be remembered? I would like to be just remembered. And when people remember me, I hope they have a smile on their face and thinking good thoughts and maybe they might have an image of me flash by, me as an actress or maybe an image of me as their friend and, and soul buddy, I'm hoping that, or people will remember me when they see my daughters and say, "What wonderful young ladies they are, aren't they just wonderful. You know she's the attorney. Look at her she's just gorgeous and she's so smart, and that's the actress over there she's a talented child." I hope they remember me as my daughter accepts her Academy Award [Oscar]. So, that's, that's and that's it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mama still likes me, so I'm happy (laughter)..