 Story_ID: 85664 Speaker 1: Barbara Ann Sizemore, B-A-R-B-A-R-A, my middle initial is A for Ann, A-N-N, Sizemore, S-I-Z-E-M-O-R-E. Speaker 2: Can you give us the date, please? Speaker 1: Today? April 9, 2003 and it's Wednesday. Speaker 2: Where are we located? Speaker 1: Chicago, Illinois at 3180 North Lake Shore Drive in Apartment 12D as in David. Speaker 2: And can you give me the name of your mother and spell it? Speaker 1: My mother's name was Delila Mae Alexander, D-E-L-I-L-A M-A-E A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R. Speaker 2: Where was she born? Speaker 1: Terre Haute, Indiana. Speaker 2: And your father's name? Speaker 1: Sylvester Walter Laffoon, Sylvester is S-Y-L-V-E-S-T-E-R, Walter, W-A-L-T-E-R, Laffoon, L-A-F-F-O-O-N. Speaker 2: Okay. And you were born in-- Speaker 1: Chicago, Illinois, December 17, 1927 in Cook County Hospital because they wouldn't take black people at Evanston Hospital in Evanston, Illinois where my parents lived at that time. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. And do you have sisters and brothers? Speaker 1: I am an only child. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. And now we'll do--I'll ask you my "People" questions after I introduce myself. I am Adele Hodge, the interviewer for today, and our camera person is Matthew Hickey. And this is The HistoryMakers interview for our EducationMakers. Thank you so much, Ms. Sizemore, for giving us this time. Speaker 1: My pleasure. Speaker 2: We certainly appreciate it. Story_ID: 85665 Speaker 1: Can you give me, search your memory and tell me, what do you remember of your grandparents? Speaker 2: I remember my grandparents very well. My grand-, my father's parents were William Laffoon and Viola Rudy Laffoon. They were both from Kentucky. My grand-, my paternal grandfather was born in Crofton, C-R-O-F-T-O-N, Kentucky, and my grandmother was born in Providence. My father was born to them after they had moved to Terre Haute, Indiana, where my grandfather was William Laffoon, was the first black man to own a business on Wabash Avenue, which was the main thoroughfare of Terre Haute, Indiana. He was a very tall man and he was religious. My grandparent, my paternal, paternal grandparents went to Spruce Street A.M.E. Church in Terre Haute, Indiana. And my grandfather, my paternal grandfather was a stalwart in the church. I can't remember exactly whether he was a deacon or not, but he was an important person in the church. My grandmother was the chief cook in the restaurant. And I remember, I just remember so many things about her because my grand-, my paternal grandfather was the kind of man who relegated all the affairs of the children to the, to the woman. So my, so I knew my paternal grandmother much better than my paternal grandfather. At one time, my grandfather had a restaurant and a barber shop on Crawford, 14th and Crawford, in Terre Haute. And at, at night, the restaurant would have musicians there playing, playing songs. I remember that very vividly. I remember my grandfather always calling my grandmother to get me out of there, take me out of there. So I spent a lot of time with her in the kitchen. My grandmother could cook like, I mean, she could make anything taste good. I mean, just, she could take anything and make it taste good. And I remember licking the batter out of cake dishes and tasting icing, you know, things like that. I remember that. And she--it seems like all my memories of her have to do with eating (laughter). She, she was a tiny woman. My grandmother was tall, and they looked like Mutt and Jeff, you know, because my grandmother was small. She was a small, wiry woman, and she, I don't think she weighed more than 112 pounds. But, and she wore this big white apron always. I don't, I don't, I know, I know she, I know there were times I saw her when she didn't have it, but that's what printed in my memory. And, and she would wear a net over her hair 'cause, I guess, that's because she was a cook. I remember that. I also remember her bed. So when my aunt died, my aunt, my father's oldest sister died in 1994, and she gave me my grandmother's bed. It's, it's in there now. I'll show it to you before you leave. I, I remember this bed, but my memory of the bed was that it was huge. So I was like so surprised to find (laughter) such a small bed. And even now, I wonder how did my 6' father's grandfather get in that bed? Anyway, she used to--it's a high bed, as you will see, and she used to put me on this bed. And we used to bounce up and down on the bed--I did, rather. I have very fond memories of that--us. So, and I have memories of my grandfather taking me on walks, and saying prayers at the table. Do you think--he would not eat dinner until everybody was seated. I remember that. And I remember that he would say these long prayers. And I used to say, oh, God, let him stop praying so we can eat. So I do, I do have those memories of, I have a lot of memories of them, but I don't know how much time you want me to take. Story_ID: 85666 Speaker 1: Probably, I will-- Speaker 2: I didn't talk about my maternal grandparents. Speaker 1: That's, that's what I was going to-- Speaker 2: My father was killed when I was, well, 10 days before my eighth birthday. He was shot by a policeman. The poli-, my mother, my father divorced in 1934. And my mother sued my father for child support. So this policeman--the story goes, there are three stories. One story is that he went after my father, and my father started running and so, he shot him 'cause he was resisting arrest. That's one story. Another story that my uncle, my father's brother, tells me is that this white policeman used to be their rival on the football team of Wiley High School from which my father graduated. His diploma is up there on the wall back there, and that he, he shot my father 'cause he didn't like him. And the third story is that my father was running to avoid something or other. I'm--it's not clear into my mind--just exactly what he was trying to avoid. I'm not sure whether it was a car or whether it was somebody else or whatever, and that the policeman shot him because he thought he was running from him. So there are three different versions. The piece in the paper about it is very limited 'cause, you know, of course, my father was black, and people didn't care anything about black people back then. And so, you know, there wasn't--who cared? So, I kind, I never have been able to get the real story there, but I did know the effect it had on my mother. My mother never, never again in her life, did she, was she the same because she felt she was responsible for my father's murder. That's what we called it. And, and she, and she just, she, she just always lived under that, that thought. Story_ID: 85667 Speaker 1: She--so then we went to live with my grandmother, my--no, my grandmother came to live with us. My maternal grandmother [Myrtle Mae] came to live with us because my maternal grandfather [Jesse Alexander] was abusive. It, it's somewhat of a tragedy--my maternal grandfather--because his mother died when he was little. And he was like farmed out to relatives. That was the way you did with the extended family among the African Americans at that time, and he, he landed with a harsh aunt. And, and so, he grew up without too much love and affection. And so, when he got to be a man and had a family of his own, he really didn't know how to do it. So they-- my, my maternal grandparents had 14 children. My mother was the second oldest, but only seven of them lived to adulthood because my grandmother, my maternal grandmother, had multiple births. She had the two sets of twins and a set of triplets, and they all died at infancy. So, so around 1936, my grandmother, my maternal grandmother, left my maternal grandfather, and came to live with my mother. So she was the one was my primary caretaker for--from 19-, for about 11 years, 11 years. And my grandmother, my maternal grandmother, married my maternal grandfather when she was 14 years old. And she never knew--I don't think she ever had a childhood. She was always an adult. And then, there's the, the family secret, which was that the father of my maternal grandmother, was the white doctor, Dr. Crill (ph.). Now I don't know this, and no one would ever tell me. And when I inquired about it from my grandmother's, my maternal grandmother's aunts, they would say, well, I don't know anything about that or, you know, what do you need to know that for? We don't need to talk about that, that kind of thing. It was like, no, we're not going to talk about that. So I don't know, but anyway, my maternal grandmother looked just like a white woman. For all practical appearances, it--and if she were to enter the room now, you would not know she was black. And, of course, my maternal grandfather was very brown. So when she separated from my maternal grandfather, and she would go places, people would think she was a white woman. My maternal grandmother was very confused about this, so you never knew when she wanted you to be proud you were black, and when she wanted you not to. It was kinda like, you know, whatever. And, and it was very confusing behavior for me because the one time she would tell you, don't do that, you know, or black people do that. We were called Negros then. Negros shouldn't do whatever. And then the next time, you know, she was bawling somebody out because they mistook her for a white woman. So you, it was like, you know, who is grandma when she gets up this morning? You know, which grandma is this? It was kinda like very confusing. She, she was, my gram-, my maternal grandmother was never too fond black people. She, you know, I'm color, I mean, color, like she don't want you to have black boyfriends or, you know. And she don't want you to go with white boys, but she preferred light-skinned black people, and kinda like, that was like kind of clear, you know, to everybody. Of course, my father was black, and so was my uncle, and so were my paternal grandparents. In fact, my, my maternal, paternal grandmother was very black, so and she talk funny, too. That--she's--people said she was (unclear) but she never, she never, she never said anything about anybody coming from South Carolina or the Sea Islands, so I'm not sure. I don't know where she got this speech from 'cause it was not like Kentucky. Speaker 2: Okay. Your, your grandmother that stayed with you-- Speaker 1: Well, my maternal grandmother. Speaker 2: --your maternal grandmother. Did she ever talk about her years of being abused by her husband, but was she the one-- Speaker 1: No, she didn't need to because grandpa was very clear about being abusive. For instance, I remember every clearly when we lived at 720 South 13th Street in Terre Haute, Indiana, my grandfather came down there and he was very drunk. And he stood in the lawn and he called everybody names in the house. Speaker 2: [Off Camera Discussion] Story_ID: 85668 Speaker 1: Okay, and you were saying in, in Terre Haute, he-- Speaker 2: I remember very clearly when we lived at 720 South 13th Street in Terre Haute, Indiana, my grandfather [Jesse Alexander] came down one morning early, it was early in the morning. He was clearly very drunk, and he stood in the lawn and he called everybody names. And we were hiding behind the curtains in the house waiting for him to go away. He was, he was abused himself when he was little. And he, and he was, he didn't know how to love anybody. He just, he just--no one ever showed him, no one ever gave him affection. No one ever loved him. Speaker 1: How did that affect you seeing that happen (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Delila Mae Stewart] loved my grandfather very much so, you know, she, she was always excusing him. And she's the one, of course, who shared the history with me of his childhood and the harsh aunt, and the other, other things. And that's how I came to know that because my mother was always excusing him, you know, and she loved him very much. And she would always take him things for his birthday. I would go with her and she would take things. His birthday was August 31st, I remember that. And we used to go out there always and take him cans of tobacco and stuff like that. My mother would go take him food. So, so she was, she was like always excusing him, apologize. She was just an apologist. And, of course, that didn't always sit right with my grandmother [Myrtle Mae] who saw him as a demon, you know. And they had a lot--there was a lot of tension around, around that 'cause my grandmother wanted to have him arrested when they were--that morning. And then I remember they had a big argument about it. And I remember my mother saying she was not going to do that. Speaker 1: Was the man your grandmother married, was he fair-skinned also, or was he brown-skinned? Speaker 2: You mean my grandfather? Speaker 1: Yeah, your grandfather. Speaker 2: Oh, no, my grandmother was the only light-skinned grandparent I had. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Everybody else was black-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --or shades of brown. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother, my paternal grandmother was black. And my grandfather was shades of brown. Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: My paternal grandfather had a lot of red in him and lot--he had a lot of it in him. Speaker 1: Now, your maternal grandmother was the very fair one? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And then, she married someone very fair? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or she married someone brown? Speaker 2: My grand-, my--she was only married once to my paternal grandfather and he was brown-skinned. Story_ID: 85669 Speaker 1: You know, before we go now, I'm going to talk about your parents, but before we go into your relationship with your parents, I forgot to ask you our "People" questions, which questions, like your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is purple. Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I really don't have one. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: I like to travel, but I don't have a favorite place. Speaker 1: Okay. Favorite color. Food, favorite food? Speaker 2: Okay, and your favorite food? Speaker 1: I don't have a favorite food, but if I did, it would probably be, be ribs (laughter). Speaker 2: Do you like to cook like your grandmother? Speaker 1: I do not, no. Speaker 2: You do-- Speaker 1: No, I cook, but I don't, it's not, not something I like to do. Story_ID: 85670 Speaker 1: Okay, let's revisit your growing up years. What was it like? And is it Laffoon? Speaker 2: Laffoon, uh-hum. Speaker 1: Household (unclear). Speaker 2: I remember--my, my father [Sylvester Laffoon] graduated from Indiana State Teachers College [now Indiana State University, Terre Haute, Indiana] in 1932. And I remember he was always teaching me something, always teaching me something. When I was seven, maybe seven, just before he and my mother [Delila Mae Stewart] separated, he was teaching me French. I remember that. I remember when I was like maybe five, five years old, I do not remember this, I'm sorry, I do not remember this. But John W. Lighter (ph.), who was professor at Indiana State Teachers College for a long time, told me that when he and my father were students at Indiana State Teachers College, that the professor argued that Negroes were less intelligent than white people. So my father took me to class with him one day to take a test with some other children whose fathers were professors to see if this was true. And I made the highest score on the test. And Mr. Lighter told me, the black students were jubilant. They were just jubilant, and that they told the professor, well, so much for your theory, you know, and everything. I don't remember this, I don't remember this. But Mr. Lighter, Dr. Lighter said that the only thing I was interested in was getting some candy, but I don't remember that at all. That's the story that was handed down to me. But I do remember that my father was always teaching me something, always teaching me something. I do not remember ever not knowing how to read (laughter). I don't remember, so I must have learned very early. I don't remember learning to read in school. When I went to school, I knew how to read and I was fairly young. I knew how to read in kindergarten. My mother told me that I knew how to read before I was potty trained. So I, I must, I must have learned to read very, very, very, very early, or I was potty trained late--one of the two, one of the two. So I remember that. My, my mother was also a student. She didn't graduate, but she was a student in Indiana State Teachers College, and she was always teaching me things. I remember that of my childhood. But most of the time, my parents were working, and I was in the care of my grandparents, one or the other. So most of my relationships were with my grandparents because my parents, when they were together, were always working. Of course, after, after they were divorced, of course, my mother was with me all of the time. And my mother was the--she worked a lot, and she was a very energetic person, and she was the clerk treasurer of her church. And she spent a lot of time trying to teach me to be a good person. I remember that. Story_ID: 85671 Speaker 1: Your elementary school years, what stands out for you about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Everything about my elementary school years stands out because these were all my mother [Delila Mae Stewart]'s and father [Sylvester Laffoon]'s friends who were teaching me. My kindergarten teacher was my godfather's sister. My first grade teacher had taught for a long time, and she had taught people that my mother knew. My second grade teacher and my mother were contemporaries. My home economics teacher and my mother were contemporaries. So my parents went to Indiana State Teachers College with these people. And although my father died when I was, when I was 10 days before my eighth birthday, he would, he--they all knew him. So these teachers were like friends of my parents, and they took special interest in me, but not just in me. They took special interests in everything, but I was so fortunate because my third grade teacher was Jane Dabney Shackelford who wrote the child story of the Negro, and was the first book about Negroes for children in this county. My seventh grade teacher was John Wesley Lighter (ph.), Sr., who wrote the history of the Negro in Indiana and who had his highest degree when he was teaching seventh grade because at that time, there were no opportunities for, for Negroes to advance. My principal was Charles Height (ph.). But the person I remember most clearly is Marguerite (ph.) Taylor. She was my eighth grade teacher, and she took our ed-, education personally. By that, I mean, if, if I would make a bad grade on something, she would, she would say things like, how could you do this to me? Yeah, it was like, it was like, okay. She, she taught us algebra in eighth grade. And when I went to the integrated junior high school, Sarah Scott [Middle School], I already knew algebra. I was so far ahead of the other kids that they had to take me out of that class and put me in an advanced class, which they didn't want to do, because only white people were in those classes. And the black people weren't supposed to be in those classes. But my mother raised such a storm because the work was so easy. She kept telling them, she knows how to do this, she knows how to do this until they put me in, in, in, 92 instead of 93. I really should have been in 91 but they didn't want any black people in that (unclear). But my teacher who was white, knew that I belonged in 91, so she gave me 91 work. Her name was Essie (ph.) Brown (ph.). She was white though. She had a black name but she was white. My biology teacher knew that I belonged in 91. He gave me 91 biology work, so even though they were white, they knew they were fair, they were fair. And it was the same thing when I went to high school because in high school, those teachers had taught my mother and father. So, you know, they had high expectations for me when I arrived. When I was a senior, my senior English teacher, Grace Arnold (ph.), called me and she called on me and she said, what is your name? When I first, when I first went into her class, she said, what is your name? I said Barbara Ann Laffoon. And she said, oh, who's your father, Herbert or Sylvester? I said, Sylvester. She said, who is your mother? I said Delila Mae Alexander. She said, well, Miss Laffoon, you can make two grades in here, A or F. I mean, they were like, you know, I know what you can do. I know your family, you know, so I expect you to do this. And if you don't, then I'm not going to have any mercy on you. Grover Rose (ph.), my mathematics teacher, he was not at all satisfied with me or the work that I did. And he kept telling me, you know, you can do better than this. I talked to your father and, you know, your father would--and now, your ma, and, you know, things like that. So, even though they were white teachers, they would come in and it's like, and they have high expectations for me, and they're expecting me to do the work. And if I didn't, then I was roundly criticized for not doing my best. Story_ID: 85672 Speaker 1: And that was like that in Terre Haute, Indiana. It's a small town, you know, everybody knew everybody. And so, it has a much more profound effect, I think, on, on you as a kid, then when I went to Evanston Township [High School]. When my mother moved, my mother remarried in 1940 to Aldwin Stewart, who is my stepfather, and she moved to Evanston [Illinois], back to Evanston. And I finished my senior year at Evanston Township High School. It was the most racist school I've ever been in. The--I was number one in my class at Wiley [High School, now Terre Haute South Vigo High School, Terre Haute, Indiana], which was unusual for a Negro to be number one in a class in, in an integrated high school in Indiana anywhere, because for all practical, for all practical purposes, southern Indiana was an extension of northern Kentucky. I mean, we rode in the back of the bus. We couldn't eat in the stores. You couldn't try on the clothes, you know. For all practical purposes, it, it was northern Kentucky, even though it was supposed to be a free state, but there, was there a difference in Evanston. Evanston is a suburb of Chicago [Illinois], and the teachers at Evanston Township did the best they could to make me their--to mold me into their image of what a Negro student was, you know, not intellectual, not a good student. My senior English teacher, I was in the last, last semester of my senior year when I moved to Evanston. My senior English teacher, Mildred Hudson, gave me much more difficult assignments than she gave my white counterparts. For instance, my nearest rival would receive assignments like this. She would have to memorize and explain "On His Blindness" by John Milton, you know. "On His Blindness" you know, is a sonnet. It's very easy to memorize a sonnet because you've got the key, a-b-b-a, a-b-b-a, c-d-e, c-d-e, so, you know, you know, that you got the first line. Then you got two more lines. They rhyme, then the last line rhymes with the first. But, you know, it's the key, it's a key. So, she gave her that, plus "On His Blindness" is pretty much an explicit poem. It's not, not, you know, rocket science. She gave me the first 22 lines of the "Canterbury Tales" in Old English. I was so determined to beat my rival at this, I was so determined. That I could still say it to you today. Now that shows you how much I overlearned it--that I'm 75 years old. This happened in 1943, and I'm 75 years old, and I can still say that cotton-picking thing. I mean, that's the kind of energy that we expend on racism that could be used in some other kind of way. You understand? It's, it's, it's such a tragedy that this country is so racist that so many teachers are imbued with this kind of conception of white superiority and the imputation of black inferiority that, that she would even treat me this way. I was like shocked, you know, really shocked 'cause I was not used to this in southern Indiana, which for all practical purposes, is Kentucky. I, I was just shocked. And it took me a, a long time to get accustomed to it. And then, when I went to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], it was the same thing over again. Northwestern wouldn't allow black people. We were called Negroes then, to live on campus. Your, your professors didn't know you apart. My cousin and I were in the same class, and she didn't wear glasses. Story_ID: 85673 Speaker 1: --the prejudice, no living on campus for Negro students. Speaker 2: Yes. When I went to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], Negroes could not live on the campus. And I was told that the only Negro who'd ever lived on the campus was Bernie Jefferson, who was the football ath-, was an athlete football player, an All-American. I didn't, I didn't know his, his history. I knew him, but I didn't know his history. At that time, I was on a scholarship in Latin and Greek. God gave me this gift. When I went to junior high school, my teacher was Mina (ph.) Rappaport (ph.), and she was surprised at my ability to translate Latin without instruction. So she asked me, you know, who taught me, who had taught me Latin? I said, nobody. I said, my father [Sylvester Laffoon] taught me some French, but no one ever taught me Latin, so she didn't believe me. She called my mother [Delila Mae Stewart] and asked my mother if my mother, you know, what, what, what happened here? So my mother, of course, was just as surprised as Mrs. Rappaport, so she said I have no idea. So Ms. Rappaport was then just, she was just simply intrigued. And I, and I was, of course, surprised that, that everybody couldn't do what I did 'cause I didn't, I didn't know any difference. I've never seen Latin before. So, so it was like, it's like God had given me this gift to be the world's best chariot driver when nobody was driving chariots (laughing). So, you know, I had this gift, and I took Latin all the way through high school. So when I went to Northwestern, my mother wanted to get me a scholarship. At that time, she was working for a dentist who happened also to be the chairperson of the Northwestern Alumni Association. And so, she asked him to try to help me to get a scholarship. So he told my mother, he said, well, the only thing that seems good for her is the Margie Ralls (ph.) Classical Language Scholarship Program. So, anyway, I took the, the examination. I didn't get that scholarship, I don't think, but I did get a scholarship. So I studied Latin and Greek and French at Northwestern University. But I also--my mother also had me major in education because she knew that this was a racist society, and that I probably would not be able to go into the translation field that I wanted to go into. So she wanted me to be prepared to take care of myself, and she was absolutely correct. Even though the United Nations started in '48 [1948], which was the year after I graduated, I was never able to get a job there. This was my problem. I could translate from English to French fast enough, but I couldn't translate from French to English fast enough. So, my ear wasn't good enough, so I couldn't, I didn't make it. So then, I started teaching school. Speaker 1: And so, your experience at Northwestern, how many, just roughly, black students did they have at that time? Speaker 2: Well, not many, but you have to remember that was World War, World War II, and the men were gone. So there were very few men there at Northwestern. And so, most of the people there were women, and most of them were graduate students from the South. At that time, Negroes could not go to the graduate schools in the South because of Jim Crow, so they came North. Now, funny thing about it was that just to show you how illogical racism is in this country, they would not let these students go to the graduate schools in the South, but they would pay their tuition to go in the North, so, so many of them were graduate students. When I was an undergraduate, many black students at Northwestern were graduate students from the South and, of course, the men were in the [U.S.] Army maybe, or in the military. Story_ID: 85674 Speaker 1: Do any of your Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] professors stand out to you? Speaker 2: Yeah. I had a race relations professor whose name I have now forgotten, but it seems like it was Elliott (ph.), who constantly confused my cousin and myself. We were both the same age, about, I'm, I'm about three months younger--older-- than she. She's three months younger than I. And we were in the same class called race relations. And I wore glasses. He couldn't tell us apart. Well, both of our names was Laffoon. She was Georgia Laffoon; I was Barbara Laffoon, but we didn't even look alike. And even if we did, let's say we did 'cause we are double first cousins, our mothers are sisters, and our fathers are brothers. But let's say, we did look alike. I wore glasses. He couldn't tell us apart. So at the end of the term, he didn't know which one, which grade to give who. That stands out in my mind. Then you wouldn't believe the number of classes I took there that were just overtly racist. I mean, these professors expected you to read stuff about black people that was derogatory, denigrating, untrue, and turn it back to them on tests. I mean, this was like standard operating procedure. I remember that very clearly. I remember my tenure as an officer in Quibblers, which was a black group, and I remember this most vividly. We decided that we would protaste--protest racial inequality on campus. There were a lot of Jewish students involved in this, too. And as an officer, I was in one of the pro-, protest lines, you know. We, we were boycott--no, we were marching in front of the, the president's home. Our president at that time was Franklyn Bliss Snyder. And so, the third day of the protest when I was marching, I looked, you know, West Knox (ph.), saw someone coming toward me. I said, who's that? It looks like my mother [Delila Mae Stewart], but my mother couldn't drive. So I said, you know, no way for mommy to get here, so when, so once she got closer, it was my mother. And she said, get out of that line (laughter), so, of course, I did. And my mother took me home. I was so embarrassed. I was the officer in this, but I was so embarrassed. And, of course, there were Jewish mothers there. I don't know what they were saying to their children, but I would just guess it was the same thing, 'cause there were a lot of Jewish kids who were officers in their organizations, too, and their mothers took them away. And my mother said to me, she said, we got a call that you would lose your scholarship if you continue to be out here. She said, and you're going to have to stop this, she says, and get your degree, and then you can protest. So I remember that very, very, very clearly. When I went back for my master's degree, however, Northwestern had changed. It was 1954, and the--I had two very good professors. One was Ray Mack [Raymond W. Mack] and the other was George Boshow (ph.), and they were both committed to equality and excellence. They treated me just as they did all their students. They made no differences because I was black for, you know, anything like that, and, and they were committed to racial equality. Speaker 1: Well, you did your graduate study in elementary education? Speaker 2: I did. Story_ID: 85675 Speaker 1: What was--you were starting to shape your focus mentally on how you wanted to deal with, you know, academia, and how you wanted to--at what, when did you start shaping your approach to education? Speaker 2: Not until I started teaching. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My first teaching assignment was as a substitute for a Latin teacher in Wendell Phillips High School [Chicago, Illinois]. And that was the first time, since I had been away from Terre Haute, Indiana, that I come into contact with a black principal. Maudelle Bousfield was the principal of Wendell Phillips High School. She was a black woman, very professional, and she assigned me to these Latin classes. But I was only there as a substitute while this Latin teacher was on sick leave. And there were 64 vacancies in the--of Latin vacancies in the Chicago Public Schools at that time, but none of them were available to a black person, to a Negro. So, so I went then to teach at John D. Shoop Elementary School [now Shoop Academy of Math, Science, and Technology, Chicago, Illinois] at 1460 West 112th Street. It was there that my educational experience began. I went into the classroom. I haven't the slightest clue--now I graduated. I was in the honors program at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. I didn't graduate cum laude or magna cum laude because I refused to stay. I'd just gotten to the point where I was just up to here with it, so I just graduated. I didn't even go to my graduation--I graduate. I left Northwestern March 28, 1947 when I had accumulated enough to graduate. I never, I never went back until 1954 'cause I was just sick of Northwestern. I just had it. So when I got to Shoop School, nothing they taught me at Northwestern worked. Now, of course, they told me a lot of things that are valuable, like knowledge and content, but methodology, none that stuff they taught me worked with these little kids. And at that time, you had 44, 45, 46 kids in a classroom. I had no idea how you keep these little kids in a seat. And they were just all over the place, you know, like 44 little kids just all over the place, you know, throwing erasers and chalk or whatever. So, this woman came into my classroom. Her name was Ella Mae Cunningham. And she said to me, she said, honey, do you want to be a school teacher? I said, yes, ma'am. And she said, well, do you want me to help you? (Laughter), I said, oh, please. And she taught me how to teach school. Ella Mae Cunningham taught me how to teach school. She said, okay. She said, the first thing you have to do is you do have to keep them in their seats. And she taught me how to do that. And she said, the way you do this is that you have to know what you're doing. She said, if you know what you're doing, and you communicate that to them, and they know what they're doing, then you won't have this problem. So she told me how to prepare for a class. She told me how to make little folders for everybody. She told me how to show them how to come and get their folders, and what to do, and whatever, whatever. She stayed in there with me for one whole week until I got it down. And then she said, and I'm not coming in next week, but I'll peek in on you. And then, she came in. If she saw me doing something wrong, she would tell me. I do it. That's how I taught school. She told me how to teach reading. I have never, ever had a child that I wanted to teach to read that didn't learn how to read--never. I have never had a child I couldn't teach how to read--never. She, she was, thank God, interested in me, and thought I was a good teacher--thought I had the makings, I mean, of a good teacher. And she taught me everything she knew. And I am very grateful to her for this. I know, there's no doubt in my mind that I would not be the person that I am today in education if it were not for Ella Mae Cunningham. Speaker 1: That's a good story. And you were at Shoop then? Speaker 2: Shoop, S-H-O-O-P, in Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 85676 Speaker 1: Now, when you got your system down pat, and you were becoming--you knew the information. Now you had the system. These children were starting to really learn in a way that pleased you. What was your next step in-- Speaker 2: Just make it work. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: I had a lot of kids, you know, 40, 44 kids is a lot of kids, and it was a lot of work. I did, I did a lot of work at home. I would carry--I would get the books that were discarded in the school. I would carry them home and tear them apart and make little--what, what we now call SRA kits (laughter). I was doing that way back then. That's what Mrs. [Ella Mae] Cunningham taught me how to do, so that each one of my kids would have their own reading level. And then I could get them, get them up out of it, you know, 'cause at first, she told me you have to establish the confidence in your reader that he or she can learn to read. That's it, 'cause she said because if they think they can't learn to do it, they won't put enough energy into it. So she, you got to spend a lot of time convincing them that they can do it. And so, she says, the first thing you want to do is put in their hands something that you know they can read. She said now, 'cause the lowest level where they can't read at all, she said, then, of course, we have to do something else. We have to teach them to work. She was the first person that taught me that you go from the word to the sentence to the paragraph. She's the first person that taught me that. Of course, later in life, I learned other things, you know, that, that helped me out, you know, for my own practice, but that's what she taught me. Now, later, later on in my life, I learned that when you take this kid from the word to the sentence, at the same time, you have to teach them English grammar because I could, I will learn this word, chagrin, but I need to know, is it the noun or pronoun, adjective or adverb, a verb, a interjection, conjunction--Yeah, I have to know that because, otherwise, when I get to the sentence part, I'll be confused by the usage of the word, 'cause it may have multiple uses in the sentence. And I'll still get confused about me, and since, since the whole purpose of reading is to comprehend and get meaning from it. Then, so she, so she let, then later, I also learned that if you really want people to be confident in it, then you have to do something about integrating their cultural life and history into what they're reading because that's important for me, not only just to understand the meaning of what is said here, but also, what does it mean to me? In my prism, what does, what is the meaning here for me? So when I read "Little Black Sambo", I'm not only just getting the meaning of the story of talking about "Little Black Sambo", but I also understand what that means to me through my cultural prism. So, so that is, that's what some of the things I learned later. But all I'm trying to say is that in the beginning, she taught me the outline, the outline, and then the courses. I'm learned to do this better and better and better over the years I added to it. So, so the first, the first thing I knew from teaching second grade and from teaching educable mentally retarded children, was that you have to teach them to read, that everybody's intellectual life begins with learning to read, write, and speak the language which is their native tongue. Now I had never little problem because the native tongue of my students was not standard English. And this became more evident as we went on because most of the children in Morgan Park, where I first began teaching school, were the children of professional people. You know, their mothers and fathers were teachers, doctors, lawyers or, or postal workers, or civil servants. You know, there, there were middle class people, not all professional, but middle class people. So, so most of them, most of these children did speak standard English. But when I moved from that experience, I encountered children whose, whose native speech was not standard English. And, of course, when I left there and went to Gillespie, I had Spanish-speaking children, and I had children from Mississippi. So you had children who were speaking Spanish, you know, and then you had children who were speaking the dialect. But neither of them spoke standard English, so you had to reconcile this problem by teaching them standard English. So the teacher of English grammar then indicate more important how to-- So one of the stress-, the stressful things that's happening has happened in the education of African American children is the elimination of the English grammar from the curriculum per se. Speaker 1: Oh, they had to eliminate grammar? Speaker 2: Oh, this is incidental. You, you teach it, you know, when you teach writing if you can remember it yourself. Speaker 1: Oh, really? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: When did they take that-- Speaker 2: Oh, it's been out for some time. My daughter, my daughter graduated from high school in '66 [1966]. She never had English grammar. Speaker 1: Oh, my. Speaker 2: It's taught incidentally, you know, it's not taught. Speaker 1: Well, they used to have English grammar. Speaker 2: English grammar. Speaker 1: Yeah, grammar, right, right. Speaker 2: It's not taught that way. Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't know. Speaker 2: It's tacked on. If, you know, if your teacher knows it herself or himself because--well, imagine, people have graduated from high school in '66 [1966], didn't have it who knows it. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And you, you could test this out yourself. Just next time you see a teacher, ask her what a gerund is. Excuse me? Speaker 1: Yeah, gerund phrase and all (unclear). Speaker 2: Excuse me? (Laughter). Speaker 1: That's (unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Next time you see a teacher, just ask her. What's a gerund? Not my age, not one my age, but I'm talking about-- Speaker 1: Uh-hum (unclear). Speaker 2: People born since '50 [1950]. Story_ID: 85677 Speaker 1: So, now in all of this, while you were laying the foundation for your perspective on education, at what point were--did, did you start to date, and get married, and how did you move all that that into-- Speaker 2: We have to go back to where my mother [Delila Mae Steawart] moved to--well, my mother and stepfather [Aldwin Stewart] moved back to Evanston [Illinois]. That was in '43 [1943] when I finished my, the last semester of my high school year. That was in Township High school. We were living next door to the Sizemores at 1103 Emerson. That's where we lived with a family named LeDeux (ph.). And the next door, of course, was this boy, Furman, that I thought was cute, right. So this was '43 [1943], so what--I, like I was 15, I was 15. I was going to be 16 or 17 the next year. And he, of course, he was 17 or 18. So, of course, now you got to remember that, that this was during the war years so, you know, they were taking kids right out of high school. When you graduated from high school at 18, you're gone, so there wasn't much time there left. Of course, we didn't think about that at that time, but anyway, he was my boyfriend, and I was his girlfriend. It wasn't never any question in my mind that I was going to marry him. I mean, like I mean that, I made up my mind about that early in life. And, of course, back then, African American men weren't as hostile to marrying just they are now. Back then, most African American men were going to get married. It, that was in their life trajectory, they were going to get married. But now, of course, it's not, it's different now. So I'm, I'm--he was my chosen one. I'm not sure at that time that I was his chosen one. But, at any point, and then he was drafted when he graduated from high school in '44 [1944]. He graduated from high school in June '44 [1944]. He went right into the U.S. Navy. I wrote to him. I wrote a letter to him every single day he was gone, every single day he was gone. He first went to Port Hueneme in California, then he went to Siapan, and then he went to Okinawa. And he was in Okanawa for 13 months. And he came back in '46 [1946], and we were married in '47 [1947], and my first child was born in '48 [1948]. So that's, that's that life history. And then-- Speaker 1: You had three children? Speaker 2: I had-- Speaker 1: Two? Speaker 2: --I had two, two children, two biological children. Then, of course, I have four step-children by the second marriage. And we divorced in '64 [1964]. Story_ID: 85678 Speaker 1: The--probably the most formative experience that I had in my educational life was the one I had in Shoop School [John D. Shoop Elementary School, now Shoop Academy of Math, Science, and Technology, Chicago, Illinois] under the principal named, Jantina (ph.) E. Jensen (ph.). Ms. Jensen felt, she was a paternalistic white person, you know. The black people were all children, needed direction. You couldn't think for yourself and that kind of thing. So she, she made a determination that we were just not patriotic enough. Remember, this is World War [II], World--no, no, no, this was 1955 [1955]. The World War was over. This was-- Speaker 2: Korean -- Speaker 1: --this was, yeah, yeah. Anyway, it was her--I'm not sure if it was even associated with the war. I think it was associated more with [Senator Joseph] McCarthy. So anyway, every single morning, we would, when school began. You would line up outside your room, and then we would march around the school in columns to the blare of bugles, listening to your drums, until you got back to your original place. Then we would sing "The Star-Spangled Banner", say the pledge to the flag, and go in your room--took 25 minutes. Now I had 41 sixth graders who could not read (laughter). I couldn't afford, I mean, like I couldn't afford 25 minutes every morning. So I just stopped doing it. Then one day, about 2:00 or 2:30, she appeared in my door. She was red as the shirt you have on, and she said, Mrs. Sizemore, I want to see you in my office at 3:00, whenever school is out, 3:15 or whatever, whatever. So I went in there, and she told me, you will march tomorrow morning--you will. I said, no, I will not. And she said, oh, yes, you will, or I'm going to cite you with subord-, insubordination. I said, Ms. Jensen, you have to do what you have to do, and I have to do what I have to do. I said, I am in charge of teaching 41 Negro--we are still called Negroes--Negro children who cannot read. And I cannot afford to have 25 minutes taken away from them every day to gratify your need to, to treat black people the way you do. Oh, she was, she, she was (unclear). So, she charged me with this subordination. I grieved to the union, and she lost. She lost for a very simple reason. The Board rules said you got five minutes to open school (laughter). That's not enough. You got five minutes to open school and, you know, she was taking 25, so she lost. So, in order to get even with me, she wrote a letter to the CIA--no, I guess, it was FBI then, 'cause I don't think there was a CIA--FBI, and told them I was teaching communism in the school. The FBI investigated me for two full years, 1952, 1952, '53 [1953], two full years. They investigate everybody in my family. And my family, my whole family worked for the military, you know, my mother, my father, my aunt, my, both my aunts, my uncle, all worked for Great Lakes Naval Training Station. Everybody was in the military. She investigate, they investigated my whole family. And, and in 1954, their (unclear) called me in for--what do they call it, culminate, culminating meeting or whatever, because they could not find any evidence that I did, had done that, 'cause I, 'cause, you know, I just wasn't into that (laughter). I may have talked about it, you know, 'cause people did talk about those things, but so anyway, she had no evidence. There was no evidence. So this is what I remember, this meeting with this FBI agent. He said to me, I want you to get up, and I want you to walk to that corner of the room, and I want you to walk back. So I'm saying to myself, what's this for? So I said, okay, so I did. Then he said to me, he said, why did you do it? And then, I'm like, do what? He said, why did you teach these kids communism? I said, I did not. He said, well, your principal said--I said, my principal does not like Negroes, and I am a Negro. Don't you get it (laughter)? So he said, I'm supposed to ask the questions. I said, okay. And then he said to me, he said, well, thank you very much for this meeting, and that was over with. Story_ID: 85679 Speaker 1: Okay. In 1974, when I became superintendent of schools in Washington, D.C., my mother [Delila Mae Stewart] sends me this article from the Chicago Tribune. The article on the tr--the Chicago Tribune on the front page says, "Police cut surveillance of citizens". And there was my name. The Chicago Police had been surveill-, had a surveillance plan for me from 1954 to 1974, and I didn't even know it (laughter). Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And you're talking about land of the free. I've had so many experiences that contradict that statement that you wouldn't believe (laughter). Speaker 2: So just in, in the light of that, and in the light today of the patriotic that, what is your feeling about that? Speaker 1: My feeling is this is the way it's always been in time. You know, I'm just, I just get so surprised at the hypocrisy of the citizens in this country. But I, I don't get mad at them because I understand they're ignorant. And, you know, if you're ignorant, you're just ignorant. I mean, you can, you know, if you're just ignorant, you're ignorant. If I know there's a man standing in front of the bushes in front of my house, I won't go in, but I don't know the man is there, I'll go in. So, you know, it's, it's not criminal to be ignorant. It's pitiful, but it's not criminal. So I understand that, you know. So when folks tell me, oh, terrorism, you know, this is, it's 9/11 terrorism. I say there's always been terrorism in this country, there was the terrorism of the Ku Klux Klan. There was the terrorism of the lynching mob. I mean, it's always been terrorism in the country. You just didn't care anything about that. It didn't matter to you that black people were being terrorized. You didn't care. So you want some (unclear) we're just washing them out. Well, it doesn't exist. It's like, you know, the slave trade and the, and the Middle Passage, we aren't teaching, teaching my kids the Holocaust, and they don't even know about the Middle Passage. You know, it's like, please, give Barbara Ann a break (laughter). You know, it's like, what, what side of the hill do you live on? Story_ID: 85680 Speaker 1: You took what Mrs. [Ella Mae] Cunningham gifted to you. And you brought to it a lot of strength, personal and professional. And as you continued to become a leader, a voice in education, did you run into any other people like-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes, a lot of people who contributed to my philosophy, and a lot of people who contributed to my behavior as an educator. When I left--well, I had to leave Jantina (ph.) Jensen (ph.) [at John D. Shoop Elementary School, now Shoop Academy of Math, Science, and Technology, Chicago, Illinois]. I just couldn't stand her anymore--I couldn't. She was, she was using too much of my energy, responding to her stupidity, and not--so I was not getting my kids, giving my kids everything that I needed to give them. So I transferred to Gillespie [Elementary] School at 9031 South State Street [Chicago, Illinois]. The next person who entered my life and affected it profoundly was Thelma E. Gray. She was my principal. She was the first principal I had ever had who was interested in outcomes. And when you, when you finish teaching the kids she wanted to know what did they learn--can they read? Can they write? Can they do their math? You know, she--those, that's the bottom line for her. She was also interested in their basic welfare. She was the first principal who cared that these Spanish-speaking kids were coming over here, and then put in seventh grade when they had completed two years of high school just because they couldn't speak English. She, she was the first person who felt that was unfair, and that we should do something about it. So I learned from her what it, what it meant to be a good principal. She, she was the one who taught me--Ms. Cunningham taught me how to be a good teacher. Ms. Gray taught me how to be a good principal. Story_ID: 85681 Speaker 1: And then God blessed me. When that school became over-crowded, and they built the new school in Princeton Park [Chicago, Illinois], I moved because I had less seniority. You know, I had just come there in '54 [1954] so the, the teachers who had less seniority, of course, had to move to the new school. I moved to this new school in Princeton Park, and God blessed me--gave me another great principal, Byron C. Minor. Now Mr. Minor was an old military man. So he ran a tight ship, you know, and everybody did what they were supposed to do. And he was also interested in outcome, that was the bottom line for him. And he was also interested in the kids, and he gave me this third grade. I taught third grace there, so I was a successful teacher. My kids were always performing and everything. So, finally, I said to him, I said, Mr. Minor, I need to learn how to teach the kids who are not learning. That's what I need, and I need you to get me a class of those kids, just those kids. And so he said, well, Barbara, then you will have mostly boys. Is--you are going to have almost an all-boy class. Well, I hadn't thought about that. So, I pondered over, and that's it. Well, it--give them to me anyway. And, sure enough, I had a class of 35, and 28 of them were boys. And what I learned there was how to accelerate learning. These kids, growth rate was too slow. That's why they were behind. It wasn't that they couldn't read. It didn't grow fast enough, so that in one year's time, they were still behind, you know, but they grew, but it wasn't enough to get them ready for the next grade. So by the time they got to third grade, they were like almost two years behind. So my job there was to accelerate their growth, and to, to try as hard as I could to get them all at grade level within that one year, okay. And many of them, because they've been neglected in classes, couldn't do the work, or for whatever reasons had developed a lot of discipline problems, you know, little behavior problems that I had to work through. And, mainly, I go back to the old [Ella Mae] Cunningham's theory, you know. I know what I'm doing and this is--and you have to do this and you have to do this. And, eventually, even the worst of them finally realized they were like--well, this is in captivity. They couldn't get away from me. And it was such a small community, you know, Princeton Park, everybody lives in the same place. I could just roll by their house on the way home. I lived, you know, two blocks away. I could walk over there. So my constant presence in their lives was just overbearing, I guess, but so they couldn't get away from me, so, so they just gave up. And most of these children are on grade level within two years. They were where they should be in two years. So then, Mr. Minor said to me, he said, why don't you take the principals' examination? I hadn't really thought about it because I liked teaching school. I, I'm a teacher--that's basically what I am. I don't care what else, what I've done, Dean of the School of Education, whatever, I'm basically a teacher. That's what I do almost all the time. And then people, my friends say, Barbara, you're teaching, you know, can we just have a conversation here? You know, 'cause, 'cause, 'cause that's, that's me, that's who I am. And so, it hadn't occurred to me to do this. And he said, I think you'd made a good principal. So I took the exam in December 1962. I passed the exam, and I was assigned to the Anton Dvorak Elementary School at 3616 West 16th Street in April, on April 8th, April 8th, 1963. Story_ID: 85682 Speaker 1: And then, a very important person affected my life. And I had known her before 'cause we were teachers at Gillespie. She came again with me to Princeton Park to Charles Richard Drew, so I had known her for about five years. And so, I chose her as my assistant principal [at Dvorak Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Her name was Clara Holton, and Clara is an intellectual. I mean, she lives in the intellectual. She breathes it, you know, she just--that's her, the essence of who she is. And so, she had this idea that we should form a non-graded elementary school. She said, Barbara, this is a huge school we got here. We got 1,400 kids here in K-6. She said, 60 percent of our sixth grade kids are born in Mississippi. I mean, and these kids had a real deep Mississippi dialect--oh, you're gonna have a couple of black eyes or you would (unclear) you know, like what'd you say, baby (laughter)? You, it's like, okay. You got to learn the language here. So, she said, so we have a chance here to really affect the lives of, of our students. And she said, what's more, Barbara, she said, you know, these people coming up from Mississippi can't go on welfare one year 'cause Chicago [Illinois] had the one-year compliance law. So you had to live in the city for one year before you could apply for welfare. So she said, their lives are gonna be extremely tenuous and difficult. So, I said, Claire, I haven't the slightest idea what you're talking about. I don't know what is a non-graded elementary school. What are you talking about? So she brought me this book, "The Nongraded [Elementary] School", okay, by [John] Goodlad and [Robert] Anderson. I read the book. I brought it home. I read it in one night. And I told her, I said, Claire, we're going to do this. And that's what we did. And we had the first non-graded elementary school in Chicago. Then Chicago adopted what was called continuous development. We used to do workshops for teachers and everything out there at that school. We brought that school in two years, we brought that school from the very bottom of District 10 to the 40th percentile. And we had 1,400 kids. We had big classes in our school. I had 42 teachers, and half of them were first year teachers. I had almost 30 Jewish teachers. They were just straight out, straight out of college, straight out of college 'cause, you know, that's, that's an old Jewish neighborhood there. And so many of their grandparents, you know, had come from there, but these, these mostly women, mostly women. In fact, one of them lives here now. She lives here now, and she was just the greatest teacher you ever want to see. This was a Jewish girl, 21 years old. She was about 5' tall. Almost all the kids were taller than she. And she took these kids and gave them just unbelievable experiences. I mean, you don't, you don't expect a 21-year-old person to have this kind of, this kind of a-, ability, you know, foresight, insight, whatever, and to--plus she was Jewish. And they were black, you know, someone's just like, wow! I, I was--then we had another Jewish teacher who told me, she said, look, I took all the girls. You give all the boys to Mr.--okay, lost his name. So, I said, well, that's an idea. I said, but, I said, Ms. Pritikin (ph.), you're going to have about 50 kids in the class. She said, I could do it. She said, but I think these boys need to have a male teacher. They need to have a male teacher. So we had two divisions of just all male students with two black men teachers. And Ms. Pritikin and somebody else took the girls. But this was an unusual school, and the really brains behind the school was Claire Holton. I just kind of like followed her plan, you know, that she had the vision and she had, she had the ideas. And I was like putting them to work. I'm a good implementer 'cause I have ideas, too, but I mean this time, these were her ideas. So she, she was the next person that profoundly affected my life. Story_ID: 85683 Speaker 1: And what I learned from that experience was that if you cannot accommodate human variation in your educational plan, then every child will not learn because children do not learn at the same rate at the same time for the same reasons, you know, and, you know, that's not going to happen. So you have to have an educational plan that accounts for those who are learning on time, those who are learning behind time, those who have learned ahead of time. You have to provide for human variation. That's what that experience taught me. So then when I went to be a high school principal at Forrestville High School [Chicago, Illinois], I already knew that, and I already knew how to be a good teacher. I knew now how to be a good principal. I knew now that the most important thing in education is dealing with human variation. So there were a lot of things that when I got to the high school, I already knew. What I didn't know was how do you deal with gangs? I had no experience in that whatsoever. When I was at the Dvorak [Elementary School] on the West Side, there were gangs, but I had a K-6 school. So when the gangs advocated on my play yard, I went out to them, and I said, look, you know, I don't mind your using the play yard, but I have to have it for the kids during the school. I said, so if you could, if you could not use the playground until school is out, and I'd be sure to give you any kind of equipment that you have or whatever. Well, this gang told me, they said, oh, Ms. Sizemore, we have, we got our equipment already. We don't need that, but we'll, we'll let you have the yard during the day. So I never had a problem with them, you know, because they were respectful to me and whatever. When I'm in the Forestville, it was a whole different ball of wax. We had four warring gangs. And the school set the, the boundary, so that my kids actually had to fight to come to school to cross Drexel Avenue. So the next person who was important in my life was Anderson Thompson. He was the assistant principal at this high school. So I'm in this high school trying to get these kids to behave and trying to keep them to be orderly and, you know, act like young men and women. And I went in the washroom--I was the principal there for about a week. And I went into the girls' washroom on the second floor, I remember, and they were smoking. And so when I walked in there, I said, no, you cannot smoke here, while some of the girls, you know, you can hear the cigarettes go zzzz, you know. But, but others said, your bathroom is downstairs in your office. And I said, excuse me? And they said, your bathroom is downstairs in your office. Don't you--did you find it yet? I mean, what? So when I met with my assistant principals, I told them about this experience. I said, this is just not going to make it. I'm not going to stand for this and so forth, so on. So Mr. Thompson, very calmly, he's always a very calm man and he was never, ever--I never saw him excited, never heard him curse, never heard him lose his temper. So when I finished with this railing, he said, Mrs. Sizemore, they don't know you, and you don't know them. He said, anonymity is their biggest weapon. He said, so until you learn their names and who they are, this is going to happen to you sporadically. So I said, do you mean to tell me, all I have to do is learn their names? He said, right. He said, do it and watch. Well, I had about 1,300 kids there, and freshmen and sophomores, so I found a really speedy way to do it. I had large families 'cause at 4040 over where the public housing was, these were 20, this was 21 or 22 floors of four bedrooms, you know, they were, they were large, large families. So i find out, if you could just identify the last name of this kid, you, you don't need to know what it was. So if I were to say, Washington, you had--it didn't matter whether he was Raymond or Henry of John or whatever. Once he knew I knew Washington, he knew where I knew, I knew where to go, you know, so I learned how to do that. So I would just say, Washington. Yes, ma'am? You know, or whatever he was going to say. And, and I had to identify the kid, and it did--it worked. The kids stopped misbehaving when I walked down the hall because I knew who they were, and I could identify them, you know. So, I said, okay, that worked. Story_ID: 85684 Speaker 1: So then I kept asking Mr. [Anderson] Thompson for every little thing. I said, tell me, you know, what is your vision for the school, and what is it you really want to do? This man had just a wonderful idea about bringing these gangs together. So, first thing he said to do, he said, look, we have to make our curriculum revolve around this community. He said, then, extend it out to Chicago [Illinois], then to the state, then to the nation, then to the world. He said, but if they do not understand their own community, and what's happening in their community and to them, they can't generalize any of this out into the bigger world. So I said, okay, that's what we'll do then. So that's what we do. We started teaching every-, everybody who was teaching whatever, would start with whatever was in the community, you know, and try to--The second thing that he, he did was form the Magnificent Seven. Now this was just like a bold streak because what he did was he formed this group called the Magnificent Seven. Let me see if I can remember them all. It was W.E.B. DuBois, Booker T. Washington, Marcus Garvey, Malcolm X, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], Frederick Douglass, and who am I missing? Who am I missing? Okay, it was seven of them--I'm missing somebody. They were called the Magnificent Seven. And every year, we would have a contest to see who would be the student to represent these men? Okay. And that student then would make up a speech from, from the writings of this man and give the speech, and go--we would send them around, like you do choirs, around the places to, to, to--it was wonderful. Everybody was trying to be a Magnificent Seven, you know, and it crossed gangs, you know it, so that worked. Then he was like an anthropologist. Mr. Thompson is a historian by trade, but he was like an anthropologist in this school. He identified all of the war councilors in every single gang. And when every-, anything would happen, be--he would try to find about it before it happened. He'd call them in for a meeting or go wherever they wanted him to go to meet with them to see if we could--what, this was his goal to see if he could resolve it. This was his goal. His goal was to form one super gang, called the Forestville High School gang, and to make all of them,, you know, concede or agree that while they were at Forestville, this would be their gang. All right. And it worked, it worked. Now, every once in a while, it would, you know, things would happen, of course. New people would come into the community and put everything like that, and so it would upset the things. But most of the time, it worked. And that was how we resolved the gang problem. So, so I learned all of these things from Anderson Thompson so he was the, the next most important person in my life, my educational professional life. Speaker 2: So you-- Speaker 1: So these, Ella Mae Cunningham, Clara Holton, Anderson Thompson, Thelma E. Gray. Speaker 2: Barbara Sizemore-- Speaker 1: They all contributed to my understanding of public school education, my understanding of how you are a good teacher and a good principal, and how you achieve the outcome of high achievement for African American students. Story_ID: 85685 Speaker 1: At what point was your work starting to be accepted in the education community at large and used and-- Speaker 2: It never has been. Speaker 1: Never? Speaker 2: No. It never has been. That's why I named my book as "Walking in Circles". If it had been, then the Dvorak [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois] would have been the model for, for, for continuous development all over, and there will be more schools with high achievement. Dvorak has never been on probation--never, ever. It has never, ever been on probation. If the vision that we had for King [College Prep] High School [Chicago, Illinois] had prevailed, you wouldn't have a magnet high school there now where only students who can pass the test get in. You'd have a great high school there for all of the children of all other people. We planned a high school when I was principal of Forrestville [High School, Chicago, Illinois], Anderson Thompson, Frank Allen, William Hunter, Beverly Daniels, all of the teachers there, planned what we thought was a foolproof high school. And we took that high school from the needs and the talents and the gifts of our students. That's how we planned this high school. First, we had to fight for the high school in the community because at that time, you know, integration was the big thing. So anything that was all black was all bad. And I fought for the high school to be in the community against the Al Raby and [Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson both, and I won. I got the site at Drexel. Of course, they weren't good friends of Benjamin Willis anyway so, you know. Some people called me Aunt Barbara, you know from Aunt Jemima, called me a traitor and all of that. Anyway, I got the high school on the corner of Drexel and 44th Street. This high school was built around the stage because it was supposed to be the premiere performing arts high school of Chicago. That's what we--make no mistake about it, we were building this high school for that purpose. And it was going to be so clear that when you walked in the high school, you couldn't miss it 'cause as soon as you walked in that high school, the first thing is the stage. Everything is around that stage, everything is around the stage. What we intended was that this was going to be the premiere school of performing arts. And in it, our students would be able to learn everything about the business--not just how to perform, but also how to manage their affairs, how to make sets, how to make costumes, all of that was to be around, okay. So the high school is built, and the kids came in. And I left. That was a mistake, that was a big mistake, big mistake. I left and went to Woodlawn, the Woodlawn Experimental School Project District with the University of Chicago, The Woodlawn Organization [TWO], and Chicago Public Schools. When I left, the high school never developed into this. The people who succeeded me, for some reason, didn't, didn't embrace the vision, or just didn't see it as important, or for whatever reasons. But the high, high school was prostituted all those years. And, of course, I left Chicago in '72 [1972], and I was gone for 20 years. And when I came back, it was the lowest performing high school in the city. I could have died, I just could have died. And so, well, at first, I didn't know what to do. So then, I talked to--the, the superintendent at that time was Argie Johnson. And she was very sympathetic toward my point of view, but she was under siege because the, the 1988 reformers did not see her as a friend. She, she wanted, she was interested in, in uplifting achievement, and they were interested in governance power. And so, they, you know, so she was never able to, to do much because she didn't have any support, and she had these people assaulting her all the time. So nothing--then Paul Vallas came in. And Paul told me, he said, I'll, I'll, I'll help you do this, I will help you do so, but something happened along the way. And I was never able to identify who the people were who were opposed to this concept of a performing arts high school. Now I got a lot of rumors, and I tried to follow up with them as much--I went to Alderman Preckwinkle 'cause somebody told me, you know, Toni Preckwinkle was against it. Alderman Preckwinkle said, no, I'm not. She said, I'm the only one (unclear) high school in my district. She said, I'm, I'm not, so I just want a good high school. So that, so I said, okay, it's not, not Alderman Preckwinkle. So then, I was told it was the principals in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. So I went to the Bishop Arthur Brazier, who I knew had contact with--Bishop Brazier said, well, no, he said, some of them think you got your own ideas about how things go and that you don't listen to others, he said, but nobody is opposed to King High School. So that wasn't it. I, I went to Dr. Cozette Buckney. And she said, yeah, there are some people who are saying, they're saying, they don't want a singing and dancing high school, Barbara. And she said, but, you know, I don't know that there's any one person who's, who's saying this or anything. Story_ID: 85686 Speaker 1: So, Paul [Vallas] didn't do it. And he came to me, and he told me that he had created all of these magnet schools which the mayor wants in order to track middle class people back to Chicago to get a bigger tax base. So, she said--he said, I, I have to build these magnet high schools. And he said, I'm going to create one in every region, and he said and so, I'm gonna make King a regional magnet high school. So, I said, can't choose another high school? And he said, well, this is the newest and it's the best. There's not many students there and, you know, so which meant that it's the easiest one to do 'cause they're not many students there, 'cause nobody wanted to go to King, 'cause everybody--it was the lowest achieving high school in the city. So no parent wanted to send his or her kid there. So the, so even black people were running away from the high school, you know. So Paul said I, I, I'm using it because it's the available resource and sort of--so I was heartbroken. So then, I said to Paul, well, will you let me have a performing arts strand in the high school? And so, he said, yes, we can do that. And that's what's going on there now, but it's the high school now that you have to test in-, into. That's not what it was designed to be. It was designed to be the premiere performing arts high school for all of the children of all of the people. This is a magnificent high school. It's got a, a professional stage in it. It's got a small stage in it. It has a dancing gym. It has, it's just a wonderful high school that's being prostituted because some people in Chicago do not want black people to have a performing arts high school, or they don't want to have one that they perceive will be dominated by African Americans, or something, something like that. I, I don't know for sure, but something like that has prevented this high school from its true identity and potential. Story_ID: 85687 Speaker 1: Tell me something, what was it like for you when you left to go to [Washington] D.C. to head up-- Speaker 2: Well, that's the kind of like sad story 'cause I never would have gone if Manford Byrd [HM] had liberated me. What happened was that I got in a lot of trouble with Woodlawn, and the Woodlawn Experimental Schools Project District. Well, you choose your own enemies, you know, just like you choose your own friends. You don't know it, but you do. And I chose Anna Kolheim to be principal at Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois] when I was the director of the Woodlawn Experimental Schools Project District. Now there are a lot of people who warned me against it, but this is what I liked about her. She was a fighter. She was willing to fight the system for change, and I knew that's what we were about. We were about changing. I needed somebody who was not afraid. This is what I didn't know. I didn't know that she was only willing to fight for herself. That's what I didn't know. So, so I chose her, and she just was not the right person for this particular job. She was a brilliant woman, a brilliant woman. She was an effective principal where she was principal. But in this particular situation, this was not a good, a good position for her. So, we came to, you know, conflict, so I was going in one direction, and she was going in another, and it didn't work out. The teachers all boycotted this--it, it just was a chaotic mess over there when it-- And so, the funding ended, and nobody wanted to pick up the pieces or do anything about it. And I (unclear) that. I take responsibility for that because I chose her, and once I had chosen her, I should have changed the direction. I was going to try to do something different with her, but I didn't. So, nobody would hire me in the system at that time. So I was sent to work in government funded programs under Mr. [James] Moffat. That didn't work out. In the first place, Mr. Moffat was a very dictatorial person. And he, he was very much in control. He wanted, he wanted to control everything. So, when I moved out of there, we all had little cubby holes, and I had this coming on a course. I, I always have a Malcolm X picture wherever I am. Wherever I am, his picture is here, and, and [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. I don't have his picture, but there's a little statue out there of him (unclear). So I always have the two of them. I have Angela Davis in my office, and I had somebody else. Now I have Winnie Mandela. Anyway, Mr. Moffat came to me, and he told me that I had to take my pictures down because they were disruptive. I said, I'm not taking my pictures down. Not until you get Beverly Sills down, Jesus over there, see, Jesus, all--everybody's pictures have to come down. If I take my pictures down, everybody's pictures have to come down. Story_ID: 85688 Speaker 1: And so, he [James Moffat], he--his next-in-command, Richard Tegalski (ph.), sent out a memo and told everybody, everything had to come down. Of course, that made me very popular, okay, on my floor, and everybody had to take down their pictures. But that's what happened. Then, one day, he called me into his office at the same time that one of my colleagues, Bill Jones, was there. Now, Bill Jones and I have a nephew in common. And so, I was not understanding, you know, why, why we were being called in, and Bill didn't seem to know. Well, two minutes into the meeting, it was very clear that Mr. Moffat was reprimanding Mr. Jones for something. So I stood up immediately and I said, why am I here? And he told me very bluntly, you're here to be a witness to this conversation. I said, oh, no, I'm not, and I left, okay. Well, he wrote me a letter and told me he was citing me for insubordination or whatever, whatever. I wrote a letter to Manford Byrd [HM], who was the deputy superintendent at the time, and I asked him to please remove me from this position and to send me back out in the field. I told him that I would even be happy to be a principal again if, if that was the only position available to me, but I had to get away from Mr. Moffat. But, Manford, he responded to me, but he said that he couldn't do this at this time, and that I would just have to make the best of a bad situation, so I quit. In December 1972. I resigned from my position with the Chicago Public Schools, and I went to Washington, D.C. And, of course, Mr. Moffat molested some children while he was the principal of Kelvyn Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] and he's in jail now. Story_ID: 85689 Speaker 1: What was it like in [Washington] D.C. for you? Speaker 2: That was my crucible of becoming--that's what I call it. You know, you read in the textbooks about a colony, and you know what a colony is, but it's surprising to find it as the capital of our country. And I like was not prepared for it. So what happened to me in Washington, D.C. is largely the result of my ignorance. I mean, ignorance is a formidable enemy, you know. And it's, it's just nothing replaces knowledge--nothing. And so, I take partial blame about--for, for what, for my failure at Washington, D.C. I come, I came from Chicago [Illinois]. Chicago is the prism through which I look politically. It's not the case of Washington, D.C. Washington, D.C. is a colony. The people do not govern themselves. They are governed by four committees in the United States Congress, two in the Senate, and two in the House of Representatives. The people cannot even spend their own tax money. The Congress decides how their tax money is spent. Right now, Congress has decided they're going to have a voucher system in the, in the District of Columbia. The people have nothing to say about it. They have nothing to say about it. Now I read about this in textbooks. I knew this (laughter), but not like I should have known it. So when I got there, I'm like, I'm ready for what was just to meet me. Let me give you a couple of examples. I plead for my budget before the Committee of the House first. This is a Subcommittee of the House on Appropriations for the District of Columbia. And at the time I was there, '73 [1973] through '75 [1975], the Chairperson was Mr. [William] Natcher from the Second Congressional District of Kentucky. And he was a very gracious Southern man. He was like, we, we're so glad to see you, Mrs. Sizemore; welcome you to the District of Columbia; happy to have you here, as the superintendent of schools. And he introduced himself to me and, you know, I presented my plan for my budget. First year went fine. I was the--that was the '73 [1973], '74 [1974]--no, '74 [1974], '75 [1975] school year. When I went to plea for the '75 [1975], '76 [1976] school year, for which I was not the superintendent, but anyway 'cause I got fired. But, anyway, we had been told by the Appropriations Committee Chairperson, Mr. Natcher, that we had to close some schools because we did have a lot of schools. It was like about 100 kids, you know, you know. So, so I had my cabinet together. There were about 11 or 12 of us to, to decide which schools we should close, so we agreed on the closing of some schools. I think it was 10 or something like that. But one of my cabinet members didn't agree--Dr. Woodson (ph.). He did not agree with it, so we were trying to compromise and everything, but we could never really get him to agree to, to any of these. So then we went to a budget hearing. So Mr. Natcher, said, Natcher, said, Ms. Sizemore, you think, what schools do you, do you all planning to close? So I gave him my list. So he looked at it and he called his chief of staff, and he gave them to the chief of staff. And he asked, his chief of staff, he said, are those the schools that we talked about and the chief of staff staff, mumbles something, to him I couldn't hear. So then, Mr. Natcher said to me, he said, was there agreement on these schools among everybody on your staff, Mrs. Sizemore? And I said, no, I said, Dr. Woodson has disagreed. So Mr. Natcher said--he looked down at the table, and he said, what, buddy, what, what do you want? I'm like saying, who's buddy (laughter)? Who, buddy? This is my first lesson. Decisions in Washington are not made in the democratic way that we know in Chicago. They are made by an invisible circle of influence. It's an invisible network of influence of people who know each other through whatever means. And these are the people who, who make the decisions. They tell me that 'cause I was on my way out then, so, you know, it was kinda like too late. Story_ID: 85690 Speaker 1: The second thing that I learned was that the establishment of these entities, the Board of Education, the City Council, they're just hoaxes. They're play governments. In other words, the Congress created them to squell [sic, quell] the '60s [1960s] rights, so it's like, okay, I'm, I'm going to let you choose some people. They're not going to have any real power, but you all can play like you're making decisions, and then you send it to us. So both, both the Board of Education and the City Council in Washington, D.C. operated under those situations. That's why you can have a person like Marion Barry [HM] in control for so long because Marion didn't have any real power. Congress wouldn't let him do anything, you know. He--they got elected over and over by the people, but he didn't have any power so it, you know, it's like was okay, because they don't care anything about black people anyway. I mean, that's just a given in this society, and we don't want to admit it. I mean, white people admit it. They, they admit it. They won't have anything to do with you. They won't live with you. They won't go to school with you. They won't marry you, you know. It, you know, there are few exceptions, there are few exceptions. I'm talking about the majority of the people. I'm not talking about the 15 percent of black men who marry white women. I'm not talking about that. I'm talking about the 85 percent. So, the (unclear) and you can see that. They say, look, we're liberty. We don't have anything to do with you, as little as possible. And the affirmative action now is trying to wipe out whatever little that got to do with you anyway. So, it's--but black people haven't given up. Black people know--won't accept it, black people won't accept the fact that white people don't like you, don't want to have anything with you. And I'm talking about the majority. I'm not talking about my white friends if you're look, listening to this. I'm not talking about you. I'm talking about the majority of white people, the majority. I'm not talking about my friends who are minority. I'm not talking about the people who married black people. They're minority, they are a minority. They do not forge or influence the decisions made by [President] George [W.] Bush--they don't. So, that's the way it is. And until that changes, until, 'till it changes, then we're going to have the same old stuff over and over. That's what I learned in Washington, D.C. I learned that very clearly in Washington, D.C., very clearly. Story_ID: 85691 Speaker 1: So that two-year period was professionally very unstable? Speaker 2: It was my crucible of becoming. When I left Washington, D.C., I knew un-, unflinchingly, I knew that I was a reject as far as white people were concerned, the majority of the white people, the majority of the white people. I keep saying that over and over because people are always saying to me, you know, well, I got a white friend who--I know. Some of us got white mothers and white fathers. I'm not talking about them. I'm talking about the majority of the people who vote and make decisions because this is the rule about a majority. This is not a rule by the minority in this country. (Unclear) is the rule of the majority, okay. And the majority of white people don't like black people; don't want to have anything with them; don't want to live with you; don't want to go to school with you; and don't want you to work with them. That's what affirmative action is all about. Speaker 1: So how would you feel when you left D.C.? Speaker 2: I, I was redirected, I was redirected, I was redirected. I was redirected from dealing with symptoms to dealing with the real problem, which is white supremacy and the imputation. It's two sides of the same coin. It's called racism, two sides, white supremacy is one side, imputation of black inferiorities is the other. They work hand in hand. They go together. When you find one, you find the other. Speaker 1: And so, your next move with that becoming your next professional move, what-- Speaker 2: Went to the university. That's the only place you're free, that's the only place you're free. University is the only place you're free. And black studies was the only place I could be free. So I went to black studies because in the university, you have to be chosen by white people, and white people don't like you. They don't want you. The majority of white people, I have to keep saying that because people will pick you up, you know, and tear you apart because I--my mother is white and, you know, hey. The majority, the people who vote, the majority of the people, the people who, who vote, the majority of them don't like black people, don't want you to be with them. Any kind of white, don't want to live with you, don't live near you, don't want to go to school with you, don't--the majority and until that changes, you know. And evolution, evolution will probably make it change, you know, like about 3010, it, it will, about 3010 'cause everybody will be black in America, you know. So, you know, it'll change over time. But, right now, I'm talking about the little space that God gave me to live in. White people don't like me. They don't want to live near me and whatever. There are exceptions. Obviously, white people live in this building. I'm not talking about that. I'm talking about the minority of white people. I'm not talking about that. Story_ID: 85692 Speaker 1: So you're--when you reach university level, how did you change it? How did you experience yourself as-- Speaker 2: Well, first, I went into black studies 'cause it's the only place I could get in, uh-hum. Now I had a Ph.D.--I did not have, excuse me, I did not have a PhD when I went into university, which is a shortcoming, a shortcoming. So I really wasn't what call qualified to be in the university as a professor 'cause I didn't have a PhD. I went into university in '77 [1977]. I got my PhD in '79 [1979], but after that, I should have been qualified. I mean, I didn't get a PhD from "Do-Wah-Diddy" University. I got a PhD from the University of Chicago which is a reputable university. So it wasn't that I had an X-rated PhD. I had lots of experience. I was 52 years old (laughter). So, you know, none of that applies. But yet, I couldn't get into the school of education. I went into through black studies. Are you following me? And then, black studies at the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I was there for 15 years. And what I chose to do now, I was focused then, I was focused then. I knew where I was going. I said, (unclear), now what I'm going to do is I'm going to prove that everything black is bad is wrong. So, so I looked for high achieving predominantly African American schools, high achieving, predominantly African American schools located in low income census zones characterized by crime and violence, 'cause people always said, well, their momma is no good, or their daddy is in prison, or they on dope. Right? So I said, I got to check all of this 'cause the Korman (ph.) thesis is a powerful thesis, and it's coming back now which says that everything good happened to you, happened to you because you have a family background. Now school didn't have anything to do with it. So, yes, the Korman thesis, and right now, everybody's racing backwards trying to go to that to excuse the poor education has been offered to African American people in the schools. All schools, public schools, public schools. So, I was focused then. So I kept looking for these schools. They're ready not hard to find, all right. I found three in Pittsburgh, and three in Dallas, Texas which was all I had money and time to study, all right. The three in Pittsburgh were just right there under my nose. One of them was a kids--it was 90 percent black school with 90 percent of the kids at, excuse me, it was 90 percent of the kids at or above the national norms on our test, the basic skills in reading. It was the Bell (ph.) Service School in Pittsburgh. Then there was the Van (ph.). Now Van serviced the children who lived in Bedford Housing Authority, and this was the largest public housing facility in Pittsburgh. And they were at the 75th percentile. Then there was Madison, you know, so I'm like saying, whoa. Then I went to Dallas. Not only in Dallas did I find two elementary schools, but I found this remarkable man named Sherwin Allen. This man turned around the Maynard Jackson Middle School from the lowest achieving middle school of the nine schools in Dallas Independent School District to the highest achieving school in one year, in one year. And then you got Napoleon Lewis, the fabulous Napoleon Lewis, who's deceased now, who created this high school in Dallas called Lincoln High School that was in the "Redbook" and the "U.S. News and Daily Report" [sic, U.S. News & World Report]. This high school services kids who live in southwest Dallas in the most crime infested district in the city. And this is the school celebrated by Redwood--"Redbook", I'm sorry, "Redbook" and "U.S. World Today" [USA Today]. So I'm like saying, how many, you know, I'm like, Ryan Edmonds (ph.) now. Ryan Edmonds said, how many of the schools do you have to see before you can create one? How many? How many do you have to see? So that's been my message, that's been my message since 1979. It's just keeping that in front of people, keeping that in front of people, keeping it in front of people, trying to keep Ryan Edmonds' legacy alive, trying to make sure people understand that the reason why we got so many schools for African American children--can't read, can't write, can't do this, and can't do that is because we will it to be so. We do not have the political will to change it. Why? Because it services white supremacy. Story_ID: 85693 Speaker 1: You can't have a whole lot of smart black people in our country devoted to white supremacy--can't have it, you can't have it. Now, the white majority is so afraid it might happen that they decided we'll put them in prison. So that's what's going on now. They didn't take away the right to vote. See, there are only five sources of power in a capitalist democracy, God, knowledge, money, votes, and guns. Black people got all of those. It's the matter of using it. So you remember in Jim Crow one, the first thing they did was take away the right to vote. They didn't give you the right to vote. You take away the right to access the money, et cetera, et cetera, access to guns, access to knowledge, you know. That's the way, too. So the vote is the key for the government. Money is the key for the people. And a God is the key for the people, God, knowledge, and money. See, God, knowledge and money, you can overcome votes and guns, so keeping you away from the knowledge as much as possible. And, of course, we are so overwhelmed with the white God that we don't know what to do. Have you seen the ad on the television from the Church of the Latter Day Saints? I mean, Jesus got blue eyes and blond hair--no way in the world Jesus could have existed in the ancient world that way--no way. There was nobody that looked like him in the ancient world--no one. Else the Egyptians would have drawn pictures of him. Else the Mesopotamians would have drawn pictures of him. You won't find any blond, blue-eyed people in their pictures. Where did this man come from? The figment of the imagination that supports white supremacy. Jesus can't be black--no possible way. Everybody was black over there--wasn't no white people living in Mesopotamia, wasn't no white people over there at the time of Jesus. Story_ID: 85694 Speaker 1: All of this period, your professional development period, how, how, what was happening with you personally raising the kids? They, you have two girls. What, what is their names? Speaker 2: I have a, a daughter and a son. My daughter is the oldest and then my son. My daughter is Kymara Chase. My son is Furman Sizemore. Both of them have terminal degrees. My daughter has a EDD in educational administration from Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois]. My son has a doctorate in animal science genetics from Pennsylvania State University [State College, Pennsylvania]. And that's another thing. Here he is, he, he went into a field that is way out of boundaries for African American people, right? And he's had his PhD now for something like 10 years--has never been able to get a tenured track position. Now, one of the reasons why he can't get the tenured track position is because the heads of all of these department are Chinese and they're choosing Chinese nationals. Now if black people do that. Out of the white people, the majority of the white people get upset. I mean, you try to do that and see what happens. It will be three years before somebody white is suing you for discrimination. Yeah, that's going in, in the university all the time. Not only that, when my son first started working, he has another problem. When he first started working, they gave him a textbook to use in "Introduction to Animal Science". This was his first teaching experience. And he was where--where was he--University of Arkansas, wherever. These, these were all positions, but they were not tenured track positions, you know, they were where you can pay people the lowest salaries to do the work. Okay. They gave him this text--no, I think he was a grad student at Penn State when this happened. He was a grad student at Penn State when this happened. They gave him this textbook and in the textbook, it said that this Negro is, that this horse was like a Negro, you know, obstinate, and whatever and whatever. So my son took this book to his department chair and he said, I can't, he said, what am I supposed to do with this? So the department chair told my son, well, this is the best book that we have in the "Introduction of Animal Science". It was really like, you know, somewhere like in 1940s, something like that. So my son said, I can't use this book. He said, I'm a black man, I can't use this book. So do you think they changed the book? They changed the book. They changed his teaching assignment. (Laughter). So you're really not free in the university. You know, I said that earlier, but I need to correct that. Story_ID: 85695 Speaker 1: So, and, and you, then you served six years at, at DePaul [University, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The dean? Speaker 2: I was 15 years at the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and six years at DePaul as the Dean of the School of Education. And the only reason I was dean there was because my provost was black, and my associate provost was black. Gladys Styles Johnston, who just retired from the presidency of the University of Nebraska at Kearney, was the provost at the time. And Carol Camp Yeakey, who was the distinguished Professor of Education at the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, was the associate provost. And they both asked me to come to be the Dean of the School of Education. Otherwise, I would not have been there. Speaker 1: What, did you finally get to do some more, some more of what you wanted to do? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, definitely. In fact, let me say, that DePaul University was the first place that I worked in my life where I was free to help the poor. See, DePaul is founded by the Congregation of the, of the Mission. These are priests who are followers of St. Vincent de Paul, and their goals are to evangelize the poor and alleviate their misery. So they have a high service requirement for anybody who works for DePaul. So, at first, I didn't understand that 'cause I didn't--I'm a Baptist. I didn't know any Catholics. Well, I knew Catholics, but I didn't know Catholicism per se. I mean, I read "The Thorn Birds", and you got, kind of got like a twisted vision of, but I really didn't. And I thought that all of the universities in the United States that were Catholic were found by the Jesuits. And, you know, I didn't know whether I wanted to work in a Jesuit university, you know, and spend all my time contemplating my navel and intellectual pursuits and, you know, living on the ethereal range of, of knowledge. I didn't, I didn't, I wasn't sure 'cause that was my conception of, my perception of what they were. Then I found out, well, these are not--we're not Jesuits. We help the poor. Well, first, I'm so cynical, I'm afraid, I didn't believe them. So, someone told me about this eating program that they had. So, I got up one morning 'round about 6:00, and I went driving by there, and there was this long line of men waiting to be served breakfast. So, uh-uh, I said, okay, so that made me more interested in them because I didn't want to work any place anymore where I was not going to be able to help the people whom I wanted to help. I just, I just wasn't going to do that. I just, I stay at the University of Pittsburgh 'cause I know I, what I can do there. I know what my parameters are there. But they gave me a wide range, and when I explained to them what I wanted to do in the Chicago Public Schools, they were like, wonderful, that's what we need. Yeah, we will support you, yes, indeed. And I must say that being the Dean of the School of Education at DePaul was one of the most rewarding experiences of my life. And I thank God every day for sending me there. I really do 'cause I was able to establish the Outreach Program in the Chicago Public Schools. I was able to work with teachers and, and preachers and, and, and principals and administrators. I had just a wonderful working relationship with Paul Vallas. Story_ID: 85696 Speaker 1: I don't have that with Arne Duncan now because he's, he's more leaning, more toward the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and most of his advisors are white people. So, you know, I don't, I don't have that kind of relationship with him now, plus the mayor [Richard M. Daley] is a very secretive man, you know, everything is done under cover. Arne is a wonderful person, you know, he's, he's a really a nice guy. I like Arne very much, but I don't think he's in control of anything. I think the mayor is running everything, and that the mayor has made a decision that this is the way it's going to be. And you can see how black people are just being moved out of everything, just being moved out. I don't think there are any black people in human resources now. Accountability is being dismantled. I would--this is my guess from what I can learn, and I'm a pretty good observer, but I don't know everything, I don't know everything. But my guess is that 90 percent of the decisions that are being made about the lives of black students in the Chicago Public Schools is being made by white people right now. I cannot tell you if any black person, who is influential in making decisions, other than Bob Reese Watkins (ph.), who is our chief educational officer, and whom I know very well, and is a very good person. I just don't think they're making the decisions. I think the Mayor is calling the shots. And he's displacing black people from the old regime from the (unclear), getting rid of all of them, and he's putting young people in there. Some of these people are black, some of them are black. He's putting them in these, but they're all--whatcha call them, patronage employees, you know, patronage employees. Now the two black girls that I talked to that he appointed in the office are really nice kids, bright, very intelligent, but they don't have any experience, you know. So they don't, they don't really know, what does this mean, you know, what, what are they asking me to do? So what's happening is that they're doing things, and then hiring black people to be rubber stamps on it, so they can say, well, this black person said it's okay, you know, whatever, whatever. And, and the other thing is that as you get older, people, you know, come like this, oh, yeah, that's Barbara 'cause they see you so much and hurting so much, and, you know, you've just been around so long. And so, I said, oh, yeah, I know Barbara. Yeah, it's like (laughter), oh, okay, here come Barbara. Yeah. So like they, you know, they say, we heard all that. We, we know all that. So it doesn't, it doesn't ring through the chaos that we're in. And nobody really calls it one, nobody really calls it one. Story_ID: 91479 Speaker 1: Dr. Sizemore, would you tell me what do you think your work in education, what will you be remembered for? Speaker 2: I probably will be remembered for my militant stand on education for black children because that's, that's what everybody is going to talk about probably. And some of them have been controversial, you know. And so, I'm not, for, for instance, I took a stand with Paul Vallas on the retention of students who had not achieved. It's, my stand is that something is going to happen to them. I mean, if you fall behind in your work, you're either going to be retained, or you're going to be sent on stupid, or you're going to be referred to special ed, which I call the prison track, because that's where the kids go. They go from regular ed to special ed, right into the prison system. So, of those three things, I'd rather my kid be retained. Now, if somebody else wants their kid go on stupid, fine, but I don't want them to send my kid on stupid. And I sure don't want my kid to go to special ed. And the reason I don't want my kid going to special ed because there's no service there for them. They put them in special ed and they don't even have any teachers. Right. So, you know, I'd rather my kid be retained. Of the three, of those three bad things to happen to your kid, retention is probably the, the least--will damage your kid the least. How does sending your kid on stupid going to help your kid? I mean, somebody has to explain that to me. Now, all of these university professors at the University of Chicago, who are arguing for sending your kid on stupid, won't let them into the University of Chicago. They're not going to get in there. Story_ID: 91480 Speaker 1: Which of your works would you refer your published story? Would you refer a read or two that says, that would say, this is what Barbara Sizemore is all about? Speaker 2: It's the one that's coming out. It's called "Walking in Circles". I'm working on it now. I think I talked to you about it earlier. It's going to be published by Third World Press. I've been working on it for like about 20 years. The first person to try to get me to do this was Geneva Smitherman who's at Michigan State University. She tried very hard to get me to finish this like in 1980. And I, I wrote the first two chapters, but I just didn't spend the time on it that I needed 'cause I had four stepchildren at the time. And they were little. I was busy being a mother and a wife and a professor, all at the same times, and I didn't get it done. So then, when I was diagnosed with adenocarcinoma of the lymph nodes and that it was terminal, and that I was going to die within a year, I decided (laughter), well, I'd better get the, I'd better, I'd better get this done. And then, of course, Haki Madhubuti [HM]--Nancy Arnez; Donald H. Smith; everybody's been trying to get me--Jay Jerome Harris (ph.), Charles Moody [HM] and Christella Moody--everybody's been trying to get me--Asa Hilliard [III, HM], Asa has been trying to get me to do this book. So now, I have it finished--just came back from the editor. I'm going through answering her queries and comments now. And then I'll get it to Haki, and it'll be published, I'm sure, this year. And that will probably be the work that you would like to see. Speaker 1: Wonderful. Give, give us a little synopsis. Speaker 2: Well, it has six chapters in it. The first chapter is autobiographical. What I tried to do is establish the roots of my biases 'cause most of, most researchers just hide them from you. You don't know what they are, but everybody has biases. There's no such thing as objective research. It just doesn't exist. Everybody has biases. And they, your biases determine where you look, what kind of model you select, what kind of questions you ask, and all of that. So I declared mine in the first chapter. It's the longest chapter in the book, and it takes you from my birth to the present--no, to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. Then I, the second chapter is the, is the--once I declare what my biases are, and what made me think the way I think, then I tell you about the paradigm that I chose in order to control these biases which is the effective school's model. So then, I talk about the research around this model because some people are saying it works, some say it doesn't, so I have it there in the second chapter. And in the third chapter, we go to Pittsburgh, and I talk about these high achieving schools which I described before. And then, the fourth chapter, Chicago, I come to Chicago and try to create these schools in Chicago. And then the next chapter, which is chapter, chapter five is about the model that I used to try to create these schools called the structure to the routines and school achievement structure. And then the last chapter six is the epilogue. That's where we are today and how we walked in a big circle. And we're right back where we started from. Speaker 1: And, and this is for general readers, as well as-- Speaker 2: Yes, it's for general readers. Story_ID: 91481 Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Well, I'm not so, so much concerned about the legacy that people refer to when they say legacy. That's not where it is for me. It's one of the reasons why I steered away from ever becoming an officer of a national organization or anything like that. That's not what--that's not what I want. I wanted, I guess in my legacy, I wanted to leave a, a prescription for high achieving African American schools. But more than that, I want, I wanted to be able to influence my children to be models of behavior for their children, and their children, and their children. And I'm very proud of that. Both of my biological children have, have terminal degrees. They both have doctorates. My four stepchildren have all graduated--no, three of my four stepchildren have graduated from college. My two adult grandchildren have graduated from college. So I'm like, my children have exceeded my expectations, and I'm very proud of that. Speaker 1: How many other educators in, in the children and grandchildren? Speaker 2: Just two. My, my oldest child, Kymara [Chase], is an educator. She's been in the Chicago Public Schools now for 32 years. She's Director of the School Achievement Structure at DePaul presently. My youngest daughter, Marimba (ph.) is, graduated from the School of Education at North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. And she has, she's the manager of her own company which monitors and creates websites. Story_ID: 91482 Speaker 1: And so, is there anything in, that I didn't ask you that perhaps I should have asked you? Speaker 2: Well, there's one little thing that we didn't talk about, and that was my brief venture into politics. I was fired on October 9th, 1975, and I'd never been unemployed in my life. I had worked every living day since March 28, 1947, and in 1975, I was fired. I'd never been unemployed, never lost a job, and certainly had never been fired. So I was, it was really a different, a different kind of situation for me. I, I was on unfamiliar ground completely, so I really didn't, didn't know exactly what to do. But Charles Smith of the Rockefeller Foundation gave me some money, a grant from Rockefeller, to, to study some of these things that have been happening to me in education. And if I remember correctly, it was for $18,000, which was a good salary at that time in 1975, we're talking about. And then I, he introduced me into consulting work that I was able to, to do. And with this consulting work and this grant, I was able to survive for, for two years 'cause I had two, I had two people whose education I was responsible for at that time. My son--there are 10 years between my children--so my son was, just graduated from high school in '76 [1976], so he was just, he was just going to college. And then I had, I had taken in a child who was going to be executed by the Blackstone Rangers in 1972. And I had taken him to live with me, so I had him and Morgan, so I had to, I had those two tuitions that I had to pay for. So it was like a very difficult time for me. Well, a good friend of mine named Athena (ph.) Minch (ph.) (laughter), who was later professor at the University of Maryland in Baltimore, came to me and he told me, he said, "why don't you run for the city council at large." He said, "we need somebody to stand up in the city council and just fight this thing that's happening in the colony." So, I didn't have anything else to do, so I said "okay, I'll try it." Thank God, I lost, oh, thank God, thank God. I came within 600 votes of winning, I think, uh-hum. Hilda Mason defeated me by 10,600 votes, and I had 10,000 votes. And I, I don't know what would have happened to me if I had won because I would have been locked in council with Marion Barry [HM] as the mayor. I'm like, you know, this would have been a black person fighting a black person in the District of Columbia. I'm, I'm like, oh, what was I thinking? It was so scary that I never, ever thought about running for public office again. And I thank God to this day that she delivered me from this (laughter) mistake, so we didn't talk about that. Story_ID: 91483 Speaker 1: What, what was going through your mind when you got fired? What, what did that feel like for you after you had been so dedicated and passionate-- Speaker 2: Well, I think the first feeling was betrayal because the white people couldn't have fired me without the black people. And that was my first concession, that was my first concession, that everything black is not good, and everything white is not bad. That was my first concession because prior of that time, I didn't even qualify what I said about white people. You know, I just say white people. I wouldn't say majority or anything. You know, I wouldn't even concede that there were white people who had different feelings because, you know, I'm, I'm--my thing was they all benefit from being white, you know, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. (unclear) corrected me on that? That's why I told you, it's the crucible of my becoming. Everybody black is not good, and everybody white is not bad, so I learned that lesson because the white people could not have fired me without the black people, so I felt like betrayed. But in a way, it was good for me, this, this to happen to me because I needed to learn that lesson because right now, I have a lot of white allies, you know, not as many as I want, not as many as I need, but I do have some. So I wouldn't have any, given the attitude that I had at that time, yeah. My biggest supporter now is a white faculty member at DePaul [University, Chicago, Illinois], yeah. So, you know, they, this is why I call it crucible of my becoming because there were a lot of things that I was thinking that were corrected, you know, a lot of things corrected. The other thing I learned about that, too, is that white people who join you in this struggle get as much hostility from white people as I do (laughter). And this must be very hurtful. They must hurt as much as I hurt when black people turn against me, you know, it was, must have been very hurtful. And some of these things take place within families, you know. And I, but before Washington [D.C.], that was not important to me. I-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: So I guess my first feeling was betrayal that these black people betrayed me. But in the end, it made me a better understanding, it gave me a better understanding of my universe. Story_ID: 91484 Speaker 1: So, you've had, you've been fortunate to have a full rich professional life. It's something you could be passionate about, and you could give, and you could receive, so you must feel satisfied? Speaker 2: I'm blessed, I am truly blessed. Never, never in my parents' wildest dreams did, did they think I would be the success that I am today--never. I was born in the middle of Jim Crow, two years before the Great Depression. I have exceeded my parents' wildest dreams for success. I have been everywhere I want to go, except Brazil. I have done everything I want to do, and mostly my way. I mean, it's, it's hurt me sometimes, but mostly, my way. I made very few compromises in life, you know. I'm blessed, I'm truly blessed, I'm truly blessed, I'm truly blessed. And I was telling my daughter, she was so crushed about the, the discouraging prognosis of my, my affliction. And I keep telling her, I said, look, look, my mother [Delila Mae Stewart] died with Alzheimer's, she had Alzheimer's for five years before she died. It's a terrible, terrible tragedy. If this happens to anybody that you love, it's just, it's something you never get over, you just never get over. So, when my mother in '93 [1993], I prayed and I still do, that God will not let me have Alzheimer's. Just please deliver me from Alzheimer's. Don't let me die with Alzheimer's, I plea. So I told my daughter, I said, I feel like a fool, going back to God now and say, well, I changed my mind, you know (laughter). I mean, like, you know, you going to die with something. You can't stay on the planet forever, you know, so this cancer is cancer. I'd rather it be cancer than Alzheimer's. So she doesn't like that though. You know, she doesn't think it's funny, and she doesn't appreciate it, but I've been blessed. I've had a blessed life. I had a wonderful mother and father. I have wonderful children, you know. My grandparents loved me. I'm, I'm, like, what's missing here? Not much. Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Speaker 2: My pleasure-- Speaker 1: We really appreciate it. Speaker 2: --my pleasure. Story_ID: 91485 Speaker 1: This is Barbara Ann Sizemore. She's about six months old here in the baby buggy. And she's on the friendly street in Terre Haute, Indiana, right out in front of a restaurant. Speaker 2: It's my grandfather's restaurant. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Remember, I told you he had a restaurant. (Unclear). Speaker 1: This buggy is parked in front of her grandfather's restaurant in Terre Haute. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What was the name of the restaurant? Speaker 1: Gee, I don't know (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Does it say anything on there? Speaker 2: Umm, uh-uh. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): See, it might say restaurant (laughter). All right. Speaker 2: This is baby Barbara. She's about what--three or four months old? With your maternal grandmother? Speaker 1: I have no idea how old I am there. Speaker 2: Yeah. She is being held by her maternal grandmother whose name is-- Speaker 1: It's my paternal grandmother. Speaker 2: Oh, paternal? Speaker 1: This is my father's-- Speaker 2: Oh, this is her father's mother. Speaker 1: Yes, my father's mother. Speaker 2: This is the one you spent the most time with. Speaker 1: No, I spent the most time with my mother's mother. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, okay. Speaker 1: That's my father's mother. Speaker 2: This is her father's mother whose name is-- Speaker 1: Viola-- Speaker 2: Viola. Speaker 1: Laffoon. Speaker 2: Laffoon. Speaker 1: Now, here's the, this is the walk-in so (unclear). I got a picture of the faculty at Drew [Elementary] School. Are you interested in anything like that? Speaker 2: Are you in it? Uh-hum, so is Clara Holton. Oh, great. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, all right, next. Speaker 2: Okay. This is Barbara Ann. She's probably about a year, not more than a year and a half old here. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): In the--with the graduation photos, who are the two gentlemen in the separate photo? Speaker 2: Is that what? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): There's three photos with your eighth and high school graduation. Speaker 2: That's my father-in-law. That's Herbert Laffoon, Sylvester Laffoon. Speaker 1: The, the tallest one-- (Unclear) High School. (Unclear) was my uncle. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my uncle, Herbert Laffoon, and my father, Sylvester Laffoon. Speaker 2: And this is you at-- Speaker 1: Eighth grade. Speaker 2: Eighth grade. Speaker 1: Eighth grade graduation. And high school graduation, eighth grade and high school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: UNKNOWN SPEAKER: All right. That was Mary (unclear). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: UNKNOWN SPEAKER: Let me know when you're ready. Speaker 2: Eighteen and 98? Speaker 1: This is my father's mother. This is when she was 18. This is when she was 98. Speaker 2: Here's the picture of me with Caspar Weinberger (ph.) and Sidley, Sidley Marlon (ph.) when he was superintendent of the schools at-- Speaker 1: Here's a picture of me and Anna Kolheim, my nemesis. Oh, boy. Speaker 2: A badge she used when she was working at the Great Lakes Naval Training Center. Speaker 1: This is her mother and stepfather. Your stepfather's name again? Speaker 2: Aldwin E. Stewart. Speaker 1: Aldwin E.? Speaker 2: A-L-D-W-I-N. Speaker 1: A-L-D-W-I-N, Aldwin-- Speaker 2: E is his middle initial. Speaker 1: E-- Speaker 2: Stewart, S-T-E-W-A-R-T. Speaker 1: Stewart, S-T-E-W-A-R-T. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. This-- Speaker 1: This is Mr. Laffoon, her dad. Speaker 2: Sylvester Laffoon. Speaker 1: Sylvester Laffoon. Speaker 2: Do you (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --foon. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear), okay. Speaker 2: Mr. William Laffoon, the father of Sylvester Laffoon, Barbara Sizemore's grandfather. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: UNKNOWN SPEAKER: 2000 and-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, start. Speaker 2: Okay. Left to right, we have the trio, mother, I'm sorry, daughter-- Speaker 1: And Kymara Chase. Speaker 2: Kymara, C-A-M-- Speaker 1: K-Y-M-A-R-A. Speaker 2: Kymara, K-Y-M-A-R-A. Speaker 1: Chase, C-H-A-S-E. Speaker 2: Chase, C-H-A-S-E, Dr. Sizemore's daughter who also has a PhD in education. Speaker 1: EDD, she has an EDD. Speaker 2: EDD, oh, it, EDD in education. And in the center, of course, Dr. Sizemore, and to the right, her granddaughter. Speaker 1: Kafi, K-A-F-I. Speaker 2: Kafi, K-A-F-I. Speaker 1: Chase. Speaker 2: Chase. This picture was taken in approximately year 2000. Speaker 1: Furman G. Sizemore, F-U-R-M-A-N. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is DuBois Milliones. Speaker 2: D-U-B-O-I-S. Speaker 1: It's just like DuBois's name. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: D-U-B-O-I-S, Milliones is M-I-L-L-I-O-N-E-S. Speaker 2: Okay. And what is DuBois doing today? Speaker 1: DuBois is in a mental hospital. Speaker 2: Oh, really? Okay. Speaker 1: He has diagnosed schizophrenia. Speaker 2: And this, these two, they're graduation pictures? Your daughter-- Speaker 1: This is, this is her senior prom picture. This is his graduation picture. He graduated from (unclear). Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: This is Lansing Chase, L-A-N-S-I-N-G C-H-A-S-E. Speaker 2: Lansing Chase. And that's her son. Speaker 1: This is Kymara Chase's son. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: She has two children. Speaker 2: Right. And this is her daughter. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: No, the pictures of your grand-, this is your daughter, your youngest daughter? Speaker 1: Yeah, but she doesn't look like that and now she looks like that over there now. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, and that-- Speaker 1: That's when she graduated from high school. She graduated from high school in '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, ready. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Ready. And ready, just-- Speaker 2: This says, and just very briefly-- Speaker 1: This is a picture of Barbara Sizemore when she was principal of Anton Dvorak Elementary School, and this is her kindergarten teacher, Patricia Akins (ph.). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, ready. Speaker 1: This is a picture of Barbara Sizemore when she was director of the Woodlawn Experimental Schools Project District and Mrs. Anna Kolheim, the principal of Hyde Park High School. Anna Kolheim's name is spelled A-N-N-A is her first name, and Kolheim, K-O-L-H-E-I-M. This is a picture of the facu-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: This is a picture of the faculty of the Drew School. In the second line, for, for--to, to the left is Barbara Sizemore, and to her left is Clara Holton, H-O-L-T-O-N. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Mention who they are. Speaker 2: This is a picture of Barbara Sizemore when she was superintendent of the schools in Washington, D.C. with Casper Weinberger, W-E-I-N-B-E-R-G-E-R, and Sidney P. Marland, M-A-R-L-A-N-D. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, right, okay, can you tell us about that? Speaker 2: This is Barbara Sizemore when she was principal of Forrestville High School. This was in 1967. Speaker 1: Dvorak, too? Well, sometimes when we edit, we need to change, but so just, we will just get it typed, and we can always clean that up later if we need to, so we'll just censor here. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: This is a picture of Barbara Sizemore when she was-- Speaker 2: Dvorak? Speaker 1: Oh, no, that's not, no, that isn't, that's, that's 63rd Street, that's 63rd Street. Okay. Speaker 2: Then that's Charles Perry's picture. No, this is not Dvorak, excuse me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's not right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is Barbara Sizemore when she was director of the Woodlawn Experimental Schools Project District in Chicago, Illinois. This is 1970. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, ready. Speaker 2: This is a picture of Ted Kimbrol (ph.), who was then superintendent of the schools in the city of Chicago, and Barbara Sizemore. The story concerns their attendance at a conference of PUSH around the problems that college students were having with racism. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, tell us about this one. Speaker 2: This is a picture of the newspaper article around the problems they were having at Forestville High School when Barbara Sizemore was the principal of that school. This high school had four warring gangs. And it also was a problem about where the high school, the new high school should be built. So there were two kinds of turmoil going on, one around gangs, and one around the new high school. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is a picture of Barbara A. Sizemore at the Macedonia Baptist Church in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania in 1991. She was the Women's Day speaker. Speaker 1: A picture of Barbara Sizemore with Marion Barry [HM]. At that time, Marion Barry was the president of the school board, and Barbara Sizemore was being inaugurated as the new superintendent. The year was 1973. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is Barbara Sizemore with Mary Hatwood Futrell in 1974 in Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: Would you spell her name. Speaker 1: F-U-T-R-E-L-L. Speaker 2: Mariam? Speaker 1: Mary. Speaker 2: Mary, okay. Speaker 1: M-A-R-Y, Mary. Speaker 2: Is that Dvorak? Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Are you ready? Speaker 2: This is a picture of Barbara A. Sizemore as principal of Dvorak Elementary School at the opening day exercises in 1963. Speaker 1: Ready. Speaker 2: This is Barbara Sizemore as the teacher at Forestville High School. I was the principal, but I was teaching a lesson this day. Speaker 1: Barbara Sizemore in front of one of the posters, which got her into trouble with her boss, James Moffat. This, this was a poster hanging on the outside of her, her office. And he asked her to remove all of these things from her office walls, including the pictures of Malcolm X and [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and Angela Davis [HM]. Here, of Barbara Sizemore, Barbara A. Sizemore, when she graduated from Northwestern, 1947. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Are you ready? Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Chase family. To the left is Lansing E. Chase II. The second picture is my daughter, Kymara Chase, K-Y-M-A-R-A Chase. Next is her son and my grandson, Lansing E. Chase III, L-A-N-S-I-N-G C-H-A-S-E, and to the right is Kafi Chase..