 Story_ID: 486039 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please. Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Carole Simpson. And that's spelled C-A-R-O-L-E, S-I-M-P-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And do you care to give us your middle name? Speaker 2: I hate it, but I'll give it to you. It's Estelle, E-S-T-E-L-L-E. Speaker 1: All right. Is there a story behind the E at the end of Carole (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. My mother [Doretha Wilbon Simpson]--I was born in December, and my mother was pregnant and started hearing Christmas carols. So she thought she would name me, if I was a girl, her daughter, Carol. But she also liked Carole Lombard, who was a movie star who was killed in a plane crash I guess in the '40s [1940s], but she was very popular with the ladies in America. And she spelled her name with an E. So, she decided to make me a little bit different, and put the E on it. And you should see all the women I meet that are of my generation with an E on the end, because of Carole Lombard; their mothers were the same way (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah she was---yeah, she was very close to Clark Gable. Speaker 2: Yes, she was in movies with him. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: There's a dispute about my place and date of birth. I was born in Chicago, Illinois at St. Luke's Hospital [Rush University Medical Center]. My birth certificate says that I was born December 7, 1940. But my mother always told me that I was born on Pearl Harbor day, December 7, 1941, because she remembers being in labor and hearing the radio reports about the attack on Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii]. So, I don't know exactly. I mean officially it's 1940, but I'm sure my mother would remember what she was going through when she was giving birth to me. (Laughter) So, I'm either sixty-five or sixty-six, depending on what year. I prefer to choose the 1941 year (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I thought about that when I saw December 7 being so close to Pearl Harbor. Now, and ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation now is leader-in-residence at Emerson College here in Boston, Massachusetts. And as leader-in-residence, I'm part of the full-time faculty, but I'm also available to the university to mentor students in the arts and in philosophy and in mathematics, and all kinds of other disciplines. They want me--I have a passion for young people, and particularly young people that are about something and want to be something, and I'm about excellence with them. This has a small African American population, unfortunately, but I do mentor all young people, and just do what I can to help them know what to face when they get out into the real world. And it's the same, regardless to what profession you're in. You're going to get a big chill, and reality bites. And I just try to keep them from bumping their heads into walls like I had to, because there was no one to tell me how I should handle myself. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is September 9, 2007. I almost said nineteen (laughter). It's September 9, 2007. It's still hard for me to say 2007. Speaker 1: Yes, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: At the present time, we're on the sixth floor of the Walker Building on the Emerson College campus in our journalism studio. This is where the students put on news programs and talk shows and so on. And we're right across from the Boston Common [Boston, Massachusetts], so there's a very historic presence that all of us feel being here in Boston and on this campus. Story_ID: 486040 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that only require, they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: And I'm compelled to ask them of everyone. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? Yes, red beans and rice (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. A favorite color? Speaker 2: A favorite color is purple. Speaker 1: All right. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I like the fall, autumn, the colors. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Jamaica, Montego Bay, Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or saying? There's one that I have for myself. And that is let go and let God. Often when things aren't going right and you want to hang onto things or people or whatever, it's something my mother [Doretha Wilbon Simpson] taught me, and I've used it throughout my life. And that's to let go of it and let God take care of it. Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You can't take care of it. Story_ID: 486041 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side [Lytle Simpson]. But we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name including her maiden name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes. Her name was Doretha, D-O-R-E-T-H-A, Viola, V-I-O-L-A, Wilbon, W-I-L-B-O-N [Doretha Wilbon Simpson]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was her date of birth and place of birth (unclear)? Speaker 2: Her date of birth was April 23, 1909. And it was in Washington, Georgia that she was born. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, can you give us any idea of where Washington, Georgia is, I mean in terms of Atlanta [Georgia], or some other (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Atlanta, it's 125 miles southwest [sic. southeast] of Atlanta. It's not really near anything else. It's Polk County, Georgia--Wilkes County, I'm sorry. Wilkes County, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Not too far. The interesting thing about my family is my grandfather, whose name was Frank Wilbon. He was the son of the richest man in Wilkes County, a white man. He was a white man. And he was walking down the street when he was about sixteen years old, and saw a little girl jumping rope in my [maternal] grandmother's [Eliza Wilbon] backyard. And he took a look at her, and just like fell in love with her instantly. And he went to her father and said, "I would like to court your daughter." This was unheard of in the late 1800s, early 1900s, for a white man to come to a black father and say, "I want to court your daughter." They took young black women if they wanted them. And he didn't know what to say to the son of the richest man in the town. So he told him, "Well, I think that would be okay, but she's a little young. She's only twelve years old." He said, "Well, when can I court her?" And he said, "Perhaps when she's fifteen or sixteen." So, he waited three years and came back and actually courted her. He sat in the parlor with her mother present, and would walk around the yard of their farmland and stuff like that, and ended up marrying her. And he became a black man in that town, from that moment on. He had to go to his father's house with his hat in his hand, go to the backdoor. He became a black man in the town. Speaker 1: So that's, that's actually the way it worked? If you married a black woman and you wanted to live as man and wife, you would actually become black? Speaker 2: You became black, yes, he was. Speaker 1: Okay. At least in that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The other interesting thing is he's just like Robert Duvall in 'The Apostle.' He was a circuit preacher that went around to different churches every other Sunday. Every Sunday he went to a different church, and he was a fire and brimstone Baptist preacher, preaching to little black churches all around that county in Georgia. That movie resonates with me very strongly. Story_ID: 486042 Speaker 1: Was he engaged in any civil rights activity, or agitation that you know of? Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not at all, no. As I say, my mother [Doretha Wilbon Simpson] was born in 1909. I think the lynchings in the South really began in earnest in the '20s [1920s], in the 1920s. By that time, my mother had gone and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, before that-- Speaker 2: --moved to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: --in fact, they were in full swing when they were courting. Speaker 2: They were. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. No, I don't remember anyone talk about that. He had a big farm, and my mother was the eldest of twenty children. He had two wives, two black wives, and there were a total of twenty children, but there were no half-brothers or stepbrothers. You know, they were all Frank Wilbon's children. So-- Speaker 1: Twenty families in succession, or was that-- Speaker 2: Twenty-- Speaker 1: I mean two wives in succession? Speaker 2: In succession, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Because my mother's mother [Eliza Wilbon] died in childbirth at twenty-nine. And she was only nine years old, and she took care of all of her little brothers and sisters until my grandfather decided, "I have got to get married again, and get a mother for these children." So, a year later he found another black woman [Eva Hayes Wilbon] that he fell in love with and married. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Are there any stories about--did the white community basically leave him alone to--? Speaker 2: They did leave him alone, (laughter) but only because--and this is a wonderful story. One of my uncles was maybe thirteen years old or something, and he was walking to school. The black children had to walk to school, and the pretty little yellow school bus was taking the white children to school. And he was kind of a hot-headed one. And the children leaned out of the bus and starting calling him nigger. "Oh, yeah, you walk, nigger. Oh, you black nigger." And he picked up a stone and threw it at the bus. And they reported this, that this boy--and it was a small town [Washington, Georgia], four thousand people, so everybody kind of knew everybody else. So, they knew it was one of Frank Wilbon's son. So after school, and the police had gotten the report, they decided that, one of the deputies decided we got to go to Frank Wilbon's house and pick up that boy that threw that rock at that school bus. And the sheriff told his deputy, "Don't do it, leave him alone. He's got eleven little niggers down there, and all of them can shoot." (Laughter) So, Papa had taught all of his children--the stories about him were that he could shoot a rabbit coming toward him right in the middle of its forehead. I mean he was an unbelievable shot. And so all my aunts and uncles, girls and boys, learned how to shoot. He wanted them to know how to protect themselves. So, they left him alone and he got away with something that probably with someone else wouldn't have been gotten away with. Story_ID: 486043 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Doretha Wilbon Simpson] have any other stories of growing up there [Washington, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yes. The interesting thing is how she ended up in Chicago [Illinois]. She was a mulatto, mixed race, and she had long, long, hair that she could sit on the ends of her hair. And she must have been very beautiful. There are no pictures of her as a young girl. And there was a white man in town that came to my [maternal] grandfather [Frank Wilbon] and said, "I want your daughter, I want your oldest daughter." And he said, "Over my dead body." He picked up his rifle and said, "Get out of here. I don't want to see you on my property again." And that day, he made arrangements for my mother to take a train to Chicago where he had a half-brother living in Kankakee, Illinois. And he sat at the door with that gun until she got off and was on the train to Chicago. And that's how she wound up there, was because my grandfather was not going to let some white man take her. Speaker 1: So, she went to Kankakee first and then to-- Speaker 2: And then to Chicago, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --on up to Chicago, all right. Now did she have a chance to finish school in the South or did she--? Speaker 2: No. She didn't finish the ninth grade, she was not educated. But throughout her life, wanted her daughters--I have one sister [Jacqueline Simpson Dillard], and she wanted daughters that were educated the way she never had an opportunity to. And she became a seamstress, and was a very accomplished seamstress. And I remember--and I still have vivid memories of this. I must not have been more than four or five years old, but I can remember her old Singer sewing machine [Singer Manufacturing Company; Singer Corporation], and her peddling. And she would have me on the floor beside her, learning my colors, learning my numbers, learning my ABCs. It's quite common for children to go to kindergarten now and know those things. But it was quite unusual for a little black girl to go to school and know all of her numbers and know how to write her name, and things like that. And I'd be down there beside her as she taught me these things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can remember that pedal. Story_ID: 486044 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you about your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes. His name was Lytle Ray Simpson [Lytle Simpson], spelled L-Y-T-L-E, middle name R-A-Y, Simpson. Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind the name Lytle? Speaker 2: No. We don't know where it came from, and I've heard it as a last name, but I've never heard anybody with that as a first name (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. There's a famous, famous vibraharp [vibraphone] player called Johnny Lytle-- Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: --who's from Springfield, Ohio (laughter). Speaker 2: Ohio again (laughter). Speaker 1: Johnny Lytle. Yeah, right outside of Dayton [Ohio]. Johnny Lytle was, you know, a jazz vibraharp player. That's the only place I've ever--and then Rob Lytle the boxer [sic.], yeah, those two. But I thought there might be some association with the name. But, so there's no story behind that name (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that I know of. Speaker 1: --that you know of? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. And what's your father's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born May 4, 1905 in Terre Haute, Indiana. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Do you know how to spell Terre Haute (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yeah, it's spelled a little different from--if I'm writing it correctly here. T-E-R-R-E, H-A-U-T-E? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: Nothing beyond my grandparents. My grandmother [Amanda Simpson] was a homemaker, and Cherokee Indian [Native American] woman. And my grandfather, Stephen Simpson, was a very dark-skinned black man who was a circuit teacher. He would go around to one-room schoolhouses and teach children in areas where they didn't have a school. And even in Indiana, the black children couldn't go to the white schools. So, they would set up, you know, in houses or, you know, inside churches, and he would teach children. Then he moved to Chicago [Illinois]. He was a barber and he opened a barbershop on the South Side of Chicago. And my dad was the shoeshine boy there. And my uncle took my mother [Doretha Wilbon Simpson] in there to get her hair cut. She wanted to get all this long hair cut. And my dad saw her when he was about fifteen, and he said, "I'm going to marry that girl." (Laughter) And she was only about twelve or thirteen when he saw her. And they did end up getting married, he was twenty-one and she was seventeen. And they married in Chicago, and that date was October 8, 1927. And why in the world do I remember that date (laughter)? It seems to have stuck in my head. Story_ID: 486045 Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Lytle Simpson] get a chance to finish school? Speaker 2: Yes, he finished high school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in Chicago [Illinois]. He went to Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], and he wanted to be an artist. He was a very accomplished artist. And if you saw my apartment, you would see some of his paintings on the wall. He couldn't go--he wanted to be an architect or an artist. And that wasn't something a black man would do, so of course he went to work for the post office, and he became a letter carrier. But he would paint the signs for windows, you know, like rib roast, five cents a pound. He would write those signs that would be in the windows of supermarkets, and wishing to be an artist. And not until he retired years later did he go to the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago] in Chicago and take some classes and start painting, as an older man. And the work is just beautiful, and you think, gee, what he could have done had he had the opportunity. Speaker 1: Did he ever mention [HistoryMaker] LeRoy Winbush or Vernon Guider? Those are two sign painters in Chicago, black sign painters. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Yeah. They were a little younger than he is. Speaker 2: Than he is, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. They used to do signs for the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois], you know, in those days. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, that's a, a post office job is a good job in those days. Speaker 2: It was a good job, yes, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know a lot of people that had, you know, who could do a lot more, like your father, ended up in those jobs like at the post office. Speaker 2: In those jobs, yes, it was steady. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But he ended up having three jobs. When I was a young girl, they bought a building. And so he was a landlord of a building that he would take care of, and he'd do the painting and the mowing of the grass and, you know, fixing up apartments for the next tenant. And he had a job with my uncle servicing radios in hotels. You know, you'd put twenty-five cents in for a half hour of music or something (laughter). Speaker 1: Really? They had, I didn't know that. They had coin-operated radios in the hotels (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And you'd drop them in. So he could repair those, and he would collect the money. I mean he was collecting quarters. But he actually had three jobs. And my mother [Doretha Wilbon Simpson] was sewing, she sewed for other people. So, that's how she made her money. And they did quite well, I mean, to be able to buy another building. But as I tell people, they're like, "Oh, is your father a doctor? Is your father this, or--?" "No, my father was a mailman (laughter). And my mother took in sewing in our house." I came from very humble beginnings, but with very strong parents with a strong sense of education. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you live in the building that your parents owned? Speaker 2: That was in, we lived in that building, and then he bought another house and that became the rental building. Speaker 1: Okay. Now where was the first building? Speaker 2: The first building was at 6401 Maryland Avenue, deep in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Those people who lived in Woodlawn a long time ago, when they drive through it now, they cry. Speaker 2: I know, it's so sad (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean I've been with people who actually have cried. Speaker 2: When I see our parents' house--because we had grass and flowers, and my mother had those boxes, window boxes, and those pots of flowers outside. Now it's just a wreck, it's a wreck. Speaker 1: Okay. So, all right, did you grow up in Woodlawn, basically? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Story_ID: 486046 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, your mother [Doretha Wilbon Simpson] and your father [Lytle Simpson], who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Both of them. My mother was tough, and she was mean. As a little girl, I thought she was mean. I can remember that she and I had a contest on whether I'd finish my meal. And she made me sit at the table, she was not going to let me leave the table until I'd finished my dinner. And I was bound and determined that I'd sit there all night, I wasn't going to finish that dinner (laughter). And she, she was, she was like that. I mean, it was--I remember her telling me when I was about eleven years old to keep my legs together, that I was a young lady now, and you don't throw your legs open, and you don't throw them over the edge of a chair, which I always did, and read books. I loved reading, and I would always read like that, with my leg hanging over. So she had told me, "I've told you to keep your legs together." So one day, I was out on our back porch reading, and she had let a pitcher of water with ice get ice cold. And she took that pitcher and doused the whole thing in my crotch. And to this day, it is difficult for me to open my legs (laughter). But it was like she was bound and determined, and she would do what it took. And I got slappings, and I got spankings, and I got punishment and all of those things. And I was kind of scared of my mother, but also wanted to make her proud, because when she was proud of me, I mean there wasn't more that she could do to make you feel special and that kind of thing. My dad was a softer person who loved nature and loved sunsets and loved music, and loved all of those kinds of things because of his artistic nature, I guess. And he taught me an appreciation for those kinds of things, which I love to this day. I guess that's why I like the fall, because they married in the fall, and it's just a beautiful time of year. He talked to me about Jack Frost and painting the leaves, and all those kinds of things. So I think I'm--and my dad was, everyone loved him. He was just a, he was a friendly mailman. He spoke to people and things like that. And I think I got that from him, because I try to be a friendly person and an outgoing person, and that kind of thing. Unfortunately, my mother died when she was sixty-four years old. She never really got to see me attain the heights that I reached in the television field, and I hope somewhere she's been able to see that I turned out well. And my dad lived to be eighty, so he did see. And he was just the proudest thing of me. We'd go places and he's like, "Well, do you know who this is? That's [HistoryMaker] Carole Simpson, that's my daughter." (Laughter) I'm like, "Daddy, please, don't do that. Don't tell people that, it's embarrassing. They don't know who I am." But I'm glad he was able to see, see me do well. Story_ID: 486047 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Earliest childhood--? I guess it would be the sewing machine, and learning my numbers. That's probably the earliest. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, can you give us an idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, when I was in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois], white flight began. We moved in and we were one of the first black families on the block, and then people started moving out. And from the time I was five or six, until the time I was fourteen and we moved to Chatham [Chicago, Illinois], the neighborhood began to change. Playing outside, we could play outside until the street lights came on in the summertime and play with kids. But as the neighborhood changed, I couldn't go out. Speaker 1: Now, your family's migration kind of parallels the story in 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry], where the black family wants to move out of, I think it was in Woodlawn and move further south (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --and get a house, and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yes, that's what we did. We went to Chatham, that's right. Speaker 1: A Chicago [Illinois] story. Speaker 2: And it was one of the reasons my parents [Doretha Wilbon Simpson and Lytle Simpson] wanted to move, because I was being hassled by men. They were afraid that some harm may come to me. I was grabbed in Jackson Park [Chicago, Illinois] and pulled into some bushes by a man. So, they began to be fearful for my safety in the neighborhood, and were anxious to get out and take me to a place where I wouldn't be scared to go to the store because some wino would fall all over me, and that kind of thing, so. Story_ID: 486048 Speaker 1: So, we were talking about sights and sounds and smells. And you were talking about being accosted in Jackson Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What happened? What were you-- Speaker 2: We went to the beach, and I guess I was lagging a little bit behind. And an arm came out of the bushes and grabbed me and pulled me into the bushes. And my parents [Doretha Wilbon Simpson and Lytle Simpson] had walked on with my sister [Jacqueline Simpson Dillard]. And I was screaming and screaming. And I kicked and I fought, and I got away. And of course, I got in trouble (laughter). I could have been raped, but that's--my mother is like, "I've told you not to lag behind. You stay, you stay with us. Don't, don't ever get into that situation again." The smells, I remember the penny store, the penny candy store. It was like a little, a tiny little store where you could get just the basics. But that's where we got our penny candy, and that's where we returned the soda bottles for a penny or two cents, and we could buy candy with that. I remember the sound of the Good Humor truck coming by, and begging my mother, "Please, please, can I get some ice cream? I want a Good Humor bar." And that's when the men were all in the white suits. That changed later to one of those Mister Softee questionable looking ice cream trucks, that you weren't sure what all they might be selling out of them (laughter). I remember the lightning bugs, the sights--it's a terrible thing to say, but we used to pull their tails off and make jewelry. We'd make rings with their little yellow tails, and we'd put the earrings on (laughter). The thought of it makes me crazy today. But we made jewelry off the lightning bugs. I had a good childhood, so the sights and sounds that I think of now, of the early days, were great. Story_ID: 486049 Speaker 1: But then, as I say, the neighborhood [Woodlawn, Chicago, Illinois] changed, and then there were lots of police cars around. And then there were sirens going, and then there was that fear factor that crept in. And oh, dear, what happened here? Speaker 2: So this is in the early '50s [1950s] when things started getting (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is, yes, yes. Speaker 2: --getting rougher? Speaker 1: It's getting rougher, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I remember seeing men beating women on the street, just things I had never seen before. And-- Speaker 2: Now, was 63rd Street like the main drag through your neighborhood (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The main drag, yes, 63rd Street. And I used to walk all the way from Maryland [Avenue] to Stony Island [Avenue] to go to Hyde Park High School [Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], and it was a beautiful street. There were bakeries on there, and shoe stores. And there was a Walgreens [Walgreens Company] where we used to go get phosphates after school, and things like that. And then, again (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the Walgreens made famous by Lou Rawls. In his first album [sic. 'Live!'] he talked about standing in the front of Walgreens-- Speaker 1: Really? How do you know all of this stuff? Speaker 2: --on 63rd Street [sic. 47th Street]. Speaker 1: Because you talk to all these people, that's why you know all this stuff. No, I didn't know that Walgreens was famous in a song. But again, the neighborhood changed. And those shops moved out and we didn't have the little bakery, and we didn't have the movie theater. The Maryland movie theater [Maryland Theater, Chicago, Illinois] closed up, and the Tower Theatre [Chicago, Illinois], which was right by Stony Island closed up. And so the movie theaters were gone. So, I watched the decline of a neighborhood, which was very sad to see. Story_ID: 486050 Speaker 1: Now you say you liked to read. Did you have favorite authors, or favorite series of books (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I read every Oz book there was, Frank L. Baum [sic. L. Frank Baum] and 'The Wizard of Oz' ['The Wonderful Wizard of Oz']. And there was a whole series of them, so I read all of those. I also loved fairy tales, all of the Grimm's [Jacob Grimm and Wilhelm Grimm] fairy tales. I read vociferously. And I read comic books, and I used to like those DC [DC Comics] horror comic books. To this day, I still like horror movies, not the bloody and gory ones like 'Chainsaw Massacre' ['The Texas Chainsaw Massacre'] or something, but I do like the Stephen King books and Dean Koontz. It's a way, after spending a career of dealing with reality, for me to escape into something that might be the occult or psychological thriller, or something like that. So, I do enjoy reading those books. Story_ID: 486051 Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have, and where do you stand or where do you fall (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have one sister [Jacqueline Simpson Dillard]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nine years older than I am. Speaker 1: Oh, that's really a--now, she was almost like another parent then. Speaker 2: She was, she took care of me. And we're, we were not very close because of the age difference. And she went to Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] and then got married and moved to California when I was sixteen. So, we never really had a close sibling relationship. Speaker 1: If she, if she went to Northwestern in those days, she was, you know-- Speaker 2: My parents [Doretha Wilbon Simpson and Lytle Simpson]-- Speaker 1: That's quite a-- Speaker 2: My parents scraped together, and guess who suffered? Poor little Carole [HistoryMaker Carole Simpson] (laughter). I had all of her hand-me-down clothes, I never got anything new. My mother sewed, so you know, stuff would last forever. So, I had all of her clothes, and to get something new was a rare occasion. I had to get new shoes, because my feet were growing. But everything was on my sister. She had a beautiful mezzo-soprano voice. I wish I had had her voice. She could have been another Leontyne Price. She was described as having a voice that's only born every generation. And so, my parents poured money into voice lessons. She started voice lessons when she was fourteen, and she got into Northwestern because--and with scholarship money--because of her voice. And she just didn't want it. She just wasn't, she didn't have the ambition. And it's because of her, probably that I was successful. Because she hurt my parents so much when they had spent so much money, and scraped and-- Speaker 1: Well, did she drop out of Northwestern, or did she finish? Speaker 2: No, she finished Northwestern (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She finished, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: She didn't-- Speaker 2: And then she got married. Speaker 1: She didn't pursue music? Speaker 2: She didn't pursue music. She would sing at weddings, you know. She was with the Los Angeles Opera company in the chorus for maybe a year. But she just, she didn't want it. I don't know how else to describe it. As I was saying, my mother's dream was for her to sing and for me to be her accompanist. So I took piano lessons, and she had this vision of the Simpson sisters (laughter). And I hated playing piano, but I was going to do this for Mama. And my sister, as I said, got married to a man that my family didn't particularly approve of, and moved away and that was it. And so my mother turned to me and she said, "Now, you're all we have. Make us proud. You're going to make us proud, aren't you?" So, I felt this burden as a young girl that I had to make my parents proud. And I didn't have a mezzo-soprano voice. I had a good speaking voice, but I didn't have that. So I was like, what can I do to make them proud? Well, I made good grades, and I got into plays so that they could come see me on stage and do something. So from elementary school, through high school, through college, I always had as an extracurricular activity, drama. And thank God for that, because that helped me develop the voice that made it possible for me to have a career in broadcast journalism. I learned how to use that voice, how to project it, how to speak in front of many people and not be afraid. So, it's, you know, it's like serendipity. You know, if my sister had been a success, what would I have been? Maybe I would have been nothing. But maybe I would have been. I often wonder. I wonder if the pressure that I felt from my parents to make them proud and to make something of myself is responsible for my career, rather than any of my own talent. But I had drive, I had ambition, I had motivation, all the things that my sister did not. Speaker 1: Did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I was not sure what I was going to do with them. Story_ID: 486052 Speaker 1: And did your mother [Doretha Wilbon Simpson]--did your sister [Jacqueline Simpson Dillard] ever discuss, any of the, any of the difficulties in terms of being involved in opera? Because I imagine there weren't many blacks in opera in those days (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, not at all, no. She didn't have any difficulties, because she was so good. She was just so good. I mean she wasn't academically good, and if it hadn't been for her voice and the recitals that she had as a student up there--that she was able to get through Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. But she just--they wanted her to tour with 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] to Russia. She turned it down; she didn't, she didn't want to do it. It's like how could you turn down something like that? She was twenty-one, and they wanted her to play--what's the role that [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll played in the movie ['Porgy and Bess']? I can't remember her character's name [Clara] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where she sang 'Summertime?' Speaker 2: Yes, the one who sang 'Summertime,' that's the role they wanted her to play. And she said no to that. She just-- Speaker 1: She was there when Charlton Heston was there, I guess, or about the same time, you know. I don't know any stories about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he's much older. Speaker 1: Is he? Is he? Speaker 2: Yeah, he's in his eighties. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So it was a-- Speaker 2: She's in her seventies. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yes, it was before then. He was before her. Story_ID: 486053 Speaker 1: Did you have any special teachers or mentors in grade school? Now where did you go to grade school, first of all? Where did you start? Speaker 2: Wadsworth [James Wadsworth Elementary School; James Wadsworth PK-8 STEM Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Well, no, A.O. Sexton School [Austin O. Sexton Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. And that was near Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois]. I'm not sure of the street. Was it Rhodes [Avenue] or Vernon [Avenue] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think so. Right behind Cottage Grove [Avenue], right? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. And I was just there for two years, and then I went to Wadsworth Elementary School. That was at 64th and University [sic. 67th Street and Ellis Avenue] in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois]. Again, it was an integrated school and that was, again, before all the white flight started going out of Woodlawn. So, I went to school with Japanese kids and Jewish kids and white kids. So, I grew up pretty much in an integrated atmosphere, at least in school, not in the neighborhood. But I knew how to deal with other kinds of people. Speaker 1: Were the students there associated with the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, just a public school. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, Wadsworth. So were there any, any particular teachers that were-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that helped? Speaker 2: I had a teacher that told me--and it's very funny. About ten years ago, I got a letter from Miss Delphine Healey, and she had been my, I think my sixth grade teacher. And she sent me a letter, and enclosed was a paper that I had written in sixth grade about Thanksgiving, what Thanksgiving means to me or something like that. And she had saved it all these years. I got this ten years ago. She had saved it for fifty years, because she thought--and she told me she thought I was a really good writer. And she had saved that, and she said, "You know, I'm getting very old now, and I thought you would like to have it. I've saved it all these years, because it was one of the best papers that any of my students had ever turned in. And so, I still have it." And you know what? It was pretty good (laughter). It was pretty good for a sixth grader. Story_ID: 486054 Speaker 1: So I had in my mind, back of my mind, writing. And so when I got to high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I was further encouraged about the writing, and started on the high school newspaper, The Hyde Parker. And that's when I decided I wanted to be a journalist. I wanted to be a newspaper reporter, I wanted to be a colored Lois Lane or Brenda Starr. Those were the only reporters I knew, I didn't know any. They were cartoon, comic strip characters, because I didn't know of any women that were actually doing that job. But working on the high school newspaper, I loved it. I knew stuff before other people. I could go and talk to the principal and interview him, and interview teachers and students. And I loved it. So I, I mean it's just amazing that I thought I could do this based on not knowing anyone who had been a female, or certainly not a black person who was a reporter. Speaker 2: Now did you get any of the black papers at home in those days? Speaker 1: Yes, my family got Jet magazine, and Ebony, and the Chicago Defender, yep. Speaker 2: Okay. Were there any black women writing for the Defender in those days that you can think of? Speaker 1: If they were, I don't know. I mean I wasn't reading it, my parents [Doretha Wilbon Simpson and Lytle Simpson] read it. I guess there was a social--I vaguely remember that there was some kind of society column that a woman probably wrote. But I don't remember the name. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Now was, was radio or TV a big deal when you were growing up? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: No, it wasn't. The newspapers were. I mean, when I was growing up there was the Chicago Daily News, the Chicago Tribune, the Chicago Sun-Times, and the Chicago Herald [Chicago Times-Herald]. It was a big newspaper town. And I saw those papers, and I wanted to be in those papers and have a by-line in the newspaper. And radio, you know, what I was listening to was Top 40 music like every other teenager. So, and there weren't all-news stations or anything like that. So, TV was in its infancy, really, in the '50s [1950s]. I remember when we bought one of those color wheels, trying to make yourself have a color TV (laughter) when there was, when there was no color (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a piece of Mylar. And they had-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --gradients of color. Speaker 1: It was, yes, it was like the craziest thing in the world. So, no, TV was--and, but I did have to watch the news on TV with the family. We all sat down at dinnertime and ate and watched the news. We watched the local news and then we watched 'Huntley-Brinkley' ['The Huntley-Brinkley Report'], and that's an experience children today I don't think have at all. My own children [Mallika Marshall and Adam Simpson-Marshall] didn't have it. Because I would be working late, or they would have soccer practice or piano lessons or things like that. So, it's, it's not like it was in the '50s [1950s] when the family was really a nuclear family and did all these things together. So I grew up with an appreciation for news, because we did watch it, and it was considered important that we watch the news. So, but I wanted to be a newspaper reporter. Story_ID: 486055 Speaker 1: Did your family follow the Civil Rights Movement in the paper? I mean, in the news on television and discuss it a lot? Or did--because that was the time when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, sure. That was, you know, Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] occurred when I was growing up. Speaker 1: Yeah, you're in high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] when-- Speaker 2: And Rosa Parks-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and the Montgomery Bus Boycott, and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. And you know, all that stuff was covered in Jet, and that's where we got a lot of the black national news. So, yes, they were aware and kept up with it. And I would hear things. You know, they wouldn't talk that much about it around me. I think they wanted to shield me from discrimination as much as possible, but they couldn't. That didn't last long before I was called a nigger by some student I went to high school with, or something like that. So, it was in high school where we really kind of separated out. The black kids hung together, the white kids hung together. And because I was in those activities, because I'd joined the choir and was in drama and worked on the high school newspaper [The Hyde Parker], I was exposed to other kids. But other than that, there was that separation you could see. Speaker 1: Okay, now did any of the racial discrimination come out in terms of the roles you got in drama, and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. So you thought it was pretty fair-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --in terms of how they-- Speaker 2: I was good, I was pretty good (laughter). Speaker 1: So did you get a lead in a lot of plays, or did you get a good role (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I did, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of the leading roles, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Do you remember any of the plays that you did? Speaker 2: 'Annie Get Your Gun' [Dorothy Fields and Herbert Fields], 'The Glass Menagerie' [Tennessee Williams]. Gee, I can't remember all of the things. 'Midsummer Night's Dream' ['A Midsummer Night's Dream,' William Shakespeare], just all kind of stuff. Story_ID: 486056 Speaker 1: Now, Hyde Park [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] was considered a good school-- Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Speaker 1: --in those days. Speaker 2: It was. It won the state math championship, and was very good in science. Yeah, it was a very good school. Speaker 1: Located-- Speaker 2: But I'm fortunate to have attended a good public school. When I was in elementary school [James Wadsworth Elementary School; James Wadsworth PK-8 STEM Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], they had suggested that I go to the University of Chicago Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. They called my parents [Doretha Wilbon Simpson and Lytle Simpson] and they thought that I could handle that, and it would be good if I could go there. And my parents, you know, couldn't afford it. I skipped a grade. That's what they could do to try to recognize my academic ability. But my parents could never afford to send me to private school. And I was very happy that I was able to send my own daughter [Mallika Marshall] there when we were living in Chicago [Illinois]. I said, "Well, we got to the Lab School after all. We finally got to the Lab School." Speaker 1: So, did, well, you know, Hyde Park is--for those who are not from Chicago, it's located right at--you've got the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois] there, and you've got the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. Did you take advantage of those--? Speaker 2: No. My parents didn't know about taking advantage of those things. And I told you how hard they worked (laughter). There wasn't time for going to museums and things like that. Story_ID: 486057 Speaker 1: Now, was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did your parents [Doretha Wilbon Simpson and Lytle Simpson] stay in the Baptist church? Speaker 2: No, we were Lutheran, St. Philips Lutheran Church [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was at 62nd [Street] and Eberhart [Avenue], I believe. Speaker 1: Okay, St. Philips Lutheran. Now, did you--I did ask before. But did you know your grandfather [Frank Wilbon] from--your mother's father? Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He died when I was about twenty-three. And he stayed a while with us when he was sick, so I got to know him very well. Now, for a white man, he was very prejudiced (laughter). He told me that he didn't want me bringing any--what did he call them? Hard leg niggers home. And by that, hard leg meant that walk, you know, the walk that black guys (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, the dip. Speaker 2: With that little (laughter) dip. And he said, "I want you to get a man with some looks and some money. That's what I want for you, sweetheart." (Laughter) He was really concerned about who I was going to marry. I was his oldest daughter's child, so he felt very close to me. He had a zillion grandchildren, but he was very close to me, and I was close to him. And it's, it's a shame, again, of talent wasted when I think about my sister's [Jacqueline Simpson Dillard] talent and my father's talent. My grandfather was probably one of the funniest men alive. I mean just quick wit, just the funniest things (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is your mother's father? Speaker 2: This is my mother's father. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, he could have been (laughter) a Bob Hope or--who were the funny people back around his day? He was just amazingly--and again, that fire and brimstone preaching. And people loved him because he would work jokes into his sermons. And I think about, gee, he could have really been a fantastic comedian. Speaker 1: Was he a part of the National Baptist Convention? I was just wondering. He was a Baptist, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Did he participate in-- Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: I know Chicago [Illinois] was the headquarters of Reverend Joseph Jackson [Joseph H. Jackson]-- Speaker 2: Yes, I know that. Speaker 1: --at Mt. Olivet [sic. Olivet Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: But I don't think, I don't think Papa, that's what I called him, I don't think he was involved. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what about your other grandparents [Amanda Simpson and Stephen Simpson] on your father's side? Speaker 2: I didn't know them. They died before--I think I was alive, but they died when I was very, very, young. So I don't remember them. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, your father's father was in education and all that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And I didn't have a grandmother. And that's why I'm anxious to be such a great grandmother, because I didn't grow up with grandparents. And my Papa was mostly in Georgia, and I didn't get to know him until later in life, except for the summers, we would go down and visit him. Story_ID: 486058 Speaker 1: You were part of, I think we were talking before we started, that you were part of the elite students at Hyde Park [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], the smarter students, right? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: And so, did you--when you graduated, did you graduate with honors or anything? Speaker 2: No honors, but I was in the Honor Society. Speaker 1: Okay. The National Honor Society? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I, now you're getting to the important part of my life, and that is trying to become a journalist. I wanted to go to Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], which had the Medill School of Journalism [Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications]. And my parents [Doretha Wilbon Simpson and Lytle Simpson] and I had this big fight, because my mother wanted me to get a teaching degree. She was so afraid that I would not be able to take care of myself. You know, if a man left me, God forbid. It was important in her mind that I be able to work and have a job and be able to take care of myself, and teaching was certainly the thing that there was going to continue to be a need for. And she was like, "I don't know about this journalism. I think it's crazy. I mean that's like you wanting to be an actress or something. You're not going to make any money doing that. You can't do that. I mean, you get a teaching degree and then you try this journalism thing. But I want to make sure that you have a teaching certificate." And I was like, "Why should I waste my time? I don't want to teach. I'm not going to be a teacher. I really want to be a journalist." I mean we went back and forth, and back and forth. And finally, I guess I wore them down (laughter). I was stubborn as she was, but I wore her down. And she said, "Okay, if that's what you want to do." So I'm thinking I'm going to Northwestern. I live in Chicago [Illinois], and I've got good grades and all of these activities I was involved in, and I was on the high school newspaper. So, I went up to visit and I had a meeting with an admissions counselor. And he goes, "Why would you want to be a journalist?" And I said, "Because I like to write, I like to report, and that's really what I want to do with my life. I want to tell the stories of people. Communication, I mean it's so important." I was into my free press thing, and everything. And he said, "I'm sorry to tell you this, young lady, but you're not going to get a job in journalism. You ought to go to Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] and become a nice English teacher." I couldn't believe that he said that, which is what my mother wanted me to do. And I was like, "But why can't I be a journalist? I don't want to be a teacher." And he said, "Well, all you're going to be able to work for is the Chicago Defender, or Jet magazine, or Ebony." I said, "No, I want to work for the Tribune [Chicago Tribune], I want to work for the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times]." And he was going, "It's not going to happen." And he said, "You've got three strikes against you. You're a Negro, you're a woman, and you're inexperienced." And I said, "But you're going to give me the experience. I'm going to come to Northwestern (laughter). You're going to teach me how to be good." And he was saying, "You know, you have a nice record, and I think you really should consider being a teacher." So, sure enough, I got the rejection letter a couple of months later, saying, "We regret to inform you that you will not be entering our class of 19--" whatever, '59 [1959] or something. And it was just so hurtful to me, and I cried and cried and cried, and thought about what my mother said. And I was just so disappointed. But then I got mad. Story_ID: 486059 Speaker 1: Okay. So as most people would, you got angry at this. And what did you, what did you--? Speaker 2: I was so mad that somebody would tell me that I couldn't do what I wanted to do. I mean, I didn't have the experience of the South. I was growing up in Chicago [Illinois] and kind of blase about racism, because it was more subtle in Chicago than it was overt in the South. I mean, people would have known right away, but I'm thinking this man's crazy. Why, why can't I do this? So, I got so angry that someone would tell me I couldn't do what I wanted do when I had all the credentials that they would want from a prospective student. I just, that just made me want to be a journalist all the more. It's like I'm going to show you. Oh, you just don't know (laughter). And I didn't tell my parents [Doretha Wilbon Simpson and Lytle Simpson] what he said, because my mother might have said, "I told you so, I told you so," and I didn't tell her that. But I was rejected by Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. And I love to tell the story now, because I taught at Northwestern for three years, and I loved telling my students that I wasn't good enough to go there, but I was good enough to teach there. And I actually ended up as a finalist for dean of the School of Journalism [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications] at Northwestern. So, it came full circle from them telling me I'm not good enough to go here, to their wanting me (laughter) to have the highest position at the School of Journalism. So, that was wonderful to see that happen. So anyhow, my parents said, "Well, you know, what are you going to do now?" They said, "You know, we'll let you go away to school, to another school, if you help us save tuition for a couple of years here. So I went to Navy Pier, which was the University of Illinois Chicago [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] campus before it was a Chicago campus. I went to Navy Pier, and of course, the first two years of journalism curriculum is going to involve liberal arts anyhow. I took liberal arts and started planning on the school that I really wanted to go to. And I decided on the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] because it was a very good school. It was called the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] of the West back in those days, and they had a good journalism department. And so I applied to Michigan and got into their school of journalism, and I did very well there. I continued to act, and worked on The Michigan Daily newspaper. And Tom Hayden, the radical from the '60s [1960s] from the Chicago Seven trial, he was editor of the paper when I was a reporter on the newspaper. I ended up later covering his trial, the Chicago conspiracy trial, after we'd been at Michigan as editor and reporter (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is about, so this is 19--you graduated from high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] in what, '58 [1958]? Or-- Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958] or-- Speaker 1: Fifty--because you skipped a year. Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958], yeah, it's '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: So it's '58 [1958]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. And you started the University of Illinois in '58 [1958], and then you went to the University of Michigan. Speaker 2: In '60 [1960]. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960], okay, okay. Speaker 2: And I graduated in '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 486060 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to the placement bureau. I was the only black in the department. There were sixty journalism students, graduates. And I went to all the campus interviews, and I got the same story I heard from the Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] admissions counselor, that they couldn't hire me because I had three strikes against me. (Laughter) I was female, I was black, and I didn't have any experience. And I'm going, "Well, how do you get experience? I mean you have to get a job to get some experience. Why can't I get a job?" Now I'm--you thought I was mad before, now here are all of these newspapers from around the country that had come to recruit reporters, and I was the only one that was not picked for a job. Speaker 2: Now, now-- Speaker 1: I graduated--I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Now, I'm just saying, when you were in school, I read somewhere that you interned in the summers for a community newspaper in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, [HistoryMaker] Gus Savage. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Gus Savage's paper. Speaker 2: Gus Savage's--yeah, Gus Savage became a congressman. Speaker 1: And I forget. It was the Chatham News [sic. Citizen] or something. He had several. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah. Gus Savage did, right. Speaker 1: But I did stuff for the--yes. Speaker 2: And he became a congressman-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --in the 2nd District later. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: The same year that Harold Washington became a congressman. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: In 1980, I believe it was. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. All right, so here's somebody that's real political real, you know, who did--what was that experience like before we get you out of the district. Speaker 1: Oh, I was a kid, you know (laughter). They sent me out to get zoning ordinance stories and stuff like that. So, I didn't have much contact with him. And I worked with the copy editor and the editors on the desk, but I didn't have much contact with him. So, it was just a summer job. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: But I was writing. Speaker 2: So you did that every summer, you worked for the same paper (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two summers, two summers. Speaker 2: Two summers, okay. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, when I was at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan]. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 486061 Speaker 1: So I was now devastated, because I had no job. I had the degree and I had no job. And all of the white students had jobs, and now the racism is like hitting me, and the sexism is hitting me in the face. And I came back home after graduation and went to work at the Chicago Public Library [Chicago, Illinois], and I had started working there when I was sixteen. I'd been working there after school and on Saturdays, and I took a full-time job at the Chicago Public Library, with my degree in journalism and no prospects. Speaker 2: So what was your position there? Speaker 1: Just librarian, helping people find books. Speaker 2: Just desk librarian? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Checking out books and putting them on the shelves. The whole thing that I did, you know, years ago when I was a kid. Speaker 2: What branch did you work for? Speaker 1: Downtown. Speaker 2: Downtown, okay. Speaker 1: And I got a call in August from the chair of my journalism school, and he felt so awful that I was the only one that didn't get a job, and that he had worked all summer long. And I didn't know that, but he'd been working all summer to try to place me somewhere, giving me some kind of journalism job. And he said, "Carole [HistoryMaker Carole Simpson], I've got a job for you." And this is where Sam Yette [HistoryMaker Samuel Yette] came in. He said, "I've lined up an internship for you at Tuskegee Institute in Alabama [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee Alabama]." And I go, "In Alabama?" (Laughter) It's 1962 now. I said, "In Alabama?" He said, "Yes, you'll be head of the information bureau. You'll be writing press releases about the college, and you're going to teach a course in journalism. And you're going to work towards credit to your master's degree here at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan]. This will go as credit towards your master's degree." Speaker 2: So the image of Alabama, say, in '62 [1962], this is before the 1963-- Speaker 1: The Freedom Rides had started in '61 [1961] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, all right. Speaker 1: I mean, stuff was happening. Speaker 2: They burned a bus up in Anniston, Alabama-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --to a crisp-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --with people on it, and people had to run off. Speaker 1: This is what I'm thinking, oh, my God, I'm going to Alabama in 1962. But I couldn't work at the Chicago Public Library, and it was like, it's a job. And I remember it was fifty-eight hundred dollars a year, which was more money than my father [Lytle Simpson] made when he retired from the post office. Can you imagine? I didn't know about money. He was only making thirty-four hundred dollars a year after thirty years at the U.S. Post Office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. So here I am--and that was no money really, but it was a job. Story_ID: 486062 Speaker 1: So I said I'm going, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, how does Sam Yette [HistoryMaker Samuel Yette] fit into this? Speaker 1: It was his job that he was leaving. And I don't know if it was to go to Voice of America or what. But he was leaving and going to Washington [D.C.], and I took his position. Speaker 2: That might have been when he went to the Journal Herald [Dayton Journal Herald]. I don't, I think--I don't know, it might have been. Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: I think that was his first job with a paper (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't know him. I didn't get to meet him. Speaker 2: That was his first job with a paper. And then he went from the Journal Herald to Newsweek. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, it was his job that I took. And I was scared to death, because I'm going down into Alabama. And Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] is as rural as you can get. The town was about five thousand people, mostly black, in Macon County, Alabama. And the segregation, I'd never really experienced like it was there. So I thought, well, it'll be a learning experience for me, too. I mean, I've grown up in the North and have been in integrated situations. This may be a great opportunity to see what my people are going through, what I've been reading about--to actually go through it. But I have to admit, I was scared. So anyhow, I took the job and I went down to Alabama, and it was scary. (Laughter) It was just scary. I took the train, and I refused to go through the colored waiting room and the colored restroom. I thought I was going to wet on myself, but I refused (laughter) as soon as I got there to go into the segregated facilities. But I got to the campus, and I'm now at home. There were all black people. It's a historically black college [HBCU], and so I had a lot of things to learn. I didn't know that you spoke to everybody. I came from Chicago [Illinois]; you don't talk to strangers on the street (laughter). But I was considered stuck-up, high yellow, from the North, and that I didn't know how to talk to people. (Laughter) So, they had to get to me. Friends of mine that I had made said, "You have to speak to people. You know, when people say hello to you, you have to respond back. That's the southern way." (Laughter) So, I had to learn how to be friendly, "How you doing?" (Laughter) And speak to people. Story_ID: 486063 Speaker 1: I didn't know about the color thing, the brown paper bag thing. Does our audience know about the brown paper bag thing? Speaker 2: It's the--tell us. Speaker 1: Tell them about the brown paper bag? Speaker 2: Yeah, tell them, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, I wanted to go to--by that time I was interested in the Episcopal church, and I wanted to go to the Episcopal church. And I was told that I could probably get in, join that church because I would pass the brown paper bag test. And I said, "What's a brown paper bag test?" And they said, "Well, you know, at that church, if you're not lighter than a brown paper bag, you cannot join that church." Then I learned about racism within racism within our race. I mean I was like, "You've got to be kidding me." And this high yellow thing that I was called, and my hair--that my hair was not kinkier than it was--that set me apart. I was a house nigger. I'd come out of a house nigger situation rather than the field niggers who were darker skinned, and that the favored people were the lighter skinned people that would work in the house. I just, I had no idea about any of this, and that it was still alive. And so you talk about learning how to be friendly with people, and how to get people to like me--I mean I just had to bend over backwards. I thought this was the most ridiculous thing I had ever heard of. And I had never had any colored consciousness. I never thought of myself as a light-skinned Negro versus a dark-skinned person. My best friends were dark-skinned. My guy who took me to my high school prom was very dark-skinned. And I just found that in the South that that was still existing, and that black people were making distinctions between themselves. And excluding certain people based on skin color just drove me crazy. Of course, I ran into that again in New Orleans [Louisiana]. And the people that were in the 9th Ward, which was devastated by Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], a lot of them were, had passed the brown paper bag test, and were lighter-skinned people. Story_ID: 486064 Speaker 1: So I learned so much down there. The movie theater, I couldn't go to the movie theater. I wanted to go to a movie, but we had to sit in the balcony. You could not be on the first floor at all. You had to enter the balcony from an outside staircase to this little theater. So, you had to bring your own concessions. You had to bring your own popcorn and candy or whatever you wanted for the movie, because you couldn't--so I was not going to go to the movie like that, so I didn't go to the movies. I went to Montgomery, Alabama, the capital of the State of Alabama. That's where we had to shop for clothing. But I couldn't try on any clothes, because I would not go into the colored dressing room versus the white dressing room. Black women were not allowed to try on hats because of the grease in their hair, which white women would not stand it. If you put it on your--if a black woman tried on a hat, there'd be grease. So people had to guess. I had to guess about my clothes. I'd have to hold them up to me. And ended up, that was so awful, but I ended up catalog shopping. I just couldn't stand those kinds of things. I was walking down the street, and a bunch of white boys--I have to get some water for this, it's so horrible--a bunch of white boys yelled out the window to me as I was walking down the sidewalk, "Hey--." Can I say these words, or do I need to spell them out? Speaker 2: You can say them. I don't know, we don't have any censorship as such, I guess. But-- Speaker 1: They called me, "Hey, nigger cunt. How big is your pussy? You nigger, nigger, nigger, nigger, nigger." I had never heard anything like this in my life. And it's like, what do you do? And they stuck their finger up in the air to me. And it's like, I'm walking down the street. What are these people saying these awful things to me for? Story_ID: 486065 Speaker 1: -When I heard that, and it's like--are you rolling? I, I, as I say, I'm emotional about it, again, because it hurt me so badly. It's like I'm just walking, you don't know me. Why would you have the right to yell something out of a window at me like that? And there were periods when I just hated that I had to have been born a black woman. I just hated that people could look at me and not know me, know anything about me, and call me such horrible things. And I cried and cried and cried. And then I get mad again (laughter). I have to get that crying out, and then I get mad. And this, you know, dyed in the wool integrationist, that we've got to stop the segregated South, and I hate the South, and it's got to change and that's when my journalism, again, came back to me. People have to know that somebody like me, who was a nice girl, could be talked to that way. I mean, my desire to tell the story of what it was like to black in the South came out all the more, of why I've got to be a journalist. I have to tell these stories so that people will know. And I got very involved with people that were in the Civil Rights Movement. I couldn't do it with the university [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and my thing at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan]. I couldn't get myself involved, but I was doing everything I could to help and advise those that on the campus and my own students who were involved (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who were some of the-- Story_ID: 486066 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were some of the--I know in other interviews they've mentioned Professor Gomillion [Charles G. Gomillion] I think at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] was-- Speaker 2: Not when I was there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not when you were there, okay. Speaker 2: I was only there two years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962] to '64 [1964]. But I was there when George Wallace stood in the schoolhouse door. I mean, that was thirty miles from where I was. The national press corps was all there. So, it was just an amazing experience for a northern girl to go down there. Speaker 1: Who were some of the people in the civil rights community that you met that we would know (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were people you would not know. They weren't famous people. They were students, for the most part, that were joining demonstrations and things like that. Speaker 1: Well, that's important too. I think that the public gets the notion that there were these big leaders only that did things. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But these were people that you say-- Speaker 2: These were my students who were going off. They'd send out a call, "We're going to be marching on this courthouse," or "We're going to--." And of course as I say, the state capital was so close, they were going back and forth there all the time to demonstrate, some of them getting arrested and things like that. But I was not part of the Civil Rights Movement in the sense that my body was not on the line. But I felt and knew, you know, as if I were. Because these were people close to me and I was talking to them about America's got to change, this is not right. As I told you, I'm a major patriot, okay. As many things that are wrong in this country, and that I criticize it for, I still wouldn't want to be anyplace else. And I've been to sixty-five countries on five continents, and there was no place else that I would want to live. All you see are people clamoring to get into the United States. You don't see anybody trying to get out and move someplace else. Everybody wants to come here. And I take, I take to heart and I hold dear that, "We hold these truths to be self-evident that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." I mean just that--you know, we have a free press and free assembly. The First Amendment, as I tell you, I taught the First Amendment for two years. I mean that is so fundamental, that we have a country with these fundamental rights and the people in the South were not enjoying these. This is wrong (simultaneous). Story_ID: 486067 Speaker 1: Did you identify with the national government and what it was doing in those days, the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] administration and the Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration? Speaker 2: No. I could only identify--I mean I was in the middle of this stuff. And you know, what Washington [D.C.] was doing, we'd hear about it and we'd see some of it on the news. But the local news was what was really important, and what we were focused on. Of course, as I learned about what they were trying to do, yes, you were happy about that. But you knew it had to--you knew it had to end. I mean it just, it wasn't going to stand. Segregation was not going to stand. Speaker 1: Did the assassination of Kennedy have a big impact on you? Speaker 2: Absolutely. I was, I was down there, and I remember in-between classes I'd gone back to my room to change clothes. And the TV was on, and I saw Walter Cronkite and heard that first bulletin. Because I would always go in and turn on the TV when I got in my room. It was like company, because I was all by myself. And I remember breaking down crying and then looking out the window, and people were crying everywhere. I mean the whole campus, I mean the campus just shut down and people were openly weeping. And you know how black people cry. Loudly (laughter). And there were services in the chapel at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and all the churches. So it was very real. It was very, very, real down there, to be in the situation I was in. I don't think in Chicago [Illinois] I would have reacted the same way I did being in Alabama. Because we felt he was on our side. We felt that Kennedy, you know, was going to do something about this. So with his death, there was that dash of hope that--what is Johnson going to do, coming from Texas (laughter)? Yeah, that was, that was hard. Story_ID: 486068 Speaker 1: So you were there until 1964 I guess it was? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I decided that I've got to be this journalist, right? So, I'm going to go to graduate school. If I get another degree, certainly somebody's going to hire me. So I started applying to universities, and I ended up at the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] only because they gave me a good fellowship, which I could pay for my tuition and work, and that kind of thing. I didn't want my parents [Doretha Wilbon Simpson and Lytle Simpson] to pay for my graduate studies, so I went from Alabama to the University of Iowa, in the whitest state, one of the whitest states in America (laughter). And this is culture shock, you know. It's rural, it's Iowa; it's rural, and I've been in the black segregated South. So, I was at the University of Iowa where I was seeking a master's degree in journalism. And I happened to have a two hour hole in my schedule that I needed to fill. And the only course I could fill it with was a radio/TV workshop. I had never considered radio and television before then because I wanted to be a print journalist. But I took this course and I fell in love with broadcast journalism. Because not only could I go out and report the story, gather the story and write it, but I could deliver it on the air. And so I applied to work for the radio station [WSUI Radio, Iowa City, Iowa]. It was a campus radio station, but it was heard in the whole town of Iowa City [Iowa]. And I applied to be a newscaster there and tried out. And they loved my voice, that voice that I got from all those acting, those acting years (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there-- Story_ID: 486069 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there a story about the development of your voice? I think now you do have a distinctive voice, and there's a way that you pronounce your name that is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) People-- Speaker 1: --every consonant is hit-- Speaker 2: People tickle me to death. They're always saying, "Say your name for me." (Laughter) I can't do it. I don't know. You know, after you say your name a thousand times, five thousand times, you know, it gets a cadence to it that you're not even aware of because you say it so much. So, I'm not aware that it's distinctive, but people say it is. But no, I think probably the resonance of the voice is my sister [Jacqueline Simpson Dillard] was a mezzo-soprano. I didn't get the singing voice, but I had a speaking voice. And people say it has something to do with the cavity, your mouth cavity, and how much air you can push out and all those kinds of things, I guess things that speech therapists would know about. But it was a voice that they had not heard women give, and I became the first woman to broadcast news there because they found other women's voices too thin, too high, not authoritative enough. But the deepness of my voice and how deep I can make it go, I can even make it go very deep when I get angry with people (laughter). So I got the chance to be the first woman to do news on WSUI [WSUI Radio, Iowa City, Iowa], and I really, really enjoyed it. So I left Iowa [University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa] in 1965 looking for a job still in newspapers. But there was a man who had been driving from Chicago [Illinois] to Des Moines [Iowa] to visit his mother, and he turned the radio on and he heard this voice. To hear a female voice giving the news was unheard of 1965. And he said he remembered the name. And he had happened to be the head of Channel 5, WMAQ-TV in Chicago. Story_ID: 486070 Speaker 1: --Was heard by an executive from WMAQ [WMAQ-TV] in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: WMAQ Radio? Speaker 2: TV. Speaker 1: TV? Speaker 2: TV. Speaker 1: Channel 5, yeah. Speaker 2: And he said that he jotted down the name, and he didn't think any more about it until he later heard me on radio in Chicago. So what happened was I left Iowa and I was looking for a print job, and was about to take one with the St. Louis Post-Dispatch when I got a call from WCFL Radio [Chicago, Illinois]. And they said that they had heard a tape of mine from WSUI [WSUI Radio] in Iowa City [Iowa], and they'd like to audition me for the radio station. So I went there and it was a 100,000 watts station. It was heard, people on the East Coast heard that station at night. It was a big powerhouse station. And they were a Top 40 rock station, but had a big news department and were very serious about covering news in Chicago. So I auditioned, and they sent me out as a reporter to get a story and they tried me in the studio. And I accepted this job, and I became the first woman to broadcast news in the City of Chicago, white or black. Speaker 1: Really? The first woman, period. So you were ahead of--now I wasn't here when it [HistoryMaker] Merri Dee and those kind of people (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not doing the news. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were deejays, and I was doing hard news. Yeah, and Yvonne Daniels. Those were all deejays. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 486071 Speaker 1: The men were not happy in the news department [at WCFL Radio, Chicago, Illinois]. It was a big news department, and they were not happy that I was hired straight from the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa]--that I'd not, you know, paid my dues by working in Mexico, Missouri first and then in Traverse City, Michigan and then come to Chicago [Illinois], as most of them had done. And most of them had started in radio. They hadn't gone to college. I mean they didn't have the education that I had--a college degree and graduate work. And so they said, "She got this job because she's black and she's female," and I guess there was a little plot to do me in. So, among the things they did--I had a newscast at nine o'clock in the morning, and then the rest of the day I'd be on the street covering news stories. When I would go in to do my newscast, these were the kinds of things they did to me. The door would open and I would see somebody's big, white butt. They would moon me, drop their pants. And to shake me on the air while I'm doing this five-minute newscast that this would happen. I had a rubber tarantula, a big, giant rubber tarantula thrown on the desk. I hate insects, okay (laughter). And this was thrown on the desk while I was doing my newscast. Speaker 2: What happened? Did you scream? Speaker 1: I did not. Get mad, see, I was getting mad. I knew what they were up to. They were trying to make me mess up on the air, and I'm not going to do it. I had them come into the studio while I was on the air. Again, you can't stop. I'm reading the newscast, and they start taking the papers away from me while I was reading them, so that the rest of my newscast I wouldn't have in my hand. But that's when I learned tricks like, "I'm repeating our first story, our main story today." (Laughter) I would go back and start re-reading the pages that I had already read, seamlessly, without making a stop because of these fools that were trying to make me mess up. They even lit, they would come into the studio and light fire to the--they'd take a big lighter or something and light the pages of my newscast. And I'm just wiping them off and putting out the fire and continuing to read. Story_ID: 486072 Speaker 1: Now, what did management--did management know of these antics [at WCFL Radio, Chicago, Illinois]? And did they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was, I was afraid to tell. People knew, everybody knew, because people could see and people had heard, and people knew about the plot. And I was determined that it wouldn't rattle me, so that management would have no excuse to say--I mean it's 1965, and we still--I mean the Civil Rights Bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964] had just been passed. I had come from Alabama; I was scared to make any noise or rock any boats. Boy, did that change later. But at that age, I'm twenty-three, and I'm like scared to death of everybody, and I'm just trying to do my job. So, no, I didn't go to management about it. But I'm sure management heard about it and saw that I was able to hold it together despite all of this stuff that was happening to me. But, you know, it's good it did. Because to this day, anything can be going on in the newsroom. If I'm on the air and a red light is on, nothing will rattle me. I've had lights explode in the ceiling; it sounded like a gunshot. You would never know that (laughter) I had heard it, I could keep going. I had an anchorman, Floyd Kalber, I'm sorry he's passed now. And he was a great anchorman in Chicago [Illinois] at WMAQ [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois], this is when I was on TV. We stood to give our reports, and he climbed down. He thought this was very funny. He climbed down and started goosing me while I was on the air reporting on a very serious story. He just got down behind me, and the camera's on me, and he is feeling my butt. Can you imagine? And of course, there wasn't sex discrimination things that we felt comfortable with. And he was the Big Tuna, this was Floyd Kalber. I couldn't go and complain about him. So, all of these things just made me better at my job (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) These things that you describe are--I couldn't imagine them other than on 'The Simpsons' or something. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: These are grown men, and-- Speaker 2: These are grown men, yes. And as I said, Floyd, I don't think was trying to get rid of me. I think he thought he was being funny. You know, men do a lot of things like reaching down into your--those things happened, reaching down into your blouse trying to be funny. It was just, "You don't have a sense of humor?" "No, I don't have a sense of humor about stuff like that." And I don't think I talked to Floyd for many, many weeks after that, because it was just--and would you do that to a white woman? Would you do that to a white reporter? Speaker 1: I wonder. I mean those were, you know, bizarre, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Those were things that would go through my-- Story_ID: 486073 Speaker 1: As I told you, the South gave me a whole different perspective now. And, but I do have to tell you this. People always ask me, "Did you suffer discrimination more as a woman or as an African American?" And I have to tell them as a woman. There were many more times that I was told, "You can't do this because you're a woman." Or, "You can't get a raise because the men need raises. Because you're married and you have a husband [James E. Marshall], but they have families to take care of." Equal pay for equal work--I mean just basic kinds of things. And the kind of sexual stuff that was done to you, I have to say it was more being a woman. And if you look at, if you look at television now, I was the first African American woman to do a network newscast. There aren't any now. I was the first; there haven't been any since me. You had a Bryant Gumbel, you had an Ed Bradley, you had a Max Robinson. I was as high as an African American woman got in news, and that was doing the weekend news. So again, a man is just better somehow than a black female. On the hierarchy it's white males, white females, black males, black females. We are at the bottom of the totem pole in terms of we don't go in the men's room and talk and josh. We don't go out for drinks after work. We usually have children we want to go home to. We're not on the golf course. More women are learning that they have to get out there and be with the men and go for drinks and stuff like that to be taken seriously. But there's still that female/male thing that somehow males are stronger, they're better, they're braver, they're more courageous. And it's bullshit, okay. I think about the woman, Kimberly Dozier, whose legs were blown up by one of those IEDs in Iraq. Bob Woodruff, you know, almost lost half of his head. But there was a woman too, that was, that has lost the use of her legs because of being in Iraq. Speaker 2: And Amy Goodman has a story like that too (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All of the, all of the journalists, the female journalists, that have been killed in Iraq. Don't talk to me about bravery and courage of women being able to do the jobs. They can, and they're not afraid to. And they're--but still the white male-dominated society feels that a white male is going to be your best guy, is going to be your best person. And then I think they'll take a black male over a white female--that there's just something different with us. We bleed every month; babies come out of us; that there's just something different about a woman that just isn't as good as a man. Story_ID: 486074 Speaker 1: So I continue to fight that battle, just as I continue to fight the battle of African Americans, because I have the double whammy. There were those who didn't like me because I was African American. There were those who didn't like me because I was female. So, you got this whole pool of people that--I, I, I--you can't believe the things that have been said to me. White males have said, "Yeah, if I put some, if I put some--." What did they call it? "Yeah, if I put some mud on my face and put a babushka on my head, then maybe I'd get to anchor the weekend news." Do I look like I have mud on my face (laughter)? And I don't think I have ever worn a babushka. But they think I got the job because I was black and female. Well, I wouldn't have held that job for fifteen years as a black female if I weren't bringing in the ratings and if I weren't doing a good job. And it bothered me that my own colleagues thought that I kept that job all that time only because they wanted to put a colored woman in that seat. I had one of the executives of ABC--I went to a cocktail party for one of our correspondents who was going to Moscow [Russia] for a tour of duty. And I didn't want to go, but I said I'd go wish him well and say goodbye. And they had cocktails and hors d'oeuvres up there. And I walk into the room, and one of the executives of ABC said to me when I walked into the room, "Where's your cap and apron? Aren't you going to serve?" And this is when my voice goes crazy. And I said, "What did you say?" Now, when you talk like that, everybody turns around (laughter). Everybody stops what they're doing. And he's, "Ha, ha, ha." I said, "What did you say? Say that again. What do you expect me to be doing here?" And you know, I got the attention of the whole room. "Oh, Carole [HistoryMaker Carole Simpson], I was just kidding with you." I didn't go further with him, he's an executive. I've gone further with other people. But it's like why is it that he can't see me as just Carole Simpson? Why do I walk into this room and an executive of this company sees a black female and thinks I should be the maid and should be serving these hors d'oeuvres? Story_ID: 486075 Speaker 1: I had a fellow correspondent--I was working the White House, in the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] White House, covering the White House. And it was--I had some radio spots to do. And I was doing a spot for that evening's news, and I wasn't going to be able to go out to lunch. And so I asked him, "When you go out, could you bring me a sandwich back?" And he said, "What do you want, a collard green sandwich?" I'm like, (laughter) I never heard of a collard--I love me some collard greens, but I never heard of a collard green sandwich. So again, he looks at me and he sees black. How does that happen? He wouldn't say that to somebody else. Another time, we had a lunch. This was the man that was the senior producer for the evening news in Washington [D.C.]. And usually we had nice lunches with Caesar salad and some pasta salad and a little broiled chicken. And this particular day, there were cold cuts and cans of Diet Coke [Coca-Cola] and stuff. And so, I was standing in the line to get the--and I'm going "Is this all we're getting for lunch today?" This guy says, "What do you want? Barbequed ribs and fried chicken?" This is one that I went with all the way. He turned as red as my earrings. But again, I said, "What did you say to me? You think I want some ribs and fried chicken? What would make you think I want ribs and fried chicken? I don't even like them. Why would you say that to me?" Oh, he's just so red, and he's just all down. So, Carole [HistoryMaker Carole Simpson] started becoming a troublemaker, because I got sick of it. I got sick of constantly being reminded. What happened, like every--I was at ABC for twenty-four years. I was at NBC for eleven years. And I must tell you that throughout my career, my nearly forty-year career, every six months there would be something to remind me that you're just a black woman. You're not Carole Simpson; you're not a correspondent for this network or that network; you're not an anchorwoman; you're a black woman. And it would come in mail, hate mail, "Why don't you go back to the jungle with your big, round earrings." I don't even wear hoop earrings. (Laughter) "Why don't you go back there, with your Ubangi self and climb the trees with the other monkeys that are like you." And I would get mostly good mail, but there would be that one piece of mail. And you'd keep going, "They're out there, they're still out there." It just was so frustrating--that through all that time and all my work to see equality for women in journalism, to see equality for minorities in journalism that it doesn't seem like it's going to happen. It's, we've lost ground. I'm so depressed with what I see today. There are more, there are fewer African American correspondents on the three major networks than there were in 1982. Now, Hispanics are the new minority. And so you look around at local stations which I watch. Every time I travel I watch local stations, and you will see Hispanics, and I'm happy. Hispanics should be represented, they're a large part of this country. But why do you say okay, that's the minority job, and get rid of the African American that had had it. "Now we got to give it to a Hispanic." You can't have two? You can't have an African American, and a Hispanic, and an Asian and whatever else? It's just really frustrating. And I see an erosion, I see things going back. I even see it with women. White males are hot again in television news. That's what the hires are when you see. And Katie Couric, you already hear the talk about her, and whether she's got it to be the Dan Rather and stuff like that. And it's, you're still held to these higher standards that anybody else is held to. And I don't know if Katie's going to make it or not, but nobody's trying to help her. They're just critical stories; that's all I ever see about her (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So-- Story_ID: 486076 Speaker 1: Let me go back over to--now you were at WCFL [WCFL Radio, Chicago, Illinois] from '65 [1965] to '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right. And then in '68 [1968], did you--so you left WCFL in '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: To go to WBBM [WBBM Radio, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when it became an all-news station. Speaker 1: Okay. I remember that, yeah. Speaker 2: And that's why I left. I mean I was happy at WCFL. But an all-news station--I really wanted to go where we didn't have to (laughter)-- Speaker 1: That's normally--WBBM is a CBS affiliate? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: An affiliate-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois]. So, you were there from '68 [1968] until-- Speaker 2: Seventy [1970]. Speaker 1: Seventy [1970] okay. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I had my daughter [Mallika Marshall]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got married [to James E. Marshall] and had my daughter (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 486077 Speaker 1: So, now how did you meet your husband? You want to tell us that story? Speaker 2: University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was in engineering school, and I was in journalism. And it was my best friend and his roommate that were dating. And we kept, my girlfriend kept telling me, "I don't want to be out with him by myself. You and Jimmy [Simpson's husband, James E. Marshall] come along." So, we'd double date a lot of times. And I was thrown with him to help my friend, who wasn't sure of what this guy would do or whatever. And so that's how we met. And we--I graduated before he did, because he was in engineering, which is a longer program. And so I was at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] while he was still at Michigan. But we became, we were friends. We had become girlfriend and boyfriend when I graduated from Michigan. But then I went to Alabama and he was still there. But we continued to be friends through the years. That's what you want to do, you want to marry your friend. And last weekend, we celebrated our forty-first wedding anniversary. So, it was a good choice for me. And I always tell young women, "Don't marry the guy that's got bells and whistles, and every time he comes into the room, you're 'Oooh'." You want to make decisions, informed decisions about, is this a man that's going to be nice to me? Is this a man that's going to work hard? Is this a man that's going to be a good father? Is this a man that comes from a good family? You know, we breed dogs and cows, and fine pigs to win prizes. And people just marry any old person, somebody they're in love with. And that's not the best way to have a good, long lasting marriage. You marry your friend, someone that you enjoy being with and have fun. We're amazed, with our kids [Mallika Marshall and Adam Simpson-Marshall] gone and just the two of us, would we have anything to talk about? We can talk about stuff forever. We can still have stuff to talk about. So he was a good catch, and I love him dearly, he has been my rock. If it had not been for him through all the mess that I have gone through, through my entire career, I don't know how I could have made it. Because he was my sounding board, somebody I could come back home--. I couldn't cry at work. I couldn't let them see they were getting to me at work. So I could come cry on his shoulder, and he would--he is a strong feminist. He will tell you today that he is a feminist. And he was like, "You go back in there, and you tell them this." Or, "You don't put up with that." Or, "You tell them you need a raise, and tell them why." So, he's, he's just been my rock. And it would have, it might have been a lot different without having someone like that to be my partner. Story_ID: 486078 Speaker 1: Now, I hear that you were the host of 'Our People' on WTTW public television [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: That was the show I think that [HistoryMaker] Jim Tilmon, is that the one that Jim Tilmon started? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, John Tweedle. Speaker 1: John Tweedle, okay. Speaker 2: Do you remember John Tweedle? Speaker 1: John Tweedle was a photographer. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yes, right, right. Speaker 2: He got me involved. And I'd do a commentary on 'Our People' that had to do with the news. Now, who was the host? I'm trying to think of who the host was. And I don't think it was Jim Tilmon but, my God, I can't remember who it was. Maybe it was Jim. (Laughter) I worked with Jim at WMAQ [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: I know Jim Tilmon hosted a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maybe he did, I don't remember. Speaker 1: --show on-- Speaker 2: Because I just came in and just did my commentary. So-- Speaker 1: --PBS [Public Broadcasting Service], yeah. Speaker 2: So maybe-- Speaker 1: I think that-- Speaker 2: Maybe it was-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but-- Speaker 2: --him and me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Stuff is fuzzy from way back there. That's a long time ago. Story_ID: 486079 Speaker 1: So, all right so you did that. And then now in the, now what happened from '70 [1970] to '80 [1980]--you started (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, yeah. Speaker 1: --at ABC-- Speaker 2: I had my daughter [Mallika Marshall]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in 1970. So, I went on maternity leave from BBM [WBBM Radio, Chicago, Illinois]. I was planning to go back to WBBM. And I got a call while I was on maternity leave from WMAQ-TV [Chicago, Illinois]. The man that had written my name down, and who had been driving to Des Moines in Iowa, was the news director there. And he had heard me on the radio through the years, but he thought he wanted an African American female on TV there. in 1970. You know, people were running around between 1965 and 1970, "We got to find somebody black to cover what's going on in the black community." And thank God for what the black community did in Chicago [Illinois], in terms of opening up television jobs to black people. I remember the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] would hold news conferences, Fred Hampton and them. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] was holding news conferences. And they would say, "You can't cover our news conferences unless it's a black reporter and an all-black crew." And blacks had not been able to get into the unions. It was IBEW [International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers] and IATSE [International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees] that were the unions that were responsible for the TV camera people and the sound people and the lighting people, and they couldn't get into the unions to get these jobs. But when this huge story of the Civil Rights Movement coming north, and what was happening when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to Chicago, and all the riots that were happening in Chicago, they put out the word that you've got to have a black crew. And so, the networks and the stations leaned on the unions, "We have got to open this up. We cannot do our jobs, we cannot cover the news. You have got to open up some of these jobs." Now, you remember [HistoryMaker] Arthur Fletcher was working for Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] at the time. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And they were trying to get the unions opened up (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's the father of affirmative action. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Art Fletcher. Speaker 2: Yes, trying to get the unions to open up. And so, but thanks to black people who said, "You can't cover our news conferences," they were important. We needed to hear what they had to say. Many African Americans were hired as reporters and as cameramen and sound people. And the people out in the streets were really gathering the news. So that was an important development, and they were grabbing all kinds of black people. So WMAQ decided--I was the first African American that they hired there. [HistoryMaker] Russ Ewing and I came on to NBC at about the same time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I decided, "Goodbye, WBBM. I'm going to try my hand at television." I had never done it before, but having been in radio was good training, because you knew how to use your voice, you knew how to track something. The reporting was the same, the writing was the same. All you did was add pictures, which only made the story more powerful. So I joined WMAQ-TV, and I worked there as general assignment reporter and weekend anchor until 1974. And then the network, NBC News, hired me to become a network correspondent in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay, this is in '74 [1974]. Story_ID: 486080 Speaker 1: So we left off, you're at WMAQ [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] NBC. And you were there in Chicago [Illinois] doing, you were an assignment reporter? Speaker 2: A general assignment reporter (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) General. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd do three or four stories a day. It was some of the hardest work that you could do. And then you have to re-write it for the ten o'clock, and then--it was a lot of work, but a great experience. Chicago is the best news town, aside from Washington [D.C.], in America. I mean the stuff I learned there--covering Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley], the plane crashes--I mean everything happened in Chicago; the gangland slayings, the crime, the school system, I just learned so much. And if you look at some of the best journalists today, many of them have come through Chicago and have gotten experience there. Speaker 1: Now you came to WMAQ with [HistoryMaker] Russ Ewing-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --who is legendary in Chicago. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: He's retired now, but Russ Ewing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did he retire? Speaker 1: Yeah. But Russ Ewing, I think he's not feeling well. But Russ Ewing was a person that would always--that criminals would turn themselves in to. Speaker 2: Yes, I remember that. Speaker 1: He became famous for that. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: People would say, "I won't give up-- Speaker 2: Russ Ewing, yes. Speaker 1: --until you bring me Russ Ewing, and I'll turn myself in to Russ Ewing." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you ever discuss that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, let me tell you the interesting thing about Russ and me at NBC. Because it was an owned and operated station by NBC, they would use correspondents, you know, at those stations to do network stories and appear on the network. Well, we were told--Russ was told that he couldn't do network stories because he sounded too ethnic. And I was told I couldn't do them because I sounded too perfect, I sounded too articulate. And so, in effect, you bar both black reporters from the network newscast. And it's like, "I thought that's what you would want me to do, is to be as clear as possible, so people would understand what you're talking about." "Yes, but it's too professorial. It's too articulate. You pronounce your words too carefully." Speaker 1: And this offends who? Who does it offend? Speaker 2: Them, I guess. It offends them, because I'm not supposed to talk like that. When I was in radio and I would show up to do a story, people had heard my name on the air. And I became famous very fast in Chicago, because here was this woman doing news. And so, my name ended up becoming a household word, "You're trying to sound like [HistoryMaker] Carole Simpson or something." But when I would show up to do an actual story, go to somebody's house, they'd say--you know, I'd say, "I'm Carole Simpson with WBBM Radio [Chicago, Illinois]." "No, you're not." And I said, "Yeah, I am." And it's like, "You're colored." "Yeah." And, "Well, I never heard anybody colored talk like you. You can't, you can't talk like you talk on the radio." And I said, "Why not?" "Well, because nobody black can talk like that. Did you have to take special speech lessons?" I can't tell you how many times that happened. "Did you have to take special lessons to be able to twist your tongue (laughter) into a way that makes you talk like that?" And I said, "If you heard my mother [Doretha Wilbon Simpson], if you heard my sister [Jacqueline Simpson Dillard], we all sound the same, even though my mother was from Georgia. She came very young to Chicago, but there was no accent that we ever had." But people just couldn't believe that a black person could talk that way. And it's like, have you been to England? Have you ever heard any of the black people in England, or go to Africa, you know, to South Africa or any of the countries and listen to their English? But it was funny. I wasn't supposed to talk that way (simultaneous). Story_ID: 486081 Speaker 1: We were talking about [HistoryMaker] Russ Ewing. But when you came to town--like Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II], [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett and others, some of the other black journalists-- Speaker 2: I knew all of them. Speaker 1: Did, were you a part of the beginnings of the National Association for Black Journalists [sic. National Association of Black Journalists]? Speaker 2: We were. And we dispute NABJ, because they list 1974, 1975 as the time that they got together. We got together in my apartment in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] in 1968 after the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination. And it was [HistoryMaker] Francis Ward, and Earl Moses, and, oh, God, what was Joe's [ph.] name? He was at the Daily News [Chicago Daily News]. There were about ten of us that met in my apartment and said--and we called ourselves concerned black journalists. And we had decided that we were going to be watchdogs within our news organizations, so that you wouldn't hear every story begin, "Roving bands of Negro youths threw rocks and bottles in--" name the city. It was like all the stories--they didn't mention that a black kid had been shot in the back by a policeman. It was always--and those were the kinds of things that within our news organizations we would raise issue about, and say--you can't say, "You know, what caused this?" You know, after the shooting of a black teenager by a white policeman, "Roving bands of Negro youth hurled rocks and bottles." But without putting it into the context of what caused it--it was never--it just sounded like roving bands were all over America throwing rocks and bottles and Molotov cocktails. So, we think that we really began the National Association of Black Journalists in Chicago [Illinois] in 1968. Speaker 1: So, that really started the ball rolling. Speaker 2: It did. Speaker 1: I mean that really-- Speaker 2: It did. Because it was like, we have to do something. I mean they're not going to--if we don't do anything, they're not going to do anything. And we've got to make sure that the stories are reported correctly and put into context. And that was--so then they wanted to assign us all the black stories. But we were interested in the newspaper understanding--and that every white reporter, black reporter, whatever, knew how to tell the story without resorting to these cliches that were inaccurate and misleading and bad; bad writing. Story_ID: 486082 Speaker 1: Did you ever have a--well, I know you probably did. So tell me the story of a conflict, I guess of a time when you wanted to say one thing and the management wanted you to say something else or suggested that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I never had a problem with my own reporting. I never had management say, "You have to say it this way," or "We want you to put this in there." I have always stood my ground, as, "I was on the scene, you were not there. I talked to the people, I felt the atmosphere. You've hired me to be your reporter. You have to trust--then fire me. If you don't trust that I'm going to give you an accurate, fair story, then fire me and hire somebody else." I tell you, as I got past my early years of being fearful, I got very strong and very adamant about what I felt was right. Speaker 1: So most of the conflict came in--I mean or the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Watching other reporters. Speaker 1: Other reporters report what-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --what's going on in your community? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And reporting it wrong? Speaker 2: Yes. And why do, why do you have to get an eye witness who is a woman with not a tooth in her head, with pink foam curlers in her hair, smoking a cigarette in a housedress, when there are all kinds of eye witnesses? I mean, it looks like attempts were made to just find (laughter) the worst-- Speaker 1: That, now that's often said on the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The worst people-- Speaker 1: --other side of the screen. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Those of us on the other side of the TV screen. Speaker 2: You see it. Speaker 1: I've been in every, I don't know how many households where everybody--somebody in the household says, "Well, why do they always find the worst looking people?" Speaker 2: The worst looking. And-- Speaker 1: Or the least articulate people to-- Speaker 2: And it's been something that happened in the street. And it's like somebody made a decision to put that person in there. So, I would go out of my way--I mean if I had to do stories that were unfavorable to the black community about poverty or welfare or teenage pregnancy, I made an effort to find an African American person that was working on that problem. So, if I was doing a story about hunger, I would go to an organization that was trying to do something about hunger (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Operation Breadbasket [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] maybe. Speaker 2: Yes, something like that, and get an African American and not have the great white father, that these are the only people that are helping. Because they are, they're everywhere trying to help our community. And it's like why do you go to the president of the organization, who's usually white, when you can find the vice president, who might be black. And so I, I made efforts to try to balance those kinds of stories. And I don't think that's altering the news. I mean, the white person and the black person would have said the same thing. It was just my attempt to show, "Hey, we got black people that are not hungry, and are trying to do something about hunger in the U.S." During the Million Man March, I'll have to tell you that I was out there interviewing people. And I did some editing (laughter) of the people we ended up putting on the air. And I think if there were white reporters who had interviewed some of these people, we would have heard some pretty wild stuff on there. And I did a mixture. I did, you know, some people saying some crazy stuff. But it was paying attention to the images that we are presenting of people. I wouldn't do that to white people, either. I wouldn't go find the worst looking (laughter), the worst looking person to do that. It just--anyhow. Story_ID: 486083 Speaker 1: You were brought to NBC in Washington [D.C.]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: After so many years (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was my dream. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My dream had always-- Speaker 1: Now, this is-- Speaker 2: --been to work in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: This is '74 [1974]? Speaker 2: --to work for the network. Speaker 1: Was it '74 [1974]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974], okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. They actually came after me in '72 [1972], but my mother [Doretha Wilbon Simpson] was dying of cancer. And it hurt me to say no, but I couldn't leave my mother. And so I thought it was over with when I said, "I can't come. I can't leave Chicago [Illinois] now." But like a week after she died, and they found out about it, and they called me and said they'd like to bring me to Washington. Oh, this is a good story. They want to bring me to Washington and be a network correspondent. And I was like so excited, because I had already been doing a lot of news out of the Midwest bureau for the network. So, I'd been on the NBC network many times before I was even named a correspondent. So, I come to Washington, and I've had now thirteen years of local news experience, a lot. And I get there to Washington, and they had assigned me to HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services]. I wanted to cover [U.S.] Congress or the White House, but again, it's typecasting. I was covering health, education, and welfare, all issues that impacted heavily on the black community, and kind of a female type story--health, education, and welfare. But that's fine, I wanted to get to Washington. I'd get to the White House and those other things later. So I moved, and I moved my husband [James E. Marshall], which was tough. He had a good job. He was a nuclear engineer at Argonne Laboratory [Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois], and I had this opportunity to go to Washington, which I said was my dream. And we talked about it and I said, "I promise you, if you move with me, whenever you get an opportunity you feel you can't say no to, I will pick up and move with you, I promise." And he was just finishing up his M.B.A. at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], so it was a good time for him to come to a new place and look for a new job. So, we moved here, and I'm all excited that I'm in Washington now; I have reached my dream. And I didn't get any assignments. I went on my beat and met people, and learned everything and started proposing story ideas. None of them were accepted. I was sent out to get interviews for other people's pieces, you know, like the justice correspondent. They might need an interview with a justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] official, and the correspondent was busy, so they'd send me out to get his interview that would go in his piece. And for about nine months, that's what I was doing; I was not on the air with my own story. And I couldn't understand what was going on. I mean I had had news and talked to them, and they said, "Well, New York's [New York, New York] not interested," or something like that. So, I would keep struggling. And I know how important proposing story ideas is to your success in the news business. So I kept coming up with stories, and still being sent out to do pieces of other people's reports. Story_ID: 486084 Speaker 1: So a friend of mine that I'd worked with in Chicago [Illinois], another reporter in Chicago, went to London [England] and went to the NBC bureau there. And happened to say, "How's Carole [HistoryMaker Carole Simpson] doing?" And the bureau chief there, who had worked with us earlier in Chicago, said, "Well, I heard she got to Washington [D.C.] and got lazy." Fortunately, she called me and told me this story that had crossed the Atlantic Ocean. And over there, they're thinking I'm lazy in Washington. And I was like, "What the heck is going on? I have been working like crazy to get on the air, and they won't put me on the air." So I started calling everybody at NBC that I knew. Many of the people that I had worked with in Chicago now had executive positions in New York [New York]. And I called everybody and I said, "Have you been hearing these stories about me?" I had a list, and I went down the list and started calling. And they said, "Yeah, that's the word in Washington, that you're not doing anything." And I said, "You know me, you worked with me. Do you think I would come to Washington, which was my dream, and not want to work, not do anything? Not try to get on the air?" And they said, "Yeah, I know how you are." I said, "Would you promise me that if you ever hear anybody else say that, that you'll tell them that you know me?" And I said, "Somebody's trying to do me in. Somebody's trying--this is a conspiracy." Nine months, and I haven't been on the air since I've moved to Washington. And I didn't want to tell my husband [James E. Marshall] how miserable I was, but he knew I wasn't getting on the air. But I had dragged him here, and I couldn't get on the air. I mean, that's what we live for, is getting on the air. So I called all of these people, and I said, "Please tell them, you know, anybody that brings it up." Then I went to my bureau chief and I said, "I understand from a friend that all the way in London people are saying, I'm lazy. Do you want to see all of the story ideas that I have presented since I have been here? What is going on? Obviously, this is not working. So I don't want to leave--I don't want to stay here. I'm going to go back to Chicago. I can go back to Chicago and any station would hire me there. I do not, this is not working, and I'm not happy, and I want--." And the guy says, "Hold on, Carole, wait a minute. You know, let me see what's going on." So he made a call to New York, and I got a call from one of the vice presidents in New York who said, "Carole, you will be getting on the air. Please do not leave, we want you to stay. And I promise you, you will get on the air." That next day, I was on the 'NBC Nightly News.' Do you see how the power is, that someone can just say you'll be on the air (laughter), and all of a sudden I'm on the air. But for nine months, nothing I did would get me on the air. Well, I didn't find out for a long time, but I said, "I'm going to get to the bottom of this. I'm going to find out what exactly happened." And I found out that it was the senior producer in Washington who had spread that word, and he was the man I'd been presenting the story ideas to. But he spread the word that I was no good, and I was, you know, I wasn't working out and I was lazy. Oh, God, please don't call me lazy. You can call me almost--you cannot call me lazy, okay. Because as I told you earlier, my drive, my ambition--and here I was in my dream job. Why would I become lazy? So this man, he's getting it in my book ['NewsLady,' Carole Simpson]. I'm writing a book, and he's getting it. And I don't know why he chose me or why he decided to do that to me, but it was--he was the one that was holding me up. Story_ID: 486085 Speaker 1: And as soon as New York [New York] said, "Put her on the air," I got on the air [on 'NBC Nightly News'] and things went swimmingly. But it's just that one person could do that to you. And then the perception--you know, it's not the reality. You're killed by the perception, which has nothing to do with what you are and what you're about. But because somebody sent out there in the ether that I was lazy, that became the perception of me. And everybody accepted it, and it was horrible, horrible. So again, I learned--all of these things were things that I had to learn, about how you have to massage and stroke these men. I mean I learned how to, "Oh, poor little me. I don't--would you help me find out how I can do this story?" I had cameramen that didn't want to work with me, Matthew [Matthew Hickey]--cameramen, who resented having to work with an African American woman who had come from radio. I knew what I wanted, I knew what shots I needed for my story. But for them, they were surly, and they would take forever to get their gear out of the car and get the camera on their shoulder. And meanwhile, we're missing the best shots. And they would--just again, mess up my story. So my story, I wouldn't have the best shots. I would have missed the best things. It wouldn't have been their fault, it would have been my fault, because it would be the Simpson [HistoryMaker Carole Simpson] spot that wasn't so good. So I had to humble myself and say, "You know, I really need to be able to see all of these people. Do you think you could get up there? I don't know if it's possible or not. But do you think you could get up on that hill right over there and get me a shot of all the people? You know, you don't have to do it if you can't do it, I understand. But if you could, it would be really nice." And now, it's the big cameraman. "Okay, I'll show this little lady that I can go up there and do this stuff." And I would have to ask for a cut-away, and for all the other things I needed to make a television piece sing. So, I learned how to court them. And I'd buy--if it was hot, I'd get them Cokes [Coca-Cola]. If it was cold, I'd find hot coffee for them and bring it to them when we were on a stakeout or something. And just be nice to your cameramen, because they can destroy you, they can destroy you. But if you're nice, oh, when I was nice they would hustle. They'd get up there right in front, and I'd get those good shots that I needed, so that my spot would look better than NBC--than CBS's spot, or ABC's spot. But it took that kind of, you know, stroking. But as I said, I was bound and determined to do what I had to do without compromising my moral principles to get my job done, and to get the best work that I could. Speaker 2: That's so-- Speaker 1: That's what? Odd (laughter)? Speaker 2: So, no, all this seems-- Speaker 1: That's sad. Speaker 2: It is, it's very sad. Speaker 1: Isn't it? Speaker 2: It is, it's very sad. Speaker 1: It's sad. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Until I got to be someone. And then, you know, it's like, oh, you're an anchorperson. Then they'll just--you know, because now you have some influence with management, you're closer to management. An anchor is treated differently. Story_ID: 486086 Speaker 1: Was there a certain point where you think you really had, I mean you had achieved that name recognition? About what year is that, when you think you--it kind of turned a little bit? Speaker 2: I think when I became an anchor, and that was 1988. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is after you moved over to ABC, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And you went to ABC in '83 [1983] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to ABC in '82 [1982]. Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, 1982. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And that was when Roone Arledge, God rest his soul, was building ABC into a real network news division. Speaker 1: Now, he had been the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We used to call ABC the almost broadcasting company (laughter) because they were the last, you know, to come on board as a network. And he went out and he hired the best people from all the other networks. Speaker 1: Now he was, he achieved the initial success as a producer of ABC-- Speaker 2: Sports. Speaker 1: 'Wide World of Sports.' Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: The most popular show on ABC. Speaker 2: He invented the slow motion, the freeze frame, stop action--all of the--I mean he was just a brilliant television producer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so he hired me away from NBC, waving big bucks [dollars] in my face. So it was like, "Bye-bye, goodbye, NBC (laughter)." Speaker 1: So, were you still headquartered in Washington, D.C.? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. I know the 'ABC Nightly News' [sic. 'ABC Evening News'; 'ABC World News Tonight'] I think in the late '70s [1970s] featured Peter Jennings and Max Robinson from Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Max was in Chicago. Speaker 1: Yeah, and Peter (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Peter Jennings was in London [England]-- Speaker 1: London. Speaker 2: And Frank Reynolds was in Washington. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. And was that the lineup when you joined in '82 [1982]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, that was the lineup. Story_ID: 486087 Speaker 1: Max Robinson, we never got a chance to interview him for HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers], but I did know him in Chicago [Illinois]. And he talked about some of his troubles, some of the same troubles you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you remember his trouble with Roone Arledge-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when he said that there was racism in America. Bulletin. This just in, excuse me. He said what was the truth, and Roone Arledge went crazy. And he went crazy with me, too, because I got to the point where I was just tired of not telling the truth. Speaker 1: So he--here's a man, this is 1982 (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he hired Max. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: He hired Max. Speaker 1: --who doesn't believe that there's racism in America anymore? Speaker 2: It was how it was said, I don't know. He said something about the mirror is cracked in America, and it should be turned back on itself so that people can see the racism that still exists. And he said something about he didn't get as much time on the air as Peter [Peter Jennings] and Frank [Frank Reynolds]. Well, Chicago was an odd place. I mean there were not that many stories coming out of the Midwest. I mean there were the foreign stories and there were the Washington [D.C.] stories. And they think that was unfair of him to have said that, and he was suggesting it was because he was black. And I don't know how much time he got, you know, compared, but I just knew that some nights most of it was foreign, or some nights most of it was Washington. And rarely was it mostly what was happening in the rest of the country. So, it was that reference to ABC discriminating against him, suggesting that, that made Roone really crazy. And I think Max ended up apologizing for having said that, certainly to Roone. I don't know if that was made public; it was probably made public that perhaps he misspoke. Story_ID: 486088 Speaker 1: Did you come into conflict with Roone Arledge too, about the race at ABC? Speaker 2: Well, Roone didn't like conflict, so he would turn it over to others. So I heard from others, but I knew where it was coming from, the top. And I just couldn't be quiet. I led the women's movement in 1985 at ABC. I came there, and I had left NBC where we had a cadre of women that were friendly. We'd go out for drinks, we'd have lunch, and it was a nice group of women, because the men weren't doing anything with us. I get to ABC, and the women didn't even talk to each other. And I was like, what is this about? And-- Speaker 1: Who were some of the other women? Was Diane Sawyer there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bettina Gregory. Speaker 1: Bettina Gregory. Speaker 2: And no, Diane was still with CBS. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, it was-- Speaker 1: Bettina Gregory. Speaker 2: Susan King. There are none of them that I think you would know, I mean that haven't gone on to big network jobs, I mean or anchors or anything. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But there were like four of us that were correspondents, and I was like, "Hi." I mean, I didn't--they didn't show me where the bathroom was or where to pick up a pair of pantyhose if you needed it or something. I mean that's the kind of thing we did at NBC when you'd come into a new place. We'd kind of take you around and show you the ropes. And I found them all cold, you know. They met me, "Oh, hi, welcome to Washington." But that was it. There was no going into each other's offices and talking. So, I found out that what had happened was a situation had been created that they divided and conquered the women. You make women feel that they're in competition with each other rather than, you know, the whole news division. It's like you set up one woman to dislike another woman, and this woman is getting favoritism. And so, you don't like that woman because she's in favor right now. And so we finally had a dinner at one of the correspondent's houses. And we invited some producers, and we all got together and talked about--it was going to be a social thing to try to just--I felt women needed each other, and that we needed to have, you know, get together and be friendly. And so we had this little social thing, and it turned into this crazy screaming session of all of the problems that women were having there. We had no women bureau chiefs, no women senior producers, no women executive producers, no women foreign correspondents, no women covering a major beat like the White House or the [U.S.] Congress, no women in top management, no women on the assignment desks deciding who covers a story and how much attention that story gets. And so we looked around and realized that we weren't succeeding because we didn't have women in any positions to make a difference in helping us. Story_ID: 486089 Speaker 1: So we decided that we, after several weeks of meeting, that we were going to confront management because--and we did a content analysis of all the shows, 'Nightline,' 'This Week with David Brinkley,' the 'World News Tonight' ['ABC World News Tonight], the overnight news. And my husband [James E. Marshall] did all of the documentation. We did all of the work of checking all of the rundowns and seeing when women appeared, when minorities appeared. And we got together unbelievable graphs and pie charts, and things that my husband made. As an engineer, he was good at that. And we could check out how many minorities were on, and how many--what shows had nobody. And we did it for three months. We did three months' worth of programs, and brought all of this documentation together. And I was chosen to be the spokesperson. They thought, "Well, she's black. They're not going to yell at her that much." (Laughter) And I was one of the senior people there. I was older than most of the younger correspondents, and I wasn't afraid to speak out about this. Again, you get tired of it. It's like I'm sick of hearing this. Why are we still fighting about this stuff in 1985? This is ridiculous. So, I became the spokesperson. And we chose as our opportunity to do this at a meeting, a luncheon that Roone [Roone Arledge] was having for Barbara Walters, who was receiving a big award in New York [New York]. And he thought it would be nice to have all of the women correspondents be there. So they came from all over the country, and the women in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], they didn't know what Washington [D.C.] had cooked up. So we had to get together with them quickly and said we're going to take this opportunity to--since all of top management is going to be here--to bring up this issue of institutional discrimination, that we do not have any women in any decision making roles at all. So, the luncheon was held. Barbara had to run off to do a piece for '20/20,' so the men were left there. And I'm waiting, I am a nervous wreck. It's like here are all these guys here, all of these white guys. I've got my sisters behind me (laughter), and I was the only African American. I was still the only African American correspondent there. And I was like, how am I--where am I going--when am I going to pick a chance to--how am I going to bring this up? (Laughter) How am I going to do it? And so when Barbara had to leave, I stood up and I said, "Well, Barbara, before you go, we just want to raise our glass to you and tell you what an inspiration you've been to all of us, and to thank you for the inroads you've made in making our jobs possible," and so on. And so she said, "Thank you," and we toasted our glasses. And I said, "While I have the floor--." And then I said, "I'd like you gentlemen to look at these documents." They didn't know what the heck was going on. And I had a speech which I memorized, so I could give it extemporaneously. So, I knew it. You know how you write it out and then you memorize it, and then you just talk it. So, I told them that, "We were in a situation, and there's no better chance where we'd get you all together than this, to tell you that we don't have any women doing this. We've done a content analysis of the show." That meeting went on. I gave my presentation and, you know, I raised the specter of legal action, just raised the specter, that some of this stuff, you know, some people might consider illegal to pay equity questions, things like that. And so then the other women joined in and started telling anecdotes of things, "That had happened to me--I covered this story, and then the story was assigned to another man. I'd been out there all day covering this and then you give it to so and so to put on the air. What's the deal? What is going on here?" And for the next two and a half hours we talked, and talked, and talked, and talked. Story_ID: 486090 Speaker 1: And I told them I didn't think it was conspiratorial. I really didn't think they had thought about it, but we had thought about it so much that we researched it. And they were wondering how we got our information, that women were getting paid less [at ABC]. And it's like, you hired us as reporters. We're reporters, we know how to get information. And it was because there were women working in the business office (laughter), and they gave us information and shared information with us. So we knew that we had them, we had the goods. Everywhere around, we made sure of that. And so that's when I really made some of those people really angry, and Roone [Roone Arledge] was not one of them. He said, "You know, I never thought about it." And he came out of sports, and you know, there were all men around there. He's used to men, and I really don't think he had thought about it. So he said, "We're going to do something about this." And they did. We had a pay equity study. Women's salaries were raised to a parity situation. I became anchor, that's largely why I became anchor of the news. A woman was named vice president. Things started to really move. And it became a Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] case study of how you get a critical mass of people--you can't do it alone, you know. I could have stood up there by myself and gone into meetings. But if I had the women behind me--and that's the speech I make to women all across the country. You know, together, they can't knock all of you off. They can get one of you if they're unhappy with something. But if you've got a cadre of people that are going to stick behind you, what can they do? They can't fire us all, they're not going to fire us all. So, I am proud of the difference that was made. And Harvard, as I said, has been using it as a case study of how people within a corporation can affect change, and serious change. I mean you're talking money and positions and salaries. That was a big deal. So it also gave impetus to women at the other networks to speak up on their behalves. Story_ID: 486091 Speaker 1: --Now one is, as I listen to this, I reflect back on what happened to Max Robinson when he spoke out, but had no-- Speaker 2: Backup. Speaker 1: No backup, no organization. He had a, he didn't have that critical mass behind him to advise him about what to say, or to stand by him after he said it. Speaker 2: Stand by him, right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I was there, but he was in Chicago [Illinois] and I was in Washington [D.C.]. I mean he was kind of out of the loop with a lot of the other people. I mean, not that there were that many of us; there weren't. But even--you know, two or three to go in with him. And we were able to do that with other African Americans that had difficulties with the company [ABC]. It was just to let them know we're watching. And-- Speaker 1: Did Max Robinson participate with the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] in the city? Speaker 2: No. I remember when he was sick, and he was given an award. And I remember hugging him, and he was just skin and bones. He was quite sick, he didn't live much longer after that. But that's the only time I had seen him there. I usually went every year, and I had not seen him there. But I can't speak to his involvement. I mean there may have been some that I didn't know about. But I was not aware of it. Speaker 1: Okay, I just thought I'd ask that. Speaker 2: He was inducted--I was inducted into their hall of fame in 2005, and he was, too, posthumously. But he is in the NABJ hall of fame. Story_ID: 486092 Speaker 1: So things--you became an anchor [at ABC] in, what year was it? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-eight [1988]. Speaker 1: Eighty-eight [1988], okay, all right. That's like, that's like three years after the-- Speaker 2: After our big meeting. Speaker 1: Your big meeting, okay. Speaker 2: And it was over that period of time that things were changing and changing. We got the foreign correspondent. I mean it really was a beautiful thing to watch, that we had come together, we had defined the problem, we researched the problem, and we presented it, and we got action. It was one of the things I'm most proud of in my career. And so the black people were all upset with me, and they were like, "Well, why didn't you (laughter) lead this charge for us?" Because the problems were the same, they were exactly the same--career development, nobody in top management, nobody on a major beat. I mean the problems were complete parallels. But as I said, I had experienced more sex discrimination than racial discrimination in my career. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But the black community didn't take advantage of the-- Speaker 2: Yes, they did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and I joined them. I had to join, and we had a similar meeting with top management to talk about the very same issues. But the men wanted to take the lead there. Of course the women did all the work, but the men wanted to do the talking in the meeting. I was like, "Okay, I'll shut up, I won't say anything. You all shine." But we had to do the same kind of work, and we used the documentation that my husband [James E. Marshall] had done, because he was able to pull up, you know, African Americans and their participation in the news product. So we did the same thing, and they began to start thinking about diversity. And little moves were made, and as I say, that was '85 [1985], '86 [1986], '87 [1987]. But things are worse now. Story_ID: 486093 Speaker 1: Was there a point that you would consider the peak of success? And then at what point does it start to drop off? Speaker 2: Probably '88 [1988], '89 [1989], '90 [1990]. And then, you know, we were all bought. Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California] bought us [ABC]. GE [General Electric] bought NBC. (Unclear), and now it's Viacom [Viacom Inc.], I guess, bought CBS. And then news became just another budget item. I mean before the networks--you know, news--we want you to be good. We want you to have the money you need to cover the news and all that. And then these people come in, and it's like, hey, news is too expensive. Why are you paying $10 million salaries to Peter Jennings and Diane Sawyer and things like that? This is ridiculous. You're not bringing in the revenue. The news audience is declining. So, with the decline of the news audience, and nobody's talking about diversity anymore, it's become a bad word like affirmative action. It's like, you know, perfectly good words like feminist or liberal have now become horrible words that--and I knew it was going to happen to diversity, and it has begun. People don't want to hear about it. "Oh, please, I don't want to hear about diversity anymore." Yet, they all say they're committed to it, but you don't see it. You don't see any action (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do the new rules of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] have anything to do with it? Or are there any-- Speaker 2: Nope, not in terms of-- Speaker 1: --legislative triggers to any of this? Speaker 2: --who is promoted. No, there's nothing. Story_ID: 486094 Speaker 1: As the country has, as the leadership has turned away from affirmative action, does that affect the situation any? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean you saw it during the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] years, I mean when it was clear that affirmative action wasn't that important anymore. George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush] has sent the same signal, that, you know. But Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was in that period of time where it was important, and he wanted his cabinet to look like America and all of those kinds of things, and would talk that talk. But you haven't heard talk like that from our leadership today, from any of them--senators or anything. Race is still the unfinished business of this country. It is still here, it is still with us, it's alive and well, and we continue to see it. I mean I, I had to speak to the nine hundred freshmen students here [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts] last week. And they were studying over the summer about free press and free expression and free speech. And I brought up the Don Imus remark with the panelists that I was moderating, this panel. And I said, "That hurt me. Don Imus' remarks hurt me. He has the right to this free expression; he can express himself the way he wants to. And I, you know, protect his right to say what he wants to say, because I want to say what I want to say. But it hurt. And we have to think about free speech. And if it is hurtful speech, you know, what is that? Should that be protected?" And it got this huge--you could just feel the energy among these freshmen students. And they wanted to know, "Why would nappy headed ho upset me?" And I said, "There's a history here about hair and black women." I can't wash my hair and shake it out and it falls into place like most of you. You all wake up and take a shower, and your hair just dries in the air. We have to work with our hair, until Madam C.J. Walker came around. And that's plantation. People were called nappy headed. It's a racist term. And ho, to be called a ho? If these nice young women from Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] basketball team can be called that, any black woman could be called that." And they were grappling with, you know, they couldn't understand that that would hurt someone like me. And telling them about how it can hurt--and we have to think about that kind of speech. As much as I support the right to--this guy was saying, "Well, you're a racist if you think Don Imus shouldn't have said that." I'm like, "I know you're seventeen years old, and hopefully you will learn over time that this is not racism on my part." As I said, I support his right to say things, but that doesn't mean it's right, or that people will be happy with it. And we have to as a country decide if that's okay, and you know, when limits are placed. You can't yell fire in a crowded theater. You can't say nappy headed hos on the radio where a lot of black people can hear it, and not expect some repercussions. And that's our right to express ourselves about what he had to say. So, I don't know how we started getting talking about that. Speaker 1: But it's relevant, though, in terms of what you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Free speech. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 486095 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about--there's two questions that I have, and I guess we'll deal with them one at a time. One is, what are some of the, I guess the most meaningful stories that you covered as a reporter, to you? And then secondly, you know, give us some of your experiences as an anchor. You know, what's the difference between being a reporter and an anchor? And, okay. Speaker 2: My stories. For five years, we had a series on 'World News Tonight' ['ABC World News Tonight'] called the American Agenda. And on that, we would look, we decided that we can't present problems night after night after night. There have to be solutions to some of these problems. So there were a corps of us that were chosen to cover certain areas, and to find out, if there's a problem of teenage pregnancy, where is somebody working on it? And is this something that could be replicated in another area? And, doing those kinds of stories. And I did social issues, because nobody else wanted to do them. But I did the poverty, and the hunger, and the juvenile crime, and violence, and that kind of thing. And although it--I was in danger of getting burned out by doing some of those stories. They affect you. You do crack babies, and you see some of them catatonic and some of them so hyperactive that they're like rolling dervishes. Some of that stuff gets to you, but I was able to bring to the American people some amazing stories that made a difference. One of the stories that was my favorite was about the elderly feeding program. It was about, [U.S.] Congress was about to eliminate it for budget cuts. And so I was like they can't cut out--I knew elderly people that counted on that program. So I went to New York [New York], went to the Bronx [New York], and I went to one of these feeding places. I had the cameraman with me, and we arrived at about 8:30, because people told us they started lining up at 9:00. It was January, there was snow on ground and ice on the sidewalk. And at 9:00, there must have been fifty people in line, old people, huddled with their overcoats and wraps around them, and ladies with hoods and stuff like that, waiting to get in. They don't open until 11:30, and they were already there waiting to get a hot meal. And all we had to do was take the camera and just pan down that line with my track saying, "These people are waiting for food. It's 9:00, and the feeding place, the feeding station, won't open for another two and a half hours, and they're out here." And I told them the temperature was like twenty-eight degrees. And we saw them go in, and continued the story. And we showed how happy they were with their fish sticks and mashed potatoes and Jello cubes. Not a great meal, but--. Story_ID: 486096 Speaker 1: So, we showed the people enjoying their meal. And somebody played a piano, and they had communal singing after it was over, and then they went home. And that was the only hot meal they would have for the day. Most of them couldn't cook, they were too old and too feeble to cook. And I understand that after that piece aired on Peter Jennings' show [American Agenda on 'ABC World News Tonight'], the phones in congressmen's offices all over the Capitol [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] started going off with people having seen that story and saying, "Don't, you can't cut the elderly feeding program. You cannot. We just saw this television story." And newspapers had been doing the same kind of thing, trying to write stories about, you know, "Joe Blow goes every morning to such and such." But seeing the pictures and seeing the faces. And the camera, that's where the camera gives you--a picture is worth a thousand words kind of, of seeing their faces, their old faces, and freezing, and waiting for this hot meal had touched people's hearts and made them take action, I mean, to call your congressman right after the show is over. And [U.S.] Congress voted to continue that program, which continues to this day. Story_ID: 486097 Speaker 1: So, when you do a story like that--and there've been others like that, many others like that, where people have come to the aid of some child that I've shown that is--you know, I had a nine year old in Ohio, Columbus, Ohio. He was nine years old, and he was the father and the husband and the teacher and the disciplinarian in his household. His mother was twenty-three, she had five children, and he was her rock. He had to look after the other children and things like that. And he didn't have twenty-five cents to go into a swimming pool, and we got a shot of him looking at the fence with other kids swimming. And his mother didn't have twenty-five cents for him to pay to go into the community pool on this hot day. Well, things came in. I mean someone in Canada, a man in Nova Scotia [Canada], promised to set up a college fund for this kid so that when he was old enough he'd be able to go to college. And he got bicycles, and the family was given food and things like that. People can fixate on one person, unfortunately. They don't see the whole big picture, but you know, there're thousands of little boys like that. Speaker 2: It's hard to focus without the media too (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Without, yes, without the media, and seeing them. So that, those stories were the greatest of all. The highlight of my career, I have to say, was moderating the 1992 presidential debate. I was the first African American and the first woman to moderate a presidential debate. And that was the one-- Story_ID: 486107 Speaker 1: We'll pick up where you left off, about the-- Speaker 2: Another major story that I will never forget was the release of Nelson Mandela from prison after twenty-seven years. I went to South Africa with the 'Nightline' team, Ted Koppel and the 'Nightline' team. And we did stories for a week there, and I was the reporter that covered Soweto [South Africa] and the black side of the problems of apartheid in South Africa. And there were white reporters to do the Afrikaans and some of the real right wing groups there. And-- Speaker 1: This is 1991? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety [1990]. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990]. Okay, all right. Speaker 2: February of 1990. And we were live. Ted Koppel was in Cape Town [South Africa], and I was live in Johannesburg [South Africa]. And I remember having to come on. It was a Saturday morning, it was early on a Saturday morning in the United States. And I remember having to come on and tell children that, "We're sorry to interrupt your cartoons this morning, but call your mom and dad into the room. This is something they really might want to see," and announcing that he was being let out of prison. It was just unbelievable. And I remember seeing him come out with Winnie Mandela and his fist in the air and the people shouting, "Amandla." And I'm describing this to the people and breaking up. I'm crying, and trying to hold it together. But it was such an emotional--I mean because for a week we'd been preparing for this. And so much about--I mean to see it actually happen and to report on that, and to report on it from overseas from a--you know, an international story--and to report it to America was just amazing. Speaker 1: As a viewer, I found ABC News 'Nightline' a major source of information about what was going on in South Africa (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, they'd gone twice. Speaker 1: And de Klerk [F.W. de Klerk] was on, and Botha [P.W. Botha] was on. Speaker 2: Right, yes. Speaker 1: And Bishop [Desmond Tutu]-- Speaker 2: Tutu. Speaker 1: Tutu was on. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Allan Boesak was on. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All these figures were on discussing the events that led to-- Speaker 2: And I got to meet all of those figures. It was just an incredible experience. But I also got beaten up down there during a demonstration. I was just another colored person down there. There was a demonstration celebrating his release, and I was covering that. And it was declared an illegal congregation by the police, and we didn't know it. We were inside a church, and everybody came out of the church singing and dancing the Toyi-toyi. And all of a sudden the police started beating us with their truncheons, and I got hit and was injured. So, it was this high of seeing Mandela, and then this low of being part of this melee and being struck. I'd never been so afraid. I'm not in America now. I can't say, "Get my lawyer, call my lawyer. I'm going to sue these people for police brutality or something." So it was, it was a very strange dichotomy there. Speaker 1: There's still a long way to go (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, still is. Story_ID: 486108 Speaker 1: I also want to tell you that the highlight of my career was being selected to moderate the second presidential debate in 1992 in Richmond, Virginia. It was the first town hall meeting debate where the people would be able ask the candidates questions. And I was chosen by both parties to be the moderator, and I became the first African American and the first woman to moderate a presidential debate; they had been questioners, but not the sole moderator. And I was seen by 91 million people. They estimate the audience worldwide was 91 million people. Because it was on every channel. It was on Fox, it was on all the major networks, and was seen overseas. BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation] and everybody carried it. And that was the debate that they think put Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] into office, because-- Speaker 2: That was Clinton and [President] George Herbert Walker Bush (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) George Bush, the father. Yes, and Ross Perot. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's when a young black woman asked Bush about the economic situation, and he didn't answer the question well. And Clinton walked right up to her, "And I feel your pain." His manner with people was warm and friendly, and, "I understand exactly what you're talking about." And I was part of many scholarly studies of what that debate did. And it's been concluded that that moment in that debate was what turned the election for Clinton. So, to be part of that history was amazing. Story_ID: 486109 Speaker 1: Now what about the highlights of your--and how is being an anchor different from being a reporter, you know? Speaker 2: Being an anchor is unbelievable. Because now people would see my reports, and I enjoyed being a reporter the best. I mean, I loved going out and getting the stories. I don't think I'd be happy just being an anchor and sitting behind a desk and reading the news. But I had the best of both worlds, because during the week I was a reporter, and on Sunday I'd get to anchor. And anchoring, now you become a celebrity, which I never felt like. But people were like, "You're a celebrity." Oh, and I'm signing autographs. Because for fifteen years of doing that, people were used to me. And you come into their homes and they think they know you, okay. (Laughter) I would get, I would get things about, "Your nails need doing," or "I don't like that dress you had on today. I've got some color swatches. Try getting something like this." And some very nice, I mean just really, really nice. But you do have a celebrity and a status that is above a reporter, because you're on the air for a half hour giving them the news. And I enjoyed that so much, because I wanted people to feel that I was watching the news with them. I'm not some person that's going to deliver this down to you. I am someone that's watching it with you. And I would react after the stories as I thought they might be reacting when something was awful or when something was funny. And people said I was a pretty good anchor, because people did feel they knew me and I was someone that they would want to have coffee with or have lunch with. And that's something that can't be taught. I think it comes through the experience I told you, of learning to be friendly in the South and that kind of thing. It's just, talk to the people, you know. They're just ordinary people out there, and I just want them to understand what's going on. So, I miss that very much. And then you get a chance to dress up, have somebody do your makeup, have them do your hair, and sit there and tell the news. But I always felt that every time I went on the air, I was representing 30 million African Americans, and that I had to be tight. All of my stuff had to be tight. There was no screwing up on the air. There was no--I had to be--and you can't imagine how mentally exhausting that is, to get yourself geared up for it, for a half hour talking to the people. And by the time that newscast was over, I was exhausted. Because you have to give total focus. They're talking to you in your ear while the newscast is going on. And you're speaking and trying to hear what they're saying, and talk to the people. It's very difficult to do. But it was fun, I enjoyed it very much. Speaker 1: Now, now you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I miss it. Story_ID: 486110 Speaker 1: You have become sort of an icon for proper pronunciation of words. I think you and Barbara Jordan are the two examples that people use (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm compared to Barbara Jordan. Speaker 1: All the time, yeah. Speaker 2: I used to listen to her and go, "Oh, my God, listen to that woman speak." But people say, they say that about me. And I've heard young anchorwomen tell me that they have been told, "Listen to [HistoryMaker] Carole Simpson. Watch her. Look at how she dresses. Look at how she approaches the news." I didn't have any role models. There was nobody I could look at on TV and say, "Oh, that's how you dress. That's how you make your hair. That's what you do." So, the fact that I was able to be a role model for other people is just, you know-- Speaker 1: I've only, I suppose only Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a great accomplishment. Huh? Speaker 1: Only Chicago people would probably understand this reference, but were you influenced at all by Bernadette C. Washington [sic. Bernadine C. Washington] on WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I don't even know who that is. Speaker 1: You don't know her? Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I don't know who that is. Speaker 1: Well, she had a, she had an air of, you know, seeking perfection as she spoke. And it was, it was interesting. Speaker 2: But I don't want it to sound forced. Does it sound forced when I pronounce words? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: People always say, "You're so articulate, you're so articulate." And black people, you hear that, "Oh, you're so articulate." And it sounds like it's, you know, racist, that we're not supposed to be articulate. As I say, acting and no accent made the difference. I didn't learn, I didn't take speech lessons or speech classes or anything like that. It's just there. It is what it is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I want to communicate, so I got to be clear. Story_ID: 486111 Speaker 1: Now, your philosophical questions. Speaker 2: Now, tell us first about your scholarships. Now, 'cause that's the other thing you're noted for doing that everybody talks about--encouraging young people and actually helping them financially to become journalists. Speaker 1: When I realized that there were so few African Americans in journalism, and how difficult it had been for me to get into it, I decided that when I had some money, some spare money, some spare change, I realized that I really should put my money where my mouth was--not just encourage young people to go into this profession because I think they're needed and I think their voices need to be heard and their writings need to be read, but to help them get into it financially. So, I established a total of six scholarships now that I have, that I have also given to Asians and to Hispanics and African Americans. My NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] scholarships, I have two of those, so those are specifically for African Americans. I have one at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. I have an RTNDA, a Radio-Television News Directors Association scholarship [Radio Television Digital News Association], and I have one at a private school in Washington, D.C. for an inner-city kid to be able to go to a private school who may not be able to afford it. And that is one of the most rewarding things, because I hear from them now. I've been giving them for about twelve or fifteen years now. And I hear from them, and they're making it. They're anchors, they're reporters, they're all over the country, and they stay in touch with me. And that is just, I mean that's more important than any story I could do on the air and make a difference with the congressmen. But here's somebody's life that you're affecting, life changing. And that is such a wonderful feeling, that you've made a difference in someone's life. And my scholarships are not very much money, because I don't have very much money. Lots of people think you're an anchor and think I have made millions of dollars all my life. I never did. Again, we don't want to bring racism up again, but a black woman anchor isn't getting what a white woman anchor would get or certainly a white man. And I have to let my family know, and everybody else, I do not have that kind of money. So my scholarships are modest, but young people say, "Hey, it bought my books. I was able to pay my fees with this. I was able to go out and get a T-shirt of my college, or a sweatshirt on it." So every little bit helps, I guess. And I hope to continue them as long as I can, because unfortunately they're still needed. And race-based scholarships have been declared illegal, unless they're by a private individual. So, I encourage my fellow journalists to do what they can to help the younger generation. Speaker 2: Okay. We didn't discuss your Emmy Awards. Do you want to mention those? Speaker 1: (Shakes head). Speaker 2: No? Okay. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Alright. Okay. Speaker 1: They're just things (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. But you did receive several Emmys? But-- Speaker 1: Yes. DuPont [Alfred I. duPont-Columbia University Award], Peabody [Peabody Award], I've gotten every major journalism award there is. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: For television. Story_ID: 486112 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: It's a bugaboo for me. First of all, I'm horrified that America's image of black America is what they see on music videos. Eighty percent of the rap music is bought by suburban white teenagers. I think their image of African Americans is that women shake their booties a lot, that they are easy, that they are sexually promiscuous. They think the men are violent, and their gold teeth and their funny looking clothes, and their gangster-ism, and those kinds of things. That disturbs me because I think that's what a lot of white kids think black people are all about, not knowing about the teachers and the engineers and the bankers and the chemists and the doctors, and all of those other kinds of things. They don't see that, they don't see it on TV. So, all they see are those kinds of things. That's disturbing to me. I think that helps racism survive. "Yeah, I like their music, but I don't want to live with them," or "I don't want to be around them." My biggest bugaboo with the black community--and I think we are not going to make any progress until we solve the problem of teenage pregnancy. I've been singing this tune for a long time now. If we don't have young women finishing school so that they can get a job or perhaps go to college. Have them getting pregnant in high school, dropping out, not having a male present to help them raise those children. I went to a housing project in Harlem [New York, New York] where 90 percent of the residents are single women and their out of wedlock children. Only 10 percent of that huge high-rise building was occupied by men. So you've got young children, girls and boys, that need a father present, and need a male present to learn what you want in a husband and what a father is supposed to be, and someone to knock somebody's head around if they're bad. It's destroying our--I just heard a statistic today that 69.7 percent of African American children today are being born out of wedlock. That is just horrifying to me. So, we've got to stop girls from saying yes, but we've got to stop boys from trying to make them say yes. We've focused on the girls, and we haven't focused on the boys who are getting them into these situations and then leaving the family. So, until we can keep our girls in school and have them get married and go back to, you know, love, marriage and then the baby. We've got love, (air quotes) love, and the baby, and no marriage. And that I think is destroying our community--no nuclear family, nobody. Grandmothers are taking care of children when they should be resting and stuff like that. And what can Grandma do? She can't take you to the museum. She's got, she's tired, she's got arthritis. It's, it's, it's, as I say, key, I think the key thing. So that would bring us back to education, which is key--keeping those girls in school. But we've got to stop the teenage pregnancy. Story_ID: 486113 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major activity that you'd do differently or? Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, there's nothing I would have done differently. I couldn't have. I am who I am. I'm outspoken to my own detriment, but if things have to be said and nobody else is going to say them, then I feel I have to say them if it's the truth. And the truth will find its way. It may not find its way when I want it to, but eventually it will. And those people that think I was just loyal to the company or biting the hand that feeds me and all of those kinds of things, I hope someday they'll realize what I tried to do, that I tried to make a difference, and I believe I have made a difference. I'm afraid it's slipping away now, but for a short time I was there and tried to make a difference. And that's why I'm teaching now, to try to pass my passion and my ambition and motivation on to the young journalists of tomorrow. Story_ID: 486114 Speaker 1: Well when you look at your accomplishments now, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy? Do I have a legacy? Does everybody have a legacy (laughter)? My legacy, I guess, is that you can do it. If you put your mind to it, if you really want it badly enough, you can do it. Now, I really wanted to replace Peter Jennings (laughter). I never got to that very top tier of--I was like the lower tier. I was a minor celebrity. But I wasn't Barbara Walters, I wasn't Diane Sawyer. I was [HistoryMaker] Carole Simpson, and that was like a tier below. But maybe I've made it possible for some other woman, African American woman, to make that top tier. So I hope that's my legacy, that I broke down some barriers and I opened up some opportunities. I know that--from local stations I hear that there were African American women named to the Sunday night news because I was doing the Sunday night news, and that that opened up that little spot, and those local stations said, "Oh, well, we can have our black woman and that black woman." And I would do promos with some of them that would air on the local stations. You know, "First you'll see me, and then Carole Simpson with the news." So I'm hoping that while I didn't hit the top, the very top that I hoped I would reach, that someone else will because I worked as hard as I did. Story_ID: 486115 Speaker 1: Can you give us a sketch of your family now? Speaker 2: My family now? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. My daughter is Dr. Mallika Marshall. My husband's name is Jim Marshall [James E. Marshall]. I didn't take his last name because I was already on the air when we got married, and they didn't want me to become somebody else; everybody knew [HistoryMaker] Carole Simpson by then. It's like, "Please don't change your name." So, I kept my maiden name throughout my professional career. But I'm married to Jim Marshall, who is retired now, and my keeper (laughter), like watching what's taking me so long tonight. My daughter--we moved here to be with my daughter, who is the WBZ [WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] Channel 4, the CBS affiliate, she's their medical correspondent. She's a doctor. She's a Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] trained doctor. And she practices, and she also does the CBS 'Early Show' ['The Early Show'] on Saturdays for the network. So, she's working three jobs. She never wanted any part of television while she was growing up. She didn't want to do what I did. And then lo and behold, she wanted to do her own thing. She became a doctor, and then realized that she could tell one mother to get her mother child vaccinated in an office, but on television she could tell thousands of women to get their children vaccinated. So she recognized the value of medical communication. And she looks like me. People know immediately that it's Carole Simpson's daughter. And I have an adopted son [Adam Simpson-Marshall] that we adopted when he was five weeks old. And he's now a talent agent out in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] at age twenty-six. Can you believe--you see how Hollywood is young-ing up. So, he wanted the movies. I don't think we'll ever see him back east again, except for the holidays. He loves California and that lifestyle, and he's doing well. And I have a grandson, a two and a half year old grandson. He's the real reason I moved here. And my daughter is expecting another baby on September 20th. So I wanted to be close to family, and that's why we made the move from Washington [D.C.]. There was no reason to continue to stay there, although I miss it terribly. I don't like Boston [Massachusetts] very much. But I will be with my daughter and my grandchildren. And, what more could you want? Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there anything I have not asked you that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think we've talked about everything. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Except my knee operation. You've talked about everything. Speaker 1: There's a recent knee replacement? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, my recent knee replacement. That's from all that walking I did as a reporter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, I can't think of anything. Story_ID: 486116 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a good woman, a good person, a woman who wanted to make a difference, and did. I'd like that on my tombstone, "She made a difference." That's, that's how I want to be remembered. That's all I can say. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you for spending the time with us today. Speaker 2: Thank you..