 Story_ID: 12823 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please. Speaker 2: My name is Sonia Sanchez, and it's spelled S-O-N-I-A S-A-N-C-H-E-Z. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is that your given name or is that Speaker 2: No. My given name was Wilsonia Benita Driver. Speaker 1: And now is there a story behind the name change? Speaker 2: Well, it's a story. It's just that I started to--I got married, and I married a Puerto Rican and the name Sanchez, and I started to write. I was writing during the time that--I got published during the time that I was writing, and I used that name, so the name has stayed with me all along. Speaker 1: Okay. Fine. Speaker 2: And what is your date of birth? Speaker 1: 9/9/34 [September 9, 1934] Speaker 2: And where were you born? Speaker 1: Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 2: Okay. And what is your profession? Speaker 1: I'm a professor, poet, a human being, I hope. I think you have to make a profession of being a human being at this stage of the game since so few people want to be human beings. Speaker 2: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 1: Today is--good question. Today is April 19, I think, '03 [2003]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And we're in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in my home. Story_ID: 12824 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughs) What is my favorite food? My goodness, I've never even thought about it, my favorite food. That's a fascinating question because I'm not much of a food person, so it's probably the last question that I woulda even thought that anyone would even ask me, and so I'm dodging around because I'm trying to figure out--I'm a macrobiotic vegetarian, so I don't know what my favorite food is. I like oatmeal, so maybe I'll say oatmeal. Oatmeal and bananas. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite color? I used to say yes, I did, but I've been striking out in all kinds of different colors, but I would say my favorite color would probably be a variation of orange. Not really orange, though, it's more a brown don't know. I have no idea what my favorite--let me say red. I'll say red. That'll do it. Since I have a red jacket on. Speaker 1: All right. Now do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I love the fall and I love--I guess 'cause I was born in the fall and the summer and spring. That'll teach you. Doubt I have a favorite. I've never, you know, gone into that necessarily, right? I love what fall does. I love what summer does 'cause I love the sun, and I just wait for the sun, literally wait for the sun. And in the spring, too, just that I was looking out the door--I came out on the porch to get the '[New York] Times' this morning, and I saw these robin red breasts out, you know, just picking out there, you know, on with my flowers and things, and I thought how beautiful spring is especially when I hear the birds in the morning now and see the buds coming on the trees, so I think I have three favorite. I hate winter, you know. If you'd ask me what do I hate, I would say winter. Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, I don't. No, I don't. I've had so few vacations in my life, okay, so I don't have a favorite destination any place. I have had some good times in Jamaica, and I've had some good times in Barbados. I had a wonderful time last year in Italy when I went over there to do a reading. It's interesting looking--being in Rome [Italy] seeing as you turn the corner you see the old, and you turned another corner and you see the new, so but I've had, you know, great times in places. I had a wonderful reading vacation up in Provincetown [Massachusetts] which was a wonderful place up there. I had never been there before, and it was just like a interesting freedom and wonderful people up there, so that was-- I have no favorite vacation place. I'm probably the worst person to ask anything favorite, you know, because I've made a point not to hold onto things because in this country in the world, things can be taken away from you so easily, so it's best not to hold onto anything except family. Speaker 1: Okay, now this last one will be a doozy then. Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Well, I have a couple, maybe. "Ebay eyah," which means it'll get better. I chant that a lot in the morning, and I give it to a lot of students so they can also chant it or say it because in that way, you know, when you say things, you can make it better. You know, if you say it out loud, you can make it better. So the language is Twi [of Ghana], and so I say, "Ebay eyah. It'll get better. Ebay, ebay, ebay, eyah, eyah, eyah, eyah, eyah. It'll get better." And my other one now is peace. I love the way the young people say, "Peace out," you know. I always think that these young students and young people and young rappers are always on target. This world needs a whole lot of peace, so I think the word peace and the words peace and it'll get better if we work to make it better are important words to say during these days. Story_ID: 12825 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about what you know about your family origin. How far back can you trace your family? Speaker 2: Not very far. We don't have a lot of people in my family, and so the one person that I could go back to is my grandmother who took care of me when my mother died at one giving birth, you know, so my grandmother--I didn't know my grandfather. He was dead. My grandmother took care of us until I was about six. She died when I was six, and then I went to live with my father, and then we moved [from Birmingham, Alabama] to a place called New York City [New York, New York] where I lived with my father and my stepmother and my sister. Speaker 1: Okay. So are there any stories that are passed down through your family about life in the nineteenth century or what things were like during the days of slavery or any-- Speaker 2: No. The only story that I got was my aunt [Louise] who was one of my grandmother's children, right? She lived with me off and on for three or four years, taking care of my children when they were little, and she used to tell the story about--I deal a lot with herbs, and she laughed when she came because she had some illnesses and I helped, you know, get rid of some of them with herbs, and she laughed and said that my grandmother, her mother, dealt with herbs. But they wanted to be educated and advanced, so they didn't deal with that kind of stuff because they thought it was old-fashioned, you know, and not progressive and not modern. You know what I mean? So but it's interesting when it came to my generation, we went back and dipped back into that history, into that past. No, because I guess because my grandmother died and because we came north and I only had my father there and a stepmother. A lot of the history and herstory of our family got really lost and it didn't continue. Story_ID: 12826 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your father? Can you give us his full name and date of birth, and spell his name for us if you can. Speaker 2: My father, Wilson L. Driver, Wilson L. Driver, D-r-i-v-e-r, was born--a leap-year baby, born February 29, 1904. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was he like and what did he do? Speaker 2: Well my father was a schoolteacher in Birmingham, Alabama. He was also one of the first jazz musicians there, so when they got out of school, they traveled around the South, and one year they came as far as Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] playing jazz. He was inaugurated in the Hall of Fame, Alabama Hall of Fame in Birmingham. He was, as I said, a schoolteacher and musician. He taught 'Papa' Jo Jones, the famous drummer who came into--my father played drums also in those movie houses when they didn't have sound. Evidently he played the drums, and this young kid came in and asked him and said, "I play those, too." So my father handed Papa Jo Jones the sticks, and he started to play, and he held the sticks wrong. And my father proceeded to show him how he was supposed to do it correctly and whatever and also talked about, you know, reading music and that kind of thing. So he began that whole first process of teaching Papa Jo Jones when he came into that movie house how to play the drums properly, how to hold the sticks properly. Speaker 1: Now is that the same person that people know as Philly Joe Jones? Speaker 2: No. They're two separate Joe--Philly Joe Jones from Philadelphia. Papa Jo Jones was the most distinguished, and Philly Joe Jones was also a good drummer, but Papa Jo Jones was, indeed, one of the greatest drummers on this earth. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So did your father [Wilson L. Driver] teach him music or-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah, he knew--he taught music privately, taught the drums privately in New York City, and when he came to New York City, he didn't continue to teach because they did not believe that at that time most southerners could teach anything. I mean, when we came north, they wanted to put me and my sister back a grade because they said we were from the South which meant that we probably weren't up to the work and, of course, they tested us and we were up to the work, so we were then put in good classes and we continued on. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So what did he do when he came to New York? I mean, what kind of work did he-- Speaker 2: He did some kind of factory work because it was during the war, near the end of World War II, and he made good money, evidently. I don't know what kind of factory it was. I really don't remember, and then after that he went to work for Chock full o'Nuts and became a manager at Chock full o'Nuts. So we would get, you know, some good franks when he came home from work and cheese sandwiches and all kinds of sandwiches, you know, that he brought in, tuna fish sandwiches and great soups and whatever. And aso because he was a manager there, when I was in college, I would work at Chock full o'Nuts during the summer which is very good because they didn't pay a lot of money, but you could eat a great deal, you know. So I would sit and stuff myself before I came home, and I had my dinner before I came home. Right. Speaker 1: Is that the Chock full o'Nuts in Harlem [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Chock full o'Nuts all over New York City. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The one with the coffee. Speaker 1: It was the one that he worked at the one in Harlem? Speaker 2: No. He worked downtown on Wall Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So well tell us about your mother as much as you know. I know she died Speaker 2: She [Lena Driver] died when I was one. I have no memory of my mother, period. I just know what's in the pictures, you know. What I can imagine and what my aunt told me about her, and she was a a wonderful young woman. I know nothing about my mother. Speaker 1: What was her full name, and can you spell the name for us and tell us her date of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know--I just know Lena Driver, L-e-n-a D-r-i-v-e-r. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know her date of birth or (inaudible)? Speaker 2: Have no idea. I don't even know when she died. Speaker 1: Is there any story about how your mother and father met or-- Speaker 2: Well my father [Wilson L. Driver] told some stories later on in his life that, you know, she was adopted by this very middle class family in Alabama, and all the men--'cause she was a very beautiful woman as you'll see on the pictures and so she had all these suitors, and my father tells the story about how he proceeded with her. That he, you know, was a schoolteacher, and he had gotten a car, actually, and so he would come and get her and take her out, you know. And he tells the story once about my mother was also very fair, so she looked white. So he would sit up front and drive up to a place, and they would serve her. So she would get all this ice cream, and then they would drive up some place and eat it together laughing. And once they were someplace together, she was sitting next to him, and the police stopped them and wanted to know "Nigger, what you doing with this white woman?" And when he said that was his wife, the men just kinda looked like, you know, they just couldn't believe. But, you know, the South always wants to forget about miscegenation, you know. What I found out about, indeed, about my grandmother on my mother's side is that she was a worker on a very rich plantation and her--the father of two children that she gave birth to was this rich man who owned this plantation, and then--so I don't know what happened. So my mother was adopted by this black family in Birmingham. Speaker 1: Okay. You don't know the name of the plantation? Speaker 2: (shakes head no). Speaker 1: It was somewhere in Alabama? Speaker 2: Yeah, in Alabama, but I don't have a clue, you know, 'cause it was so hard. I used to ask questions of my aunt, but my aunt had ten children. She was busy raising ten children so then no one kept--and that whole group died off. I mean, when I first went down to Birmingham years later to do a reading at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], there was a man in his nineties someplace who knew my mother, but, you know, he was very protective about giving out information, so I finally had to tell him I was the daughter, and he finally, you know, talked about her, you know, and how pretty she was and what a wonderful person she was, and she had married my father, and she died in childbirth. Story_ID: 12827 Speaker 1: If you can reflect back to growing up in Birmingham [Alabama], I know you were there till six--until you moved-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm, 'til eight. Speaker 1: And then in New York City [New York, New York] give us some sense of what some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up were. Speaker 2: Well the sights and sounds and the smells of Birmingham were a mixed bag, I think, on many levels. The sound of my grandmother humming in the kitchen cooking was always a mighty sound. The sounds on Saturday of the old sisters coming from the church to cook food in our house, in our place where we lived, was always a mighty sound. Wherever I was I would wait for those women to come, and I'd come zooming in the house, and I would slide behind the couch just to hear them talk. And they talked--I did a piece called 'Dear Momma' 'cause I had an astringent memory of that. It never left me. When they came in, I would come in and listen to them. They talked about the church and about the pastor and about everybody, and eventually they'd talk about somebody beating somebody, you know, a husband beating a wife, and I remember them talkin' about what you do in the case like that that they would say, like, you take this child, the little girl child, and you take the little male child, and we'll have to get Sister Jean, you know, and tell her, you know, what she should do and that, but they had no counselors. They had no psychologist, you know, who was gonna counsel them about this kind of thing, so those sisters had to figure out what to do when some of the men got so frustrated they would begin to beat their wives. And so I remember sitting behind the couch hearing one of the women talkin' about puttin' some grits on the stove and waking the husband up holdin' the grits saying, "If you hit me again, I'm gonna pour these hot grits on you" and oil grease. And I remember laughing out loud when I heard it because it just seemed like such a different thing. And I remember my grandmother shooting her eyes behind the couch saying, "Either you keep quiet and listen to this 'cause it will serve you well, or you have to leave." So I got very quiet and listened to these women talk about the ways that they dealt with problems, you know, in their family. I heard them talk about sister somebody who would cross her legs in church and was trying to get at the pastor, you know, and what they thought about her, you know. And so I would go to church and watch for that sister so I would know I could identify her and tell my sister who she was. My sister wasn't interested that much, but I was, I mean, 'cause I was always identifying people as to who they were and what they did. And they talked about one of the sisters who came to church every Sunday and got up and got happy at the same time, the same time, and would take her purse and sling it over, you know, the church. And so I looked for her also, too, and when she did it, I would just fall out laughing. Of course, my grandmother would come down and, you know, and tell me to keep quiet, but I had memories of Sundays eating breakfast. My grandmother would do brains and eggs. I tell people that. They collapse. But I remember them being good and with grits. I don't know if they were good because she made 'em, but certainly she was a good cook. And we spent Sunday school and church home to eat dinner and back at church in the evening, so Sunday was spent in church. I remember, like, with my grandmother would stretch out and take a nap during the afternoon after she had worked, you know, in the morning and gotten us, you know, whatever, et cetera. And I remember I was the one used to go wake her up, and one day I walked into it, and I used to wake her up by jumping on the bed. I would run in and jump on the bed and jump all around her, right, and say, "Get up, Momma. Get up, Momma. Get up, Momma," and one day I did that, and I jumped off the bed and went running through the house, and I said to Louise, who was my first cousin but we called her Aunt Louise 'cause she was so much older, I said, "Momma didn't move. She won't get up." And that was the last time I saw her. She was dead, evidently, you know. Probably worked herself to death. I have memories of my grandmother walking me and my sister to Tuggle Elementary School [Birmingham] where we went, my sister and I, and I went back years later. The first time I went down to do this reading at the University of Alabama, I had a memory of this school being at the top of a hill, so the hill just seemed to be really there. The school at the top of the hill, but I thought it was just the imaginings of a child and came to find out later on that it was not the imaginings of a child, that that school's at the top of a hill, and Momma would come halfway up 'cause she was, you know, she was heavyset, you know, she had some weight on her. And then my sister and I would run the rest of the way up the hill by ourselves, and she'd wait until she saw us get over, you know, the top, and she would go back home. So, you know, she was doing a lot of work, taking care of a lot of people. Speaker 1: Okay. What time--? Speaker 2: And we came north to a place called--the great thing about Alabama is that I was able to get up in the morning, eat, get dressed, and run. I ran all day outside playing, you know, playing, you know, with the boys, with the girls. I played mostly with the boys 'cause they had much more interesting games going on. The girls stood and just looked pretty sometimes and just jumped rope. So I would run outside and play with them, so there was a lot of freedom there in Birmingham, you know, and I remember it as, you know, a very good, you know, period for me. We moved to a place called New York and the sounds of the urban city. Those are different sounds. They're not sounds of freedom and running out in grass and climbing trees, but they're sounds like, you know, a back apartment with a bedroom facing a blank wall with a dingy, dark apartment. No light ever hit that apartment. So it's a different kind of motion and movement. It was a very small apartment when I, you know, look at it and remember it. Small bedrooms. It was actually an apartment, I think, that the super would have had. It was apartment three in the back on the first floor, but then a super had one downstairs and small living rooms, three bedrooms, a small kitchen, small bathroom, and long hallway, and it was a difficult place to grow up in, I think. As a consequence, you know, we stayed outside a lot, but it was, again, double dutch jumping rope. I played ball in the streets with the brothers, stickball, 'cause I was a good pitcher. You know, running, going to the movies on Saturdays, cleaning the house on Sundays. I went to the library almost every day 'cause I was a reader which is one way that I could escape what was going on in the world, also, too, and in that house. And, as I said, we were put in our right grades, you know, when we came to junior high school. I went to a place called George Washington High School [New York, New York], and I got out of there at sixteen and went on to Hunter College [New York, New York] Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in New York City. Speaker 1: I don't want you to go too far 'cause-- I don't want to get you out of-- Speaker 2: --New York yet. I mean out of-- Speaker 1: --the childhood yet. Speaker 2: But what part of New York [New York] did you all live in? Speaker 1: We lived in Harlem right near the Polo Grounds at 152nd Street and St. Nicholas Place. Story_ID: 12828 Speaker 1: Where did you go to grade school? Speaker 2: Tuggle Elementary School in Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Tuggle in Birmingham. Speaker 2: And in New York? Speaker 1: [Edward W.] Stitt Junior High School [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Spell that word. Speaker 1: S-T-I-T-T. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. All right. Tell me what kind of a student were you in grade school? Speaker 1: I liked school, you know. I was one of the people who read a lot, and so I was pretty decent student, you know. Not brilliant just, you know, okay. Story_ID: 12829 Speaker 1: Did you have a tough time adjusting to New York [New York], you know, life when you--. Speaker 2: I think so. I think the tough time was how we lived. Well that was a tough adjustment in the apartment, as I said, and there was a different smell and sound to New York. The urban sounds were different. They were rougher. They were tougher. The good thing on our block, I think, is that we had some brothers who looked at some of us as good students, and so, therefore, they protected us, and, you know, we were not hurt as a consequence. We were allowed to go to school and learn. When we came out of [Edward W.] Stitt Junior High School [Washington Heights neighborhood, New York, New York] and there was gonna be a fight with the gangs, the brothers on our block would tell us to rush off. "Go home. Get outta Dodge right away," which we did. We got out of Dodge right away 'cause they had zip guns, you know. That was serious, serious kind of stuff going on there. And, you know, so we were left alone because we liked school. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any teachers or people in the community that served as mentor or people that helped develop you, you know, as you were growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I was a person who--we had a woman named Miss Craig who lived in the front building, and she was very nosey, and we really didn't like her 'cause she would tell at least my father when I was out in the street playing stickball 'cause I wasn't supposed to be playing that, or if we did something wrong, you know, she would report like clockwork to our parents, so we really didn't like her. The difference with her, though, is that we realized years later that she also was a person who took care of the block. She would report to the police when something was going on, when something was wrong, so that was very good. She was a protector. She really was protecting us, and we didn't understand it. In junior high there were no significant teachers at all. In high school there were some teachers who, in a sense, would invite me to their house to give me books to read that I could not find at the public library or in the library at school, but there were more teachers in the South--there were interesting teachers in the South, you know. In the South if you couldn't get something, those teachers [at her former school in Birmingham, Alabama] would hold 'ya back at lunchtime and go over the work time and time and time and time again to make sure that you got it. And then when she was sure that you had it, she would then give extra homework. And then she'd come by your house, knock on the door, and say, "Sonia needs to study this, that, whatever," and that way they made sure that you were up always on your work. The difference in the schools in New York City that did not happen. There was no connection at all with the teachers other than in that classroom, and so, you know, they didn't live in your neighborhood at all and really didn't necessarily care if you got the work or not, you know. But my father [Wilson L. Driver], being an ex-school teacher, was always concerned that we had homework, and so he always checked the homework to make sure, indeed, that we had homework. So I would make up homework whether the teachers gave us homework or not. And also in junior high school because I, you know, my teacher would grade my papers first in math or something and then he would give me the papers to bring home to mark is it to grade, so I was one of those people who was grading papers if you're ready for that, and the problem with that is that the bad kids in the back of the class would tell me, "You better gimme a good grade," so I learned how to be a good forger of people's writing, you know. At night when I went on and checked their exams to make sure they got eighties and not the sixties or fifties they should have gotten. Right. I had forgotten about that. Story_ID: 12830 Speaker 1: What kind of activities were you involved in in high school? Speaker 2: I was part of a literary club 'cause I wrote. I wrote poetry, so I was part of this literary club in high school. That's about the only thing I was a part of, actually, where we read books, and we did some creative writing. I don't remember being a part of anything else other than that, actually. Speaker 1: Okay. Let me ask you about your introduction to poetry--'cause I've read about your introduction to poetry before but tell us about how you got-- Speaker 2: Well I started writing poetry actually when I was a little girl in [Birmingham] Alabama. I used to just write and keep little pages and stuff, and no one paid any attention to it, and I didn't put any great import to it. However, after my grandmother died and we were shifted to other people before we got to my father's house, that's the thing that I did. The family had taught me how to read when I was four, so I had gone to school in Alabama with my sister who's two years older than I, you know, I would go in and I'd stayed along with her and as we proceeded but I started to write poetry at some point, but I really started to write little pieces when I went to--after my grandmother died--oh, I feel so depleted for some reason. I don't know why. Yeah. So, no, that's about it. I started writing then, and then when we came north, I kept little notebooks. I would hide my notebooks in the bathroom. We had these old-fashioned tubs, you know, with those long legs that are worth a lot of money now probably, and since I cleaned the bathroom, I would put my notebooks underneath the bathtub, and that's where I kept my little, you know, my little poems. And the first poem I think I read I wrote for school was when we were home on vacation for George Washington's birthday and I did that, you know. I had that poem about George Washington crossing the Delaware [River] and I was called inI had washed the morning breakfast dishes. We were all home on that day, and my stepmother called me to come in and rewash them 'cause she found grease and stuff, and I was writing this poem for class. I left it on the bed and my sister came into the room 'cause we shared the room together and found the poem, and she came into the kitchen and stood in the doorway and started to read the poem out loud, and I was so embarrassed, you know. So I grabbed it with my wet hands and took it. It was from that point on that I hid all my work. No one ever knew that I had continued to write and probably would not have paid any attention or done any, you know, anything with it at all. But I wrote throughout high school and wrote throughout college never really taking myself too seriously but certainly I took a writing class once at Hunter College [now part of City University, New York, New York] which was a fiasco in a sense, and I remember I did a piece about my stepmother who was very much what I called a Southern black woman who was very much afraid of going downtown. And she would go to 125th Street to do all her shopping, and one day she couldn't find--I don't know what it was she was looking for. She couldn't find it at 125th Street, and so my sister and I took her down to Macy's [department store], which was on 34th Street, and as we went down there. I remember that she waited for this woman to come to wait on her, and she waited for a long, long, long time, and finally the woman waited on her and just gave the change. She just threw the change on the glass partition there, and I remember thinking that I would never let anyone treat me in that fashion. But as I said my stepmother was a Southern black woman and she, you know, was scared. New York frightened her, I think, in a very large way, and it didn't frighten us 'cause we were kids and we had to learn how to maneuver it. We had to learn how to take the buses to school or the subways to school or the subways downtown. We would on Sundays take buses all the way down to the village, you know, and then come back around 'cause the buses went all the way from where we lived on St. Nicholas Avenue all the way downtown down Fifth Avenue to the Village [Greenwich Village, Manhattan, New York]. We'd get off, walk around on a Sunday, come back on home. I learned how to, you know, take the subway train to Ebbets Field [Brooklyn, New York] 'cause I was a [Brooklyn] Dodgers fan. We lived right near the Polo Grounds. I learned how to walk up to the Polo Grounds by myself and go in and see the [New York] Giants playing. Of course, my sister and I learned how to walk to Tuggle [Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama], to [Edward W.] Stitt Junior High School [Washington Heights neighborhood in Upper Manhattan, New York, New York] and then we learned how to take the bus up to George Washington High School [Washington Heights], so we learned how to maneuver. You had to take the subway and the buses because you had to get around in the city. You couldn't get to school, you know, otherwise, but my stepmother was not one who did it well or liked going out by herself, you know, a great deal. We learned how to maneuver going from St. Nicholas Place over to Broadway to the movie houses, of course, down to Riverside Drive where you would walk on the drive and, you know, and have fun. So as children we learned how, you know, how to do that. Speaker 1: Now where did you first become exposed to black poetry? Speaker 2: Well, you know, in Alabama, and when we had assemblies, we would stand up and sing anthems, national anthem, and the song we sang was 'Lift Ev'ry Voice and Sing.' So when we got to New York City, we stood up in assembly to sing the National Anthem, and my sister and I both started to sing 'Lift Ev'ry Voice and Sing,' and everybody else was singing the other one. And we stopped cold and looked up and went 'whoops', you know. We would have assemblies and someone would get up and recite a Langston Hughes poem or a Countee Cullen poem or a Paul Laurence Dunbar poem, you know, so I knew that those poems existed. The difference was coming North, we never got another black poet or another black writer again in our lives in school. Even when we read [Alexander] Dumas, you know, Dumas. No one ever told us that Dumas was, you know, "black." The only time we came across black folks was in during slavery in a history book where you saw pictures of them, you know, probably looking very sullen and very helpless in those books. That was the only time, so the New York education was one that was interesting. Well it was interesting in looking at the two, in segregated schools you learned about black folks. You got some black history. You got, I mean, some black poetry at least, you know. You got some black books. You knew that black folks did write. When you came to the North for freedom, you came into these schools that were "desegregated" in a sense, right? And you never ever read anything that was black. Speaker 1: Now were white people in your schools in New York? Speaker 2: Yeah, a few in Stitt Junior High School and the big high school, George Washington, oh, yeah. Yeah. Most of them. They were the majority, actually. We were the minority, in so-called minority. Speaker 1: Where was George Washington? Was that-- Speaker 2: It was up in Washington Heights. Up beyond 160th Street. Speaker 1: So I read someplace that a librarian gave you an anthology or showed you an anthology? Speaker 2: Yeah. A librarian on 145th Street, 'cause I went to the library [Hamilton Grange Branch Library] almost every day, at least every other day, and I was gettin' books that had a--like, 'Forever Amber.' They had a lot of--had some sex scenes and stuff, you know, 'cause I read, you know, all these love stories or whatever. And I would every now and then take out some little poetry thing, and she evidently spotted that in checkin' me out, the black woman at 145th Street between Broadway and Amsterdam, and she put this anthology in there, and I came and I devoured it, you know. But, of course, I did not tell her I wrote poetry. I think she asked me did I write poetry because not many kids took poetry out, and I lied and said "No" 'cause I knew you didn't tell people you'd wrote poetry. I mean, I had gotten that hip in New York City that you protected yourself. You never let people find out too much about you. Speaker 1: What was the stigma about writing poetry? Was that--(inaudible) Speaker 2: I don't have a clue. I don't have a clue, you know. I really don't know. I just think that people probably think you're odd if you write poetry, you know, if you did anything creative. I mean, my family laughed at me, but it was not a harsh laughter, you know. It was just like oh, she's writin' this poem, you know. And every now and then they knew I was--I'd be sitting off someplace in the room writing, but they just left me alone and didn't bother me. Story_ID: 12831 Speaker 1: When you graduated from high school, what did you think you were gonna do? Did you-- Speaker 2: Well, actually, when I was a senior in high school, at sixteen I was gonna get a job because we were pretty poor, you know. And a young woman by the name of Mack Ebomoto (ph.), a Japanese American, said to me, "Sonia, aren't you going to college?" I said, "No, I'm not going to college. I'm gonna get a job." She said, "Yeah, but you can go to college, you know. You have decent grades." And I said, "Well, I can't afford college." She said, "Well, there's Hunter [College, City University of New York, New York, New York] is free. There's City College [of New York, New York, New York] is free. There's Queens College [New York, New York] is free, and there's Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York]." We had all these free schools or colleges in New York City. You don't have 'em now, unhappily enough, and so she said, "All you have to do is go into the English department and ask the chairperson for an application." And I did that, and he looked up and said, "Your mother has to come to school." Well, luckily enough, my stepmother's not working, and so the next day she came up to school. But I thought about it years later. If my mother had been working and could not take off, I would not have gotten an application to go. So my stepmother came in too, and we knocked on the door, and she came into the office, and he turned around. I remember he had a nice little pipe in his mouth. I don't think he was smokin' it, just had it in his mouth, and he turned around, and she said, "I'm here for my daughter." And he just handed the application. She said, "Do I have to sign it?" He said, "No." So I filled it out and gave it back to him. She really didn't have to come to school. It was a really interesting thing that happened there. And anyway, so I went to Hunter College, yeah, because we got free books. I didn't go to City [College] because City you had to pay for books. So I could have gotten into Hunter, but I would not have been able to pay for my books, so at Hunter, which was a school for all young women and although some men were coming into the school after the war. I guess they had G.I. Bill and things and stuff whatever, they had come in, I guess. In my classes I never saw any males. They were up in the Bronx [New York], I think. There's a Bronx division. Sometimes you went two years up in the Bronx, and then you came down for the other two years on Park Avenue. But, you know, so that's what I did, you know. I went to Hunter College and took a writing class at Hunter. The teacher asked us once to do a piece about your parent but something that unusual had happened to your parent, right? That same day I went home with this assignment, my father [Wilson L. Driver] came in and my father cursed. He opened the door and he slammed the door, and he's cursed out loud. My father was not a curser. He was not a person who cursed. And he said, "That damn man." Someone had patted him on the head in an elevator, and he was furious that that kind of violation had happened, and of course, he did nothing and said nothing 'cause he also was a Southern black man, right? I remember observing him, how angry he was. And I went into the bedroom and proceeded to write about this thing about my father who worked downtown and came home one day, and I heard the door open and the door slam and my father curse, and I talked about how unusual it was 'cause my father never cursed at all. At dinner table he kept saying over and over again how he had been patted on the head by this white man in elevator 'cause something had been said, and the guy pat him on the head, and he was furious but he hadn't said anything and he released the fear. He held in all this on the train. He didn't say anything at all and all the way home he didn't explode until he got into the safety of his apartment, and he exploded. And I wrote just that little kind of thing about my father, and at the end said something about how unusual it was to see my father that angry 'cause he was never angry. And it was handed back by the teacher who wrote all in red that she didn't believe anybody would be angry because someone had patted him on the head. He did. He wrote it. And I remember I got a C+ and looked at it, you know, never--. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And then the second assignment was take another member of your family and get into their emotions or something, whatever. And I did my stepmother and the occasion was when we went down to 5th Street, and she couldn't get this piece that she wanted, and she had to go downtown. I remember she turned, and she got very nervous. So I was talking about how nervous she was, right? And we had to go downtown to Macy's, and I talked all about what she had done and how she sat there waiting for this thing and she held until this woman who saw her and waited on everybody else and finally said, "Yeah." And my stepmother gave it to her, and the woman came back and gave her the money, and she just put the change--wouldn't touch her, wouldn't touch her. Put the bag on the counter, and I remember looking at her and my stepmother, Gerry was so startled and scared that she really was shaking in a sense until she got back home to the sanctity and safety of Harlem. And that's what I wrote, and I got a C+ again. It read--and the man said he didn't believe anybody would be nervous about going downtown to Macy's [department store]. That it rang false, he said, because he didn't know of anybody--he didn't know of anybody who would be scared about going downtown. And at that point he said to me, "Why don't you"--then he said later on when I was just trying to explain this to him, he said, "Why don't you write about something less intense, you know, more imaginative?" But he had given these assignments, right? More creative. And so I figured I'm gonna get a C+ in this class, and so I was in my bedroom and I looked in the mirror, and then I began to pretend that something rose up from the mirror and talked to me and that. And I wrote this little dumb piece, and I got an A- for it, so from then on I just never did anything that really spoke to--anything that was of interest to me. But it also made me stop writing. I stopped writing after that class. I mean, I really did. I mean, I didn't really write because it just taught me a terrible lesson as to what that was about, and I guess I didn't start writing again until I got out of Hunter and took a course with a woman by the name of Louise Bogan, who was a famous, well-known poet. She was a poetry editor for the 'New Yorker', and I took, you know, this course with her. Story_ID: 12832 Speaker 1: Did you teach school or something when you got out or what did you do when you got out of Hunter [College, City University, New York City]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I got out and I, you know, was waiting to teach in the public school system. I ended up teaching at a private school called Downtown Community School [New York, New York], and I did that. I was still in school. I went back to school at NYU [New York University, New York City], and then I did the whole thing of beginning to write, you know, and get published at that time. I was getting published in what they call the small journals, you know, the 'Transatlantic Review', the 'Minnesota Review', the 'New England Review', all those little magazines that you do. That was the route that Louise Bogan had taught us when I was taking a class with her at NYU is that you begin to send your work out to these magazines to get published then, you know. I also wrote children's things, a children's play that had been accepted in someplace all the way out in the far West, Seattle [Washington], I think, or Portland [Oregon], either one of them. And that's how I began getting published via little magazines, via journals. I went that route that she had told us to go. It was not like here, I'm a poet. Let me publish your book, right? It was like let me be a poet and let me go and make a name for myself in these little journals. Speaker 1: Okay. So we're talking about I think about in the late '50s [1950s], right? And were you married by that time or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't like to talk about my personal life necessarily, you know. Yeah. Because, you know, people, you know, take it, but I was married at that time. Yes. And that's why I wrote under the name of Sanchez. Story_ID: 12833 Speaker 1: I suppose you were taking note of the Civil Rights Movement (inaudible)? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. We went on the March in Washington, D.C. in 1963. We were on that first one down there. We went on the bus from New York City [New York], my husband and I, and we were very much a part of that progressive movement that was in New York City. There was a reformed Democrats in New York City. I was a part of the reformed Democrats in New York City, and I was asked to run for office in there. The person who finally took it won, but my husband was not in particular for me running for an office, and I really thought about it, you know, and I really didn't do it. But we were very much involved with being progressive people. We lived on Riverside Drive, and we, you know, I guess ran what you call leftist, I guess, on some levels, and were progressive, and as I said involved with reformed Democrats and that kind of thing, yeah. And then I got involved with New York CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] which was a completely different movement. New York CORE was very much more--well, you know, they--much more, I guess, I hate to use that word militant. Don't know but keeps running in my head, much more inyourface kind of thing, you know. We-- Speaker 1: More action (inaudible)? Speaker 2: Yeah, action or we would go and we picketed the Woolworth's [and Co.], you know. We went out to Long Island [New York] to open up the housing for people for blacks and Latinos in Long Island. We did that. We picketed the stations when some of the southern governors would come in to speak, you know. We picketed Harlem Hospital [in June, 1963] that which I've written about already and talked about at length. My father tells the story of hearing this noise downstairs at 135th Street and he got out his binoculars and looked down, and there we were blocking the streets at 135th Street right in front of Harlem Hospital [Harlem, New York] because they were attempting to build an extension to Harlem Hospital without using black and Puerto Rican workers, you know, no electricians and no plumbers, and we had been trying to get them to open up the unions at that particular time. And they said, no, they weren't gonna do it, so we block it--we blocked it. But my father also says he saw coming towards us the police on horseback, and they were coming at a fast gallop, and he dropped his binoculars and went running for the elevator because he saw all kinds of carnage. And before he came down those steps in that elevator, and he said he ended up running down the steps 'cause the elevator was slow, one of the big-time captains, black captains--I don't know if he's the only one--or lieutenant was being driven to work, and he saw the confrontation that was gonna happen, and he had his driver drive up in front of us, and he got out the car and put his hand up to the policemen coming at us, mind you, on horseback, and he turned and said, I can still see his face now, "What do you want?" He was so angry. And we said," We want to integrate the unions." We're living in New York City, and the Plumbers Union and the Electricians Union is not integrated, and he then told everybody to get together. And we went downtown, I don't remember where it was, some building, and I was not one of the negotiators. I was one of the people who had been involved with like, you know, if you needed something, I didn't go. I can't think of the head--the person that time was negotiating and we--the rest of us, was sitting outside as support people. And we were there, believe it or not, until about two o'clock in the morning from about 11 or 12 o'clock, and we had gotten an agreement, and then it came out asking--I never forget. The guys came out asking for names. They wanted names for the union, and I gave my brother's name, Wilson L. Driver, Jr., because he was always doing electrical things. He could fix anything, and also he was going to a community college at that time and really was just messing around. And so when I got home, my telephone was ringing about three o'clock in the morning. It was my father [Wilson L. Driver]. I knew it was my father. So at that time you could let the telephone ring forever and ever and ever and ever and ever and it wouldn't be cut off. You know, the telephone rings now seven times, and some operator will cut it off, you know, and said, "No one's at home. We will hang--we will disconnect you." I remember putting some coffee on the stove. I remember lighting the cigarette. I remember going to the bathroom. I remember pouring the coffee, smokin' a cigarette. My kids were always so surprised that I smoked, and I picked up the telephone and said, "Yes, Dad" 'cause I knew it was he. He said, "Sonia, Sonia, Sonia, why don't you just stop all this stuff, you know. You almost got hurt today. Why don't you just stop all this stuff. Why don't you just, you know, move to Long Island or move to, you know, upstate New York, so get out of this, "whatever. And I rememberI can't remember what I told my father, but I remember I said, "Uhhuh, uhhuh, uhhuh. Oh, tell Wilson to show up." I said, "One minute," and I got the address, "show up downtown. I gave his name for the Electrician Union." I said, you know, "He'll become a journeyman, and he'll make good money." And my brother did. He became an electrician before he died and made very good money, made more money than any of us as an electrician, which was really wonderful. Story_ID: 12834 Speaker 1: Tell me what Harlem [New York] was like about this time [1960s] 'cause were you livin' in Harlem at the time or-- Speaker 2: I was livin' in Riverside Drive, actually, at that time. I had moved out of Harlem after I was married and moved to Riverside Drive, but I was in Harlem all the time and--because New York CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] office was in Harlem [New York, New York], okay? And Harlem was a fascinating place for all of us, I think. It was a place that, you know, we started to upgrade what we did in Harlem for the community. And so when we did that, a man by the name of Malcolm [X] said, "You cannot do anything in Harlem without me." And I remember, like, people called him a racist, you know, in our office and, you know, and we all agreed because we were all in New York CORE, right? And I remember I tell this story on for the brother up in Boston [Massachusetts] that series that they did, 'Black--' --was it 'Black--'? I forget now what it was this series. Seventh Avenue had these amazing islands that separated the uptown from the downtown side, and I remember we had the demonstration, and Malcolm came with his men, the FOI [Fruit of Islam], to speak, and he was speaking in front of the Hotel Theresa, and in order to see I had to get up on the island to see, and I remember it was, like, a strange kind of day, kind of cloudy. The sun was going in and out. And I remember watching Malcolm, and I remember, like, I just stood there and listened to him for the first time although we had heard him a lot on television, but we were in New York CORE so we were quite different from the Nation [of Islam], you know. And I remember getting down when he finishing and went off jumping off the island and running. I was short so I could run in between--you know how people couldn't even see you. I remember coming right up on him and touching him and said, "Mr. X" I think I said. I don't think I said, "Mr. Malcolm X." I mighta said, "Mr. Malcolm X." I don't really remember, and he turned. I remember he looked down, and he said, "Yes, yes, yes, yes, young sister." And I said, "I don't really believe--I don't agree with everything that you said." And he said, "One day you will. One day you will, my sister." And the brothers had tried to come between, and he did like that, you know, and he turned around. He smiled a most fantastic smile, such a wonderful smile, but the thing that I remember about him were his eyes. His eyes were the gentlest eyes on the planet earth, but they would pierce you, but they didn't pierce you to make you bleed. They pierced you to make you smile. And I remember standing there when he left, just standing still in the midst over this crowd of people who were moving trying to follow him. And I remember going back to the office there at 125th Street, right? I opened the door 'cause most of the people had left when he started to speak said, "We don't want to hear that racist." I walked in, you know, Malcolm said, and they said, "We don't what's wrong with you, girl? Don't you know he's a racist?" Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, and that night we had a major party on Riverside Drive 'cause we worked hard in New York CORE, but we partied hard, too. And so I was doing this cha-cha-cha at this party on Riverside Drive, right? And I said to this brother I was dancing with, I said, "You know, Malcolm said," and I'd made this turn and came back he was gone. He had just disappeared. Story_ID: 12835 Speaker 1: So you said a lot of the writers would follow him [Malcolm X] around? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, wherever he was going to speak they would go and follow him around and never told I mean, I would be someplace with somebody and say, "Well, okay, I'll see 'ya," you know, and then later on I'd show up someplace where he was speaking and never said that I was gonna come, you know, at some rally or some school on the Island where he was. I mean, it's like you just couldn't really get enough of listening to this man speak and then youof course, everybody in Harlem [New York] turned on the television when he was on because, you know, he would massacre PhDers, you know. He would massacre those people, you know. They would ask a question, and we would wait for his answer, and then when he wiped them out, we would go, "Woo, look at that. Look what he just said. Look what he just said." And on Monday morning when you went out in the morning to get on the subway train to go to work or whatever or to go school, you felt like a hundred dollars, you know, or a million dollars, actually, 'cause you really felt that someone had defended you when you should have been defended Speaker 1: (simultaneous) This had been unusual, too. Not to interrupt you, but this is unusual just to savor this a minute because black people up to this point, they had Joe Louis and, you know- Speaker 2: (simultaneous) But Joe Louis didn't- Speaker 1: (simultaneous) boxers and baseball- Speaker 2: (simultaneous) But it was-yeah. Speaker 1: (simultaneous) players that we know but it's not the same as having an intellectual defense. Speaker 2: Exactly. If they had had--I mean everybody would listen to the Joe Louis fight on the radio and when won, you know, that very famous essay I think that Wright did, Richard Wright did, about Harlem [New York, New York] busting loose, and he used the word busting. He said, "Harlem busting loose" after Joe Louis had won, but Joe Louis never defended black folks because-- Speaker 1: Probably because he didn't know how to do it. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, 'cause he didn't know how to do it, and plus he was also the times and also 'cause he was just a fighter. I think that we loved probably Malcolm and Muhammad Ali also because they were people who would speak out, and Muhammad Ali spoke out about the war. I mean, he articulated some things that a lot of people were thinking about, you know, the Vietnam War, and we were talking about it as poets on stages also, too, right? But most people were not talking against the war, but we were, you know, and Muhammad Ali was too. And I guess what I'm saying that Malcolm, when he stood up on the television screen and took people to task for the enslavement of us in this country, for the discrimination, for the lack of jobs, I mean all those kinds of things, you know, for the employment, for the housing in Harlem, I mean you had someone who was an advocate for you, and people literally cheered and felt empowered because of his words. Speaker 1: Yeah. He was someone who really didn't care what white people thought about what he said and did. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well he really didn't, yeah. Speaker 1: And which was--hadn't been--you hadn't had anybody like that around in a long time and not since-- Speaker 2: Not since [Marcus] Garvey. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Probably, you know, and also [W.E.B.] DuBois in that whole group of our people coming but they were, like, older now and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] did not say it. You know, they negotiated much more, so I would say that what we saw then with Malcolm and with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and with the young people in the South was a standing up for self, you know. But Malcolm's thing was a Northern, urban thing, you know. It's like, you know, the urban thing that we had. It's a rough mouth, a rough tongue, you know. You say something to me, I'll give it back to you staccato style kind of thing so it wasn't that--and you knew that when he was with his FOI [Fruit of Islam] that you didn't mess with him, you know, so it was that kind of thing that was happening too. Story_ID: 12836 Speaker 1: When SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was organized in the South, were you tempted to go down there and--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, but I didn't. Yeah, it was not a possible thing and it also--a lot of us, as I said, we knew that we were urban. We knew that we were a little bit different in terms of that, you know. I think it's in the sense that when you had seen and been around Malcolm, I think,it was a different kind of motion, but we appreciated what they were doing. We understood what they were doing. New York CORE [Congress of Racial Equality, of which Sanchez was a member] did the Freedom Rides, and they went South with the Freedom Rides, okay? So we understood what they were doing. It's just some of us did not, you know, necessarily, you know, go and do that. Speaker 1: You think the-- Speaker 2: But the bravery of those young men and women is something else. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you think that you could have done some--I mean the Freedom Rides or do you think that you? Speaker 2: I don't know. I really hate to say. I thought I could. I had wanted to go but I could not go because I--I mean I did not go 'cause I was married and the disruption there--but a lot of people that I knew in CORE went. They signed up to go. Speaker 1: Right on. Speaker 2: Sometimes you wonder if you really would end up being nonviolent, you know. Different. Speaker 1: That's the question then? Speaker 2: Yeah. Different--It's always raised. The different kind of training that we had growing up in New York City [New York], you know. We always felt like we were ready to rock and roll with people, you know, growing up in the city, so I'm not really sure or certain about that. Speaker 1: That's right. Yeah. Some of that is reflex in a city like New York because-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You gotta be able to defend yourself. Speaker 2: Yeah. You better defend yourself. Story_ID: 12837 Speaker 1: As the '60s [1960s] progressed--now in Birmingham [Alabama] in '63 [1963] did you have any relatives in Birmingham in '63 [1963]? Speaker 2: Yeah, my aunt was still in Birmingham, my cousins, my first cousins, my Aunt Louise was still there, and so it had a particular--and my father [Wilson L. Driver] knew a lot of the people there 'cause my father went back and forth to Alabama even after he moved up. We didn't go back. I didn't go back to Alabama until I went down to do a reading when I went on a book tour. I had never been back to Alabama, so I was much older when I went back to Alabama. But my father would make train trips and car trips back to Alabama to see some of his friends.The problem is that we didn't have friends, you know. We had left at a certain age and didn't remember. I remember going down asking for some friends like the Durrs, Joyce Durr was a friend that we hung out with and her father was a newspaper man in Birmingham, Alabama, and nobody knew where they were, you know. So it's that kind of thing. You didn't know where you--couldn't place where people were. Someone came up to me, however, at the reading I did there at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] and said she was a schoolmate of mine, but I didn't remember her, you know. And she wasn't in my class, so I didn't know who she was. Story_ID: 12838 Speaker 1: Malcolm X is silenced by the Nation of Islam in 1963-- Speaker 2: He's killed-- Speaker 1: --'64 [1964] Speaker 2: --in '65 [1965] Speaker 1: And that's killed in '65 [1965]. Now tell me about that. Now did you get increasingly closer to Malcolm's messages? Speaker 2: Well, I think we all did. We were all so very much confused by what was going on because when we thought of Malcolm, we thought of a nation, and there was this now this division that was going on, and that was a real division in Harlem, my brother. Make no mistake about it, you know. That was real. You felt it. You felt the tension between the two [Nation of Islam and Malcolm X]. The day that Malcolm was, indeed, assassinated, I had said I was going up to the Audubon [Ballroom and Theater, Harlem, New York, New York] that day, and I got up that day. It was one of those dreary days, and it was really drab and a lot of things happened in between, and I said I just gave up. I said, "Well I'll go next week. I won't go today. I'll go next week," and there was no next week, you know. I had the little radio on on my kitchen table, and I remember the guy broadcasting his death, and it was done with such relish. I will never forget that, you know, such relish, and I remember breaking down, sobbing on the table thinking to myself, you know, would it'd been possible to have changed things if you had been there? But, you know, of course you probably could not, but you wonder, you know, you know, what that was really all about at some point, right? It was a terrible, terrible, terrible day. Speaker 1: What did Malcolm X mean to you and you think--what did he mean to Harlem (inaudible)? Speaker 2: I think Malcolm was so important to us in Harlem because he articulated out loud what we had been afraid to articulate, to say. He actually removed the fear from us, you know, the fear that most black folks had in this country about saying anything out loud, you know. When he said the things--just imagine the things he said out loud in this country. Whoa, you know. He did that for us. He was our talker. He was our person who said what we had been thinking and feeling for so many years, and so he was our savior in that sense. He said things that we couldn't say, and he made us get stronger and prouder as a consequence of that. That was the amazing thing about him. He took on that role for us as articulator of what we felt, what we knew was going on, and he threw it out to the larger society and said simply, "This is what my people are thinking." And America was shocked about--"Oh, they can't be thinking this. They're so quiet. They're so nice. They're so good." Speaker 1: You know what their retort always was or usually when he spoke they would say--they would charge him with causing Negroes or black people to hate white people. "You are causing this." Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. And it wasn't that black folks hated white folks. They just wanted white folks off their backs, you know. They had never gone on the level of hate. It's just like, "Hey, gimme a job." Story_ID: 12839 Speaker 1: When I first got outta school [Hunter College, City University of New York, New York, New York], I answered an ad in the 'New York Times' that asked for someone--they needed a writer for their firm, and so you know how in the 'New York Times' they'd say write XYZ 123456, right? And I answered the ad, and they asked me to send an example of my writing, and I did. I got a telegram on a Saturday to report to work on Monday at nine o'clock, I was hired. And so I went around the house showing this to my father. "See, see, see, see, see!" I mean he halfway knew that I liked to write, you know. "I can get a job as a writer." I jumped up and down. I showed that telegram to everybody and their momma. I was so excited. I was like "Whoa, look at this, look at this!" and I went out on a Monday morning. I had on a blue suit, blue shoes--blue heels, blue hat, a blue purse, and white gloves, you know, and I was going out for my job, and I was all of 20 years of age, right? Happy, happy, happy, you know, like boom boom. Got downtown and I got downtown not at CP [colored peoples] time, right? But I got downtown at eight thirty [a.m.] instead of nine o'clock, and I'm standing outside waitin', and up comes this woman who evidently is the secretary or receptionist. I showed the telegram. She looked at me. She opened the door. I went in, you know, right? Sat down in this little place, and she sat at her desk and whatever she went behind she came back. I guess she put her coat down, and then about a quarter to a face came and looked like that, and I looked, smiled, and sittin' there. At ten minutes to nine, I mean another face came and looked like this. And so about ten or five minutes to nine, the guy came out and said, "I'm so sorry. The job is taken." So I said, "Well, no." I said, "No." I showed him my tel--I said, "Hold it." I showed him the telegram. I said, "Look, look. It's not nine o'clock," I said. "I was supposed to report at nine o'clock." I was being halfway facetious. I said, "Shall I go out and report at nine o'clock? Then I'll be okay. I just came at 8:00, right? " And the guy just stood there. He looked at it. He looked at me, handed it back, said "The job is taken." I said, "How can the job be taken when nobody else has come in here, right? I'm the only one here, sitting here. I'm the only one who's due here at nine o'clock for a job. How can the job be taken?" He said, "Look, lady." I mean he just got right, you know, "The job is taken. That's it. You do not have a job, so you should just leave." And I said, "Oh, I got it. It's discrimination. You're discriminating against me because, you know--I'm black." And the guy looked at me. Then I said very dramatic, "I'm gonna report you to the Urban League." And he looked at me, like, with a half smile and went on back behind wherever, and I looked at this woman who wouldn't raise her head to look up. I mean, she just kept her head down, and I remember taking off my hat when I got outside in the hallway, taking off my gloves. I started to cry, and I remember I'd said, "I am gonna report them to the Urban League 'cause the Urban League will do something about this," right? And I got on the train. I'm sitting there and, you know, if you're from New York, if you get on that train you have to get off at 96th Street to stay on the west side otherwise it takes you to the east side. But we got to 96th, I'm sitting there just so upset that I stayed on. I looked up and the train had begun its run over to the east side, and I looked up and saw, what, 110th, you know, then 116th and 125th Street. Then I said I would get off at 135th Street, and I did. And as I got off I had to walk all the way back and go through the park to get over by where the Urban League but I think it was like around Eighth Avenue around that place. I forgot now, but that's where I had to make a long trek. And then I got off 135th Street, and I passed this building and lo and behold it said [Arthur] Schomburg Library [now called the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture], and I went inside there and I said to a guard who was standing outside smoking, I said, "What kind of library is this?" He said, "Lady, go inside. Just sign a book. Go inside. The woman inside would tell you. Miss [Jean Blackwell] Hutson's her name." So I walked inside in the old Schomburg was this room. You walked into this room and this long, long table, and there were nothing but men, scholars, sitting there doing work. And to the right of the table was this glass enclosure, and I knocked on the glass door, and the woman turned around. Is this Jean Hutson who is the curator? And she opened the door. She said, "Yes, dear. Can I help you?" and I said, "What kind of library is this, this Schomburg," you know. I was so hot and sweaty by then. And she said, "Oh." She said, "This library is called the Schomburg. It has books in here only by and about black folks." And then I said with my smartass self, I said, "There must not be many books in here then." When I started to teach in university level, I brought my students every semester to the Schomburg to do research, and every time she'd tell that same story, and I would just sort of disappear before, and she used to tell it with a sly smile on her face, right? And she would smile. It was so funny, but she told that story every time I brought my students to the Schomburg she would tell that story, and she'd look at me and just smile. I gave her a great homage on "Like It Is," Gil Noble's show, when he was asking me who were those people who influenced me so much, my mentors, and I had said Shirley Graham DuBois, who was a mighty mentor. And then I turned and said, you know, "I've never spoken about Miss Hutson, the woman who gave me my first black books to read really," I mean, and I really began to study the books in a grateful fashion because that day she told me to sit down and she would bring me some books, and she brought me 'Souls of Black Folk' [W.E.B. DuBois], 'Up From Slavery' [Booker T. Washington] and 'Their Eyes Were Watching God' [Zora Neale Hurston]. And she put 'Their Eyes Were Watching God' on top, and she said, "Here, dear, now you read these and be quiet," you know, so I eased into one of the little spaces, and the men looked up at me a little bit and kept on workin' and writing. They had their books all spread out, so I had, like, this little tiny spaces. They had their stuff all spread out on that long, long table. And I started reading 'Their Eyes Were Watching God,' and I was so stricken by the beauty of that book. At first I thought I'd get lost in it because of the black English that was written, that was spoken, and I eased outta my chair, and I went and knocked on the door, and I said to her, "What's your name again?" She said, "Miss Hutson, dear." I said, "Miss Hutson, how could I be an educated woman here in New York City and not have read this book?" She said, "Yes, dear, I know. That's why we're here. Now go back and read some more." So I got--she closed the door, and I inched back in, and I read some more of 'Their Eyes Were Watching God.' Well, I got about maybe two thirds, and I inched out again, and I went and knocked on the door. I was in tears. I said, "But they told me I was educated," and I realized I'm not educated now because I hadn't read this book. I said, "This is by a black woman?" She said, "Yes, this is by a Negro woman," you know. And "a black woman," she said and as I eased back in, one of those scholars looked up and said, "Miss Hutson, would you tell this young woman either she sits still, or she has to go." And so I sat still and I read, finished that book, opened 'Souls of Black Folk,' start reading. I came back. When I told my father [Wilson L. Driver] I was going out looking for a job--I never made the Urban League, right? I went home'cause you can't take those books out. I came back. I showed up the next day when they were open and she handed me some of the--I told her I wanted to come back and read those same books. She held 'em, and I sat there, and she fed me all these books. I read everything you could possibly read. In fact, when they started black studies and someone said, "You need someone to teach black literature," someone said, "Hey, Sanchez," you know. I'd been talkin' about it for years, you know, when I read my poetry and I start writing whatever, I would talk about, ask the question, "Did you read (blah, blah, blah, blah, blah)?" 'cause Miss Hutson had fed me those books, and she had sent me to Mr. [Lewis] Micheaux who had a bookstore at 125th Street [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York] Speaker 2: Is that Lewis Micheaux? Speaker 1: And Richard Moore who had a bookstore at 125th also, too, and they gave me books. That's why I had a little library of these black books, you see. I remember walkin' into Mr. Micheaux's bookstore. Miss Hutson said, "And I want you to go down to his store," and he said, "I wanna give you some books. Miss Hutson told me about you." You know, quite often I wonder what did these people see in my eyes that made them do this for me? But she saw something in my eyes that made me do that, right? And made me know that I wanted toI had this thirst for these books, for this language, you know, for these words that these people were writing. And he gave me a bunch of books by [W.E.B.] DuBois, Zora [Neale Hurston]. I got that "Their Eyes Were Watching God." He had copies there, you know. And I said, "I don't have money." He said, "That's all right. You'll give back." And I did, you know. When I published, I did book signings in his bookstore, and a lot of people came in, so he sold a lot of books. But she also sent me to Mr. Richard Moore's bookstore, and this bookstore was this narrow bookstore, small bookstore. Mr. Micheaux's bookstore was a little bigger. He had a downstairs and everything. Speaker 2: And his was the one that Malcolm X used to speak in the front of-- Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 2: With the picture of all the African (inaudible). Speaker 1: Exactly. Each one teach one, you know. And he had, like, one of these rollers that he rolled, and I came in and he said, "Who are you?" And I told him who I was, and he said, "Oh." He got on the little roller. He rolled it down. He said, "Have you ever heard of this?" And he'd start naming all these West Indian, these Caribbean writers, so I said, "No. No. No." He looked at me. He said, "And you graduated from college? The university [Hunter College, New York City]?" And I said, "Yes." He said, "What kinda education do you have?" And he brought down these books and said, "Here." And I said, "I don't have any money." And he just said, "That's all right. We got that figured out. We got that figured out. You read 'em. You read 'em, and then you come back and tell me about 'em," you know. That was Mr. Moore. Dapper man, good-lookin' Caribbean man, West Indian man. Always. I saw a picture maybe about six years ago about the Scottsboro Boys thing [nine black men charged with allegedly gang raping two white women]. He was a leftist, you know, and he was with some of the mothers who were trying to meet with the president and they hadand he was with his hat, this white hat on, dapper in his suit. It said Richard Moore in this picture, and I said, "Oh, my goodness, what an amazing picture." I kept it. I have it someplace in my papers now. I kept it. I was just so taken aback by seeing of him again, you know. Amazing man. They were amazing people who helped me read the lit that I had not read, had no knowledge of, did not get it in university at all but got it from them that it made me understand how tightly what a tightly knit group of people, Miss Hutson, Mr. Micheaux, and Mr. Moore were that they would look at me in this young woman, this young girl and would, you know, lay this stuff on me. And then she would tell that story when I was a professor, you know, about what I said and just appreciate it, but she saw and aside Jean Hutson saw the show "Like It Is," and by the time I came back home to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], she was calling me, and she was saying, she said, "Sonia, thank you. No one has ever given me credit for that kind of thing." And I was so happy that I had said something of worth in the city where she lived there in the Riverton [Hotel, New York, New York], right? And said that she had influenced so many of us, had given us the books that we needed, you know, to read and to deal with, so I was just so pleased that she was so happy, that she had gotten some kind of praise, if you know what I mean? Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. God, I think, you know, the intellectual history of Harlem aside from the poetry was not--I'm not saying that's not an intellectual thing-- Speaker 1: Yeah. But Miss Hutson could--you could give her a picture of any building in Harlem, and she could tell you where it was and who lived there. That was the other good part about it were the people who lived there, you know, and, you know, and what they said and what they did and who was, you know. Because from her I met Mrs. Countee Cullen, Ida Cullen, when I was teaching up at Amherst College [Amherst, Massachusetts] and when I was bringing my students down, of course, in a chartered bus to do some research in the Schomburg [Library], she [Jean Blackwell Hutson] set up a meeting for us to go see Mrs. Cullen, and we went to her house and had tea. She served us tea and some crackers or something, you know, and my students were just so amazed, you know, about being there with her. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. They named the library after Countee Cullen, didn't they? The old library that's there. Speaker 1: Countee Cullen Library, right. Story_ID: 12840 Speaker 1: How did you publish your first poetry? Speaker 2: My first poetry, as I said, was done in journals. I was studying with Louise Bogan, the poet, and she taught us one thing that once you begin to take your poetry seriously, you must make up a notebook, and in the notebook you put down the places you want to send the poems, you know, the 'New Yorker', 'The Nation', 'The 'New England Review', 'Transatlantic Review', you know. All those places, and you give each one a page which you did, so I had about ten or twelve of them like that. And then you put on the left inside the name of the magazine or journal and the date sent and then how many poems, so she insisted that you only send three poems. She said no editor will read more than three poems and then the date returned. Well, I always used to tell my students in the university that the first time I sent my first poems out, I dropped it in the mailbox. By the time I got home, they had been returned already with one of these little things that just said, "The editors," you know, and I said--and I went, "Whoa." Well what that did is that it made you go, "Oh, no, no, no. I can do better than this," right? And so you began to send out more, and it was during the time I was studying there at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] with her that one of my first poems was accepted. So I brought in some bottles of wine to the university, right? And with some little paper cups, right? And we celebrated that. But the thing that I really asked Louise Bogan who was a very aristocratic woman, very formalist poet, was that did I have any talent? You know, 'cause she had heard me read my stuff, you know, in class, whatever. And she--remember her first response was, "Why do you want to know?" 'Cause, you know, like, it's very obvious to me why I wanna know, right? And I said, "Well, I would like to know if I'm wasting my time with this." And she said, "Well, many people have talent, you know, Sonia." And I said, "Yes," you know, I'm sittin' here going like oh, oh, oh, and I really felt really down by then with all this response. And she said, "But they don't do anything with it. What do you intend to do if you find out--discover you have talent?" And I said, "Well, I intend to pursue this thing." You know, I was this young woman, you know, talking about, you know, what I want to do. I was opening up to her 'cause I had opened up to someone at Hunter [College, New York City] and gotten slapped down about writing, so here I was opening up to this woman, and she turned and looked at me, and she said, "Yes, you do have talent. Now it's up to you to do something with it." And that was it. She was finished. I mean, she had nothing else. I'm waitin' for, like, tell me about this talent. Tell me whatever. She was, like, you know, like, "Hey, I've said what I had to say." I remember walking out the office feeling on the one hand very excited and happy. On the other hand, like, oh, well, what else? But after that about maybe a couple weeks afterwards, I came in and I showed her the--and she looked up and she just smiled, and we had some wine in that classroom which I'm sure was illegal 'cause one of the guys said, "You're not supposed to drink wine in the classroom," and I said, "Okay, right," but I had to celebrate. But after the classes were over, one of the guys by the name of Fred Stern, who was also studying with her, went around to about eight people went you, you, you, you, you, you let's now meet in the Village and let us now begin this process of studying, and the only thing we had to do, the only requirement we had is that you had to come with a poem that you had begun, maybe you hadn't finished or you had finished or whatever. That was the only requirement. And we met in the [Greenwich] Village [New York, New York] on Charles Street for close to three years, and during that time I started to publish, and nobody else in the group was publishing.It got a little awkward for a moment there near the end and I--at some point you have to learn how to get out of a group, you know? And we would sometimes leave the group, and we would go and listen to some jazz on some Wednesday nights,and we went to the Five Spot, and we walked into the Five Spot and we identified LeRoi Jones [Amiri Baraka] sitting right by the door with his hat sitting acey-deucy, smoking a gold-tipped cigarette, drinking a boilermaker. Someone said "That's a boilermaker he has." 'Cause I didn't know a boilermaker from anything else. And as I passed by, he said, at that time he says, "Sanchez, send me some of your poetry. I'm editing an anthology out of France." And I went "Whoa," and everybody in the group said, "Oh, wow. He called your name." I said, "Oh, yeah, yeah." We kept on walking. Story_ID: 12841 Speaker 1: We did a big memorial for Miss [Jean Blackwell] Hutson at the Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Studies] and--I guess someone probably taped that at that Schomburg, I'm sure. And I talked about Miss Hutson, how I first met her. And how she used to tell a story, you know, that I told, right, about--I mean really, just how brash we--you are when you're young. I said, "Must not be many books in this place," right? She'd never let me forget that. She'd just laugh. And I remember the last--one of the last times I saw her--'cause my father [Wilson L. Driver] lived at 135th Street and she did too at the Riverton [Hotel, New York, New York], She was in one of the walkers, you know, walking. Speaker 2: (Unlcear) Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry--, Speaker 2: Tell that story though--finish that story the one you're telling about Miss Hutson. Speaker 1: Oh, Miss Hutson? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The last time I saw her? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: One of the last times I saw her, I talked to her a lot on the telephone. The good thing about, I think, talking about her in that television program is that it alerted some people in New York City to who she was, and so she had a major interview by some of the men and women or some of the women from down to NYU [New York University, New York, New York] who were interviewing a lot of people from New York City. And so she called me about it, and she said she was being interviewed, and she felt very good, and she said, "Especially since I can still remember some of this stuff," right? She was sharp, you know. I mean always her mind would stay sharp. She didn't lose it, you know at all. But it was great. I saw her one day going to my father's [Wilson L. Driver] because my father was ill at that time, and she was walking to the store, the grocery store that was right downstairs from Lenox Terrace [Harlem, New York], and she had a walker, and I remember stopping and talking to her and hugging her and thinking and then I think, you know what? Afterwards seeing her with that walker, I went to her house. I brought her some stuff one day 'cause I remember calling saying, "I'm coming up to my father's if you need something," and she said, "Yes." So I got some stuff, some juice. I got some stuff for her. I brought it to her place, so I remember I had to ring up. It took a minute for me to get in the Riverton and going in there and just staying for a little while, a couple of hours, you know, with her, you know, talking to her. And we always said we're gonna do more than that, but our lives interfere so, don't they? You know, you travel so much, and someone called me and told me she was dead. And, of course, the moment you hear that you think oh, you know, I could have done more. I coulda been there. And as a woman who's writing something about heris that the woman you talked about? The Sharon [a woman they discussed off tape] you talked about who kept saying she wanted to interview me, but she never has about Miss Hutson, you know, and the importance that she--how important she was to many of us. Story_ID: 12842 Speaker 1: Tell me about, I guess, Broadside Press, a black quartet in there? Speaker 2: Yeah. Broadside Press was initiated by Dudley Randall [in 1965, Detroit, Michigan], and Dudley began to do this press after he had done a book called "For Malcolm [X]," which was an anthology of poems about Malcolm's life and death, and he had asked a lot of writers in the country, black, white, green, purple, blue to contribute, and that was his first book evidently. And after he did that, we got a letter from Dudley saying that he was thinking about organizing a press called Broadside Press that would have these black poets, these young black poets, who would do books for him, reasonable books, reasonably-priced books, you know, paperbacks, for $1, a $1.50 so they could sell very fast, and, you know, and people could get 'em, and they could be moved around very fast, et cetera. So that's what we did. He wrote me a letter, and I sent him a manuscript called "Homecoming," my first book, and he published that. He had Don L. Lee or [later known as] Haki Madhubuti, Nikki [Giovanni]. Nikki didn't stay with him long, though. Nikki Giovanni. Even Audre Lorde, Etheridge Knight, somebody else in that mix, and myself. And we stayed with him until he actually, you know, went under. You know, I did my books with him, "Homecoming,"[1969] "We a BadDDD People," [1970] "A Blues Book for Blue Black Magical Women," [1973] a collection of poetry for children. I can't think of the name of it now, so we did those books, and we did it on purpose because we wanted to keep a book company alive. And I think that Dudley gave up on that company 'cause someone stole from him. You know, there was someone who worked for him who stole, you know, and money from him. I remember Etheridge telling me that the guy who stole from him opened up a bar or something, whatever. But Dudley became very depressed. What I remember was the depression. I didn't know at the time why that depression occurred until Etheridge told me that, you know, that that was what had happened. He had been, you know, suckered out of his money and stuff and whatever, so I think he just kinda gave up and so, and someone else bought Broadside Press, but they don't do, I don't think, new books. I think they just reprint all our old books in there. Some of them, not all. And the children's book was "It's a New Day [Poems For Young Brothas and Sistuhs]" [1971]. And then at that time too I sent a book to Haki and that was--forget the name of that poetry book now, but-- "I've Been a Woman: New and Selected Poems." --that's what it was, and a children's book 'cause he was asking us to write children's stories, and I did a children's book called "A Sound Investment and Other Stories" which I thought was gonna be, you know, bigger, you know, for children and more illustrations 'cause it called out for illustrations, you know, left and right, you know? And so I did those two books with him, so I had stayed with the black presses during that period during that time. Story_ID: 12843 Speaker 1: You were talking about meeting LeRoi Jones who is now Amiri Baraka. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. We had gotten a poetry group in the [Greenwich] Village [Manhattan, New York] where we met on Charles Street. We met down there for close to three years. Some Wednesday nights when we finished, we'd go into a jazz place to hear some jazz and one night, one Wednesday night, we went into a place called the Five Spot and there was LeRoi Jones, also known as Amiri Baraka, sitting there with a hat, sitting acey-deucy, smoking gold-tipped cigarettes, drinking a boilermaker and listening to the music, writing review for 'Down Beat'. I'm sure it was 'Down Beat' at that time. He was writin' reviews for some of the magazines, and when I passed by he says, "Sanchez," and I jump because I didn't know this man knew my name, right? And everybody in the workshop, you know, all eight of us, six, seven, turn like this and said, "He called you. He called you." And so I stopped and said, "Yes," and he said, "I'm editing an anthology out of France, Paris, France. Would you send some of your work to me?" And I said (unclear) and kept going, right? And they said I sat down at the table, [they] said, "Oh, wow, you got, you know, you published." I said, "Oh, he didn't, you know, he doesn't want my work. He doesn't know me from beans." And I went on about my business, didn't send it out. About maybe three weeks later we're coming into the same place. He's sittin' there, and I thought he didn't see me, and I passed by, and low and behold he says, "Sanchez, I guess you don't want to be in the anthology, huh?" And I said, "Oh, were you serious?" And he said, "Yes, yes. I was serious." And I went whoa. Okay. Okay. Okay. I will, you know, I will do that. And, you know, that's what I did. I rushed--in fact, I went and got--I went and told them goodbye, went and got in my VW [Volkswagen automobile], raced up the highway, got in my house, sat down and typed up the stuff, came back outside, went back downtown, and dropped in the main post office, and I got a letter for him that say, "Yeah. We'll use this, okay? Thank you," and whatever. I think I still have that letter in my papers, but that's how I first met and then from then on, you know, I published in there, and then when he had some of his plays being done on off-Broadway, he would send me invites, and I would go and see it, and when "Dutchman" was done, I was part of the people invited to go to the actor's show, you know, I think it was somebody's house on Park Avenue was giving it, right? And that was the first time I saw African art when I went into that I mean, you see African art but not, I mean, African art that was expensive African art. I mean African art that looks like, Whoa! all over in this man's study, and I just stood there looking in, enclosed in, you know, in these cases. And I was just stricken by that. I just stood there looking at all that artwork. It was an amazing moment for me. And so he waited until the reviews came out. Someone went down and got the ['New York] Times' and came back and the reviews were wonderful, you know, for "Dutchman." So that is why, I guess, because of that association of my going I realized that I wanted to write plays also and started to write plays that when Baraka decided to move up town up in Harlem, that he sent letters out to all the writers and artists, actually, musicians, writers, painters, and said that, you know, after Malcolm [X] was assassinated that he was coming back home to Harlem [New York] and that, you know, they were gonna have a brownstone there, and he was calling on all of the writers, all of the artists to help him to continue the great work of Malcolm. And, you know, that's what many of us did, you know. We helped with that. Story_ID: 12844 Speaker 1: Were any of your plays produced or which ones were? Speaker 2: Right. A number of our plays were produced but in the book "Black Fire," one of my first plays I had written was supposed to be in there. "The Bronx" is next, but it got lost. I don't know. Larry Neal said, you know, he couldn't find it. So a man by the name of Ed Bullins put it in the Tulane Drama Review and at the drama review--I don't know if it's Tulane Drama but the dramas that came out of New York, and he put it in there, and so it was done. And then at that point we went out to a place called San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California] to begin black studies and Ed Bullins was out there. He was out there doing plays, and the black studies invited [Amiri] Baraka to come out and do the drama part of it what they called the cultural part of the black studies program. I went out to teach there. I taught black lit, and I taught poetry, creative writing poetry. Of course, by the time we got out there, the president of a college said he had not said he was going to have black studies, so we were teaching courses for no credit the first semester we were out there. Speaker 1: This is 1968? Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967]? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause we did '65 [1965], '66 [1966], the black arts, BART [Black Arts Repertory Theater], the repertory theater, and then we went right from there out there because we were out there the next year Martin [Luther King, Jr.] was killed, and I remember I cancelled my classes that next semester. Story_ID: 12845 Speaker 1: I was teaching black lit and, of course, what I taught were the books that Miss [Jean Blackwell] Hutson [Curator of Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] had given me. We did not have books, but I was privy to my own books, so I gave my books to people and they would type--they would mimeo, put on the mimeo [mimeograph copy machine], and they would run off the sections. So our hands were forever purple and blue, you know, from that period 'cause we didn't have Xerox machines. Speaker 2: No Xerox. Speaker 1: No Xerox machines yet, you know, people I was telling this story years ago and I said Xerox. I caught myself. Say what, Xerox? There were no Xeroxes. We had mimeoed. And one day I was at home off campus, and there was a knock at my door, and I opened the door and there was my landlord and two men and one guy this guy put something and says, "I'm from the FBI." And I said, "Yes." I said, "What's happening?" 'cause I lived two blocks up from Haight-Ashbury [San Francisco, California], so something was always going on in that area. And he said to me--he put his hand in my face. He said, "You're out there teaching [W. E. B.] DuBois, [Marcus] Garvey, [Langston] Hughes, [Paul] Robeson. I mean right in my face, and I kinda backed up. I say, "Excuse me?" I'll tell you how naive we were, huh, at that time. I said, "Yes, that's so true. I'm teaching black literature." Just what Miss Hutson told me, I was teaching, right? And he looked at me like I was--he went duh, duh, duh, are you stupid, you know? And, "Don't you realize that you're teaching people that we have banned, that nobody's teaching?" And I didn't get it. So I said to him, I went to explain to this man "Yes, I'm doing Black Lit I. You have to teach 'Souls of Black Folk' [by W.E.B. DuBois]. You have to teach Garvey, or you can't teach the Harlem Renaissance. You have to teach Robeson because, you know, whatever. Speaker 2: It's academic. Speaker 1: Right. And this man is standing there and he put his hand--"You're out there teaching DuBois," and he got red in the face and furious at me, and he turned to my landlord and said, "Put her out. Put her out. She's one of those troublemakers out there on San Francisco [State University, San Francisco, California]. Put her out." And I'm trying to compute--I can't figure this out. I'm standing there saying, "What is wrong?" And my dog--I had a dog by the name of Snow, a Samoyed who had been given to me by my next-door neighbors who were Japanese-Americans, a man who bred these beautiful dogs. They were very expensive thoroughbreds, right? And he says, "Well you need something here 'cause, you know, you're here by yourself a lot, so you need something to protect you." And he had just brought this dog to me maybe two or three weeks ago and I had been closing that dog off in rooms, so I said, "This dog is gonna eat me up," you know. It's just this huge, white dog, and I heard these big feet come down the hallway, and it was Snow. And he came and sat next to me and looked up at the guy and just sat very still. And I looked at the dog and said what's wrong with that dog I'm thinking. And I'm still attempting to explain to this man that I am teaching black literature. "What is your problem? Why are you so upset? Yes, I do teach DuBois. Yes, I do teach Hughes, whatever. What's the problem?" I still haven't gotten it yet. And he said, "You should put her out. She's teaching." And this thing comes over me at some point I'm beginning to understand finally by the third time, and he put his hand in my face. Snow leaped for him, and he said, "Lady, watch your dog." And I said, "Snow?" I mean, I said Snow like Snow? Snow? Snow? Snow, you know, and Snow sat down and looked up at me but he kept his eye right on--and the guy had told me that Samoyeds are great protectors of family. They will die for you protecting you. And he sat down but he never--and I'm lookin' at this dog, you know, at the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] man and the dog, and I got it, you know. And I said, "Well, okay. Well, I'm gonna close the door now," I said, "because I got what you were saying, okay?" My landlord was leaving, you know. He was like, "She has a lease. She has a lease. What can I do? What can I do? What can I do?" And I closed the door, and I went back down the hallway with Snow, and I said, "What a great dog you are." I said, "I'm gonna keep you," you know, and I went and found something great for him to eat. I think I gave him something, meat or something, you know, that was in the house, you know, and I fed that dog. That dog was so happy that day. But I called back east. I called some friends. I said, "Can you help me?" I said, "I just got a visit from the FBI, and they said "Uhhuh, uhhuh, uhhuh." They listened, and they said, "Well, Sonia, you gotta realize that these [authors] are men that are on the list for the FBI and nobody's teaching them. And what you all have done with Black Studies is that you've rescued them, you resurrected these men," and nobody mentioned Robeson's theme in the hallways of academic life, you know. And I said, "Oh I got it," you know. That's what I had done. And so they were mad because all of a sudden we had unearthed these people that they had banned forever, and here you had students reading 'Souls of Black Folk', and this is so apropos because this is centennial of 'Souls of Black Folk', you know, now. And I remember about maybe, maybe eight to ten years ago when 'Life' magazine put out that 'A Hundred--', really, they put on this 'Hundred Men and Women Who Have Influenced America.' Remember they put that out? And I'm turning the pages and on that page I got to DuBois. You know I cried. I sobbed because you see, my brother, at some point you have to know what you have to do in your time. You have to be willing to do it, and I am not saying that finally he would not have been unearthed again, but at some point you unearth people or you do things when you're supposed to do them, you know, and because I had done that, of course, my name got on a list as a consequence of that too, you know. But I was telling Miss Hutson years later when I came back home to New York. She said, "Sonia," she said, "you had to do that." She said, you know, she said, "You could not have realistically taught lit, African-American lit, Black Lit as we called it then, without teaching DuBois. And she said, "So you had to cut through whether they thought he was, Communist or leftist or whatever, but you had to do that." She said, "Of course, you had to take the weight for doing it," you know. And she said, "Of course, many of you didn't know what you were doing when you did it." Remember I taught Robeson "Here I Stand," you know. I didn't know, you know. And Hughes and Garvey, you know. What they did to Garvey, you know, but you couldn't do the Harlem Renaissance without mentioning Garvey. You'd be lying, you see. And so what I remember is coming home, grabbing Miss Hutson, saying to her, "You know what happened to me on the West Coast?" And she laughed when I told her that. She said, "Of course." She said, "Dear, you know, I coulda told you that," she said "but, you know, yes they did not want this man's name mentioned in the halls of academic life at all," but what we did is that we unearthed him and said, "Here." You cannot get an education without reading "Souls of Black Folk" or "Black Reconstruction," you know, or any of the things that he's done, you know. You gotta read "Here I Stand" 'cause you gotta know how this man stood tall in the midst of some terrible times in this place called America, and you gotta know that someone said back to Africa before you're not saying Africa. You know, Marcus Garvey, you know, and the UNI[A, or the United Negro Improvement Association] was a glorious organization that became before the Nation [of Islam]. I mean all of that, you know, came about, and so it was wonderful that I did it, but it was a scary thing having the FBI knock on your door, you know, and put their throw their fist--hand in your face and actually threaten you, you know, about what you're doing. But you have got to do it 'cause you know it's right. It's correct. Story_ID: 12846 Speaker 1: Do you have any reflections about the day that Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated and the subsequent riots and so forth? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. I was in San Francisco [California]. I went on campus, and I cancelled classes, and we stood and we all mulled around on campus, you know, with just like pockets and pockets of people, you know, just talking saying, you know, you know, how could this have happened? You know, why did this happen? And I remember going home late, getting home late that night, and I picked up the phone to call back east and the lines were dead. They had cut off the lines. You couldn't call back east that night. That I remember. I never forget that. And I remember going outside saying to people, knocking on doors, what are your lines--? The lines were cut because they were so afraid of what was going on. But when I went to China in 1973 with a cultural group, you know, with Candice Bergen. We met Shirley MacLaine there, Earl Ofari [Hutchinson], Alice Childress, the San Francisco Mime Troupe, one of the last men who had been brought before [Senator Joseph] McCarthy. I can't think of his name. He's a junior, a writer, famous writer, blanking on his name, and Herb somebody who was a famous Broadway star. Real leftists kinds of people, you know. We all went there, and they gave me a map of all the cities that exploded in America. They had, like, a little red fire there. And I didn't realize that many cities had exploded in America when Martin [Luther King] had died, and then I realized why they cut the phones. It was the first time in our lives that we understood that they cut the phones in something like that. We could not get a call. I couldn't call my father until the next morning, you know. But they cut off all communication from the West Coast to the East Coast. Isn't it amazing? Yeah, yeah. And most people didn't know that--don't know that happened. Story_ID: 12847 Speaker 1: You joined the Nation of Islam in 1970 right? Speaker 2: I joined the Nation when I came back home from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] --no about '70 [1970]--about '70 [1970] or '71 [1971]. I stayed in the Nation two years. Speaker 1: Now what happened, I mean, how--I mean why did you end up joining the Nation of Islam? Speaker 2: Well because many of us had listened to Malcolm [X] a great deal, had taken a position that it was not the Nation that had killed him [February 21,1965]., that they was this uproar. The Nation was one of the few organizations that was still doing something positive, you know, in the country. They were educating children. We all needed our children educated, you know. And I guess that's one of the reasons why, you know, I ended up doing it. A number of people I knew were going into the Nation because, I guess, it was in New York City and see you had the positive in New York City [New York, New York]. The Nation had grown after, you know, over the years, and that whole city was pro-Nation. People came to the temple, to the mosque, to that building to kinda get, you know, refurbished, to go out every day to deal, you know, with the world. And so I went into the Nation with my children and they went to school there, and it felt very protective, you know, in a sense, because we were out there saying a whole lot of stuff about a whole lot about the wars and whatever is said. We were really under attack a great deal, and so yeah, I did go in there. It was very interesting because I've never been a real religious person, you know, so I think I went in more for the pol--most of the people I know--the young people who came in there came in because of the political structure, the words. I mean like with Malcolm before, the political words was not the actual religious things, and then by that time [Louis] Farrakhan had taken over, and so it was also a lot about the words that were going on there, the confrontations that were going on in the city. What people don't know is that New York was leaning very pro-Muslim, a Nation, and if New York City had gone Nation of Islam, the rest of the country woulda gone. You know, it was an amazing moment, so you realize that happened with Malcolm. It was very pro-Nation with Malcolm. Excuse me. And you knew at that point that if that city had gone Nation, you know, that whole place--the rest of the country would have just exploded a lot. "Cause he, you know Malcolm had set up all those temples all over, you know, the country, and so at some point you realize that there were many reasons why Malcolm had to die because, you know, you had that whole intellectual group. For the first time in our lives, the intellectual group really had been challenged by someone like Malcolm to think beyond the education we had been given, to think beyond, you know, getting a good job. It was an amazing moment in history, and I do believe that people had to change. This country had to change that history because everyone I know spoke Malcolm every day, every day. You could not go any place without someone saying what Malcolm had said, you know, right. So then he was killed Then the fallout from that. When everything settled in a sense--when I came back this way towards the thing that was going on was only that going on in the city was the Nation when I came back, so people I know, artists I knew were going to the temples, so I went there also, too. And many people were steady regulars, you know, so many of us kinda went into it also, too. But, you know, my thing was not a religious thing with them. My thing was about challenging the kinds of things and trying to organize--in that city trying to organize people who were involved with drugs, sisters who were involved with drugs, trying to make sure that we challenge how we lived, that people who live in Harlem [New York] would be in charge of what's going on in Harlem. It was a continuation in a very real sense of what Malcolm had done, and that's what Farrakhan was doing too in that New York mosque was a continuation of what Malcolm had done too with that kind of interruption had gone on, and you saw the building of businesses, the selling of fish, the newspapers, the men and women who were, like, real role models, you know, for that area at that particular point, and you began to see that. And so people looked up to the Nation in no uncertain terms whether they join or not. You will see someone walking down the street who was like (shakes), and they'd see someone from the Nation. They'd go "I'm getting it together. I'm getting it together. I'm gonna be okay," you know. They were role models, amazing role models, for the community. Story_ID: 12848 Speaker 1: There was no organization that was not infiltrated, you know, by the 1970s. I mean I think--and that means all of them, you know, that means even the people who appear to be, you know, [black] nationalist. They were like people who we had gotten notes about who became in quotes, 'leaders' that we were told that they certainly are welcome for the government, but there's nothing to do with that information at that time, you know. But the points is that I guess what I'm saying on some levels there was some dangerous times out there, and some of us who indeed were in a sense by ourselves, and with children, had to make decisions about how you were going to, you know, to stay afloat. And even though you know people--I knew people, I mean a [Amiri] Baraka went and became associated with [Maulana] Karenga you know, and they did that whole thing and then, you know, people have hindsight. They look up and they realize that was not the best thing to have done, whatever. I went into the Nation. I always believed--some people were always saying, you know, "Well how could you have done that?" I think you do what you do what you do when you do it, you know, and I was able to move on without turning around, you know, chopping people up. I don't have to chop people up or an organization up, you know. I was in there. I did what I did. I taught during that time. My children benefited from some of the things and then I moved on, and the point is simply that you move on, and you grow. You do what you have to do. Circumstances will make you go in a different fashion, in a different way. I think that we know that within all of the nationalist groups, they were all infiltrated also too, so it's not by chance that the nation was infiltrated. Every major group that was out there was infiltrated also too, so we know that indeed the government had decided very much to keep a close watch on all of us at this particular point, and put people in key positions of power in order to report on people. I just think at some point that, you know, we did what we had to do in order to survive and we moved on, you know, and I'm just always amazed now at the people who perhaps haven't learned lessons from that period. And to me the lessons of that period is that people have got to, you know, bond, you know, come together in such a fashion--progressive people--so therefore we can continue, you know, to move and respond to this country at this particular point. So anyway, that's what happened to me. I left the Nation [of Islam]-- Speaker 2: (inaudible) Speaker 1: No I still was in the Nation when his son--because I don't know if you remember, I was invited to come out to write for [Nation of Islam newspaper] 'Muhammad Speaks' to Chicago [Illinois], which I did. I did a woman's page and a children's page, you know, two pages in the center, right--and I went out and I became the head of The Office of Cultural Development, and I did cultural programs for the Nation, which they had never had, you know. I brought (unclear) Shirley Graham DuBois out who lectured about her husband, Dr. [W. E. B.] DuBois, you know that is amazing considering her politics if you know what I mean. I brought [Max] Roach out, you know, to play at the restaurant. I brought for the first time Gwendolyn Brooks and Margaret Burroughs and myself. We did a reading for the Nation. They'd never come in to any of the Nation's facilities to do anything. I brought a sister Cari Amu, a dancer. She brought her troupe from Buffalo [New York] out there and there was a big talk about we're going to have the African women go ooga booga (imitates dance) and it was a big stink going on, and of course they came in and did some fantastic modern dance. Amazing women that is of great success that the minister come to--those are the kinds of things that I did. I mean I brought all these people in to there to give talks, to lecture, to do dance, to do music, to say simply that there was a culture that was involved even though people were Islamic. There was still a culture that they had to also listen to and be a part of, so that's what I did. And then I did a textbook for the young people with questions and answers that they should know, like a cataclysm, it's a cataclysm. I did a cataclysm for the young people so therefore, by the time they got into high school, their information would be so rounded in the Nation, so therefore, they would know what it was they were supposed to know. It was amazing the kind of hard work that I did out there, and it was published, and it was given for a while to some of the students, but there were always forces working against you there, you know. So, you know, I'd go down to lay my pages out and there would be delays, and someone saying, "I don't know why you have two pages. You're not the chief minister." You know, whatever, amazing stuff, you know, and, you know, and up close, you see things that are wrong, you know. I'd seen things that were wrong before, you know. I saw things that were wrong when Malcolm was there. I saw things--and he ignored it. I saw things that were wrong when (inaudible) was there and he ignored it, and they ignored it. I was--and at some point it just converges, and at some point you say--at some point--no, I can't continue here. You know and they kept saying that I was not a Muslim. They kept saying that I was Pan-Africanist. That I was a communist. I was called everything but a Muslim, by the way, and they wanted to know what was I doing in the Nation. Shirley [Graham] DuBois used to kid me when she came out there. She said, you know, Shirley said, well you know, "You need to become the head of this so therefore we can bring it to where it should be," you know. But I said, "Only you would think of something as seditious as that, right?" But I did I brought her out there, you know, her and Margaret Burroughs, who was as left as you could be, came to speak there at the nation. What I'm saying is that, my brother, every organization I have gone to, I have not changed. I have not allowed the organization to change me. If I had a vision for something, I proceeded to do it, you know. When I couldn't do it anymore, I moved on and just left, you know. When it became so apparent that it was impossible for anything really progressive to happen, I moved on at some point, and that's what I did. Not cursing anybody, not saying there's always some good that comes out of something. I saw some good that the Nation did with people, you know, and I saw some harm that the Nation did with people. You cannot ignore the good. You cannot ignore Malcolm [X]. You cannot ignore the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, you know, and what he attempted to do. Even in spite of who was around him keeping it from happening, you can't ignore Minister [Louis] Farrakhan and some of the good things that he was attempting to do. And I'm not talking about the things that did not happen like et cetera. You cannot ignore Marcus Garvey, all the stuff that surrounds him is all negative. You cannot ignore [Paul] Robeson, although he dies in a place called Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--as some people say a broken man, you know. You cannot ignore DuBois although all those years that he lived to 96 [ninety-six], you know, you cannot ignore, you know, all the good that he did. Although there was some things that he did that were incorrect Story_ID: 12849 Speaker 1: There's always that dialectic there, you know, that with the good and the bad you're going to have progress, do you know what I'm saying? And what I was tempted to do is to look at what I correct, and I try to take whatever was working at a certain time and use it, so therefore, there was progress for our people. But I included everybody and that was, like, always a problem with some people that I happened to be with. I mean I remember the first time I got on stage and included gays and lesbians in my discussion. Nationalists went crazy on me, you know. When I called brothers and sisters--everybody brothers and sisters--whether you're black, white, green, purple, or blue, people went crazy on me, but that was my vision. That's how I had advanced. That's how I had traveled in the world. That's what I understood. When someone said that they wanted to instill me as a queen mother, I said, "No," I said, "Where's my country?" You know, why am I going to be a queen mother or a king, right? You know, when we're trying to change the world. We're trying to move away from that kind of thing, so that means nothing to me. I wasn't being anti-Africa or anti-African, you know. I was merely saying at some point, "That's not the vision that I have for the world," you know, "my vision is not to be enthroned some place," you know, "but my vision is how can I make people walk upright like human beings? How can I promote peace on this earth? How can I make people in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], New York, look at each other and if they don't love each other, at least respect each other, not kill each other," you know, "how can I do this with these young students that I'm teaching?" And so in my classroom, I called everybody brothers and sisters in my classroom, you know, and sometimes the black kids would say, like, you know, "Why are you calling them," you know, "whatever?" I said, "Because they just like--" They said, "We're your sisters," you know. And I said, "How do I know that? You just telling me--I'm looking at your skin." But I said, "In Africa," you know, "they killed 400,000 people in Rwanda," you know, "that all looked the same." Were they brothers and sisters, you know, right? I was trying to make people go a different place than what this was about, you know--that basically on this earth if we can get people dealing like brothers and sisters with each other, we can get rid of war, we can get rid of famine, we can get rid of someone owning all of Texas or half of Texas, you know, someone having twenty-five cars and 2,000 pairs of shoes, and twenty fur coats, and somebody right around the corner is starving, you know. I mean on some level, at some point in our lives, we've got to begin to get people to understand that all that I got from Malcolm [X] and Martin [Luther King Jr.], all that I got from the nation, all that I got from many nationalist organizations that I belonged to, you know, from BART [Black Arts Repertory Theater] to you name it, all that I got, I've put into use and saying, but I'm not just going to limit it to a few people. I'm going to take it out to this larger world and say, "Here we is," you know. I know I teach English. Here we is, you know. And I expect the new larger world to understand what I'm saying right now, and that's what I'm doing today, you know, that's where I'm going today, you know. I am insisting that people be human. I'm insisting that they walk upright like human beings, and I don't care if you black, green, purple, blue, gay, lesbian, I don't care who you be. But the point is that if you're going to stay on this earth, this earth is going to demand that you be that, that you be human, and you walk upright like a human being, which is not easy. Because this country puts us in these little boxes and most people occupy who still quote Malcolm, are still fixated there, you know. I was teaching a class on 9/11 [terrorist attacks] and one of my students ended up with one of the poems like this is chickens coming home to roost, and I let him read it and we talked about, whatever, and then I said to my brother, "This is not chickens coming home to roost because this is not the 1960's." I said, "This is much more than chickens coming home to roost." I said, "No what we're seeing with the kind of people who died there. All kinds of people did in those buildings. That's not chickens coming home to roost, you see." Younger people got to get a new language to tell us what this is about, a new feeling, what is this really all about? We can't go back to old language, you know, and use old language for this new things that's happened, for this new kind of killing that's happening, you know, for this new theme, this new death that's happening, you know. You can't do it that way, and that's what I'm saying, you know. So at some point I always say to my students, "you can read it and you can quote it if you want to, but when you get ready to write, you've got to understand it in a different fashion and in a different way today, because there's a different thing happening in this world today." It's not an easy work anymore. It was much simpler back in those days, and this is much more complex than we will ever, ever have. Look at the whole world. The whole world is almost trying to destroy itself. It's trying to destroy this earth, my brother. I never thought I would see people kill people the way they kill people in Africa. I never thought I'd see that again after what happened in Nigeria, you know. When they had that major--I thought I wouldn't see this, and now it's like, you know, it doesn't matter. I never thought I'd see little children on the continent of Africa being trained as soldiers to go and kill their family members with a gun pointed--they didn't kill their family members or somebody like that they were going to get killed, so they did it, so they became little murderers. You know I never thought that would ever happen. I never thought that I would see Africans in the way that we look at Africans in the 1960s. I'm going back now to 1960's--you know, take money and send it out the country, whatever. Rob a country and then leave it there, you know, to all kinds of terrible things. I never thought I'd see that. I never thought I'd see that kind of death. That means you have to re-examine who we are. The ideology "who are we?" Who are we? How can that happen? What happened? Who trains people? Who educates people? How can you get (inaudible) someone in Nigeria who would do what he did, do you know what I'm saying? You know, how can you get someone in Rwanda, you know. How can you have people saying--although the same skin color, right? You know, how can you get Tutsis or Hutus, you know, fighting each other, killing each other, you know, slaughtering--hacking each other. Makes a serial killer look uninteresting. You're hacking children coming and just hacking people in half--in to--just body parts all over the place, a river of blood. I never thought I'd see, my brother. Never, never, never. But what I do know is that we have to work to make sure that never happens again, and that comes through education, that comes from the whole idea of we can no longer allow people to look up and say simply, you know, "I will kill you because your religion is different from mine. I will kill you because you belong to a different tribe." You know, "I will kill you because your sexual orientation is not like mine. I will kill you." We can no longer let that happen, so we got to teach people, and so that's one of my roles is always teaching. Teaching, teaching, constantly teaching. Trying to open people up to beyond where they live in Harlem [New York], beyond where they live on Park Avenue, beyond where they live, you know, in North Philadelphia and South Philadelphia. Beyond these--no boundaries, you know, what do you think? What does this mean? Why do people kill people? You know, why do people kill people and say, "My God is better than your God." Why do people bomb people and say, "My God is better than your God." How is that possible? You know, or, "My war is more righteous than your war." How is that possible? So we have to start dealing with the whole idea of religion, you know, and the whole idea of what does it mean to be human? If I'm human, I don't believe in capital punishment. I can't. Someone said, "Well suppose people come in and kill your family?" Well then that won't bring my family back and it will not change the fact that I don't believe in capital punishment. I don't believe in killing people on any level, in any way. I don't care what they do. I don't care how horrific it is, you see, and that's what I'm finally said I don't believe in wars, I believe in peace, you know. [W.E.B.] DuBois talked about the reason that we have war is for the preparation of war. We prepare for war, you know, and I believe that we must prepare for peace, you know. The only way that we have peace is by preparing for peace. You can't have peace san say we're not fighting, we're having peace. Like people tell you, "Well Sonia, we had peace before 9/11." I said, "No we didn't have peace. There was war all over the planet Earth, you see." And so peace does not mean that there's no war, you know, peace means simply that you begin to teach peace so therefore, no one will even talk about war. War is not within our vision at all, so I guess, I mean, it's been an interesting journey, you know, from a place called Alabama where I wrote my first poem about my grandmother. That was my first poem that I remember that was published to a time in New York City, you know, where I began to write in a serious vein with Louise Bogan, until I met people like [Amiri] Baraka and Larry Neal and Askia Toure and people like that, you know, who began to read with them and hone down this craft to allude to Malcolm to Ms. [Jean Blackwell] Hutson to Mr. [Richard] Moore to Mr. [Lewis] Micheaux to the boys who changed my political life, who sat me down at night after I had gotten the children in bed and taught me. Taught me what she new about politics and I'm forever grateful to her on this earth, to all of these people, to the men and women that I began to meet outside this country to [Pablo] Neruda and Gilean [Douglas]. When I went to Cuba, you know, and looked and looked and began to understand the world in a better sense. And I went to Africa and really tasted that earth. I went to Brazil--when I went all over the world and came back home and said, "Now what do you with this information?" Do you just stay very Catholic, you know, or do you look up and say, "Okay world I'm here to teach you what I've just found out, what I've learned from Malcolm." The true revolutionary I learned from Malcolm is one who does believe in peace and who is--who loves people. He did. He really did, you know. And that's important to me and important for all the people I know who are on the same trail, the same journey that I've been on. It's been a mighty journey, an interesting journey, you know, one where I look at my children today and I say to them that's it's a hard life for all of you because you've been my children. You've been identified with me, but on the other hand too I just hope that what you want to be is a peaceful person on this earth, and certainly you want to try very much to influence people to do good and to do right, and to be correct on this earth--that which is not easy. Story_ID: 12850 Speaker 1: And my father [Wilson L. Driver], a man I got very close to during the last year of his life, last couple of years of his life, you know, I thanked him at some point, you know, for just being on this earth and for being my father, and for taking care of us over the years. Allowing us to vote and to be and finally this man who looked at me and said simply, "Oh Sonia, now I understand what you've been doing all your life." And he said that to me at ninety-six, and it was the most glorious moment (crying) in my life, and a very important moment in my life, you know, that finally he stopped saying, "Girl, stop what you're doing." And said, "Now I understand what you're about, what you're doing," Story_ID: 12851 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I don't know. The thing that I think most people I know who have been in this struggle for justice and peace and all kinds of economic and social and religious, you know, justice. I guess I want to be remembered as probably as the teaching and the poetry part--writing part, always do this. They're always battling each other. So I think I want to be remembered as the poet/teacher, teacher/poet, one who tried to tell the truth. One who tried to engage--at the beginning, I engaged only black students, but contrary to what I said about Malcolm [X], although we were speaking to a black audience, whites and Asians and Puerto Ricans--people came around us so therefore we looked up and recognized the message is not just for black folks. And so, I just want people to remember that I was forever learning. Everyday I learned something new. Everyday at the end of the day I write something in the journal about what I have learned, how my thoughts have changed on this earth, how I have changed, how I love this earth and need other people to help protect this earth, and how I love people. That how amazing these human beings are if we would just learn how to laugh at ourselves a little bit more, how we would learn how to just back up and not get so angry. So therefore, I try to teach a lot of young people how not to be so angry, how to have discipline over their lives, over their bodies, over their hands, over their eyes, over their hearts, so therefore they can live longer. But also so they would not hurt people, not have an explosion that would make them end up in jail for the rest of their lives, you know. I want to be remembered as a woman who finally understood what it meant to be peaceful, finally understood what it meant to be a human being, because everything conspires to make you less than human on this earth, and that has been a difficult thing, because there's always something that will make you want to lean the other way, you know. And every morning I get up and I look in the mirror and I chant, ebay yay yay yay [ph.]." It will get better, and then I smile and said, "Of course if you work to make it better, Sonia, it will get better." And that's what we have to do but I'll go around, you know, I'll meditate and I'll chant, ebay eee [ph.]." I'll chant coming down the steps, getting ready to get my tea and go out for my walk in the morning, ebayee." It'll get better but we got to work to make it better. We got to make it work. We got to make it work. We got to work hard to make it better. I want to be remembered as a woman who looked at the world and looked at this earth and said one night, to this earth, "Don't give up on us. Don't give up on us humans." Because this earth is very close to giving up on us. She's [Earth] close to swallowing us whole, saying, "I will wait millions of years for another species to come along because you people do not understand what I means to be humans." I mean, we're trying to destroy this earth and this earth and this earth will not be destroyed, by the way. This earth said, "I will survive, you won't. You might not, but I will survive." And I just call out to the earth, you know, some nights when I come out and stand on the porch, and just say, "Give us time. Give some of us time, just to try to save you and at the same time, save ourselves." You know, try to make people understand that it's unnecessary--this war's unnecessary. And it seems like--I was talking to a very dear friend who's a writer, who said to me yesterday, "Sonia, I feel so down, I mean, what is going on in this country and the world? There is no peace any place." And I said, "You can feel that way, my brother, my dear friend," I said, "but the point is that we must wake up every morning saying, 'but I'm going to contribute one more--one more part of the peace puzzle on this earth,'" and that's what we must do, you know. I must contribute one more part of the human puzzle on this earth. That's what we've got to do. And even though it doesn't look it, if we do anything--I know when I speak to 400 people or 500 people or 200 people, I've touched some people. They come up, they write me, they call me, they send me all kinds of email, a 1,000 hits, you know what I mean? That I've backed away from that bloody email right now, because I can't answer all those things. They're saying, "You've given me hope, to have hope as young people," and we can never eradicate the hope for young people at all, you know. We've got to say as writers, as educators, there is a win here, you know, because now all this is now is we're seeing what I called in the latest--the stages of the people who are carnivorous. It's the latest stages for these people, you know, what I call--there's a scientist I was on the program who said, "The carnivorous animals are dying, are disappearing off the earth," you know, "The meat eating animals are dying off the earth, they're disappearing, you know that?" And I said, "Yes now we've got to wait for the human meat eating animals, you know, to go off the earth." And they are disappearing. Just what you see, you see they're flailing, they're killing at will, you know, whatever, because they know they're a dying breed. They're a dying breed. I see it, I know it, because I see a vision beyond death, beyond a war, you see. Because if you really checkout younger people, they really don't want to die. They don't want to fight. They don't want to do any of this at all, you know. And I always maintained if people want war, I said recently, "Send the old men off to war. Send those generals to fight. Leave the young ones at home, right? And send," you know, "all the ones," you know, "all the sixty, sixty-five, send them off to fight. Let them fight. Let them just go over there and fight, okay, and we'll watch them," you know. And we'll applaud them if they make it back, you know, whatever. But young people, you know, you get these old men sending off young men and women to die now in these foreign places, you see. You get old men and old women who cannot look at the world and say simply, "We need to share the land in the Middle East," you know. "We need to share land in this country. We need to share the wealth in this country," you know. "We need to share what we know about education." The people in these private schools need to come into these public schools and tell people really how to teach, you know. How we really educate, you see, and not go around and sell it to private businesses, you know what I'm saying? To educate--they're businessmen, they're not educators. What I'm saying simply, my brother, in conclusion, is that I want to be remembered as someone who watched this earth and watched us as a people and watched human beings and said simply, "The one thing I want to remember about is that I participated in the struggle to make us all walk upright as a human being." That was a long hard struggle from Alabama to New York to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you know, to the world..