 Story_ID: 476714 Speaker 1: --And I'm the interviewer [Julieanna Richardson] and Matthew Hickey is the videographer and Larry Murphy is our observer. And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us. Speaker 2: It's Stacey Davis Stewart [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart], and it's S-T-A-C-E-Y, Davis, D-A-V-I-S, and Stewart, S-T-E-W-A-R-T. Speaker 1: Okay. And can I have today's date and your date of birth? Speaker 2: Today's date is July 30th (laughter), 2007 [sic.]. My birthday is March 1st, 1964. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, is it the 31st? Speaker 2: This is the 31st? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Unclear) July 31st, 2007. Birthday is March 1st, 1964. Speaker 1: And I'd like to have you give us our location and your occupation? Speaker 2: We're in Washington, D.C. in the offices of Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] and my occupation is I'm chief diversity officer for Fannie Mae and also the senior vice president for the Office of Community and Charitable Giving. Speaker 1: Okay. And how would you state that--it's a foundation executive or diversity foundation executive (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I, was the president and CEO of the Fannie Mae Foundation. The Fannie Mae Foundation activities ceased and all of those activities came back into the company (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 476715 Speaker 1: Now, I wanted to start out and ask you about your father. Can you give his name and what you know about his growing up? Speaker 2: Well, his name, my father's name was Albert Miles Davis. He was born on June 22nd in 1918 in Atlanta, Georgia. His--he had one brother, Edward Langston Davis [Edward Langston Davis, Jr.]. And his parents were originally from--his mother [Lena Miles Davis] was originally from Hinton, West Virginia and his father [Edward Langston Davis, Sr.] from Sparta, Georgia. My father grew up in Atlanta and attended high school in Atlanta at Booker T. Washington High School, which was one of the few high schools at the time that was available for blacks to attend. He also attended Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and then went on to receive a medical degree from Howard University [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. He practiced for over fifty years as, as a general practitioner, physician in Atlanta. He started his practice on Auburn Avenue in Atlanta and then moved his practice right around the corner. Story_ID: 476716 Speaker 1: My father [Albert Miles Davis] also in addition to being a physician was also very active in the Civil Rights Movement. And was very, very concerned, spent a lot of time with respect to the treatment of particularly low income African Americans with respect to their healthcare. So he was very active in the Civil Rights Movement, in fact he served as the president of the Atlanta [Georgia] branch of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] during the Civil Rights Movement, during the 1960s. He also with a, a few of his other physician colleagues worked on an effort to help desegregate hospitals and it started with an effort at Grady Hospital [Grady Memorial Hospital] in Atlanta which is now the largest public hospital in the Southeast. But he and a few other doctors formed something called the Doctors' Committee on Implementation [sic. Doctors' Committee for Implementation] which was essentially an effort to actually implement the desegregation of hospitals, law that had come into place. That, that law though it was in place, was not actually carried out. And so he formed a committee with other doctors called the Doctors' Committee on Implementation, to actually implement the law that actually desegregated hospitals and worked with President Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] to actually ensure that that implementation could occur. And that eventually led to the desegregation of Grady Hospital in Atlanta. Which eventually then led to the desegregation of many hospitals in Georgia and throughout the Southeast and around the country. So for that effort he received an award called the Trumpet Award. And, and you know, that was probably one of his proudest moments. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Xernona Clayton (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Xernona Clayton, was really a part of that effort actually too, with a few other doctors. And the ironic thing about that is one of the other members of the Doctors' Committee on Implementation was a man named Dr. Otis Smith [Otis W. Smith] who eventually served with me on the board of Grady Hospital in the 1990s. So I think one of the things that was most kind of, I guess, bittersweet about my father's efforts with desegregation or actually in, in some way a triumph was the fact that his daughter ended up being one of the people to actually serve on the board of the hospital that he helped desegregate. Story_ID: 476717 Speaker 1: My father [Albert Miles Davis] was a, a little bit, was a very caring and warm doctor. He was--there are many, many people in Atlanta [Georgia] who if I walk down the street will say, "You know your daddy was my doctor. Or you--my father, your father delivered me." And so he treated many, many people in Atlanta. And also treated people who often didn't have the ability to pay. And he had a very warm sense about him. And so you'd go to his office and he would literally have lines of people waiting (laughter) outside of his office to see him. In some ways he was as much of a physician as he was, you know, a psychologist as he was a physician. You know, he--many people would find comfort in going to him not just because they would be treated for whatever actual physical illness they had but he spent a lot of time sort of advising people and really serving as a, as a listener for people that really had a lot of challenges in their lives. And so people enjoyed coming to the doctor because they found great comfort in being, just spending time with him. And so that's why he ended up having so many lines is that he spent three times longer (laughter) with people than he, than most doctors will today. But, you know, for that he became a very well-known physician because he was such a thoughtful and caring doctor. Speaker 2: Now, so he had a very good, good bedside manners (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, very good. Speaker 2: --is what you're saying. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The ones that you want nowadays. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you sort of wonder where they are now but they used to exist actually. Story_ID: 476718 Speaker 1: Did he share---like on his side of the family how far back do you know the family history? Speaker 2: So, his father actually, you know, my sister [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] in, in Atlanta [Georgia] has done a lot more of our family history, but what we know about my father's [Albert Miles Davis] father who came from Sparta, Georgia is that his mother and father, his mother was Suzie Morgan [ph.] who was a very dark skinned black woman who had been a slave. Suzie Morgan had two children, my grandfather and his brother. My great-grandfather was a white man whose name was Judge Little [Franklin Lightfoot Little]. And I actually went to Sparta, Georgia and did some searching around Judge Little, and if my memory serves me right, Judge Little was, I think he was in fact a judge in Hancock County [Georgia] which is where Sparta, Georgia was. His house, he lived in a very, very, he was a very prominent man in Hancock County. He lived in a very nice house on the main street in Sparta, Georgia. It's actually listed in some historical books down there. When I read about Judge Little, he also was--helped to start the Confederate regiment in that part of Georgia. He think--he started, helped to start the, found the chamber of commerce in Hancock County. So he became a very prominent white man but very much grounded in the Confederate history of that part of Georgia. So this was my great-grandfather. So he had two sons that were very fair skinned, my grandfather had blue eyes but he was black but with blue eyes. Really long eye lashes is the most thing, the thing I remember most about my great-grand, about my grandfather. And, and, and so that part--that piece of the, of our history is very interesting. My father's, father's mother, so my great-grandmother this woman, Suzie Morgan, was a slave. Somehow she made it to Atlanta [Georgia] and we're not exactly sure how it was that she came to Atlanta. And we're also not exactly sure where the name Davis came from. Because my grandfather's name was on his birth certificate it says Eddie Davis [Edward Langston Davis, Sr.]. And so his mother was Suzie Morgan, his dad was Judge Little, we're not, not sure how Davis came. I, I've looked at the records to see was there a landowner named Davis, you know, I guess our best guess is that she may have just changed her name to Davis when she came, you know, to Atlanta. So that's, that piece of our--is not, is not really clear. But my--actually my cousin here just told me that when she came to Atlanta she was working for the Rich family. If most people from Atlanta know Rich's Department Store [Atlanta, Georgia], which is no longer around, but the Rich family was a Jewish family. I actually went to high school with some of the Riches, Jenny Rich [ph.] and some other, some others of the Rich family. But she worked for the Rich family. I think as just a, a laundress, washing clothes for the Rich family. So she had these two sons, my grandfather was born Eddie Davis, married my grandmother, Lena Miles [Lena Miles Davis], who again was born in Hinton, West Virginia. She--her parents [Anna Miles and Albert Miles] lived in Washington [D.C.] where I am now, for, for some period of time. Story_ID: 476719 Speaker 1: Her parents [Anna Miles and Albert Miles] came from Hinton, West Virginia, to Washington [D.C.]. And actually my great-grandfather, my [paternal] grandmother's [Lena Miles Davis] father worked here as a civilian working in the, in the [U.S.] military, he was killed tragically, I think, he was working in an ice house, remember they had ice houses a long time ago, and a block of ice fell on him and compressed his spine. So he died of a bad spinal cord injury. Which comes up in my history again. My, my sister [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] in Atlanta [Georgia] who's a judge had a bad accident and with a, has a spinal cord injury and is a quadriplegic now. So it's kind of an interesting sort of, you know, echoing of history in our family. But anyway, my grandmother moved from Washington to Atlanta and attended school in Atlanta and, and, married my grandfather [Edward Langston Davis, Sr.]. My grandmother was a very, very headstrong woman. She became an educator. She was a principal of an elementary school in Atlanta for many years. She always had aspirations of doing well and, you know, and being actively involved socially and being a part of sort of the middle class of, of Atlanta and she worked really hard to do that. And my grandfather was a, a quiet man who became a, a postal worker [for the U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] and, you know, was just a hard worker. He could walk for miles and miles and miles. He would walk to church. He went there to the Friendship Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia]. They would walk from their home on Fair Street all the way over to Friendship Baptist Church to go to church. He would walk anywhere (laughter) but he--the two of them were very interested in, in, she in particular, very interested in being a part of the middle class of Atlanta. And so she drove a wonderful, grand car and was always well dressed. And she insisted that her kids go to medical school. So my father [Albert Miles Davis] and his brother [Edward Langston Davis, Jr.] ended up going to medical school not 'cause they wanted to but because their mom basically forced them to. My father really wanted to be a coach. And it was his mother that forced him to go to medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] because she was adamant that her kid would be successful and do well. And she sort of, she kind of forced herself on them in that way. You know, I think my father, you know, sort of regretted that in his life that he never had a choice or never felt like he had a choice to determine his own career but he lived in a pretty head--you know, with a pretty headstrong mother so that was, that was how that, you know, was bound to occur, so-- Story_ID: 476720 Speaker 1: Did he share any stories of his growing up, you know, that you remember that sort of you know, come to mind (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father [Albert Miles Davis]? Yeah. Well, you know I think this issue with his mother was really tough. She was a very head strong woman who was very insistent on things being her way. And I think that impacted him in a certain way and kind made the relationship between the two of them, you know, a little difficult. But my father was very, very committed to my, my grandmother, you know, all throughout her life and took very good care of her through, through his life--through her life. You know, my father was an athlete. He was Atlanta's [Atlanta, Georgia] first ham champion. After some point there was a tennis championship where he won hams. And he was Atlanta's first ham champion. He was a great tennis player. He also played basketball. He was pretty short but he had a nickname of, of Duck. So everybody called him Duck when he was at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. So sports was really his thing. He really enjoyed sports. And he had his, his best friend was Dr. James Ellison [James B. Ellison, Sr.] whose nickname was Snub. And the two of them were big athletes and great friends. In fact, my father was the physician for Morehouse's teams for a while and then sort of transferred that relationship to Dr. Ellison who is still, he's technically not the physician for the team, but he is like the, almost like the spiritual mascot for the team cause he goes to all Morehouse teams and the, the, the clinic on campus at Morehouse is named after Dr. Ellison who is his best friend. So they have a very strong tie to sports, and school and, and that was a big part of his life. You know, I think my father's growing up was, you know, I don't think necessarily he was, he was a good student, I don't think he was a great, great student. But he worked really hard because his parents [Lena Miles Davis and Edward Langston Davis, Sr.], you know, really, really required that. You know, he had lots of--yeah growing up he, he grew up near the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]. So that was also, he grew up on Fair Street and could, was within a block of Morehouse. So I think that kind of influenced him in a way too. I mean that was a part of Atlanta that was very vibrant and, you know, had a very active, sort of black middle class. The Herndon family was not too far away. And so that, that part of Atlanta was, was kind of where most, you know, sort of more prominent blacks lived at the time. So I think, you know, he had a lot of great influences on his life. He was a pretty mischievous kid, I think. But, you know, ended up doing well in his life. Story_ID: 476721 Speaker 1: Your mother. Can you talk about her-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --give her name. Speaker 2: Yeah. So my mother name is Myrtle Reid Davis [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis]. My mother was born in Rock Hill, South Carolina. Her mother Emmalee Reid [Emmalee Williams Reid] was, had been a teacher but also during the war, during World War II [WWII] had worked in, I think like an artillery ammunition manufacturer in that, in that part of South Carolina and developed what I think is probably akin to black lung disease and so later on in her life she had really bad episodes of coughing and things like that. I'm, I'm not sure it was ever medically proven that that's what it was but it appeared that that may have been what she, a condition that she developed probably coming from that time working during the war. And I think probably a lot of people were impacted in that way I guess during that time. But my mom was, was one of three girls that were blood related, but my grandmother also adopted a number of girls. And so the house at some point had maybe seven girls, six or seven girls in it, and, and it was busy, was a busy house. And it was a pretty small house (laughter) I'm not exactly sure how they all fit in this one house. But, but all of the adopted girls we weren't close to but there is one of the adopted daughters that, that is, that we are very close to and, and is my aunt as if she were my own blood related aunt in Atlanta [Georgia], my mother's sister who's her adopted sister. But my mom grew up with, with, with, in this house with again another headstrong woman who had very strong beliefs about life and what--how things should be and, and I didn't spend a lot of time with my grandparents 'cause they were away, they were in South Carolina. I was probably closer to my [paternal] grandparents [Lena Miles Davis and Edward Langston Davis, Sr.] that were, that were in Atlanta. But my mother went to, attended high school in Rock Hill, went to college at Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and that was unlike her other sisters who attended South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. My, my mother, my grandmother had gone to South Carolina State and had to continue her college degree later on in her life. But my mom's sisters had all gone to South Carolina State. My mother decided to go away and go to Xavier. I think in part to get away from home. She was the youngest girl and, and she decided to pursue a, a degree in pharmacy. She was pretty strong in science and, and majored in chemistry. And went on to get a, a degree in pharmacy which Xavier obviously has a very strong program there. Xavier I think, really influenced my mom, in a, in a very important way. She, she didn't grow up Catholic but she became Catholic attending school down there. And I think the nuns at Xavier really influenced her in that way. She was also one of these people that was, you know, the number one in her class and also the prettiest in her class. I think she was homecoming queen at Xavier and she was also very smart. And so she, she was blessed to, you know, be--have brains and beauty. And when she left Xavier she moved to Charlotte [North Carolina] and worked in a pharmacy in Charlotte and which was not too far from Rock Hill. And she became really active, I think, with the Urban League [Urban League of Greater Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] and obviously with, you know, kind of civil rights and activities and she was a young woman being actively involved in, in the, what was going on there. She kind of, I think met Whitney Young during one of his visits in Charlotte. And if I get this story right, I think Whitney Young had been friends with a doctor in Atlanta named Dr. Richard Hackney [Richard C. Hackney] who owned a pharmacy in Atlanta. And the pharmacy happened to be in the same building of my father's [Albert Miles Davis] practice in Auburn at, on Auburn Avenue in Atlanta. And Dr. Hackney had shared with Whitney Young that he needed a new pharmacist to work in his pharmacy. And Whitney Young said, "Well, I just met this pharmacist. You might really like her in Charlotte. Her name's Myrtle Davis." And somehow that connection got made and Myrtle ended up coming to Atlanta and kind of interviewing with Dr. Hackney. And then she got hired by Dr. Hackney, moved to Atlanta, she actually stayed in, I think she moved to, I know she lived in two places I think on, on, on Boulevard in Atlanta which was, which was then a pretty nice neighborhood, it's not such a great neighborhood now. And I think she also lived near Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia], which ironically is where my father had gone to high school. She lived across the street for a while. But she worked with Dr. Hackney and then lo and behold met my father who, whose office was right upstairs. And that was how they, they met. Story_ID: 476722 Speaker 1: And they had some interesting stories of, of courting and their relationship. I mean, my father [Albert Miles Davis] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can you tell us some of those? Speaker 1: I think my father used to pretend--he says believed that he could hypnotize her [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] and he used to try to hypnotize (laughter) her and he used to, she used to pretend like he actually was hypnotizing her. And so that was kind of like a thing they used to do. I don't know, I'm not sure where he thought he could actually do (laughter) hypnotizing. But, but she went along with the joke and so they, you know, they dated and, and courted and eventually, you know, and eventually got married. And, and then they had two kids. My sister Stephanie, [HistoryMaker] Stephanie Davis who is now a judge in Atlanta [Georgia], and, and me. So, so the story of doctors, doctor and the pharmacy, pharmacist, I think that actually does happen in, (laughter) in real life sometimes so. Speaker 2: So do you know what attracted them to other? Did they, did they ever speak about that? Speaker 1: You know if I have to, my mother--my father was a very charismatic, you know, I wouldn't say he was the best looking man but he had that kind of charisma that he was a very attractive, warm, engaging, funny, classy kind of man. And so I could see any woman being attracted to him. Now my father had been married once before to a woman named, Bernice DeCosta [Bernice Craft DeCosta Davis] who, who had come from a very prominent family in Charleston, South Carolina, the DeCosta family. And so I have two older half sisters, Joy, Julia-Ellen Craft Davis [Julia-Ellen Davis], and, and Vicki Davis. Vicki lives here in Washington [D.C.] and Julia-Ellen, Joy, lives in Charleston with her mom actually. So my father had been previously married, I think really wanted to be married. That first marriage didn't work out for him. And my mother was a little bit younger. And you know she was very, very attractive and, and very smart. And so I think the combination of, you know, beautiful, attractive, smart young woman and kind of, you know, very attractive, charismatic, you know, charming older man who was a doctor, I think, that was a pretty good match (laughter). And so I think they, they really, you know, they really were quite attracted to each other. Story_ID: 476723 Speaker 1: Now did your mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] share any stories of her growing up in that house of seven? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know I think she was the youngest so I think it was, I think she was a little spoiled, frankly. (Laughter) I think, I think she was the baby and was, was treated, treated like the baby. And there was a big age difference so like her older sister, Ruby [Ruby Reid Smith], is quite a bit older than she is. And then her middle, the middle sister, Willie Carl [Willie Carl Reid] we had called her Aunt Bill, was still a few years older and so there was, there was quite a bit of age difference. You know, I think as just as my [paternal] grandmother [Lena Miles Davis] on the other side I think my--this grandmother [Emmalee Williams Reid] was pretty strict. And you know, I think my mother was, was, was a very good student but also wanted to strike out on her own. I think she may have felt a little constrained in a small town. And Rock Hill [South Carolina] was a very small town at that time. And I think just being the youngest, I think she probably felt like I need to go on and be, you know, spread my wings and, and do my own thing. My--her father [Carl Reid] also was a postal worker [for the U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. And was a very, if you saw pictures of him, very, very keen features. He was African American, but he almost, he didn't, he looked like an Indian [Native American]. I mean he was keen nose, my mother's got a very keen nose. And he was more of a quiet, a very caring, and, and very loving man as I can think that I remember her talking about him. I never got a chance to meet him. I've only seen one picture of him. But I think they grew up in a pretty stable household with a strong mother and kind of more of a quiet, but hard working, but very strong man who I think loved them a lot. And so I think my mom, you know, I think her father probably died, you know, I don't know what age in her life but pretty early in her life. And so I think that was probably something missing in her life is that she didn't get a chance to spend as much time with her father as, as probably she would have loved. My grandmother died you know within the last ten or fifteen years, so she lived a very, very long life. And we would spend Thanksgivings with her over much of my growing up, is when we would see her mostly. And, and stayed pretty close to her that way. Speaker 1: So it's interesting that both of your grandmothers, is that right, were strong women. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Very strong women. Speaker 2: Very strong. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Very strong. Story_ID: 476724 Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, you know, I grew up in Atlanta [Georgia] on 592 Waterford Road. And I grew up in the same house, my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] just sold the house a couple years ago. And so my earliest, you know, memories of, of growing up were growing up in that house with, with my, my parents and my older sister [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] who's six years older than me. So it was--and I, you know, as my sister talks about it, for me she had been by herself for six years so by the time I came around, it was like, you know, having a playmate and having a--so I always remember being, you know, a bit teased and, you know, kind of, you know, loved greatly right, but just always kind of like treated almost like the little play, play toy (laughter) (unclear) doll in some way. But my sister was, was great in terms of being the great big sister. I mean all throughout my life she took me everywhere. She took me ice skating. She took me to all her activities. I mean even when it was not cool to be in high school and have your little sister hanging around, my sister always took me (laughter) places and, and did things with me. But I also remember my parents being very, you know, always having a big influence on my life. And being--always having this discussions in the house around political current activities going on in the world and I always felt very much a part of those discussions even as a young, as a young girl. So they always made me very much aware of what was going on outside of the house. And what was going on in the larger world. And I always felt very much attached to the issues going around me. And so I remember that as a very young girl. What I also remember is the influence that my nursery school teacher [Annie Lou Hendricks] had on me. She was a woman who had been my father's [Albert Miles Davis] high school teacher [at Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia] and by the time I came around she was--she had started a nursery school. She lived to be over a hundred years old. She was a woman who had come from Newnan, Georgia and was very bright. And at the time, you know, girls that graduate at the top of their classes in high school the Atlanta public school system would reserve jobs for them. And she was lucky enough to be able to get a job with the Atlanta public school system and that's how she ended up teaching my father during high school. And then when she retired, from Atlanta public school system she started a nursery school in her, in her house. And so my sister and I both went to nursery school in this house. And it was--the house was almost like magical for me-- Story_ID: 476725 Speaker 1: Her name was Mrs. Hendricks [Annie Lou Hendricks]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: My nursery school teacher. And she lived--she had her house on West Lake Avenue in Atlanta [Georgia] and we would go to, that's where we went to nursery school. And it's interesting cause I, I was apparently did I did really well in nursery school and she really recommended to my mom [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] that I didn't need to go to kindergarten. I skipped kindergarten and went directly to first grade. And, but what I learned--there's a thing that I remember most in kindergarten was, was around planting tulips. I can remember planting tulips in her backyard, planting the bulbs and, and then putting 'em in, in September and the fall or whatever and then waiting for spring for them to, to bloom. And that was to me, that was a very--that was a big thing for me, (laughter) that you could put something in the ground in September and sort of care for it and watch over it for a period of time and all of sudden they turn into these beautiful blooms. And so, you know, she was, to me she was an amazing teacher because she--there are not too many teachers that I can remember in my life that really influenced me in a way that just helped develop these kinds of lifelong memories, you know, in a way that was really moving to me, so. And she lived to be a 102 years old. I think, a 101 year old, years old. She just died a few years ago, couple years ago actually. My oldest daughter [Madeleine Stewart] and I, I took her to see her when she was just a few months from, from passing and we have pictures of her. And so even though she wasn't able to really understand my daughter, my daughter didn't know what she, who she was, I still wanted to make that connection (laughter). So I, I have some very fond memories of, of that as a young girl. Speaker 2: Can we talk about that? Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, I think, you know, you know, that having--first of all going to school in someone's house, I think is, is kind of a warm way of, of, of developing as a, as a young child. I think, you know, we send our kids off to schools in these classrooms and these hard, cold kind of environments. Here I was going to school in another woman's house, you know, and sort of feeling as if she were just a family member almost or someone that was closer than just sort of--it didn't feel like a school. It just felt like going to someone's house and learning and being involved in activities with other kids. And she's amazing. I mean if you look at a lot of prominent people in Atlanta, they went to Ms. Hendricks for nursery school. I mean the list just goes on and on. Or at some point in Ms. Hendricks' career, she was their teacher. So she had an amazing impact in--her life story tells you sort of, speaks volumes around the importance of teachers and how they can shape someone's life and the impact that a teacher can have. So, so that was a very early experience I had. It was, you know, I think a very important one for me in my life. And, and just a very strong family connection too 'cause my father [Albert Miles Davis] had, had also, she had also taught my father [at Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia] so that was something--she was, it was an important family thing. Story_ID: 476726 Speaker 1: You know, there are other things in my life like, you know, I do remember as a young girl being really, my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] would grocery shop for my [paternal] grandmother [Lena Miles Davis] all the time. So we took, my mother took very good care, and my dad [Albert Miles Davis] too, very good care of my grandmother. So I had a very early set of memories around caring for my grandmother who, you know, by the time I was even a young girl was, it wasn't older, it was pretty old at that time. And--but lived independently for a long, long time. And I can remember that she had this paddle in her house underneath her, underneath her television and I didn't know what it was 'cause I didn't understand the letters. Later on I understood that it was Zeta Phi Beta [Zeta Phi Beta Sorority]. I think my grandmother's cousin was one of the founders of Zeta and so my grandmother was a Zeta. Which is almost unbelievable considering the fact that every--all the woman in my family are mostly Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] (laughter) and so the thought that I have a grandmother that's a Zeta, you know, it's like (laughter) almost hard to believe. And the fact that she had this paddle at her house and I never understood what it was until later on, is sort of interesting. My grandmother also--just another thing I remember, is my grandmother in her, in the back of her house had this dollhouse that was really you, it was a very interesting, it was a fun thing. It was like a, a play, like, it was the size of us. We could literally walk into the house and it was like, it was a big, big, big dollhouse, like a big toy dollhouse. But that was large, a large, not a small sort of miniature house, it was a, well it was a miniature house, but it was big enough for kids to play in and walk in. So that was kind of--it was always sort of fun to go there. And even though she wasn't a particularly warm woman, she had that very tough exterior and could was sort of a little tough, she, you know, was, you know, there I just have a lot of memories of that. I also have memories of, you know, for a long--for me, for, you know, a long time when I go visit my grandmother she would give us a coin, like give us a nickel or every time we'd visit she'd give us some money. You know, my grandmother was very interested in making money so she always, I think that was her way of getting us to appreciate money. Which is, which again comes up later in my life around my (laughter) appreciation for money in terms of my career. But, but she, she, she would, she did it for a while, then she stopped for a while. I can remember, she didn't do it for maybe several visits, we used to come and visit and then, and then, she'd pick back up and now all of a sudden she gave me another coin. I think she gave me a, you know, a quarter. And by that time a quarter really meant something to me but it was quarter, it didn't mean a lot, you know, it was just a quarter (laughter). And I, and I took it from her and then I said we used to call her Wawa [ph.], I said, "Wawa I don't really, I don't really need it but thank you. I don't, I don't really need it." And my mother was just outraged. She couldn't believe I had given this, you know, it was gift and I was giving it back and telling her I didn't need it. And Wawa thought it was just funny. And she just thought it was hilarious because in her mind I, I guess, I had learned the lesson she was trying to teach me, (laughter) which is learn to appreciate money and I'm glad you've got it that a quarter's really not worth a whole lot, (laughter) you know. And so even though my mother was outraged and couldn't believe that this child, that me, I was giving back this gift and telling her I didn't appreciate it, I didn't want it, my grandmother just thought it was hilarious. And, and, and I think felt like in some degree she had been successful in helping me appreciate how much money was really worth. And so what she understood was, "Wawa, if you gonna some give me some money, why don't you give me some real money (laughter) like a few dollars or something like that?" So, so, you know, that, that was some, you know it was kind of interesting, interesting times, growing up. Speaker 2: Now did everyone have nicknames in your family? I'm just wondering, 'cause-- Speaker 1: We--not really, I mean Wawa and Papa [Edward Langston Davis, Sr.] were my, my father's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --parents we called Wawa and Papa. My grandmother was Mama Lee [Stewart's maternal grandmother, Emmalee Williams Reid] and so we, you know, the grandparents had nicknames but we didn't really have nicknames. Story_ID: 476727 Speaker 1: --I remember your father's [Albert Miles Davis] name was Duck and then his best friend was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I guess we did, yeah. Speaker 1: --was-- Speaker 2: --was Snub [James B. Ellison, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Snub. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Snub. Speaker 1: Duck and Snub (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess we do, you know, it's interesting. And I, well I can tell you my father called me Joe [ph.], for a long time. And then he called me Tiger later on. But Joe was a [U.S.] military buddy and my father had four, four girls and I was the youngest and I thing he really did wanna have a boy at some point. So, so he called me Joe, Joe-Joe. So Joe was my name but only my father called me that, nobody else (laughter) called me that. And, and I think that's another piece of my growing up, I think because my father and I had a really close relationship. And so, you know, my dad would take us, take me take my sister [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] and but, you know, my sister was a little older so there was a period of time where it was just me and my father. I would go to baseball games with my father. We'd go to--all kinds of sports activities with my father. When the Braves [Atlanta Braves] were not a very popular team and there would be like just a few hundred people in the stadium and now that Barry Bonds is about to break Hank Aaron's record, you're hearing a little bit about that time for the Braves when they were just completely terrible. I mean, and Hank Aaron was playing for the team but there was a period of time when you know before Hank really started to approach the Babe Ruth record when the Braves were not a great team. And we would go to the Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium [Atlanta, Georgia] before it got torn down and it would literally be just several hundred people at the game. And we would be sitting up there watching (laughter) the Braves my, me and my father. He was an adamant sports fan. And so that's how in many ways I developed, you know, an interest in sports. And, and, but I also remember my father you know in his--this is when doctors used to make house visits, my father would take us to a lot of his house visits and we would have to sit outside in the car for hours or, you know, just it, it would seem like hours, probably wasn't hours, but while he went in to visit different patients. And sometimes I was allowed to go in the house. But mostly, you know, if I was with my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis], I had sit out in the car and wait for him. But I just--that was a big part of like a lot of time if we went out to dinner usually we went out to dinner on Wednesday nights, that was our time to go out to dinner and we would always have to make a house visit after we would go to dinner and, and I do remember distinctly going into this very old lady's house, she was really sick. And, and he had to make a house visit on her and she was, she was really sick. So I didn't get a chance to go in very often but that was a big part of my growing up was going on house visits with him. Story_ID: 476728 Speaker 1: Let's talk about growing up. If we take yourself back there and you're doing a good job, can you talk about what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, you see, I always remember the sound of, of the smell of grass because we had a big, big, yard and it always seemed like the grass was getting cut or somebody was working out in the, out in the yard. And so I always remember that pretty distinctly. You know, I also remember, I used to love to watch my parents [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis and Albert Miles Davis] get dressed to go out at night. I used to, you know, they used to, they were such an attractive couple and my mother was really pretty and, you know, she always had makeup and she was that, she was, had gotten an award for being one of the best dressed women in Atlanta [Georgia] at one point. And so I always really enjoyed watching them get dressed to go out. My dad was a pretty good dresser and, and so I always remember that smell of my mom's perfume, you know, getting dressed when they would go out. You know, the, you know, the sights I think are--I was always fascinated with downtown Atlanta when I was growing up. The Hyatt Regency hotel [Hyatt Regency Atlanta] in Atlanta which has this blue dome, at one point it was like the tallest building in Atlanta (laughter). You could barely see it now with all the other, you know, tall buildings have come up around it. But when we would go downtown I always remember the sight of the Hyatt Regency hotel and how grand it was. And I can remember the times when we could actually--a time when we could go up into the dome. I remember being able to go up inside that blue dome and that was just huge to be able to go up inside there. I mean those are some of the things I remember, you know, I remember most. I, I'm very--I love Atlanta a lot. And so just the--what I remember of the, sorry, I'm getting a little emotional about it think, thinking about home. But just being able to, to there are just a lot of scenes of Atlanta that are just, just remind me, you know, I had a great growing up. Story_ID: 476729 Speaker 1: The neighborhood I grew up in is called Collier Heights [Atlanta, Georgia] and it was considered almost it was considered a subdivision back then, back then. And it actually has a different, the technically has a different name the subdivision does, and I just can't remember the name of it right now. But the, the neighbors call Collier Heights and it's in northwest Atlanta [Georgia], just north of southwest Atlanta which, which is where a lot of black middle class at Atlantans grew up. And, but it was unique in that Collier Heights, when a lot of the black professionals that had lived a lot around the Atlanta University Centers [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia], Simpson Road, Ashby Street [Joseph E. Lowery Boulevard], that whole area, Fair Street all of that. When a lot of them moved out from that part of Atlanta they moved west and this particular neighborhood was one that where the land was acquired by all blacks. Black contractors, builders, built all the homes. And all the homes were owned by black, black people. So it had a very strong history in having been developed and built, constructed and owned by black people. Unlike southwest Atlanta which had been primarily white and when white flight occurred in Atlanta, a lot of those white families moved out of the city and blacks moved into those homes. Our neighborhood had, had always been built and owned by black people. So you had a very strong history of pride in that neighborhood. And you know we lived around the corner a few houses away from [HistoryMaker] Herman Russell, who, a very prominent and good friend of my family's and, and across the street from [HistoryMaker] Dr. Harvey Smith who was a dentist, across the street from Dr. William Shropshire [William Bruce Shropshire] who was a dentist, down the street from the Miltons, Mr. Milton [ph.] had been a banker in Atlanta. And we just had a, have had a, had a very prominent set of families who lived in that community. In fact, one of the stories that has come out or at least I've heard is that Coretta King [Coretta Scott King] wanted to move in that neighborhood. And they lived on Sunset Avenue in Atlanta. And I think it was Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] who said, who didn't wanna move in that, into that neighborhood and wanted to stay sort of in the neighborhood they were in. But it was, I think a real up and coming neighborhood for a lot of black prominent families, you know, in the late '50s [1950s] early '60s [1960s]. By the time I, I think my family moved into their home in about 1962 or so. And so that was just a year or two before I was born. And so, so I, my upbringing was always around black people that I, I never knew a time when I didn't see or wasn't surrounded with black people that were prominent or successful, or doing well. I didn't, not that I wasn't exposed to others, you know, I, you had a wide range of, of people I was exposed to, but in terms of who, who, I was mostly surrounded with, it was primarily black people that were always doing well. And so I never had a thought in my mind that black people didn't have the ability to do well and be successful. That was never something that entered my mind. In fact, when I go to cities where I don't see that strong black middle class, it's, it's hard, it's harder for me, you know, (laughter). I don't even, I can't fathom that. And I struggle it, with my own children [Madeleine Stewart and Savannah Stewart] in that I want them to always have that constant exposure as well. But, but so I always feel like I was, I grew, I was able to grow up in this very, very fortunate set of surroundings. I mean we, we were not rich, by any stretch of the imagination but we lived a very comfortable, I had a very comfortable way of living. And, and my sister [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] and I talk about this all the time. And we, I felt, we, we always knew we were blessed, you know. We always felt we were blessed. And, and felt very fortunate to have been able to be in the family that we were in and have the kind of exposure we had so. Story_ID: 476730 Speaker 1: So can you describe family life, what it was like and-- Speaker 2: So family life was, was, was always a lot of fun. My father [Albert Miles Davis] worked a lot. So he wasn't there a lot. So it was really my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] who was really there to, to raise us. And she did a great job. I think it was tough for my mother because I think really, you know, she had been this smart, beautiful, attractive, could have done anything in her life, kind of had all the promise available to her but at that time, you know, she grew up in a time when men really wanted their wives to be at home and raise the kids and do, be, sort of be more like that. She, when she was a pharmacist early on when my, my mother and father were married, my dad want--did (air quotes) let her work (laughter) as a pharmacist. She worked at Grady Hospital [Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia] as a pharmacist for a while after she left the, the Dr. Hackney's [Richard C. Hackney] pharmacy. But soon he really wanted her to stay at home and that may have been, you know, right before my older sister [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] got--came, was born and all of that. So she spent most of her life at home with us. And, but she had a lot of help at home. She had a, she had a housekeeper. When my father had gotten divorced and was a single man, single doctor living by himself, he had a housekeeper, Margaret Jenkins [ph.], who cooked for him, helped clean the house. You know, I can't imagine what this must have been like. He lived a life that was more like white people lived, you know, like I've got my own home and I live, I have a housekeeper. And then he had a housekeeper and so when my--when he married my mom, you know, he kept the housekeeper. So my mother had this great life, right. I mean I can't, you know, there's not a lot of black people that live (laughter) like this, right. And I'm not, again, I'm not saying they were wealthy but just to, you know, have, you know, have a husband who's a doctor and have your own housekeeper and, that's a pretty good life, I think in some ways. But I think it was not all what she wanted because she had a lot of dreams for herself and, and knew that she was very capable of doing more. 'Cause I think that was very frustrating for her. So she, I think when my sister came along, and I'm guessing on all this, I think she was pretty happy to be the mother and kind of raising the child. I think by the time I came along, she was ready to get out and do something else. And so she began when I was a young girl, she got, she started being very active in the community. She became a very, very one on civic, sort of volunteer. She did a lot of work. She was on the board at Urban League in Atlanta [Urban League of Greater Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia]. She was very involved in a lot of civic activities. And became when I was, I think in elementary school, the first black woman to be the president of the Atlanta Fulton County League of Women Voters [League of Women Voters of Atlanta Fulton County] and that put her in a different sphere in terms of civic activities because the League of Women Voters was a white women's organization. And to be the first black woman to be the president of it, really she, began to be exposed to so many other prominent white women in Atlanta [Georgia] and they began, began to be exposed to her that it opened up a world of opportunity for her. She really made a name of herself. She, the, the League of Women Voters actually sued Fulton County [Georgia] while she was president for some, some issues that came up and she successfully won that lawsuit. Story_ID: 476731 Speaker 1: She made a name for herself as being a real steward of good government and that's what eventually that led her to a career in politics. And so by the time I was graduating from high school [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia], she was winning her first race as a member of city council in a race that no one that she could win because she ran against a man who had been a long-standing and very powerful member of the city council. He had been the chair of the finance committee in the Atlanta City Council. And-- Speaker 2: His name? Speaker 1: Q.V. Williamson. And he was a real powerbroker in Atlanta [Georgia]. And no one, no one had been able to beat him and no one--there, there was nobody, no one thought anyone could beat him. Q.V. Williamson though, ran into some issues, he was, he struck and I think killed a child while he was driving drunk. And that pretty much was the thing that, that, that brought his career to an end. And then my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] stepped into the picture and here this woman with, who was beautiful, smart, good government, I mean everybody got behind her and she won at large and at large the city council seat. So she needed the support from around the city, not just the black community but also the white community. Of course, she had it because she had developed these relationships. So, so, you know, so going back over my mother's life a little bit in my, and her influence on me, was seeing this woman really step out on her own and utilize all her time, all her talents, and her intellect to really do something that was really important. And I think by the time she began to do that, my, my father's [Albert Miles Davis] own feelings around women should stay in the house, I mean societally we were sort of breaking all that down. And so everything was sort of coming together, you know, during you know the '70s [1970s] and into the '80s [1980s], right. So, so I think time really caught up with her in a way that she was able to also catch up with it and sort of pursue things on her own. So she, now my mom stayed on the city council for twelve years and became one of the first black women to run a major campaign for mayor in 1993. She was in a race with Bill Campbell and Michael Lomax. And she came in third but she did a really good job and I, I think in many ways helped lay the groundwork for Shirley Franklin to be the current mayor of Atlanta. You know, at the, at the time I think Atlanta probably just wasn't ready for a woman to be, to be mayor and I think, I think after the heart ache of what they went through with Bill Campbell, I think they were ready for a change. Because I think the times of Bill Campbell as mayor were really hard on the city. And, so, so, you know, my mother to this day has a reputation for having been one, and, and ironically to, back to the issue with Q.V. Williamson, who had been this very powerful chair of this finance committee, during my mother's time on the city council she became the chair of the finance committee. And did a phenomenal job and, and, and really is recognized as having been one of the smartest people to have ever served on the Atlanta City Council. Story_ID: 476732 Speaker 1: I wanna go back to you growing up in this neighborhood [Collier Heights, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, and you went to with Mrs. Newnan (unclear)? Speaker 2: Ms. Hendricks [Annie Lou Hendricks], Ms. Hendricks (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ms. Hendricks. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was from Newnan, Georgia. Speaker 1: Newnan (unclear) okay (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's exactly right. Speaker 1: So Ms. Hendricks, so you, you went to nursery school and you skipped kindergarten. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So where do you go to first grade then? Speaker 2: So I went to first grade at the school which was, which was a part of my church as well. I grew up Catholic because my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] had been Catholic even though my father [Albert Miles Davis] was a Baptist and had gone to his parents' [Lena Miles Davis and Edward Langston Davis, Sr.] church, Friendship Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], my mother was Catholic because of her influence at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. And so we grew up Catholic. So I started going, my sister [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] had gone to St. Paul of the Cross Catholic School [Atlanta, Georgia]. I went to St. Paul of the Cross for first and second grade. And I guess this is something that's really interesting the school was a all-black Catholic school. It was a all-black Catholic church. Right, very close to our, to our house. I think I wasn't doing that well, I think it wasn't a great sort of environment for me in first and second grade so I eventually, my mom pulled me out of that school and I went to public school. But what's really interesting while I was in, at St. Paul, is that it's an all-black school but there are only two white girls in the entire school. And one of them was probably to this day one of the, one of my very best friends. I mean I, you know, if you ever think of in your life a friend that you absolutely loved and adored she was probably it. A young white girl named Leann Harper [ph.]. And so it's so ironic that of all of the people in this school, this young white girl would be the girl (laughter) that would be my best friend that I've, and the closest girl that I've ever felt close to in my life. We were very, very best friends. She lived in, she lived in a, a neighborhood that was sort of in between my neighborhood and the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]. She lived in not too far off of Martin Luther King Boulevard [sic. Martin Luther King Jr. Drive] and, and really not far from the hospital in which I grew up, in which, in which I was born, which was called McLendon Hospital [Atlanta, Georgia] which was a small private hospital that was owned by a black doctor, Dr. McLendon [Frederick Earl McLendon] long ago. And so she, I don't know a lot about her living and growing up but she, she lived in a black neighborhood and went to this black school. And so she was a very dear friend of mine and we used to spend time at her house, she would come over our house, we'd spend the night over each other's houses. And then I, I grew distant from her when obviously I moved to a different school [Margaret Mitchell Elementary School; Morris Brandon Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] by the time third grade. But just as an ironic thing that happened, later on I think when I was sort of in middle school, a babysitter, a woman that was close to us who had also been my babysitter, and I went to a mall in Atlanta [Georgia] and I was walking in the mall with this babysitter and I must have been, you know, about twelve or so. And I saw this girl coming towards me walking with a young boy. And I could see in the distance that this was this girl that I had loved in first and second grade Leann Harper. I immediately recognized her. And as she was approaching me she caught eye contact with me. And I could tell in her eyes that she knew exactly who I was just as I knew who she was. And she started walking towards me and as she approached me she may, she had been looking at me, her eyes turned away from me and she walked directly away from me. And it just stopped me in my tracks 'cause I was, I knew who she was. And I absolutely knew that she knew who I was. And I couldn't believe that she wouldn't even say hello to me, you know. And it just broke my heart. I mean I was crying, I was in tears I couldn't understand why she didn't recognize me. I, you know, I wanted to go up and say hi to her but she was sort of ignoring me. And, and that was one of my first experiences, I think of real racism. I think what really happened is she was walking with this young boy and I think she didn't want to recognize me. I think she didn't want to acknowledge that there was this black girl that she may--at least this is what I perceived was going on, she didn't want to recognize me. She didn't want to acknowledge me. And she certainly didn't wanna acknowledge me as somebody that had been somebody important in her life, like her best friend. Story_ID: 476733 Speaker 1: Now what year was this? How old were you when this happened? Speaker 2: I was probably twelve years old. So this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twelve years old? Speaker 2: So this would have been in the mid-'70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay. And that's not that long--I mean-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Maybe like six, seven-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --six years had passed. Speaker 2: Not, yeah. So, so that was a very painful experience (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How had she [Leann Harper (ph.)] come to go to that school [St. Paul of the Cross Catholic School, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: I really don't know. Speaker 1: That's what I find-- Speaker 2: It's really interesting. We know her mother--what just as interesting is she came to live in, well go to the school, is that she came to live in this neighborhood [Collier Heights, Atlanta, Georgia] that was an all-black neighborhood too. So I, I don't really know exactly how, how it was that she happened to live in this all-black neighborhood and goes to this all-black school. You know, I don't know if maybe her father had been black. I don't know exactly 'cause I never knew her father, I just knew her mother. Her mother was white, though. And so, you know, maybe there were issues that she was struggling with in her own life as I think about it. You know, I don't know and I probably will never know in my life unless she sees me and contacts (laughter) me. But, but I do remember that that was a very painful experience. And really tells you something about, to me it tells me something about when kids are so young we don't see race and color. We don't see that. But you definitely do see it and, and you see it as early as ten, eleven, twelve years old. And you, and somehow the, your environmental conditions start to create some issues or you start to hear what people are talking around, about and form some ideas around people that don't look like you. And sometimes they aren't good ideas. So, so that was pretty unfortunate and, and, you know, and I think by then I was starting to be much more aware of the issues around race and all of that. Story_ID: 476734 Speaker 1: You know, intuitively I think, you know, these, these are your surroundings and, and the I think the messages I was sent as a young girl around people that look like me are successful and can do well and have so much promise and opportunity like, I never for once didn't, I never had a thought in my mind that I couldn't do whatever I wanted to do (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: But the fact that I, you know, also didn't restrict myself to having friends that only look like me, I think it's very common for young, very young kids I mean I think kids bond with each other. My daughter right now is bonding with a little white girl that lives in our neighborhood. And, and, and it reminds me a little bit of (laughter) of, of maybe what I had gone (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: But again they don't, they don't see any of that. Speaker 2: They don't see color, that's right. Speaker 1: Just see that the love for each other and somehow they have a connection-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --that. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So anyway, by the way this little girl that my girl, my girl, my little girl is friends with has some sort of disability and has very, very thick eyeglasses and I, I have not asked her mother what, what the issue is but I suspect this little girl is probably a little bit ostracized by a lot of kids because she's got these very thick glasses. She's got some sort of vision issue and I find it so funny that my, my daughter's bonding with her. In, in some ways kind of showing her compassion for her I think so but maybe, I don't know. I'm probably reading too much into it (laughter) but anyway. Story_ID: 476735 Speaker 1: So this growing up and-- Speaker 2: And, and-- Speaker 1: And going to school in St. Paul [St. Paul of the Cross Catholic School, Atlanta, Georgia] was a really interesting experience for me. Speaker 2: Now, so where in the St. Paul, you went there until sixth grade is that-- Speaker 1: No until second grade. Speaker 2: Second grade and then where-- Speaker 1: And I went to public school. Speaker 2: Oh, that's right. Speaker 1: From third grade until sixth grade. Speaker 2: Now what was the public school? Speaker 1: It was Margaret Mitchell public school [Margaret Mitchell Elementary School; Morris Brandon Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. So Margaret Mitchell who wrote 'Gone with the Wind' was from Atlanta [Georgia]. And so I went to Margaret Mitchell Elementary School which was in, in, in north, in almost in Buckhead, northwest Atlanta (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now why the change? Speaker 1: Well, I, you know, I think honestly I, I think I, I think I wasn't doing as well at St. Paul for whatever reason as I, as my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] wanted me to and I think she thought the pub- this public school was probably gonna be a better environment for me. You know, one of the things that my mother--we just talked about recently is I, I had I had a lot of aptitude growing up. But I also had some issues around reading comprehension and so I ended up going to like tutors and other outside of school activities to increase reading comprehension. Speaker 2: Was there any dyslexia? Speaker 1: No, it wasn't dyslexia. I don't, I don't know if it was ever really called anything, maybe just other than just needing more help on reading, but the ironic thing is I did really well on standardized tests and I, after I went to a public school for 'til sixth grade I took the exam to go to private schools and did, scored really high and went to Westminster [The Westminster Schools] which is one of the best private schools in, in Atlanta. So, you know, I don't know what it, it may have been some sort of learning thing. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now had your sister gone to St. Paul's and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --then to public too? Speaker 1: Yeah. My sister, my oldest Stephanie [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis], had gone to St. Paul and she went all the way through in elementary school. And then-- Speaker 2: At St. Paul? Speaker 1: At St. Paul. And then went to, gosh this is really weird, went to middle school I think at, well she may have gone to St. Paul all the way through I need to just double check. She went to high school at Northside High School, which is now North Atlanta [North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia], but my sister was, had done very, very well, she was very bright. She won what is called the Journal Cup [Atlanta Journal-Constitution Cup], the Atlanta Journal [Atlanta Journal-Constitution] would give an award to the best all-around senior graduating from high school, she won the Journal Cup. She was named the top in her school. She went to Stanford University [Stanford, California] for college. She's really smart. She was on the homecoming court. She was a lot, lot like my mom with that homecoming court in high school. So she had a very different sort of coming up. She had gone mainly through, you know, spent more time in public schools than I, than I had and had done very well. And seemed to have--when I look at her growing up and mine up until high school, she seemed to have a much fuller experience socially and then academically than I did. I had--when I went to Westminster from seventh grade on, I left-- Speaker 2: Oh, so you went there in seventh then (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I started in seventh grade. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now-- Story_ID: 476736 Speaker 1: Talk about the Atlanta [Georgia] you were growing up in. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because we're in, when you go to what--Westminster [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia] are we in 1972? Speaker 2: It was seventy-- Speaker 1: Seventy-- Speaker 2: --it was like seventy--I was about, '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975]. Speaker 1: So what is the Atlanta that you are-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, a part of because-- Speaker 2: So this is just-- Speaker 1: --and that-- Speaker 2: --ten years out of the '60s [1960s], I mean, you know-- Speaker 1: Right Speaker 2: --out of like from 1964 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 2: --you know, to 1975, I mean it's, you know, it wasn't, it hadn't been to long before that Westminster had even been desegregated. So it wasn't like I was, I mean it was almost like I wasn't the total trailblazer but they hadn't, there weren't a lot of black kids-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and it was very hard. Speaker 1: Now who--with [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond was a big thing then too, wasn't he, I think (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, Julian had been, you know, in the state's legislature [Georgia State Senate] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He had been in the state, state legislature. Speaker 2: Yeah, in the state legislature. He was-- Speaker 1: Who else was around that you were away of? Speaker 2: Well, [HistoryMaker] John Lewis was very prominent. Maynard Jackson was, was our hero. You know, Maynard had I think just become mayor not to long before that, I think mayor, became mayor in, in early 1970s and was, was really the up and coming rising star. And, you know, up until Maynard died he was always viewed as a real hero. His first two terms as mayor were much more successful. But that part of Atlanta that, that time in Atlanta was, was still going through some growing pains. Atlanta as a city has always though been very, very focused on getting the relationships between black people and white people to be at least on the outside as healthy as they can be. Now there have always been underlying issues. But the leaders, the white leaders in Atlanta as well as the black leaders always worked really hard to present a united front. Because early on the, the leaders in Atlanta understood that the success of the city was gonna, was gonna be, was gonna rely on whether or not the city could, could be, could be presented in a way that said this was a city that was a welcoming city. And I think that's how Atlanta got such a reputation for being such a welcome place for black people, is that it worked really hard on creating an environment in which black people and white people could live peacefully together in that, and then you had had such prominent black leaders and prominent white leaders who were so well thought of not only in the city but nationally. I mean you had Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Maynard Jackson and John Lewis and, you know, and all of, a lot of the civil rights leaders. And then, you know, and then there were a lot of white business leaders who had not just a reputation in Atlanta to think about but nationally. Corporate leaders like the Woodruff family and all the families that had had helped to lead Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] and Delta Air Lines [Delta Air Lines, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] and a lot of, Trust Company Bank [SunTrust Banks, Atlanta, Georgia] and a lot of corporate leaders who, you know, had a pretty vested interest in, in the success of Atlanta. And, you know, there's a, there's a book about 'Where Peachtree Meets Sweet Auburn' ['Where Peachtree Meets Sweet Auburn: The Saga of Two Families and the Making of Atlanta,' Gary M. Pomerantz]. I mean there's a, there's a whole way of telling this, this story of the history of the City of Atlanta that really talks about how blacks and whites really came together in an important way-- Story_ID: 476737 Speaker 1: So when I went to Westminster [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia] it was, you know, part of an effort to really reach out and get more black enrollment at the school. The problem was is that the culture of the school wasn't really ideal for that. And so when I started in seventh grade and there was a girl school and a boy school-- Speaker 2: And this is 1974? Speaker 1: About '74 [1974], '75 [1975]. When I started there it was--there were several black girls that started in the seventh grade class, by the time I graduated there were only two of us. Most of the girls had dropped out, dropped out because they, they demanded that their parents take them out because it was such an uncomfortable sort of environment socially for a lot of black girls. The black boys seemed to do better, I think sports could bond the boys better together but the girls seemed to have a tougher time connecting with each other. And so socially it was very, very hard. My parents [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis and Albert Miles Davis], even though I wanted to leave Westminster my parents never let me leave 'cause they absolutely knew this was one of the best schools in the city and, and that I needed that kind of structure and disciplined environment to do well and so they, they forced me to stay. The other black girl that I graduated with was Kim Henderson whose father Vivian Henderson [Vivian Wilson Henderson] had been president of Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] at the time. And so she and I graduated together and, and I've, I've talked about this later in my life which is that Westminster taught me early on, some of the very important lessons that I've learned and applied later on in my life in white Corporate America which is that this--the environment isn't, isn't always going to be welcoming or accommodating for you but you've got really tough it out. And being one of a few or the only in a class or the only black girl or the only black person in an environment is--was something that I learned to deal with and cope with ever since seventh grade. And obviously I've had to apply those lessons later on in life. Story_ID: 476738 Speaker 1: So at this point in time that you enter West- Westminster [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia], what are you like as a young person? Are you quiet, are you shy, are you-- Speaker 2: I was pretty shy. I was a pretty, pretty introverted girl. And when I was in seventh grade it was, you know, that kind of very difficult time of adolescence and. My sister [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] and I both had scoliosis. And my sister's issues with scoliosis were, had been a lot worse than mine because my parents [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis and Albert Miles Davis] were not able to, and the doctors were not able to detect it early enough in her life. She ended up having, having to have surgery to correct it and it was during her tenth grade year was had a spinal fusion surgery to, to straighten her spine and was in a hospital bed in our house for most of her tenth grade year. Had--was home bound, had home teaching and all of that. Mine got caught earlier but I still wore a back brace for about three years. So from seventh grade to about tenth grade I wore a back brace, I had glasses, I had braces on my teeth, and I was in this environment that was already hard enough socially for black kids. So I was little bit of a mess actually (laughter) from seventh grade to tenth grade it was really, really pretty tough in trying, trying to deal with it and then academically very challenging environment. Just, it was really hard. Speaker 1: So, you know, the other thing it sounds like you had been in a nurturing, sort of nurturing-- Speaker 2: Oh, I was? Speaker 1: --everything had been very nurturing. Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: And then this was sort of a culture shock for-- Speaker 2: It was a culture shock. I mean the way I feel about leaving home and coming to work and then going from like one extreme to another or, is about like how I felt in seventh grade. I mean I'd go home and I could be comfortable at home in my neighborhood [Collier Heights, Atlanta, Georgia] and with family but I'd go to school and it was like go--for a lot of people like going to work. It was hard, you didn't really wanna be there. You know, it was uncomfortable and it was just tough. It was really tough. Story_ID: 476739 Speaker 1: Now, what, what did you also, did you learn in that environment? Because this is your first--your mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] had she been involved at this point in the League of Women Voters [League of Women Voters of Atlanta Fulton County]? Speaker 2: So yeah, she was really, that was a lot of when she was really coming into her own in terms of all the civic volunteerism all that. And I, during summers I would, and I would spend time volunteering with her. I mean she, if she had to go to Atlanta [Georgia], the League of Women Voters office, I spent many, many summers in the afternoons stuffing envelopes for the league. I mean she was really active with the Girl Scouts [Girls Scouts of the United States of America]. I spent time there, I'd go with her to the Urban League [Urban League of Greater Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia]. I mean she dragged me around to every single organization that she would volunteer with. And I spent a lot of time being exposed to her volunteer and community activities and that really was an--I think a really important influence on me. I, I think my and, you know, on the other hand my father [Albert Miles Davis] was exposing me to all of his work as a doctor and I was being, you know, seeing all of his work outside of his medical office with his community activities and, and so I had this real, you know, sort of understanding of--I had school, but then I had these parents that were really involved in, in the city and community things and so and, and I saw them being successful professionally and so I was beginning I think to form these thoughts around having a life in which I was professionally successfully but also very involved in the community and always figure out a way to give back and improve my community. And so that became a very important way of, of me understanding life, I think. And, and I think that those were some important seeds that were planted for me in terms of my own life. Story_ID: 476740 Speaker 1: Now are you active in other organizations when you're at West- Westminster [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia], I don't know why I'm having trouble. Are you, are you active or what are you, what are your-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What are you good at in school, I mean, you know, you, you're in an awkward phase, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, very awkward. So I was a pretty, I was generally a pretty good student. I mean I was a B, B plus sort of student at Westminster. You know I always think had I been, maybe if I had actually gone through kindergarten instead of skipping it maybe I would have been a better student 'cause I, remember I was sort of ahead. I was a year ahead and so, and so I always, I felt like I was working harder to, to, to do the B, B plus kind of work that a lot of kids were knocking out A's in. But, but, but I was--so I was generally good in both in sort of English and math. Wasn't great in science, didn't really enjoy science which is sort of interesting that I had two parents whose, whose careers both my mom [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] with chemistry and my dad [Albert Miles Davis] with biology having been a doctor. Science was not my thing. And I did enjoy math. And, and, and so that was something that was really important to me. My mother also kept me very involved in outside of school in Girl Scouts [Girls Scouts of the United States of America]. And so I really wanted to drop out of Girl Scouts by the time I got to high school. My mother made me stay in the Girl Scouts until I graduated from high school. And it was, it was probably one of the best things that she ever did because I needed some balance to the white girls that I was in school with that I really kind of wasn't bonding with and not socially connecting with. I stayed connected with these black--this black Girl Scout troop. Some of the girls, I still see and talk to, to this day. In fact, there are couple of 'em that go to church with my mother and she sees them every once in a while. But these girls were, today they're all like doing very well in their lives, they lead really important and successful lives in Atlanta [Georgia] doing all, have good families. And that Girl Scout bond was, was something that allowed me to stay connected with a really terrific group of black girls. And taught me something as a, you know, about, about, about life. I mean as a Girl Scout you, you develop some really good qualities and characteristics and I think that was an important connection for me. Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now were you a Brownie that became a Girl Scout or you got (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I never was a Brownie. I start--I was really a junior when I became a group went to cadet and senior and so, you know, but there are very few, by the time we got to be seniors there were, when you start as juniors with like twenty or thirty girls by the time we got to seniors there was only like six or seven (laughter) of us but we were like a, we were a strong little band of six or seven girls and the mothers that helped to make that troop be, stay intact were really committed to us. I also was very involved in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]. Jack and Jill is a really important part of my life too. And so my mom I think knew socially that I needed some other ways in which to stay connected with, with black kids when I spent so much time with white kids that I wasn't connecting with. And so Girl Scouts and Jack and Jill were a very important part of how I was able to maintain some level of social happiness so to speak, I guess, during that very difficult period of middle school and through high school. Story_ID: 476741 Speaker 1: So seventh to tenth [at The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia] you have the effects of scoliosis. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now was that was hereditary of any sort (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think so. Speaker 1: Why would-- Speaker 2: It is, it is genetic and so genetically passed and so my mom [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] I think has, had it, and so, you know, it's something that I need to watch out for my own daughters [Madeleine Stewart and Savannah Stewart] but my mom, my sister [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] and I both had it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, and the brace, the back brace--and my sister had something that was called a Milwaukee brace which was a brace that these big metal bars that are in the front and the back and it ties and then it's a big thing and it comes up here and sort of supports and hold up your neck like this, right. And then, but I had one that was more it was called a Conti brace [ph.], Conti or Ponti brace [ph.], I think. And it was more like a corset and it would still the bars but it was not as obvious so you could wear it almost under your clothes. I mean people you, people would know you had it on, but it was not as, not nearly as obvious. But I had to wear it for three years so it was just pretty tough, so. Story_ID: 476742 Speaker 1: What are you thinking you're wanting to do or be at this point? You know wait, wait tenth grade let me understand. So tenth grade the brace comes off? Speaker 2: Tenth--oh. Tenth grade the brace came, comes off and now I had braces on my teeth. I was sort of, you know, then like more like sixteen, seventeen year old kid. And it was almost like I blossomed. You know, it was like, you know, it was like I had gone from little ugly duckling to, you know, a kind of pretty little girl, you know, pretty young girl. And, and so I kind of started to have boyfriends and then was really a lot more active socially. I had lots, lots of friends that went to high schools in other parts of the city. And that was a pretty fun, fun time in my life. 'Cause even though I was still going to Westminster [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia] and working hard and, and, and then school seemed to be going a lot better for me I think. I still was doing the I go to school just like you, you get up and go to work and then your life, your fun personal life is in other, somewhere else, right. And so mostly my life was go to school at Westminster, with all the white people and on the weekends hang out with all your black friends in southwest Atlanta [Georgia] (laughter). That, that was sort of my life from eleventh grade to twelfth grade. And so, and so to, and if, most of my fondest memories of high school come from that period of time. When I had, felt like I had a little bit more balance. And, and had better ability to manage my own social life with my work, school life. Speaker 1: Now is your social life set up, you know, through Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], through your mother's [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] and your father's [Albert Miles Davis] affiliations, who are the families, you know, who are your friends that are emerging out of this? Speaker 2: So there's a couple of things. My father, we went to, we on summer vacations we always went to Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina]. Because our summer vacation was built around my father's going to, attending the Georgia State Medical Association meetings (laughter) every year. It's not like we ever took vacations, this was my father who was like a workaholic, right. We, we never really took real vacation like everybody stops working and goes and rests. My father would--we our vacation was my father going to the Georgia State Medical Association meetings, him being in these meetings all day with his doctor buddies and then we'd go out to dinner every night. But during the day I don't really even know where my mother was, I mean I'd be hanging out with a bunch of these kids of these doctors and those were a lot of my, a lot of my friends were the, were other kids of other doctors. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Will we know some of their names? Speaker 2: --summer vacation in that way, yeah. Speaker 1: Will we know some of the names? Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh. Let's see. Who can I (unclear) that well, there are lot of 'em, I don't even know if a lot of 'em are living but like Dr. Warner Sessions [ph.], Dr. Herb Bland [ph.], and then there were other, other doctors in other parts of the State of Georgia. In fact, a woman that is friend, I'm friends with Empira Washington [ph.] I used to always see in Hilton Head, but most of the, most of the doctors that had kids my age were, were the doctors that whose kids I was friends with and played a lot with. Speaker 1: But you have a sense that you are having a privileged life in some respects? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 476743 Speaker 1: Now are you still going to Catholic church? Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or not-- Speaker 2: No, no. I, you know, I, so my relationship with the Catholic church is sort of has gone, has been up and down. My mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] is a devout Catholic still. I never really felt like I really even quite connected with the Catholic church through high school [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia], it was more like it was forced on me. So even though I ended up going to a Catholic college, I went to a Jesuit college, Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.]. It wasn't, I didn't really go there because it was Jesuit, I went there because it was in Washington [D.C.] and I began to under- I began to feel when I was graduating from high school that having a career around government and politics might be something I might, be interested in. And so, and I just felt like given my family's interest in politics and current events, going to school in Washington really seemed like the--seemed like a great fit for me. And so I ended up going to this Catholic school but my relationship with the Catholic church was not that strong. And so when I was in college I really didn't even go to church. I really didn't even have a relationship with church at all. And then I went to business school [Stephen M. Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and it was kind of the same thing. It wasn't until my early thirties that I really reconnected back with even developing more of my own spirituality and really connecting with the church. And when I, and when I was at that point I really didn't wanna connect back with the Catholic church I really connected, wanted to connect more with my father's [Albert Miles Davis] church. And so in my early thirties I joined my father's church which was Friendship Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] where my grandfather [Edward Langston Davis, Sr.] had been a deacon and my father was active and my mother--grandmother [Lena Miles Davis] was very active. And, in fact, I was married one time before my current marriage and I got married in that church my, the, my first marriage. Reverend Guy, William Guy [William V. Guy] was the pastor who married, [HistoryMaker] Jasmine Guy who is an actress, her father married us. And, and I thought I would be a Baptist. And, and that kind of continued, I'm not sure I really connected too much with that church in a way. I moved to Washington and when I got the job to move here to be the head of the Fannie Mae Foundation and I did connect back with the Catholic church 'cause I really felt, I hadn't really strongly bonded with the Baptist church, Catholic church had been what I had known from all of my growing up and I thought well maybe I should go back and try Catholic church. And so I actually had started attending a church in Southeast Washington, D.C. called Our Lady of Perpetual Help [Our Lady of Perpetual Help Catholic Church, Washington, D.C.]. And I met a priest there, Father Lowell Case who is my dearest friend to this day, one of my dearest friends. Ironically he ended up marrying my current husband [Jarvis Stewart] and me at, not in Catholic church but at a, in at Trinity College's [Trinity Washington University] Notre Dame Chapel [Washington, D.C.]. And, but my husband who is Baptist, who grew up Baptist was never gonna convert back to Catholicism. And so I now am a Baptist (laughter) back to being a Baptist and he and I attend Shiloh Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.]. So I've gone back and forth from Catholicism to, to, to being a Baptist. And, but what's happened throughout all that, and this started in my early thirties, is I developed a very strong sense of spirituality around God. And so for me it's been less about what church I'm affiliated with or what particular religion I'm affiliated with. What's strengthened me is a belief in God and a strong development in my own spirituality which I've worked really hard on. And so, so that's what really kept me strong and sustained me you know through, you know, through my thirties and, and now. And I think that's what gives me, gives me the most strength. Story_ID: 476744 Speaker 1: When you decide that you're applying to school, let's go back there. How do you end up applying to George- [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.]--I mean who, what, who did you apply to first? Speaker 2: So, let me go back to, to, to high school [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia] which my senior year in high school going into my senior year in high school in September, early September I was, my sister [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] had just graduated, this was 1980, my sister had just graduated from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] in May of 1980 and she was living in Oakland [California] with her boyfriend. They were soon, they were gonna be getting married, gonna be getting engaged. They were very, had been dating a long time and he was from the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay, California]. And she really wanted to stay in the Bay Area. My mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] and father [Albert Miles Davis] really wanted her to come back to Atlanta [Georgia]. She wanted to stay there. So she was working for AT&T [AT&T Inc.]. She and my, she and her boyfriend, her boyfriend's sister and, and his sister's boyfriend, so four of them took a trip to Lake Tahoe. They were driving from Oakland to Lake Tahoe. And this is early September so just a few months after graduating from college. And they were in a Toyota, in a hatchback Toyota, the back was down it was late, like early in the morning like one or two, you know, midnight, one o'clock in the morning or something. My sister and her boyfriend were laying in the back of the Toyota asleep, the other boyfriend and the sister were in the front. And the man who, the boy, the boy that, the guy that was driving, they were driving through the Sierra Nevada mountains, the boy that was, man that was driving fell asleep. The car went over a cliff and the Toyota hatchback, the hatchback opened up and my sister and her boyfriend flew out of the car as the car was rolling down the cliff. And my sister's boyfriend landed on his feet and broke his ankle. My sister landed on her head and broke her neck. Story_ID: 476745 Speaker 1: So she was thrown out of this car and somehow it was, you know, they were, someone came to their rescue. Of course, the two people in the front were not hurt at all. I think the girl that was in the passenger's seat had, you know, a gash on her forehead and the man who was driving was not hurt at all. And so somehow they were found. She got, they were near Truckee, California or were taken to a hospital close to Truckee, California. Her, my sister's injuries were so bad that she had to be airlifted to Santa Clara Valley Medical Center which is in San Jose, California, which has a spinal cord injury division or part of the hospital. When she was in Truckee, California is when my sister's boyfriend called my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis]. And that call came in at three o'clock in the morning. And it came in, we had two separate lines, one line for me and my sister and the other line for my parents. And so the call actually came into my bedroom. I picked up the phone and it was Ralph [ph.] who was my sister's boyfriend. And Ralph asked to speak to my parents. I went and got my mother, now while my father [Albert Miles Davis] was not there, my father was actually in Washington [D.C.] visiting my sister here and her son. So my mother came in and all I can remember it was three o'clock in the morning and I think I sort of dozed back off, my mother was crying, she didn't really talk to me about what was going on, she said, "Stephanie's [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] been in a bad accident," but, of course, I had no idea what that meant. I think she did say she broke her neck. I had no idea what that meant. I was sixteen years old, I didn't know what it meant to break your neck. You know, when you hear people say don't, you know, "You're gonna break your neck," you don't know how serious that is. I didn't know how serious it was. I think I dozed back off 'cause it was like four o'clock in the morning. By the time I woke up, it was six o'clock in the morning and my aunt was at our house ready to take my mom to the airport. And so I went to the airport with them, my mother left and was basically gone for the next six months. And this was just a few days from me starting my senior year in high school [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia]. We had to call my father to get him to come from Washington. I went and picked my father up from the airport brought him home. He basically broke down crying trying to repack to get his clothes so he could get back on a plane to go to California. I think my father stayed out there for just a little bit 'cause he had to come back to deal with his practice. But my mother stayed out there with Stephanie and lived in an apartment with a woman who had a daughter or child in a similar situation. So all this was going on, my sister was in some sort of rehabilitation but it was already looking like she would never walk again. And I go into my first, you know, time back in as a senior, as a senior trying to figure out my life and in this very difficult situation at home. I think I lived with my aunt and my uncle for a little bit while my parents were away and then when my dad came back I was back at home with them but I was pretty much on my own because my father worked so much. So it was a--and so and dealing with my mother and my sister in California and so I went out to, we'd go out to visit with them when I could. I remember visiting during the holidays. Trying to struggle through, you know, senior year in high school and struggle through what to do with colleges and just a lot of emotional stuff going on with family and it was just very, very--senior year was very tough, very tough. And so I remember going to--being out there for the holidays and I took some college applications out to talk to my family about like what I should do and all of this stuff. My father jokingly wanted me to apply to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] just to see what Morehouse would do (laughter) with the application. And I had it, I was gonna do it, somehow the application mysteriously disappeared. I don't know what happened all of sudden I couldn't find it when I was out there. I think my mother like (laughter) trashed it or something. Anyway I think some, somewhere during in the kind of the February, March time frame or something I think was when my sister came back to Atlanta [Georgia]. And, you know, we were then trying to figure out how to redo our whole house to deal with, you know, her having to be in a wheelchair. We actually redid our house to have an elevator in the house. To this day my, my house today has an elevator because of my sister. But we had to change everything we had to build a ramp in our house, we had to make a lot of renovations in the house. Story_ID: 476746 Speaker 1: On the college front by the time I, I did apply to colleges I applied to Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] and some, it was sort of a random sort of pick of colleges. I had no rhyme or reason to where I went to college basically. And-- Speaker 2: But you wanted to get out of Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 1: But I knew, I knew that it was I, I really I applied to, it ended up being Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.] and, and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And I really wanted to go to Spelman actually. And I was gonna being going in the honors program at Spelman and going into Georgetown. And I sort of flipped back and forth between the two of 'em and I eventually decided to go away. And felt that, you know, I really need to go away to college because I felt like if I stayed at home I would, I wouldn't really grow as much as I, as I wanted to. But that period was one that was really hard 'cause I felt like I was making a lot of these decisions on my own. And I'm not criticizing I mean I also felt like I needed to make them on my own because I shouldn't be imposing so much on my parents [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis and Albert Miles Davis] 'cause they had so many other issues to deal with, with my sister [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis]. So I felt like it was probably better for me to make these decisions on my own and not, not burden them with it. So, you know, it is what it is. I ended up going to Georgetown. I'm not sure that was the best decision for me but it was, you know, it's, it's a good school and I, I think, I think had I been a little, I didn't make a lot of visits to a lot of campuses to see it and I wish I had, had more of an opportunity to do that 'cause I probably would have picked another, another school, but-- Speaker 2: So, you say that because why? Because it was too large of an environment for you? Speaker 1: I-- Speaker 2: Because? Speaker 1: I think the Catholic influence and the Jesuit influence was a lot more, was way more conservative than I wanted than, than the kind of environment I would have wanted for myself. Georgetown was a school where you had basically a lot of northeastern Catholic kids and a lot of international kids. And anybody else that fell outside those two categories was sort of out of the loop, or, you know, you know, a black kid from the Southeast was like, you know, there were, there weren't many of us around. It just was--it's a very, it just wasn't as diverse an environment and in again the Catholic influence was very conservative. I had also started forming some thoughts around the Catholic church and some of the political views the Catholic church they weren't in line with my own and so I just for a number of reasons didn't feel that the that Catholicism was where I belonged. So it just, you know, the environment at school was also really hard. Black kids they, they had a hard time then creating an environment in which African American kids could really feel comfortable. And so there were a lot of issues there and so I just felt it was not a great environment for me. Speaker 2: I understand. Story_ID: 476747 Speaker 1: So this is 1980-- Speaker 2: Eighty-one [1981]. Speaker 1: Eighty-one [1981]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And now how are you, how was your family managing all of this? I mean this is a major, major-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, your parents [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis and Albert Miles Davis] are handling a serious injury of their child [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] and then you're in the point, you know, where you're a young adult-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, looking for her way sort of. Speaker 2: So I think in many ways I, I think we didn't receive, I think my family, I think we could have done more to--for all of us to get more counseling around how to cope through that period. I think our coping mechanism was just to power through. I mean just keep going, keep pushing, keep driving ahead with whatever your thing was. So for me it was go to college [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.], you know, live, go on with my life keep living, keep moving. For my mother, my-- Speaker 1: Isn't she running for-- Speaker 2: My mother ran, my mother ran (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Had ran for city council [Atlanta City Council] then. Speaker 2: My mother was elected to city council in 1982. So she did, did all this, you know, right on the heels of my sister having had this terrible, you know, accident. My sister took the LSATs within a year of this accident and went to law school [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia]. I mean maybe it's just like bizarre when you (laughter) think about it. When you think about it, it's like our way of dealing--and my father just continued in his practice and continued to do what he was doing. I mean I just I think it was almost (unclear) our way of coping, our way of coping with this kind of tragedy was just to keep pressing on. And I'm not saying that's a good thing, I'm saying it, but it was just our, maybe it was just our way of doing it. And I, I do know that I think that as a family we didn't, I think we could have done more in terms of family counseling. 'Cause I think it then, I think as a family, and we're very close, we've always been really close, but I think you know it's just anytime somebody goes through that kind of tragedy that you kind of need to do more in terms of sort of healing and, you know, sort of coming together and sort of working through some of the emotions around it and the heart, and the hurt around it and I don't think we did that. I think we just said, "Just keep working, just keep going." And I don't know it's kind of crazy, but you know, but you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That-- Speaker 2: --but you know we get through that, you know. You just people, you know, you find you have amazing strength when you, when you, when you deal with these kinds of ordeals, you know. Story_ID: 476748 Speaker 1: But your sister came back to live in Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yeah, she, yeah. And she still lives in Atlanta (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At that point-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she really needed to. Speaker 1: So the whole--the community came out to support her I would take it. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I mean, you know, people to this day look at my sister like I mean I look at her like I can't believe she does what she does, you know. She's just like amazing. She's got, you know, I think it's been hard for her. And I think, you know, emotionally, you know, it's taken a big toll on her, you know, but she's an amazing person. Speaker 1: That's amazing. Speaker 2: She really is. Speaker 1: (Cough) Excuse me. Speaker 2: She really is. Speaker 1: I'm getting over a cold. Speaker 2: No, I know. She, she really is been a quite a role model for many people. And, you know, quite an inspiration for a lot of people who, you know, you think about things you're dealt in your life and then I'm not even gonna begin to tell you, that was just the beginning of her issues. So, you know, remember she had scoliosis in high school [Northside High School; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia] and was in bed for six months with this with a cast from her, from her chin down to her knees and did, had to be home schooled as she healed. Then she had the car accident and then she, you know, she had, she's had bouts of cancer, she's had an issues where, you know, bed sores because, you know, a lot of people that are in wheelchairs, you know, if they don't do enough weight shifts will, will get bed sores and or, you know, pressure sores basically. So she has to deal with an enormous amount, you know. She has a--and, you know, you wonder like how, how much can one person take in their life. She's, she's managed to make it through a lot, so. Speaker 1: And she's still, is she still a judge? Speaker 2: She's a judge in Atlanta. She just, she was just in the paper, she just, you know, I don't know this, this guy who was accused of, of--who people thought at one point was the killer of JonBenet Ramsey that Mark Karr [John Mark Karr] guy. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He was just in her courtroom. She was just in the paper for giving him six months of domestic violence counseling 'cause he's, he was abusing his girlfriend or something else (laughter). She shows up in the paper with, with these kinds of crazy cases. She's a magistrate court judge. And she's, you know, she's, she's amazing. She's brilliant. She's very smart and funny as can be and has the funniest personality. My kids [Madeleine Stewart and Savannah Stewart] love her to death. They just you know, Aunt Stephy [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] is like the best and they're fascinated with her wheelchair. They're just and, and actually for them it's--they look at people that are, have certain disabilities differently (crying). Speaker 1: Than the typical, right? They're accepting. Speaker 2: Very much so. Speaker 1: Okay. Gosh, that's a lot. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: I mean I can't believe that anyone--you're going off to school [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.], your sister's had this major accident, your mother's [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] running for city council [Atlanta City Council] and your father's [Albert Miles Davis] a busy doctor. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Did your father have any guilt you think over your, you know, or did he was he able to bring the best resources, you know, that he knew to, to your, your, your sister's care? Speaker 2: Oh, I think there's no doubt it helped us tremendously to have my father as a doctor be able to help with her care. You know, I wouldn't say it's guilt, but I think you could just say imagine as a parent, you know, how painful it is. And, you know, even though my sister has accomplished more than anyone could ever dream anyone could accomplish even everything she's had to deal with, you know, I think it, it will always hurt that, to see your child now have to endure that. Speaker 1: Now what happened to her boyfriend? Was that a hard thing for him? Oh, my god. Speaker 2: He's gone (laughter). Speaker 1: He's gone, okay. Speaker 2: He's gone. Now, I think, you know, he was twenty-two years old I mean-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --he's just graduated from college himself and starting his own life and I think though they were very much in love I think it was too much for him to handle (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Too much, I understand. And the person who was driving that would have been horrible. Speaker 2: Who knows? Oh, gosh. You know it--my, my family did-- Speaker 1: File a lawsuit (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) hire a lawyer and, and they did find some fault through, with Toyota [Toyota Motor Corporation], actually. And, and so, but I think the, the driver, you know, basically had no resources and there was no--right now I don't even know if anyone could find him or knew where he was or any of 'em. It was just no point of going after, after him for that. But, but we did hire a lawyer and I think, our family did and pursued legal action that ended up helping in a way, so. Story_ID: 476749 Speaker 1: Like how many black students were there at North- at I'm sorry, Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Not a lot. I think the, you know, the black population probably wasn't even 5 percent. And so that was, you know, that was very hard. You know the good thing is Georgetown's in Washington, D.C. so there was enough of a vibrant black community here at Washington. But one of the things I always said is having come from Atlanta [Georgia], it will be hard for me to go live in Des Moines [Iowa] or some (laughter) you know, it's kind of hard to leave that environment of, of where you got this strong vibrant black, you know, culture to a place that, that doesn't have that at all. And so part of my attraction, the attraction to Washington, well, there's actually a few things, one is that, you know, I felt the family connection here, my great-grandparents at one point had lived here. I had a sister [Vicki Davis] that, two sisters that lived here at the time. My other sister [Julia-Ellen Davis] that is now in Charleston [South Carolina] had been living here for a little bit. I had--so I had nieces and nephews. I had cousins here. And my father [Albert Miles Davis] had gone to medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] here. So there was a, you know, I, I, felt like Washington had, we had a very strong sort of family connection here. So I felt like if I was gonna be away from Atlanta, then Washington seemed to be a good place for me to go. And so that was, and so Georgetown was the best school in, to me in Washington. So that made it, that was logically how I thought about it. Story_ID: 476750 Speaker 1: Now how did you choose economics as a major? Speaker 2: So I, you know, I somehow in my early part of college, I sort of began to be interested in math and economics and banking. I worked I think the year after my sophomore year in college one, one summer in the year that made me, it may have been before going into to college. I worked at a bank in an internship program. I worked at First Atlanta Bank [First Atlanta Bank, N.A., Atlanta, Georgia] which is now Wachovia [Wachovia Bank, N.A.] and I worked at a branch (laughter) of a bank. And I, you know, how you walk into a branch and there's customer service people well, I, I was did one of those jobs. I was like seventeen or eighteen years old. I became a customer service representative. I worked with this woman, it was a black woman who was the branch manager. Who was--who took me under her wing and she showed me everything there was about working in a bank. And during that summer, I, I was opening CDs [certificate of deposit] for customers I, you know, I was doing banking. I was like being a customer, I had no training, I was just basically out of high school [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia]. And it was really fascinating to me and I thought that's really interesting. After my freshman year of college I actually did something I'd always wanted to do which was be a lifeguard (laughter) so I did that for one summer. But after my sophomore year I went, I did another internship at First Atlanta again, but I did it in the corporate finance department downtown Atlanta [Georgia]. So it was more like a real professional job. And then, and then I sort of really understood that I really wanted to major in economics and finance. I was real interested in banking and so. My, the, my summer between--I used my summers to, to pursue internships to really, get more exposure to it. In between my junior and senior years at Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.] I applied for a very, what was then a pretty prestigious internship with Chase Manhattan Bank [JPMorgan Chase and Co.]. They had an internship program for minority students and they picked the best and brightest minority students to participate in this very, a very rigorous internship program where you went through a training piece of it, an educational piece, and then you did sort of an on the job piece. And most of the students that were selected came from all the best schools. In that year a guy who's running, who's helping run a private equity firm in, right now in Dallas [Texas] who went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] was in that class. Pamela Thomas-Graham who is the former head of CNBC, who is now head of Liz Claiborne [Liz Claiborne Inc.], was in my class at, at Chase. We just had some extraordinarily bright people in this--and it was only like twenty some of, twenty or so of us in this internship program. So it was a real honor for me to have been a part of that. And that really launched me then to continuing to sue--pursue a career in a banking. Speaker 1: Now who was the--was there a high ranking black person at Chase at that time? Speaker 2: There was a guy named Jim Young [James E. Young] who is now president of Citizens Trust Bank [Atlanta, Georgia] which ironically is the bank that was my father's [Albert Miles Davis] bank and when my father moved his practice to Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia], it was in the Citizens Trust Bank building. Jim Young was who hired me for this internship program and later on became head of Citizens Trust Bank. So again I have these things that come full circle in my life, these things that continue to, to echo themselves, but Jim Young, you know, kind of was a mentor for me early on in my career. Story_ID: 476751 Speaker 1: Did you go straight to business school or you took some time off [after graduating from Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: I went to straight to business school which was not what most people in business do, go to business school do because most business schools really do want you to have some work experience. But by the time I had so many internships in banking and then was majoring in economics I pretty much knew that was the track I wanted to go in. And no one in my family had really pursued banking or business at all. I had, you know, my sister [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] was a lawyer, my father [Albert Miles Davis] was a doctor, and everybody was sort of more going in those routes. My father really wanted me to go to law school and I was not at all interested in law school. Speaker 1: And why did he want that? Speaker 2: Because that's what, that's what he knew. He either knew medicine or law and that's, those are the paths you go in and everything else is sort of fuzzy for him. And I said, "No daddy I really wanted business school. I really wanna go to business school." And at, I really wanted to go Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] it was where I really wanted to go. And, you know, at the time Harvard was really, you know, very particular around people that didn't have work experience as a lot of the big schools, most of the best schools were. And so because he had never encountered that sort of taking off time to work and then going to school and his belief was if you took time off you would never go back, he was adamant he said, "Look I don't care where you go to school, but you're gonna go to school as soon as you graduate." And so I applied for schools and I ended up getting into some good schools with no work experience. And so it came down to Columbia Business School [New York, New York] which at the time was ranked fourth or so and Michigan [Stephen M. Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] was ranked sixth in the country. And I got a fellowship to go to Michigan through the Consortium for Graduate Study in Management which is a program that helps blacks and Hispanic students attend business schools. And so I got a full fellowship to attend Michigan ranked number six, and no financial aid to go to Columbia, and by the way since I was the fourth child my father wasn't gonna help me pay for graduate school he was sort of tired and tired of paying for everything (laughter). So he said, "By the way you're on your own but you need to go to school." So I said, "Fine I'll just go to Michigan on this full fellowship." And again, didn't really visit Michigan didn't really know anything about it, knew it was a great school and so that's where I ended up going to school. And I felt like I had just, even though I knew Michigan had this great history and people loved Ann Arbor [Michigan] and my father's best friend, Snub [James B. Ellison, Sr.] had gone to medical school in Michigan [University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan]. Everywhere I had people in my life there were so, "Oh, you'll love University of Michigan. Oh, it's great. As a black person you'll love going there." I, when I showed up on campus to--I went there actually a couple months early to find a place to live, when I got there I was just like horrified by just how it was so different from Atlanta [Georgia] and from Washington [D.C.] and kind of more urban settings. Ann Arbor had this kind of more semi-rural, you know, Midwest sort of feel to it. And I was just, I just broke out in tears thinking oh, my gosh I can't believe I have to spend two years of my life here, this awful place. Turns out that Michigan was my most favorite school. I love Michigan. I mean I appreciate Westminster [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia] for what it taught me and how it prepared me for life but Michigan was the place where I felt most comfortable and I felt like was the best environment. I felt successful, I felt that it was just a fantastic place to be in school. And, you know, while I was there it was cold as--I can never describe how cold it was to go to school there. But I became head of the Black Business Students Association. It was where I developed a lot of my leadership skills and did well in school and just loved being there. And Ann Arbor I've been, since I've gone back to speak at the business school at graduation and, and it's just I love that school. And I love Ann Arbor. Speaker 1: Now was-- what you said his name, at Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.], Jim (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jim Young [James E. Young]. Speaker 1: Was he influencing you at all during the dec- you know, to make the decision (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I stayed in touch with him periodically I think it wasn't until I started at Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we--he became head of Citizens Trust Bank [Atlanta, Georgia] and we were doing business with Citizens Trust Bank that I kind of really reconnected with him (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 476752 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what are you learning in business school? What what, what is it that you're learning? I mean you had a very strong, you know, you know, sort of business training background with economics. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So what did that experience, how did it add to what you had experienced to date? Speaker 2: Well, I think it gave me a lot more exposure to business over all. I mean I had basically been exposed to economics and, and banking. I think this gave me a much broader view of business. And Michigan's [Stephen M. Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] very strong from a general management perspective. So I got exposure to marketing and corporate strategy which I loved. Still love. And so it gave me some exposure to other parts of business that I had not been exposed to. And so even though my concentration was finance and that's sort of what, where I knew I wanted to end up, I began to be exposed to other areas that I was actually pretty good in too. So that was some great exposure. What also happened when I was at Michigan is that's when I began to be aware of investment banking. And if you remember the late '80s [1980s] that was really the hot time for investment banking and everybody's trying to work on Wall Street. And I thought that that would be where I would wanna go too. But I wasn't really interested in corporate finance and mergers and acquisitions and all that stuff. And I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which is the hot thing and (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Which is what was the hot thing. That's what everybody wanted to do. And in fact I spent my summer between my first and second years in Michigan working for Citigroup [Citigroup, Inc.] in the leveraged buyout group. And that was a very hot area doing all the leveraged buyouts and, and, and all of that. But when I was my, early in my second year in business school there was an alumni panel discussion, a lot of Michigan alumni had come to talk about investment banking. And there were, I don't know if there were seven guys, and they were all guys and they were all white guys, six of them were talking about corporate financing, mergers and acquisitions and leveraged buyouts and now blah, blah, blah. And I wasn't interested in that. And I kind of knew that wasn't really, you know, I had a good summer doing it but I didn't really wanna pursue that as my career. There was one guy talking about public finance and that really caught my eye because that was then for all of my life and what it had meant to be thinking about a career in finance and banking and economics all that, but this public sector focus which was all about how I had been raised around community and having, you know, concern and wanting to contribute back to community and being concerned in, in local government and all that stuff that my parents [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis and Albert Miles Davis] had really exposed me to. I finally heard about a career that brought those two together. So it wasn't financing for corporations to buy out the corporations and make a bunch of people rich. It was all around financing to build bridges and roads and schools and hospitals and solid waste facilities and all these things that I just thought this was great. And so it immediately clicked. I mean it was like all I needed to hear. And I said, "That's what I wanna do is public finance." Ironically what had happened is my mother because she was chair of the finance committee of city council [Atlanta City Council] was exposed to all these guys and all these people, men and women that were public finance bankers. And so I called her and I said, "Do you know any of these folks that do public finance?" And she was like, "Yeah, I know a couple of 'em." She gave me a couple names to call. But then I, on my own cold called people in other firms that, I don't know how I got their names through an alumni contact or So and So said they knew somebody and I just cold called people. And I would call people and say, "Hi, my name is Stacey Davis [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart], I'm a student, I'm an M.B.A. student at Michigan. I found out about public finance I think it's really interesting. I think this is what I really wanna do in my life. Can I just come to New York [New York] and meet you? I wanna learn from you." I mean that was basically what I would call people. I never had one person turn me down. Story_ID: 476753 Speaker 1: And they didn't feel a need to come through Michigan [Stephen M. Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], why, why come all the way to Michigan when you got Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] and Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and all these other places on the East Coast. So, so I had to force my way into meeting with some of these guys. And I did. And on my trip to New York [New York], I had a friend who lived in Brooklyn [New York] so I stayed with her. I had a full round of talks and meetings with people one day, got off the subway, had never been on a New York subway before in my life got off the sub- by myself but had gotten off subway in Brooklyn, late '80s [1980s] not a good time, lots of crime, lots of drugs. Some guy mugged me, he took my briefcase I had, you know, it was like when women used to wear their briefcases with the straps over your shoulder (laughter). He mugged me pulled this, pulled my briefcase off, my wallet was gone, of course, this was before the days where you had to show security to get on a plane. Ended up my wallet was found in Queens [New York]. A very nice woman in Queens sent my wallet back to me in Michigan, that's another long story. But I had a very crazy time trying to get this job in, in New York. I'm thinking about pursuing a career in New York on Wall Street. Anyway I ended up through these cold calls I ended up getting a round of interviews with Manufacturers Hanover bank [Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company], which doesn't exist anymore or is now a part of some other bank now. I ended up getting an offer from them to go in their public finance group and an on campus interview. When you get on--when you're in business school you go through a lottery system to get a chance to interview with firms on campus. Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management] was coming as I mentioned to interview for sales and trading jobs, but not for banking jobs. Well I ended up getting the number one lottery slot for Merrill Lynch on campus. Lottery, total luck. And the day before the interview I debated whether or not to take the interview 'cause I didn't wanna waste their time 'cause I knew I didn't wanna do sales and trading. But at the same time Merrill Lynch had the number one public finance group on Wall Street and I, and I thought well I could take it, the interview and tell 'em I really wanna do public finance because this is my only shot at Merrill Lynch or I could not take it and give it to somebody else who really wants to sales and trading. And there was a guy who cornered, kind of after me to get my number one slot, another student who wanted my slot. And I finally decided you know what I'm just gonna go for it and take this interview and tell 'em I really wanna do public finance. So I get in this interview with a, with a guy who's from HR [human resources] and a junk bond salesman who are both doing the interviews together. And they started giving this junk bond salesperson interview and me about junk bonds and all this stuff. And I, and I said, "You know what I have to just tell you I don't really wanna do junk bonds sales." And they said, "Well what do you wanna do?" And I said, "Well I wanna do public finance," and they said, "Okay. We'll give you the public finance interview." And I was like, "Great." So I interview with them on campus, they thought I was great. I ended up getting two rounds of interviews in New York. Well, by this time it was like February or March of my second year and you really, and you're graduating in May and you really need to be telling people, either having an offer or telling people that you're either gone take an offer or not 'cause if you're not they need to give it to somebody else. Well, I had worked at the Citigroup [Citigroup Inc.] the summer before, Citigroup had already given me an offer to come back to work in their leverage buyout group which I didn't wanna do. And I kind of strung them along waiting to see if this public finance offer would come through. So I had the Manufacturers Hanover offer but it was with a bank and it really wasn't an investment bank, it was a depository and that's sort of okay but not great. But that was sort of, I was probably gonna take that over the Citigroup one if that's all I got. But when the Merrill Lynch thing was going I was like number one group on Wall Street. Oh, my gosh if I can get the offer. Well, they kind of strung me along a little bit too to a point where literally I had given Citigroup a deadline of the day that I needed to tell them that I either was gonna take the offer or not. And I decided that I wasn't gonna take the offer and I need to tell them that but I still hadn't heard from Merrill. So I declined the offer from Citigroup without the offer from Merrill in hand. I had Manny Hanny [Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company] over there but it was, I was like, ugh. And the very following day I came home to my apartment and on my answering machine was, "Stacey [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart] just wanna let you know this is so and so from Merrill Lynch. We'd like to extend an offer to you to come and work in public finance." And that was total, I was totally going on faith. I mean to totally give us this thing that is a sure shot with the Citigroup with is not a bad place to work, to hoping that this thing with Merrill Lynch would come through. And it did. And so I went to work for Merrill Lynch. Speaker 2: That's 1987, right? Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-seven [1987]. Story_ID: 476754 Speaker 1: I took the Series 7 exam [General Securities Representative Exam]. If, if you remember the black market crash of October of '87 [1987] started on the Thursday or it started on the Friday and really crashed on the Monday. I took my Series 7 exam on that Friday. So my, my entrance into the securities industry happens on the day when the total market crashes (laughter). And there were tons of layoffs on Wall Street and all this stuff. But I survived and I worked at Merrill [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management] for three years and had, those were some of the best three years of my life. I then decided to move back home to Atlanta [Georgia]. I really wanted to move back home and I, I had worked for a, a guy who was just opening an office of the largest minority owned investment banking firm in the country at the time, Pryor, McClendon, Counts [Pryor, McClendon, Counts and Co., Inc.]. I worked for a guy named Ray McClendon [Raymond J. McClendon] in the new Atlanta office with Pryor, McClendon. Speaker 2: And Pryor, McClendon was one of the main people was Malcolm Pryor? Speaker 1: Yeah. Malcolm Pryor. Yes and Allen Counts [Allen W. Counts] and Ray McClendon were the three big partners. And so I worked in investment banking in public finance for five years and it was fantastic. It was a great experience. Story_ID: 476755 Speaker 1: But after five years of doing it, it was really hard work I mean in New York [New York] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can you talk about what the-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --industry is like. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And who were the key players at the time. Speaker 1: Well, they were all, you know, Frank Raines [Franklin D. Raines], was one of the key players. And that's when I first met Frank was actually on Wall Street. I was a young associate and he was already a partner at Lazard Freres [Lazard Freres and Company LLC]. But like Jimmy Haddon [James F. Haddon] and Jeff Humber [Jeffrey L. Humber] at Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management], would--eventually became my boss at Merrill, was very prominent. Bill Hayden [William H. Hayden] at Bear, Stearns [Bear, Stearns and Company, Inc.]. I mean Ron Gault [HistoryMaker Ronald T. Gault] at First Boston [First Boston Corporation]. And they were just a lot of folks that--Mary Ann Spragens [ph.], that did very, very well on Wall Street. And at that time if you did well on Wall Street you were probably in public finance. I mean since that time, you know, we've been able to do, there was, there were some folks, that was also beginning where there were some folks on the trading side that were doing very well. So I have a good friend named Tracy Maitland who now runs Advent Capital Management [Advent Capital Management, LLC]. A guy named Paul Viera [Paul E. Viera] who runs a very successful assets management firm [EARNEST Partners, LLC] in Atlanta [Georgia]. I mean these were all people, John Utendahl who has his own firm, was at, started at Merrill and has his own firm. So a lot of these folks that are doing so well now with their own either investment banking firms or asset management firms were folks that I had started off in my career with. And, and, and but for the most part most of the more successful names were folks in public finance. And public finance was a booming sort of business. You know, after I left public finance it really started to take a downturn I mean the, there were more restraints put on the industry. Speaker 2: Can you talk about that though? Because-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --really a lot of it is you're soliciting public, I mean municipalities, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. I mean a lot of-- Speaker 2: Oh (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) politicians. Yeah, it was, and this is a little bit why I'm glad I got out of it because it, it got to be a very tough way to do business and there were to many ways that people could find unethical ways to do business, both the bankers and the politicians. And I think any time you solicit politicians for business I mean well I have a, I have a mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] who was a politician so I don't mean to be you know critical of all politicians, but it you, you just create an environment in which there's too much potential for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Set for abuse. Speaker 1: --something can go wrong. And unfortunately things did go wrong and there were a lot of people that abused the system on both sides, the banker side as well as the elected official side. And I think for the, for those reasons you know the regulatory authorities decided to put more constraints on the industry. And you saw fewer issuances and more rules put in place around what, what was possible in terms of political contributions and things like that. Story_ID: 476756 Speaker 1: Who were your clients, who are a few of teams you worked on? Speaker 2: So I worked for three years for example with, in bond financing in Michigan. I did a lot of work back where I had gone to school [Stephen M. Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan]. For three, I did all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Would, would that have been in Detroit [Michigan] with Coleman Young? Speaker 2: In Detroit, I worked exactly with Coleman and Bella Marshall was the finance, chief financial officer for the city at the time. I worked for the--on the general, general bond obligations for the City of Detroit for a few years. I worked for bond financing for the Michigan State Building Authority on jail financings in Michigan. I worked on bond finances in the, in the State of Indiana. I worked on, with the Indiana Bond Bank authority on bond financings to support the relocation of, of auto manufacturers. Subaru and Isuzu [Isuzu Motors Ltd.] plants in the State of Indiana. I worked on housing financings for the State of Ohio and other states in Michigan, in Georgia. So a lot of my work was on general public finance and, and also some in the area of housing. And then I did some work in Washington, D.C. with Jeff Humber [Jeffrey L. Humber] with airports authority, bond financings, and some other deals too. Speaker 1: Now when you worked with Jeff, how long had he been with Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management]? Speaker 2: Jeff had been with the company for, I don't know maybe seven or eight years. He had been the director of finance and revenue and sort of for the City of Washington and sort of really was well thought of here in Washington and was sort of commuting back and forth between, you know, New York [New York] and Washington. Had a home in Washington which he's, which he's kept and also an apartment in New York. Story_ID: 476757 Speaker 1: My other boss was Aida Chinloy, who is the only woman that I've ever worked for in my entire career. A Filipina woman who, who I stay in--I just talked to last week. She is a, she's still in investment banking. I can't believe it. She works for Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.] now. She's a manager in, managing director there. Still, still going after business and, and doing it, doing, doing that hard work. But she--and she was a big influence in my life. I had never, never had a woman. Most of the mentors in my career have been--and bosses have been men. Speaker 2: Well, you know, also this is '80s [1980s], women have a lot of pressure. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: I remember in the '80s [1980s] you know, people would say things like, you know, maybe I'll buy a house or I'll have kids, you know, there's a lot of-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --pressure. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: You know it's a very hard business, right? Speaker 1: It was very hard. And, and since I had gone from undergrad [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.] to grad [Stephen M. Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and then directly into business, into Wall Street, most of the other first year associates I start with at Merrill [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management] were twenty-eight, twenty-nine, I was twenty-three. And, and so I was, I was as young as the analysts. I was as, I mean the analysts and I were the same age. But I was with the associates so I was expected to bring in business and go after business and all this stuff and I was twenty-three years old. I was really young. So that made it really hard for me. And I think it brought an early end to my investment banking career 'cause I, I worked, you know, I had to work sixteen, eighteen hour, twenty hour days, you know, six days a week (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what people have to realize. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I had did it for five years and so by the time I got to be not even thirty I was burnt out (laughter) of that, you know. I was, you know, I still felt like I had a great career and I was, and I was doing well but it was just five years after doing something like that just really kind of, you know, I was ready for a change. Speaker 2: Because it's not only the, you know, it's the client, you have to do a lot of the client interaction, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: A lot of evenings, weekends-- Speaker 1: A lot of evenings, weekends, you know, I had to deal with an issue around sexual harassment and, you know. Yeah, it's not a good, it's not a great environment for a young woman. Speaker 2: Was that disappointing to you, though? I mean you-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --have identified the, you know, this area and had really been pretty aggressive about-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --pursuing it. Speaker 1: It wasn't disappointing to me because I felt like after five years I had really done all that I wanted to do with it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I mean and, and it was, it was beginning to take that turn to, you know, where getting the business was hard. You put yourself in too much risk in terms of dealing with elected officials in ways that could be, you know, there were people at other firms that were going to jail. I just felt like, you know, what this is--there's like really a better place for me I think. I mean it's, and so I, and so I thought, you know, and this is how I got to Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] which is, you know, out of the blue a headhunter called and says, "Hey there's a job at Fannie Mae," and I didn't really even understand Fannie Mae. All I knew it was like, it was a financial institution but it had this public sort of mission with it. And then when I got into it I realized, wow, that's a lot like what I've always said I wanted to do any way was be involved in finance but have sort of some sort of public aspect to it that was why I got into public finance. So that's how I got into, got into Fannie Mae. Story_ID: 476758 Speaker 1: So when you said you were investment banking in the public finance area for five years that's between Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management] and Pryor [Pryor, McClendon, Counts and Co., Inc.] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. And now wasn't--at that point in time Maynard's [Maynard Jackson], didn't he also get involved in public financing? Speaker 2: Yeah. So Maynard started his own firm. Jackson Securities [Jackson Securities LLC] after he left being mayor, obviously (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it--so what year was that? Speaker 2: So that must have been in the early '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's-- Speaker 2: That was the early '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: That's about just really the time that you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --are joining Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association]. Speaker 2: Yeah. When I, when I joined Fannie Mae it was 1992. So Jackson Securities probably started around that time. Speaker 1: Okay. How (simultaneous)--- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pryor, Pryor, McClendon was benefited greatly from, from Maynard being mayor. Pryor, McClendon during that time that I was in the Atlanta [Georgia] office became this senior manager investment banking firm for the city's largest airport bond deal at the time. At the time it was the largest senior managed bond deal ever done by a minority owned investment banking firm. It was really, Maynard really helped put Pryor, McClendon on the map in that way. Speaker 1: And how many people were at Pryor, McClendon? Was it based in Atlanta? Or was it in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, actually it was based in Philadelphia. The Atlanta offices where Ray [Raymond J. McClendon] was I didn't, I didn't do any work related, relating to the business that the firm did in Atlanta. I actually did work in other parts, I was based out of Atlanta but I did work, I worked on a deal in New Jersey, I worked on deals in other parts of the country actually, St. Louis [Missouri] and other, other, other parts of the country. Part of that was because my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] had been an elected official and we wouldn't want to create some real, and even though I was in Atlanta working for firm, it was, we wanted to be clear that I wasn't doing any of the work with Atlanta, so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you wanted to create some separation? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay, well that's smart. Speaker 2: And, and I don't know you may, you may or may not know this but, but Ray was found guilty of some, I don't know the exact charges but wire fraud or something and this was a very painful piece of sort of after I left the firm he was indicted and then received charges and I was coming to Fannie Mae and, and he was about to receive a sentence and he served his seven years in jail actually. Speaker 1: Now what was the--what were the charges? Speaker 2: Technically I think it may have been wire fraud were the charges. But it had to do with the firm's securities trading with, this is the City of Atlanta. And, and there was a jury trial and they found that there were some things that were not being done properly between Pryor, McClendon, Counts and, and the City of Atlanta. And so there was an official at the City of Atlanta who also went to jail too. So that was a really--but at the--it was also a time in which a lot of minority owned investment banking firms were being-- Speaker 1: Investigated. Speaker 2: --investigated. Speaker 1: Okay, who were the top players-- Speaker 2: I mean the Grigsby, Grigsby Branford [Grigsby Branford Powell, Inc.] and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know even M.R. Beal [M.R. Beal and Company]. I mean there have been a lot of investment-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --banking firms, minority owned to have gone through something similar. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, you know, for me it was, that was obviously, that was not anything I wanted to be around. I did not want my career to be at all around any of that. Story_ID: 476759 Speaker 1: You know, there's a lot of debate among a lot of us around why, why was all that going on? And sad to say (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Why the investigation or why the (unclear)? Speaker 1: Why so many investigations and why so much targeting. Speaker 2: Basically--do you think he was really set up or you think that it's--'cause part of it is the nature of the beast. Speaker 1: Part of it is the nature of the business, I mean I can't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause you have to wine and dine officials, you know. Speaker 1: And the political contributions and then there were rules that were put in place to limit a lot of that, but, you know, you could look at a lot of things in our society and say I wonder why there's so many black people that are going to jail? Why are there so many, I mean, you know, you're not gonna say that there are, that we're not in some way committing crime or there's some wrong doing but at the same time, you know, I mean it's a lot of debate we have in our own community around are we being, are we disproportionately targeted for things or are we disproportionately being, you know, really actually doing these things (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I don't know what the answer to that is, but I know I lot of us believe that there's a lot of targeting that goes on. That, that's not to say that there's not a lot of wrong, wrong doing. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I'm not, I'm not also suggesting that but, but I do think-- Speaker 2: Now, when that, when that happened with McClendon [Pryor, McClendon, Counts and Co., Inc.] what--was that in the midst of the, the airport deal? Speaker 1: It was after the airport deal. Speaker 2: It was after it, okay. Speaker 1: But I think, I think, when I think, I think that put the firm on the map and elevated its visibility. And I think a lot of times when that happens it creates, you put yourself as more of a target. And I think after that there were a lot more eyes on the firm and a lot more questions and so. Says something about being black and visible. Story_ID: 476760 Speaker 1: How had they come together Pryor, McClendon [Pryor, McClendon, Counts and Co., Inc.]? So Pryor [Malcolm Pryor] was based out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Yeah, out of Philadelphia. Speaker 1: And McClendon [Raymond J. McClendon] was based out of-- Speaker 2: Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Atlanta. And then Counts (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then Allen Counts [Allen W. Counts] was in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, so Malcolm and Allen had been friends and had this partnership and there was a guy named Greg Govan [Gregory Govan] who had been the other partner. And then Greg got out of the partnership. And I think they were looking for a new partner and Ray had worked at Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] for a while and left Fannie Mae and then I think he was kind of doing some things on his own and I think this opportunity to become a partner with them kind of presented itself. I don't know this is really before I joined the firm. And that's when the firm renamed itself and reconstituted itself as Pryor, McClendon and Counts and opened an Atlanta office and really expanded it. And really was, you know, the number one investment banking firm, minority owned. Was doing more business than any other and so the, the firm was doing quite well. Speaker 1: And that you think did quite well for how many years would you say? Speaker 2: I would say at least ten to twelve years they did pretty well. And then, and then things didn't go as well. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is, what is McClendon doing now? Do you-- Speaker 2: So Ray, I've talked to him. He's working for, you know, I think he's pursuing a lot of opportunities I mean one of the things he's doing he's working for Atlanta Interfaith Broadcasting [AIB Network] it's a--it's a nonprofit broad, broadcasting firm and he's helping to do some marketing for that firm. But I think he's pursuing a lot of other business interests as well. Story_ID: 476761 Speaker 1: How did Pryor, McClendon [Pryor, McClendon, Counts and Co., Inc.] differ from Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management]? You know it was black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --it's black. I just wanna have an idea of culture? Speaker 2: Yeah. So Merrill was obviously big, bulge bracket player, Wall Street able to be better positioned to be senior manager and the lead banker on lots of deals. When you go to a minority owned investment firm you're really dealing more as a niche player. I mean yes, there's an option you become a senior manager on some bond deals but usually it's gonna be some issuer that's willing to, that has a real interest in diversity and real interest in wanting to extend itself to do business with more actively with minority owned firms. More often the minority owned firm is gonna be a co-manager meaning, you're just gonna be one of a group of firms and you're not gonna have a lot of leverage in the deal and not make as much money. So you tend to not be as profitable and tend not to be sort of directing the, the deals as much. You know, where at the time where a lot of minority owned banking firms really tried to push to was being co-senior manager so that if Merrill Lynch was in the lead, a minority firm could be sort of the co-lead and be in a little better position of leading the deal. A little bit more lucrative positions. But and that, so that sort of grew to that over time. Some investment banking firms also serve as financial advisors and that, that sometimes was another business opportunity. But, you know, it's, it was a tougher business because you're not, you don't have the kind of resources and people and all of that. Typical of any small firm. But, but it also was something where you get a lot more exposure than you might if you were in a big firm 'cause you, you're doing everything (laughter) right. So I find it, I found it to be really interesting and really it was a lot of fun. It was a lot of fun. I just really got the lifestyle which is, got a little too hard for me (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I understand. And then the other thing is that a lot of these opportunities were opening up as they were more black mayors and more blacks-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in political positions. Speaker 2: Had it not been for more black elected officials the minority owned investment banking firms would never be able to get to the point that they've gotten to at this, at this point. And now obviously it's a lot more accepted around doing business with minority owned investment banking firms and they have a lot more expertise as well. But, you know, it was Coleman Young and Harold Washington and Maynard Jackson and David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] and all these mayors and that were the ones that opened up the opportunity and took the risk to say, you know, "We need to be doing more business," and understood the impact of that. And so created a real, a real opportunity for, for blacks on Wall Street to really do, you know, incredible things. And then from that, we've been able to do, now you got blacks that are involved in private equity and involved in all kinds of different ways on Wall Street. But it, it really started with public finance in, in a big way. Story_ID: 476762 Speaker 1: Now the life cycle for a deal how would, how long would it take for your average deal from start to finish and then what was the percentage that you would get you know paid, was it-- Speaker 2: So you get paid on a per bond amount. So if, so if it was a $100 million deal there are a 100,000 bonds, you get paid a certain per dollar amount per bond. And then there was usually a management fee and some amount of fee to underwriting and, and as deals got more competitive the fees get whittled down. You could, if it's a really big deal you can make a few hundred thousand dollars, the firm could. And on smaller deals less so. Sometimes on smaller deals with a smaller issue you had the ability to negotiate more because it takes as much time and effort to put together a small deal, than it does to put together (laughter) a big deal sometimes. So, in order to make a small deal make sense you really had to negotiate a little bit more. But in order--the, the deals could take it, it just it depends on when you, when you look at it. I mean most, the process for a deal usually is that the issuer will identify a need that they need bond financing for, that can take months. And then by the time they get to an RFP [request for proposals] they may give, you know, several weeks for responses to that. Several more weeks for, to identify who the firms are and then depending on how complex the deal was it can take two or three months to structure it and get it ready to come to market. So, you know, you're not doing a deal a week. And you're not doing a senior managed deal a week. I mean if you were a banker and you did five to ten senior manage deals in a year you, that's pretty good. I mean that's, that's pretty good. And if you're a co-manager on another ten to twenty to thirty deals I mean that's, you know, that's a good year. That's a lot of work, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it's, it, if so it's, you know, it's, but it's all the, the, the way those deals work is so unpredictable, right. Because the decisions are in the make- in the hands of elected officials there may be other lots of political stuff at play it may not be one decision maker, it may be a whole city council. So you gotta figure out who are all the decision makers and how do you get to them all or is it the mayor. Is it the mayor and the chair in the city council, you know it's, it's very, it's fascinating in that way. And then is there a financial advisor? Do they have a role? How much influence do they have? Sometimes bond counsel has, you know, influence over how the decisions get made. So you gotta get to know who the bond counsel is. A lot of times the bond counsels are law firms that are located in that, in that city so they kind of know who's who and all the relationships, so you end up knowing them 'cause they sort of have an inside scoop on everything. And so, you know, it's really, it's just fascinating. Speaker 1: So who were some of the key bond counsels back then, do you remember? Speaker 2: Well there's some minority owned ones like Lewis, White and Clay [Lewis, White and Clay PC; Lewis and Munday, PC] was a big one in Detroit [Michigan]. But all of the big law firms usually served as bond counsel. I mean and, and depending on which state you're in it's gonna determine which, you know, like in Ohio it might be Squire, Sanders [Squire Patton Boggs]. And Indiana might be Ice Miller [Ice Miller LLP]. And you know it's, so it's just, so you go to different bond firms in different states and, and they may have more of a stronghold on the business that gets done in that particular state. Story_ID: 476763 Speaker 1: So Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] was started in 1938 to really restart the, be a part of restarting the economy after the Depression [Great Depression]. It was part of the New Deal. It was set up to really buy FHA [Federal Housing Administration] insured mortgages and as a way of providing it, making it sure that there was a constant supply of credit for people that wanted to buy homes. That model really proved to be pretty successful. By 1968 we were spun off as part of the government into a private company but that still has a government congressional charter. So what that means is that we're a private company, our stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange [New York, New York], shareholder owned company but we have to operate within a charter that has been granted to us by [U.S.] Congress. And that charter basically says is that our, our role is to, to provide housing, a supply of housing finance to low and moderate income and middle income families who want to buy homes and want, and need housing in, in America. And so that's really our public charter. Now, there's a lot you can do in that charter but that's pretty much it. I mean we can't go off and extend credit for boats and cars and student loans and all that. But Fannie Mae was really created to be in the housing market. And so when I got a call from a headhunter about an option here at Fannie Mae, I didn't know about, I didn't really know much about Fannie Mae. I did some research on Fannie Mae but I just--it sounded like an interesting job. And by that time I was sort of thinking well, maybe I need to, I wanna start looking beyond just investment banking, you know, there are other things I'm interested in so let me try to think if there's something else I wanna do. And I, when I started looking at Fannie Mae and this was a new job that was created around public affairs I just thought it sounded interesting and I thought that Fannie Mae sounded very consistent with the way I've seen my career anyway. Financial institution that's doing something public, around the public good. And so this job was the, the job that I ended up getting hired for was around public affairs. It had a little bit more of a politics government sort of thing to it. But it was a new job that no one had had so I thought well, you know, that's sounds interesting. You get to shape it and be a part of something that's kind of new. Jim Johnson [James A. Johnson] created, Jim Johnson was the former chair and CEO of Fannie Mae and created this new position, really as a way of getting Fannie Mae out of Washington [D.C.], you know. Fannie Mae was such a Washington institution but it's required to do business in every single part of this country. I mean part of the charter is in good markets and in bad Fannie Mae has to make sure that that liquid supply of mortgage financing is always available. And so, so that means we have to be in every state in the country at good times and bad, every congressional district. And here we had a congressional charter and many members of Congress didn't even really understand who we were. So it was part of an effort to try to extend the experience and the knowledge and the impact that Fannie Mae could have across the country in a way that was never possible just by doing it from Washington. So that was part of my role, was to understand the needs of congressional members housing needs, their housing needs in their districts and understand how Fannie Mae business could connect to contributing to someone's housing needs. Story_ID: 476764 Speaker 1: That morphed into a different role which was being promoted to vice president of all of our affordable housing efforts in the Southeast and we began opening offices throughout the Southeast to focus more intently on housing issues in various parts of the country. I opened our first partnership office in Baltimore [Maryland] to really focus on housing needs for primarily low and moderate income families in Baltimore. I opened eight other offices in the Southeast from Florida to Maryland, in Kentucky and all across the Southeast. And so we dwelt with a lot of issues from urban housing to homelessness to rural housing to rental housing as well as, as for sale housing. So it was really--and it was also during that period of time that Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] started to build out more tools to really do more in affordable housing. 'Cause up until, up until that sort of I got hired, Fannie Mae had really been viewed more as a company that provided financing to middle income families. And when I started at Fannie Mae, Fannie Mae pioneered a product really the low down payment mortgage that reduced the level of down payment needed from 20 percent down to like 5 percent then down to 3 percent. And when that happened, that opened up an entire market for people whose primary, you know, obstacles to buying a home was not having enough money for down payment. So now people needed less money. That meant more minority families, more low income families could achieve home ownership when they never thought they could. The company also began an outreach campaign to help minority families and low income renters understand that home ownership was, in fact, indeed possible. And so we started this outreach campaign with television advertising and radio, and television, primarily television advertising and home buying fairs to reach out to millions of people to talk about how they can get on the path to home ownership, how they can get on the path to repairing and establishing good credit. Then they eventually moved into avoiding being a victim of predatory lending. And so I was a part of all of this evolution of the company to really redefine itself as being a company that wasn't just about serving the needs of middle income families but really serving the needs of low and moderate income families, immigrant families, minority families. And to me that was, that was all, that was what I really wanted my career to be around, about, was how do I take the power of financial institution and really make a difference for communities and for people. So I think if I had to think back to my, you know, my being in college at Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.] or even my growing up, it sort of all ties together for me because this is exactly what I feel like I was hearing and listening in my early years, connecting it to--through school to my career. Story_ID: 476765 Speaker 1: Did Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] have any, any push back in its move, you know, to enter these different markets or were-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --was that not the case-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and I'm just wondering in the context because this is, you know, really you're talking about the period from 1990 to the 1999-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And at that time isn't Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], he's-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Well, Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] mainly. Speaker 1: Clinton, oh, it's Clinton. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. It's, okay, that's right. Speaker 2: We were in pretty good economic expansion-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --times which made it-- Speaker 1: Easy. Speaker 2: --which made it good and easy for people to wanna buy homes. The economy was good, more people employed. So it made it possible for home ownership and housing to be made available. So it was all started coming together at a really nice time for the country. So Fannie Mae became a very successful company and made a lot of money in-- Speaker 1: In those seven years. Speaker 2: And so to come back to another theme, like any time you make a lot of money and you become highly visible you gotta watch out (laughter). That's the one lesson I learned in my life. It's not that you shouldn't make a lot of money, you shouldn't be successful, but if you do-- Speaker 1: You have to be careful. Speaker 2: --you have to be careful. Because there will be people coming after you. And that's what happened with Fannie Mae. Speaker 1: And you're talking about under the leadership of-- Speaker 2: Well, then Jim [James A. Johnson]. Speaker 1: When did Frank Raines [Franklin D. Raines] start-- Speaker 2: In 1990--he started in 1998. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Late '98 [1998], early '99 [1999]. Speaker 1: I see, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Kind of that was, he transitioned in late '98 [1998] to early '99 [1999]. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And so and then I got hired, he hired me to come and work at the foundation [Fannie Mae Foundation] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At the foundation, I see. Speaker 2: So I had been at Fannie Mae already since 1992. Speaker 1: Right. Okay. Speaker 2: And but remember I had known Frank from my, my days on Wall Street when he, when I was in Atlanta [Georgia] he was the vice chair of Fannie Mae. He left to go be head of OMB [Office of Management and Budget] under the Clinton administration for a few, a couple of years, few years. And Jim Johnson knew that he was gonna be retiring out of Fannie Mae, he was about to approach his tenth year. And, and that was when he asked Frank to, to be his successor and that's when Frank came back to the company. And, and so, so Frank was coming in at a really high time for the company. The company though also was, you know, I never really know for sure if anybody that's successful is always arrogant or if sometimes the arrogance just comes with success or maybe it's a little of both. But the company was also being accused of being pretty, a pretty arrogant company. And I think there's some legitimacy in that. I think the company was enjoying a lot of success and really felt like it could determine the way it wanted to do business and can dictate that, that, that to others. And I think that was not a good way of doing business. And the company now is having to try to rethink that and redo it a different way and it has taken a whole different approach now (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now-- Story_ID: 476766 Speaker 1: Fannie Mae's [Federal National Mortgage Association] competitor is? Speaker 2: Freddie Mac [Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation]. Speaker 1: Freddie, which there is-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it's the two Fs. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right. Speaker 1: And it's really the mortgage-backed-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --securities. Speaker 2: Yeah. But I also think that what, over time what happened in the mortgage markets is that this combination of Fannie Mae saying, "Well we want to do business our own way," created a sort of way for the lenders that would sell loans to Fannie Mae to say well, "If, that's the only you wanna do it we'll find other people who wanna do it a different way," and the Wall Street firms really became another option for them. So instead of selling loans to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, some of them said, "Well we'll go and, and securitize our loans on Wall Street and that's another outlet for us." 'Cause basically all they wanna do is, if they're originating a loan they don't wanna necessarily hold all those loans in portfolio in the bank, they wanna sell them off. Well, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are only gonna do it the way they wanna do it, you know, they found Wall Street firms that said, "Well, you know, we can do it this way and that way," and that was one piece that, of things that evolved. And then another thing that we've seen now, right now we're experiencing the real brunt of is that because Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac would only buy certain types of loans and we're, we're not inclined to buy the most risky types of loans, lenders that saw an opportunity to originate riskier loans, primarily to people who didn't know any better like lenders who would take advantage of minority communities and, and originate loans that were subprime when the borrower didn't have bad credit or somebody had bad credit and they charged, you know, unusual fees to originate the loan, loans that were probably not done properly, underwritten properly were still getting originating, originated. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were not outlets for those kinds of loans and Wall Street then became the outlets for those loans. And what's happening now with the subprime crisis is that a lot of those loans are now, we're finding are not or defaulting at unusually high rates. It's put a lot of lenders out of business 'cause those loans are now defaulting and a lot of foreclosures are happening. And a lot of the Wall Street firms have been, have enabled that to, to occur and are sort of feeling the brunt of that as well. So it's, it's been unfortunate what's happened, you know, you could argue, one could argue that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were too restrictive in terms of loans they used to, they used to not want to, you know, we used to be accused of not wanting to buy a lot of loans that were really legitimate loans for minority families and then we got a lot more flexible but then the market then grew beyond us to these, you know, really ridiculously underwritten loans, a lot of them, and those were loans that we still wouldn't buy but here Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are sitting with less exposure to those really terribly underwritten loans and a lot of other firms are going out of business. You know, I just--and I sit in the middle of all this worried about both the health of the financial institutions that have to deal with this right, wanting Fannie Mae to do well financially so that we can continue to sustain ourselves. But also thinking about the communities that have had such a disservice done to them. So many families who we worked really hard to get into the dream of home ownership that now are having that dream taken away from them because people have put them in products that make no sense. Or people were making decisions on their own when they didn't have all the information that they needed, when we worked so hard to get 17 million people information to tell 'em how to go through home ownership and tell them how to get good credit and keep it and tell them how to avoid predatory lending, it's just, you know, we, we reached 17 million people, we should have reached more, you know. Story_ID: 476767 Speaker 1: So we're sitting in an interesting time and it's sort of an interesting time in my career because I've been at the company side, I've been at the foundation [Fannie Mae Foundation] side and now I'm back in the company and I'm seeing it from both, from both sides. At the end of the day, I still think Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] has an important role with respect to housing America and in particular reaching the needs of, in particular minority families. Because at the end of the day we still have a, a huge home ownership gap. You know, 25 percentage points or more between whites and black and Hispanics. And, and what we know about a lot of minority families, and in particular immigrant families, is that more than anything what they want is to own a home. You know, I mean if white families are in the 70 percent range of owning a home there's not many more white families that are really gonna own a home, I mean there's just not much more home ownership you're gonna get in that group of people. The real growth in the business, in the market is gonna be with black and Hispanic and Asian American and immigrant families that are coming to this country. And in fact, 68 percent of all the household growth in this country is, over the next decade it's gonna come from minority families. So I really strongly believe that if we're gonna be positioned as, to be a successful company it's gonna come from those segments. So one of the interesting things in my career is that not only am I head of giving for the company and helping to support a lot of the growth in this way by aligning our giving to these business opportunities, but I'm also the chief diversity officer. And so one of the things that I'm, that I am putting forth in terms of a new strategic direction with the company is that, you know, guess what diversity isn't just something you do because it feels good and sounds good, it's the right thing to do morally, but it's the right business thing to do because if we, if we value diversity in this company and really hire people who are from diverse back grounds and diverse cultures and have diverse experiences, that will come back to help us when we're dealing with diverse, a diverse marketplace that has a very unique set of issue and challenges and different languages and people that have different cultural experiences and, and needs. And if that's the market, if that's what the market is presenting to us as an opportunity we should, we ought to be ready and able to seize on that opportunity. So my diversity hat now has a very business tie to it which is kind of interesting. Story_ID: 476768 Speaker 1: Good, I wanna go back (cough) to when you, when Frank [Franklin D. Raines] came on and you became-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know head of the foundation. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: 'Cause this was a whole different career path. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: And you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you really weren't familiar with the philanthropic-- Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: --arena. And I just wanna set this up too, that there hadn't been, there're still women head of foundations. I don't think there were still a lot, women heads of foundations, but I wanna have an idea of the size of the foundation, what had been done with the foundation before that. Speaker 2: Yeah. So when I came to the foundation in 1999, I was the first black woman to run the foundation. There had been, the foundation was started many years ago and was spun off as its own entity from the company in 1996. And when that happened a woman named Wendy Sherman who worked very closely with former secretary of state, Madeleine Albright, was running, came to run the foundation. She stayed for about a year and then there--a Hispanic woman ran it for a few years, couple years, couple years. And then I ran it for most of the remaining, for the remaining history of the foundation. And when I came to the job, I was sort of, I wasn't looking for a job in philanthropy, I didn't really want a job in philanthropy, I didn't, it wasn't something I wanted to do and most of while I was in the job at the foundation I didn't really think of it as philanthropy (laughter) even though it was. 'Cause I had such a business orientation to me so that the whole thing around philanthropy, I mean I took the job primarily 'cause it was a great opportunity to be president and CEO of a large--the nation's largest housing foundation, dedicated to affordable housing. I thought this was a great opportunity to work directly with Frank. I thought it was a fantastic opportunity and to have my own show and be the CEO of something that could be my own, I thought was just great and it was. It was, it was the best opportunity for me. I took a very business approach to the work that we did, I mean the philanthropy that we did had a lot to do with real results on creating new units of housing for people and ways of tracking our results in a way that most foundation weren't really accustomed to. We used technology in more innovative ways than most foundations had ever seen. We created a tool called KnowledgePlex which is, was the first Internet portal targeting affordable housing community development practitioners and policy makers. So we did some very innovative things to, to within the field of philanthropy that really weren't typically being done. We weren't--I never thought of ourselves as really a grant making institution. We ran programs, we did all kinds of innovative and unique things. We ran a, the most successful fundraiser and effort around preventing and ending homelessness the Help the Homeless Walkathon, which started here in Washington [D.C.] and has raised over $60 something million to address the needs of ending homelessness here in the Washington area. We've taken that national now. We're gonna be in seven cities across the country with help the homeless this year. So, you know, I could go through a list of all things that we, that we did that were real accomplishments but again, it was my job there wasn't as if I was making some major career shift, it was really still it was Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] 'cause it was Fannie Mae Foundation even though it's a separate entity it was all sort of part of the same thing. And it was--our mission was very similar to the company's around affordable housing opportunities for those that needed it the most. In our, in our case with the foundation we were probably targeting even lower income people, people that had had even tougher housing needs. But it was all sort of still the same thing for me. And so I never really viewed it to be--and so I'd go to counsel foundation meetings and feel more out of place there than I would at Fannie Mae or in some business setting because I felt more aligned with the corporation and not as aligned with foundations, per se. Speaker 1: What and when you mean that, that the philanthropic community (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 476769 Speaker 1: Now how large was your annual giving [through the Fannie Mae Foundation]? Speaker 2: So in 19--at our height we were at a $128 million. When the company [Federal National Mortgage Association] went through its tough times in '05 [2005] we actually, that got cut quite dramatically down. We and, and along with it we cut our, the outreach campaign to get information out on home ownership and, and credit. And so we went down to like $72 million, down to $60 million and the, the outreach campaign itself was about $50 million so when we cut that out that cut out a big chunk, but it also happened at the same time that the company was going through the restatement and so a lot of the financial picture for the company really changed a lot to. Speaker 1: Now, most of that $128 million-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --at the time it was the, where--well how was that divided in terms of a lot of that was, you know, helping people-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --really, either-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --educating them or helping support-- Speaker 2: Yeah. So-- Speaker 1: --affordable housing. Speaker 2: Right. So-- Speaker 1: So you worked with a lot of community organizations (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Absolutely. A lot of nonprofit organizations. So about $50 million of it was the outreach campaign. It, very expensive advertising television, advertising campaign to direct people to call this 1-800 number and get information they needed on home ownership and credit. The remaining part of it was really around grants and program that we operated to really address the needs to increase the supply of housing, deal with the issues of homelessness and, and support our efforts here in Washington, D.C. which is our hometown. So basically you know the bulk of our spending was either in grants or what we call programs because we didn't necessarily make grants. All of our money wasn't just in grants to, to groups. It was--some of our spending was to operate certain leadership programs that support housing and all of these other programs like our help the homeless program. So money that we would spend directly to actually operate programs. So we supported programs like for example with the Kennedy School for Government [sic. John F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to help train state and local officials around housing issues. We started a fellowship program called it Johnson Fellows [James A. Johnson Fellowship Program] to reward fellow, reward leaders in the field of affordable housing in community development. And our Maxwell Awards program acknowledges superior affordable housing developments across the country. Help the homeless again, you know. Those were some of the programs that we (unclear) operate. And then a lot of grants went to affordable housing developers and others that are, were, are in the space of developing affordable housing, both rental and, and for sale housing. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 476770 Speaker 1: So this was a time of great, you know, productivity. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, a lot of housing is being built. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, people are and affordable housing, that's sort of center stage. A lot of cities-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --are wanting to see that. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You have the whole issue of public housing and a lot of, you know, changes occurring-- Speaker 2: HOPE VI (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, there are, Section 8. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So what happens with Frank [Franklin D. Raines]? Like, can you describe-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know that whole process because his sort of being pinpointed-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know, whatever irregularities happened under there-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --then spun all of this out. Speaker 2: So in 1999 when Frank started, you know, Frank had a, Frank had a real vision for the company that was really around extending the company's ability to be more impactful, cutting the costs in the mortgage process. He was very interested in the use of technology in reaching borrowers. He was also very interested in how to create new channels of business. So our traditional channels of business were mortgage bankers that would sell loans and depositories selling loans to the company. He was really interested in looking at, you know, so a lot of people go to Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.]. When they go to Walmart they may buy goods and things for their family, but while they're there they may be interested in figuring out how to buy a home. Well why can't we partner with Walmart to figure out how people can start the process of figuring out how to buy a home and gee, isn't that our target market a lot of working families and low income families and middle income families that go to Walmart that, you know, are just basic average Americans. And so he had a lot of innovative ideas around different ways that the company would partner. And I think some of it, some of his efforts were misunderstood and I think it also happened at a time when on top of how successful the company was being, there were times when the company was misviewed or misread as wanting to step outside of its bounds. And that got a lot of or traditional lenders really upset. And a lot players in Washington [D.C.] politically upset. And what happened is that a group was formed called FM Watch, now you gotta a lot of FM Watch, you got Walmart Watch, you got I mean it became the model for how you sort of pick apart a big company. But it was heavily funded by other industry participants' effort to be the political and industry critic of Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association]. And some I think dismissed them for a period of time but they continued to grow strong and I think there was a real mistake in being too dismissive of them. The political sounding around Fannie Mae put constraints on Fannie Mae, confine Fannie Mae, they're getting too big, they're a risk to the industry, they're a risk to the country. What would happen if Fannie Mae failed? You know this would be the biggest bailout the company, the country's ever seen. I mean you began to hear during Frank's time just constant barrage of Fannie Mae this, Fannie Mae that, Fannie Mae is a risk. Fannie Mae is a problem. Fannie Mae's out of its bounds. Fannie Mae--I mean it would just be like relentless. And a lot of it was just ginning up from a lot of stuff. And then I think on our end, we weren't doing enough or the right things or whatever to stop it. And so it just kind of continued on and continued on to the point where, and, and then let me just say, and then one other thing that happened is through the company's growth I think the company did not do what it needed to do to manage the growth well. I think what's become clear to a lot of us and I'm speaking just from my own vantage point, is that the company didn't get the-- didn't get its accounting right. There were a lot of other companies that didn't either by the way. But we didn't get ours right. And also I think what also happened is the company that just grew, grew, grew and got to be so successful the internal operations and control didn't grow with it. And I think we didn't we do all of what we could do ensure that the underpinning of the company was as strong and as solid as it should be. And so when, and so basically what happened is the accounting was wrong, the systems were not in place to support it, and Frank was the head of the company. Story_ID: 476771 Speaker 1: So the accounting being wrong, what do you mean by the accounting was wrong? Speaker 2: They, that, that--well what's come out is that the way in which the company interpreted the accounting rules was not being interpreted right. I mean that what's come out. And the accounting rules (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were they over, overestimating or underestimating? Speaker 2: It, it what, so I'm not sure if I know the net effect of that on the financial statements 'cause the, the we're stilling getting the financial statements right, but essentially the way in which you account for things was just not done properly. So it wasn't as if someone was doing it in order, I mean there's no been--no evidence that there's any, at least I'm not aware of, of any degree of wrongdoing to try to drive results to be any kind of way. It just like, it's just like you just got it wrong and therefore your statements are wrong. And it's like as if you got a math problem wrong you just missed, you just got it wrong, you just got the equation wrong, you know what I mean. What these are, are very complicated accounting rules around derivatives. And these particular rules, there have been like forty-five other companies that did it wrong too. It's not like Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] is unique in this, it's just that Fannie Mae was the biggest and Fannie Mae got it wrong more than others or, you know, we had more, you know, we got, got it wrong worse than other people. I don't know but again when you're big and important in the market and your--people have got their eyes on you and you do something wrong, it's gonna be, have a bigger impact than somebody else that may not be as big as important as successful or whatever. And so, and so that was disappointing because I think it shook the confidence of a lot of people in the company. I think we all weren't quite sure what to think and what to believe and, and then you have to, and then a lot of us were wondering well was there--were people doing it deliberately or was there something wrong, you know. And, and that that shook people's confidence I think. You know, I, I think, you know to this day my own personal belief around people is that I think the people of the company are good people. And I think there were--but I think people might have made mistakes. And, but in my heart I don't believe anything was done deliberately. In my heart I don't believe Ray McClendon [Raymond J. McClendon] did anything deliberately wrong. But people make mistakes. Story_ID: 476772 Speaker 1: I think the company was maybe naive or not as focused into it as it should have been on understanding what it needed to put in place in terms of the investment of controls and operations. And I think that's ultimately one of the things that, that hurt the company. Look I think, I think if any, I think if anybody looks too deeply at anyone's own house, you're gonna find something wrong. I mean I don't care who you are. And whether its Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] or any, any company in America if you dig enough and investigate enough, I think you're gonna find something that's not right. No one's been carted off to jail, there's been no evidence of criminal wrongdoing that I'm aware of. So what I think it comes down to is just some bad business judgments and, and business mistakes that I'm not convinced were deliberate. Nonetheless, they've had a big impact on this company and it has cost us a lot of money. Speaker 2: How much money has it cost? Speaker 1: I don't know the exact numbers but I mean it's been quoted in the press as, you know, hundreds of millions of dollars it's taken, to pay for the restatement, pay for the fines, pay for this, pay for that. I mean it's just been an enormous amount of money. And, and that's a real shame. We have shareholders that we're accountable to and, you know, you could argue that's their money that's being wasted away. It's money that could have been put into strengthening the company to provide more financing to more people to get into homes. I've even heard arguments from people saying that, you know, through this subprime crisis if we hadn't had all these distractions maybe Fannie Mae could have been a more influential player in avoiding some of these things happening. You know, you live, and you learn. I mean it's, you know, the company went through a really tough time in the '80s [1980s] under David Maxwell [David O. Maxwell] it was losing a million dollars a day almost. Almost faced going, you know, completely bust. And David Maxwell turned the company around and Jim Johnson [James A. Johnson] grew the company and Frank [Franklin D. Raines] grew it even more. And, you know, we hit another rough spot and I think the company's now getting through it and as all good companies do, they'll, they'll get through it and, and eventually get back to a point of being really successful again. I don't, I'm not aware of any company in America that hasn't hit a rough patch at some point. You know everybody does. And, you know, we're not Enron [Enron Corporation], and we're not going out of business and haven't laid off people and having the CEO carted off to jail and commit suicide or something (laughter) else like. It's not that so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But in close, it occurred in close proximity to, you know, people sort of think-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah people thought, yeah. I mean there were all kinds of ways in which the, you know, people wanted to do. It was--well there had been a whole string of all these corporate problems, right. Speaker 2: Tyco [Tyco International]. Speaker 1: Tyco. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And all these different things and you had the Martha Stewart thing. So you had CEOs in companies that have been accused and alleged and to have done all these things and been convicted of things. And so it had fell at an unfortunate time where so like Fannie Mae's in the middle of all that, and I, and, you know, I need to say having worked here for fifteen years and worked with people here in no way do I see us being in any way close to that and when I read that we're compared to like an Enron it just it's sort of infuriating in fact. Speaker 2: Now, has Sarbanes-Oxley [Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002] had-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --it's definite impact. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. And a lot of the controls and operations I'm talking about were getting compliance with Sarbanes-Oxley and do the compliance sort of things that are, that every good publicly traded company needs to do. So, yeah absolutely. I mean that's, that's some of it. But some of it was just other, you know, accounting policies changes and having an accounting policy, you know, division, department that sets accounting policies separate from finance. And, you know, I mean just some basic things that, that, that were not in place and really needed to be. Story_ID: 476773 Speaker 1: You had--you're--the foundation's budget dwindled-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --but then what was the decision for it to be folded back and, you know, made-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --part of but not separate. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So in 1996 the company was--the foundation was spun off from the company. The foundation had been the Fannie Mae Foundation but like most other corporate foundations a part of the company. So most of the corporate foundations have, if people do work for the foundation they are really corporate employees and they're donating their time to the foundation, that's how we used to operate. What happened with, in 1996 is that mainly it was the outreach campaign, the advertising campaign. It was started in the company and some of the reasons the company decided that it was, it was going very well and very successful but it was one of these things that many of the company's lenders, business partners, lenders that were selling loans to the company felt, you know, why are you doing outreach to consumers, doesn't that, yeah, that feels like you're really trying to go over us and lend directly to lenders, to customers, to borrowers. Meanwhile the company is not putting any place, any kind of retail lending operation while it's doing this. This was really Jim Johnson's [James A. Johnson] vision of how do you, how do you get to people to be able to drive more people to be able to own a home. And we had done, the company had done some research to say what are the main barriers to home ownership? Well, two main barriers are down payments, this is well the company had already kind of tackled that by lowering down payment requirements on its loans. The other big thing was a lack of information. People just simply didn't know, they didn't know it was possible for them to buy a home, if they rented, they didn't think they could own a home. They thought that was only for other people. You know, if they did own a home they didn't know who to talk to, they didn't know what questions to ask. They didn't know what the process was. It was all so complicated and then very intimidating. The outreach campaign was all about trying to eliminate the intimidation factor in mortgage lending to have it be more transparent, to have it be much more of an attainable thing for people, particularly minorities and immigrant families, that was all it was about. The lenders misread it or they read it as, oh, no Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] sounds like you're trying to get to our customers. Fannie Mae said, "Fine we're not trying to do that but you know what we're not, we're also not gonna stop it because it's a good thing. What we'll do is we'll give this to our foundation and have it be a charitable thing so there's absolutely no way our charitable arm, is gonna be somehow driving business," 'cause its legally you can't even do that, you know. So here we are trying to protect the outreach campaign which we know is an important thing for the company to do, to reach a market of people that need information but we'll do it in a way that sort of walls it off from our customers. Thinking that that would satisfy them, well unfortunately it didn't really make them happy. They were still unhappy with it. But we continued on with it anyway and we did it up until 2005. But it remained a lightning rod with, with the company's lenders for, for all that period of time. And even though it did so much good for so many people. We finally made a decision to bring it to an end in 2005 and that was really my decision. I really felt like there was, there was a point in time where I would turn on the television and see Countrywide's [Countrywide Financial Corporation] ads or other ads and they look like our ads. So people were replicating, they were copying us, they were imitating us, I couldn't tell the difference between our ads and other people's ads. We had served almost 17 million people, almost 20 million people, after ten years and we spent a few hundred million dollars, I felt like, you know, you just can't continue with everything forever I mean at some point you need, you need to, to move on. And I felt like that combined with it being such a lightning rod maybe, maybe it's a good time to bring it to an end and focus our time and attention on the other things that are also important. And so I was a part of that decision with some others and so we did. Story_ID: 476774 Speaker 1: As we're making that decision in 2004 to bring it to an end in 2005, 2004 was when the company [Federal National Mortgage Association] hit, the skids. And the news about the accounting being wrong and all this stuff started to come out. And we needed to go through a downsize so the company was gonna, go, going through shutting down parts of the company and redirecting and new CEO and all this stuff. And, and for a long time because of the separation of the foundation [Fannie Mae Foundation] from the company, even though the foundation got to be this very unique institution on its own with its own identity, it also was sort of very different from the way most corporations in America did philanthropy. Nobody would have their philanthropy outside the company. Having its foundation go off and do its own thing whatever the hell it wants to do and the company doing something else, everybody tries to align their philanthropy with their business. But we couldn't do that because we had a separate, two separate entities with IRS [Internal Revenue Service] guidelines that restricted how we would not do things together. And so people in the company had been very frustrated around the separation for a long time. They wanted the foundation to be closer to what they were doing sometimes we would be frustrated, 'cause we couldn't coordinate more closely with the company. So get rid of the advertising. So that's big a chunk of our budget. The company's going through a lot of changes, everything in the company's being relooked at including the foundation and so I began working the company to say how should we do this, in '05 [2005] it was, we couldn't see eye to eye. We, it just I don't think I, me and the company and the company and us were seeing eye to eye about how to make this work. But then we eventually got to a place with we started to think through a way it could work. And the only way that it really could work was to really bring the foundation to an end. It would have been like putting tooth base--toothpaste back in the tube to try to pull the foundation with these very separate IRS rulings back into the company as a foundation. So really the only way to do it was to have the foundation dissolve and just bring all the philanthropic activities back in as a corporate giving department, not really a foundation. And so that's, and and, we did that primarily just because if the company is sort of reinventing itself this was the opportunity for us to reinvent philanthropy and, and do something that we had really wanted to do was that to align our giving and our philanthropy with, with the company, with the rest of the company (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So-- Story_ID: 476775 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So how's it gonna change what you do and the diversity, what--did, did, did you displace someone who was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't, no. When I came, well how on the giving how it's gonna change is really a lot is staying the same, particularly through this transition year. And our main focus areas of housing homelessness in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] remain. I think what's gonna change is sort of how we do it. I mean now we're much more integrated with the business units around how are they working with certain partners, lender partners, and other partners to create effective solutions to financing housing. And how does grant making support that? Some of the partners that we work with are nonprofit partners so we, they may need some grant support along with loan and equity financing tools to be able to do the business. So it's a much more comprehensive approach to working with our partners than we've ever had before. Which, which is really a great thing. And I think that's making us a more impactful partner. Just create more, more housing. On the diversity thing it was completely on a different tract. I mean I came back to the company, the company had sort of identified that it had really lost its focus with respect to diversity. Here Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] was one of the models of corporate diversity for years and through this restatement period, you know, it was very hard to focus on just about anything else other than getting accounting right, getting the systems right, getting the operations back on track, you know, it was just so many things needed to be fixed in the company that I think people just lost sight of other big priorities like diversity. And so when I came back to the company it was all Dan Mudd [Daniel H. Mudd] was becoming aware of the fact that, wait a minute we're, we're not where we really need to be on our diversity stuff. We need to reenergize this and get this back on track. And the head of diversity was on leave at the time. And so there wasn't really anybody to lead the effort and I sort of raised my hand and said, "I'll do it." And it was because, not because I had this long steep background in diversity, it was because I care about it and thought I could help. And, and so and so Dan said, "Give it a shot." So I'm now the chief diversity officer and kind of running with developing a new strategy for us in terms of diversity and bringing diversity and giving and the business altogether. So creating a lot more alignments. The diversity isn't just off on its own as some feel good thing, it's really sort of a part of everything else that we do. From recruitment hiring, retention of employees, to the culture, how we behave, and work within the company. Speaker 1: (Cough) Excuse me. Speaker 2: It's okay. Speaker 1: Can you--oh, sorry. Speaker 2: Through to the: how we do business? And how we take advantage of the market opportunities so as I mentioned before. So, so this is all, it's a--so I feel like I've got sort of two jobs but I think we're also in a way redefining what--now that giving is really now a part of the company again and we have this focus on diversity we're really defining a whole new way that Fannie Mae expresses its values around the corporate social responsibility in a variety of ways. And I sort of see myself as being over that. I also think that the company is wanting to redefine what its mission is. You know, it had a way of thinking about it when Jim was, Jim Johnson [James A. Johnson] was the chair and it had its way of thinking about it when Frank [Franklin D. Raines] was chair. I think now the company is saying in, in turn to fulfill our mission, our public mission what, what are the ways in which we wanna go about doing that? And I sort of feel like my experience and my background the company is now putting me in a position where I can help define that for the company. So it's really, it's really kind of fun (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so it's an exciting time for you then? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh, no it's great. It's great. Speaker 1: And you'll be able to pull, pull on your business background too in it-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: --in a more integrated way. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. I'm not an HR [human resources] type so I don't, the people piece I'm like, "Can you help me on that," 'cause (laughter) I'm not a HR executive and so diversity has a big piece of that. But I am a businessperson in, in a way. And have been a CEO of an organization [Fannie Mae Foundation] so understand people and culture and, and from that perspective. And so it really is a lot of fun. Story_ID: 476776 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you're saying that Mudd--who's now in charge? Speaker 2: Dan Mudd [Daniel H. Mudd]. Speaker 1: Dan Mudd. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: How is he a different leader? In a way he had to come in and clean things up. Speaker 2: Yeah he's had to, he's had to come in and clean, clean things up, and that's been, you know, a tough, you know, assignment for him. He is a different leader in that, you know, Jim [James A. Johnson] and Frank [Franklin D. Raines] kind of came more from a finance but also through government and politics background. I mean they had a lot more of that in their background. Dan has much more of just straight corporate background. I mean he went to the Kennedy School of Government [John F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, Massachusetts] so it's not like he has very little exposure. It's not like he doesn't have some exposure to, through government or politics, he absolutely does. But he, you know, his, his roots come from GE [General Electric] and, and very much of a corporate background. And so he brings a different kind of mentality to the job that's about making sure that Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] is a real company. That's what people (unclear) it's not just a pretend company or sort of like quasi-governmental, no. It's a real company that has to operate like a real Fortune 100 company. And it also has this very unique aspect to it, which is it has a very public mission. But at, you know, we begin with but we're a real company and have to operate like that. And so he has that kind of philosophy which, which I think is really pretty healthy. I think, I think the being the CEO of Fannie Mae is like being the CEO of no other company though, I think. It is, it is a job in which you're, you're required to walk and chew gum at the same time. You need to be a real company and operate with, with, you know, quality controls and standards and, you know, returns that are you know attractive to Wall Street investors and investors around the world but you also need to stay focused on what's happening over in LeDroit Park [Washington, D.C.]? And what's happening in South Central, L.A. [Los Angeles, California]? And what's happening in Mechanicsville, in Atlanta [Georgia]? And what's happening in Cabrini-Green [Cabrini-Green Homes] of Chicago [Illinois] and you know the old Cabrini-Green? And what's happening in, you know, Sandtown-Winchester in Baltimore [Maryland]? Because that's really why you're here. And don't forget that [U.S.] Congress has the ability to change that charter at any time they feel like they want to, if they don't feel like you're doing, meeting those needs. And so you gotta be able to understand [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters as well as Ben Bernanke, to be (laughter), you know, you have to be a pretty unique person to be able to do that well I think and serve both of them in the right way and feel comfortable in that in, in going from one meeting to another. And, but with the one message that resonates with both, right. I, that's the thing I love about, about this company. I think you, when you come here you can come here with this sort of mono-line thinking or this sort of I, this is my job, this is what I do. I think that's wrong. I think you gotta, and I think people that are at Fannie Mae that view themselves as being sort of very narrow are not the ones that do well. I think the ones that, that can think about the world across a range and a spectrum of ideas and perspectives, I think are the folks that tend to do a little better because I think that's what the company requires, you know. Story_ID: 476777 Speaker 1: So your giving budget going forward is gonna be what? Is it something that you're gonna build and it will be tied to revenue or? Speaker 2: That's a, well that's what we're working on. We're trying to work with our chief financial officer right now to, to determine what is the right level to peg our giving at every year. This year between the foundation [Fannie Mae Foundation] which still has some resources and some stock that we'll be able to sell as soon as all the financials are complete. And, and some and the giving come from the company the combined giving that's gonna be about $70 million this year. And we're hoping it stays somewhere around that range going forward. And but, you know, a goal would be 1 percent of pretax earnings kind of that's generally thought to be the, the industry standard for corporate giving for most companies. Some are a little below, some are a little above but usually that's a, a great way to pay it. To say 1 percent of pretax earnings. And that means if your earnings go up or down, you know, so goes your giving. Story_ID: 476778 Speaker 1: So do you think you'll retire here, from here is that-- Speaker 2: You know it's entirely possible. In some ways that sound a little sad (laughter) and like, you know, I mean sad in that gosh, can you have some other career than working at Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association]. But there are very few other places that I would like to work. I'm a little annoyed that none of the civil rights organizations have, have a woman that runs it. And I don't know if I would wanna go do that but I'm, I don't understand that. I don't understand how all these great women that work in Corporate America and run nonprofits and do all these things seem to never make it to the head of the Urban League [National Urban League] or the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I don't understand that. You know, in my life I could see myself going back into philanthropy but it would have to be in pretty senior position. But I wouldn't discount that. Most foundations I think I couldn't deal with the culture of them, but there's some that I think would be pretty exciting. As for other companies it's hard to think of another company that I'd like to work for but you never know. I mean it's sort of a mutual thing I mean I'll probably stay here as long as I'm happy and they'll probably keep me as long as they're happy with me (laughter) so. You know nothing is ever promised. Story_ID: 476779 Speaker 1: You know, in many ways I was thinking your husband is Jarvis Stewart? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. And he's a lobbyist? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You're almost like your mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] and father [Albert Miles Davis] in some respects. Speaker 2: I am? Speaker 1: Well you are, you're both-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --both a power couple. Speaker 2: I think about that too, yeah, yeah. Yeah, you know, and, and. and when I look at, when I see Jarvis, see he reminds me a lot of my husband of, he reminds a lot of my husband, my father, very charismatic, very gregarious and thoughtful and caring and well, you know, well, well-thought of and successful. You know, he is well-dressed and, you know, always well-dressed and, you know, he does, he reminds me a lot a lot of my dad. My, I think my mom is very proud of where I am and, you know, I think, you know, had my mother, had the times been right for my mother would have been as successful as is if not more than I've been able to be. You know, I think the times just weren't right for her or for most women at that time. But, you know, you know, I think, and, and I'd like to think of like my parents had two girls [Stewart and HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis], I have two girls [Madeleine Stewart and Savannah Stewart] I think I'd like to think that we're my raising my girls to be, our girls, to be as exposed to the potential in life as, as we were exposed. You know, so I think, I think there are a lot, there are lot of similarities, you know. It is kind of interesting. There's some parallels. Story_ID: 476780 Speaker 1: What haven't you done in your life that you think you would like to do? Do you ever give thought to that? Speaker 2: You know one thing that I would like to do, but as long as private school and college cost so much I'm not sure I'm gonna (laughter) really do this. You know I would love to be head of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development]. I would love to be giving, philanthropy isn't what really excites me, it's the issues around housing and serving people that excite me. That's really, it's not I don't really, it could, I could actually go and run a business unit here at Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] just as easily as I can run this unit, frankly. The issues around expanding the ability for more people to get into homes and housing is what really excites me and I think being in a position as, as the head of HUD would be another level of, I mean I've been in the, I've been in the private sector, I've done, I've been Wall Street I've been in the private sector, corporate, I've done giving, philanthropy nonprofit, being government, directly in government I've never been directly in government. And I think that could be really interesting. But in order for me to do something, I always have to be, for me, I, I, I only feel comfortable if I'm running it (laughter). I have this, like, like it's like a DNA thing. Like I don't mind working for a CEO 'cause he's got a lot of responsibilities and he lets me do a lot of what (unclear) as long as I'm accountable and I'm doing what he thinks is the right thing to do, I have a lot of latitude to do what I think is the right thing for the company and that's feels good to me. You know, I think being able to set the direction for this country with respect to housing and serving the needs of people that, that need, need housing and dealing with this issue of the home ownership gap and trying to get people to a point of being able to build wealth in this country which is, been primarily through housing is the thing that I would like to influence the most. And there is a way to do that at, at, at through influencing federal policy. Story_ID: 476781 Speaker 1: I have two other questions. One, along those lines, what do you see the challenges as we look forward into, you know, this century in terms of the housing and, you know, and those, you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What are you know, there's a wealth, a wealth gap-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, people are--someone told me there's huge people, the people are the millionaires plus. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: There's gonna be more and more growth. Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a gap between-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --the very rich and the very poor. I think, frankly, the biggest challenge is affordability. Unless we deal with the supply issue we're gonna continue to put pressure on the price of housing in, in this country. In that we've already seen a tremendous impact on price in most areas of the country. Now the subprime crisis is dampened prices a little bit in some areas but for the most part people are still enjoying. And if you've owned a home for a while you're enjoying enormous amount of equity in your home, more than you ever could have imagined. Which is great. But if you're not owning a home, that means that your ability to enter the market is really limited unless you look for a smaller home, a small, a home that's further out from where you wanna be or you work. And people have to make, have tremendous sacrifices to then find a house that's affordable for them. And, and I think that's not only on the home ownership side I think it's on the rental side too because we're losing units that had been affordable on the rental side. So I think the, the country has got to tackle with how do we want to deal with the degree to which we need to increase the supply of housing in order to accommodate the needs that exist so that we can bring some more moderation to the market and allow people the opportunity to find housing that's affordable for them. Some of that is that that's a lot more complicated than just figuring out how to get more loans out the door. It's a combination of federal policies, state and local policy interesting financing tools and different kinds of housing stock that people need to deal with. I mean, but I think the affordability is the big challenge. I also think the other challenge is in opportunity is, is closing the home ownership gap. I mean with whites being in the 70, 70 something percent range and blacks and Hispanics being around 50 percent range I mean there's just no, and, and a lot of it coming from years of, of built in discrimination and still lending discrimination exists and other kind of bias that exists. We just really have to get on top of it and some of it is that you're not ever gonna eliminate bias. It's like you're never gonna--you know are we ever really gonna eliminate racism in this country? I don't know. But I think what you do is you empower people to be able to make better decisions for themselves. So that they can then choose between what's best for them and what's not. And I think a lot of people have been, have now also not been making good choices around financially what's best for them and what's not. And I mean look in high school, you know, nobody's every taught about financial literacy. Who the hell ever finds out about a mortgage until you, you know, you don't find out about a credit card until the credit card companies send you credit cards when you're a college student and you end up screwing up your credit before you even graduate. I mean we don't do a good job in this country of helping to educate people on financial matters and how to manage their own financial, you know, the, financial aspects of their lives. And so there's no, there's no, it shouldn't be any big surprise and when people get out into the real world they have no idea what to do. You know, and this whole thing about buying a house and saving and investing in the stock market and I mean, no one has a clue about that. And in our communities it's even worse 'cause we, we get a poorer quality education in general and on top of it don't, don't learn those things. For us, you know, you know, I deal, I work a lot in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] on the issue of public education and, you know, one of the struggles that I'm, that I've faced with it, is that we have issues around financial literacy for black people and Hispanic people. We have issues around just basic literacy. You're not gonna get somebody to understand around an IRA [individual retirement account] or an annuity or something like that if people can't even fill out a college, you know, a job application or can't read a Metrobus schedule. Which unfortunately for 39 percent of adults in D.C., can't read at the third grade level. Story_ID: 476782 Speaker 1: Now, you were talking about the issues. I have one other question along, you know, and you were talking about, you know, financial literacy. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I mean literacy, the lack of literacy-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --at 39 percent, you know, not being able-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --to read here. Do you in, in are, are Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] or those in the housing dealing with the issue of displacement of the urban poor into the suburbs and to poor suburbs that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --have less access, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They don't have cars, can't get-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --get to places and they're sort of stranded. Is there (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Primarily by trying to figure out ways to create more, more housing supply in the neighborhoods in which they're currently living so that they don't feel that--I mean some of the families are being forced out because the housing has gotten so unaffordable they can't afford to even live in these neighborhood any more. If you're elderly and you're on a fixed income, you can't pay your property taxes 'cause your value of your house has gone up so much. You, you may have to leave and you may lose your home. So what, so what, but this is why it's more complicated because now that, that house prices are so great and land values are so much greater in say in some urban areas, people might want to continue to live there but the cost to develop that housing creates an, the situation in which the housing is so expensive that's it's still too expensive to either buy or rent. So you just get this circular thing. So, you know, you have to work with local elected officials and state elected officials on policy changes that create more incentives for there to be a preservation for affordable housing or an opportunity to create more affordable housing. So there are policies like inclusionary zoning for example, that says, you know, if there is a new housing development going up, some percentage of the units have to be reserved for low income or moderate income families. Or in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] there's a first right of refusal act for tenants which talks about, you know, if you're a tenant in a building and, and it's gonna get converted to a condo, you have the ability to, to band together as a set of tenants and buy the building. And you have the first right of refusal to do that if you can make it happen. And that allows those, those current tenants to stay in their unit and, and have it stay affordable basically. So, but that requires Fannie Mae to be very much working in partnership with nonprofits and developers and the cities and states and all these other folks. I mean, we don't have the ability to do this on our own. So, so the issue of gentrification is one that is just being created because of market forces. I mean there's nothing that anyone's sort of deliberately doing or not doing to force this happen. It just--it's happening as a result of the way the market is moving. In many of our urban areas we have a lot of young professionals and empty nesters that want to move into, and some of them are high--upper income, higher income folks and the developers see that there's a real opportunity and so when they're building housing they're building more expensive kinds of housing. And guess what, that's the only kind of housing you can really build because everything is so expensive, you know, you have to charge a lot. And if those are the kind of people that wanna live there, but you know if that's in that same space if you could have built a building with units of housing where more, more lower income people could have been, you know, then you or even a mix of incomes then you get an opportunity to have cities, where cities are really are, what cities have typically always been where it's just a mix of people and, and opportunity for lots of different people to live. And we're losing that opportunity in many of our cities. Story_ID: 476783 Speaker 1: The redevelopment around public housing is really controversial to your point around, I'm from Atlanta [Georgia] and it's a huge controversy in Atlanta where Atlanta's probably had more HOPE VI developments going on than any other city in the country. Well a lot of those poor people have been shipped out to other parts of the city. The good thing for the City of Atlanta is that you've got a whole bunch of new, beautiful, mixed income developments where many of them, many of the public housing residents are living in those new developments but so are a lot of working families and upper income families. But what you've got in Clayton County [Georgia] and south Fulton County [Georgia] are huge numbers of people that used to live in those developments and now are living in, you know, with Section 8 vouchers and living in housing. And some of them are living in still concentrated areas and neighborhoods where the same social breakdown that you saw in public housing, now occurs in those not public housing but concentrated areas of Section 8 renters. And so you're in some ways you're making it better for the public housing resident who come back to the nice new mixed income development but you're not really making it better for the people who are now being, having to live in other areas where they're still dealing with the same social issues that they did when they were in public housing. Yeah, maybe it's better for some but, and I'm not being critical of Hope VI in that way, I, I'm very supportive of HOPE VI but I think we just have to understand the impact that that has. And jurisdictional what happens is if the City of Atlanta housing authority is doing their Hope VI program are they really paying attention to what the Clayton County housing issues are now? Well, no. And no the City of Atlanta housing authority I mean it the--but, you know, the people are people, people can go anywhere. And then the issue is well it's not just the cities issue, then isn't it a regional issue. Because people don't really just live in a city they actually live in a region. I mean when I tell people I'm from Atlanta people say, "What part of Atlanta? Oh are you from Marietta [Georgia] or--." I'm like, "No I'm from the City of Atlanta. There is, there is something called the City of Atlanta (laughter). It's not, I don't, I'm not from Alpharetta [Georgia] or any--I mean I'm from Atlanta it's--," and, and you wouldn't believe the number of questions you have. I get this all the time where at, "I live in Washington, D.C." "Oh, well, what part of Washington, D.C.?" "Well I live in D.C., Washington, D.C. If I lived in Bethesda [Maryland], I'd tell you I live in Bethesda," I live in Bethesda now. But, but I mean it's just this interesting thing where people say, "I live in Washington, I live in Chicago [Illinois], I live in New York [New York], I live in, well, you know, I live in Long Island [New York]. Oh, I live in--," you know what I mean. We don't live in, we live in cities but the cities are big. And the cities in people's minds go beyond the jurisdictional lines that are drawn. They, they really are regions that people live in. And people work in regions and they live in regions and they travel across regions. And their kids go to school in the regions, you know. They don't go to just one particular area. And so I think that's another opportunity that we have, is that we gotta really think about this very differently in terms of how people actually do live and work. There are lots of people in Atlanta that live in Lithia Springs [Georgia] and work in Doraville [Georgia] and go to the baseball game in downtown Atlanta and that's all Atlanta for them. They don't think about anything else. Story_ID: 476784 Speaker 1: When you look back over your career what do you want your legacy to be? Or your life-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --not just your career, sorry. Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure that I've gotten there yet but, I I'd like to be able to point to ways in which I've tried to make things better for people. I'd like to look at a way that I've been able to impact Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] being able to be a successful company in serving its mission and its, its goals. You know, for me waking up every day and, and understanding that I have, can have a meaningful impact on how people are able to live a better life, even though they may be people I don't even know. My father [Albert Miles Davis] used to be the kind of person who could talk to the mayor of Atlanta [Georgia] and also talk to the little, little old lady, black lady in Atlanta who is a grandmother whose baby was getting shipped off to jail and, you know, was dealing with issues around about to lose her house and I mean just having lots of stress in her--and he could talk to anybody in that way. And I feel like I have I, I inherited that ability from him to be able to deal in a lot of different people and a lot of different venues with a lot of different situations. And I think that's a gift but I just wanna be able to use that gift in a way that benefits a lot of different people. And I feel like I'm in a pretty unique position working at Fortune 100 company to leverage the resources of this company to be able to help people, in pretty unique ways. And I feel really fortunate that I work in a company that actually has a mission to do that. So, so I'd like to just be able to point to the ways in which I've been able to that and I think that's my legacy and I think, you know, ultimately it's not just about, for me it's not just having impact in a little way I mean I'd want my impact to be very, very much national. I'm, I really have a very domestic focus. I'm probably kind of narrow in that way. I mean the Gates Foundation [Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, Washington] thinks about serving, solving world problems and I do care about world problems and I know how Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] thinks about world problems and I, I think about that to but I go too many neighborhoods where people are suffering and I've seen too many issue around in the border region of, you know, between Texas and Mexico and I've seen migrant worker housing in Florida and parts of this country and I've seen what, how Native Americans live in this country and I've seen how poor black and Hispanic people live in this country and I don't need to go anywhere else to see, you know, where the problem is and what the opportunity is to help. Story_ID: 476785 Speaker 1: I have to ask five People magazine-ish questions which I should have asked at the beginning of the interview. Speaker 2: People magazine? Speaker 1: Yes, the type questions. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: We usually start this way but getting rusty, I guess. Can I have your favorite food? Speaker 2: Popcorn. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Gray. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Christmas. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Kiawah Island [South Carolina]. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: That's cool (laughter). Speaker 1: It's a wrap, we're done. Story_ID: 476786 Speaker 1: This picture is a picture of [HistoryMaker] Stacey Stewart and Al Gore then vice president but in the process of running for president before the year 2000. This was an opportunity for me to meet vice president Al Gore. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: So this is my, [HistoryMaker] Stephanie Davis and [HistoryMaker] Myrtle Davis, Stacey Stewart's sister on the left and mother on the right with an unidentified waiter at Stacey's wedding reception at the marriage of Stacey and Jarvis Stewart. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was in five--two thousand--what year did I get married, 2002. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Two [2002]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Tell us about this one. Speaker 2: So this is a picture of Stacey Stewart as then head of presidency of the Fannie Mae Foundation with a group of boys from the Marshall Heights Bisons Pop Warner [Pop Warner Little Scholars, Inc.] football team. They are located in Ward 7 of Washington, D.C. And the Fannie Mae Foundation provided thirty thousand dollars for the team to attend the--play in the Pop Warner Super Bowl in Orlando, Florida. This was a team that went undefeated all season and ended up winning the Super Bowl and representing Washington, D.C. at the Pop Warner Super Bowl. So this is Stacey Stewart with the whole team and the coach of the team, 2006. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Ready. Speaker 2: This is a picture taken some time in 1980s of Dr. Albert Miles Davis, the father of Stacey Davis Stewart and a physician from the City of Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Did you mention the year? Speaker 2: Yeah, I said, during I don't know, it was during-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): This one, please. Speaker 2: This is picture of Stacey Stewart on the left and Autrey Dunlap who is Stacey Stewart's now mother-in-law, then my mother-in-law to be and at the engagement party of Stacey and Jarvis Stewart and this was a party also to celebrate Jarvis' birthday. So this was in June of 2002. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead and tell us about this one, please. Speaker 2: This is a picture taken some time in the 1990s of Myrtle Davis on the left and her sister Dorothy Land. Myrtle Davis is Stacey Stewart's mother and Dorothy Land is Stacey's aunt. This picture was taken during Christmas at Dorothy Land's house, again during the 1990s. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. And-- Speaker 2: This is a picture of Savannah Frances Stewart [Savannah Stewart]. This picture was taken in 2005. Savannah was not quite one year old. And this was taken at the Stewarts' home in Washington, D.C. My childhood picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm ready. Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture taken in 1998. It was taken in Sparta, Georgia with Stacey Stewart and her father Albert Miles Davis when he was very sick with prostate cancer. And Sparta, Georgia is the home of Albert Davis' father, Edward Langston Davis [Edward Langston Davis, Sr.]. Ready? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Um-hm. Speaker 2: This is a picture taken in Atlanta, Georgia with Vicki Davis, Stacey Stewart's sister and Stacey Stewart in the middle and Myrtle Davis, Stacey's mother on the right. Stacey was around ten years old, so probably taken around 1974 and it was taken at a friend's home in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm ready. Speaker 2: This is a picture probably taken around 2002. This is at the Choral Arts [Choral Arts Society of Washington] celebration at The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] in celebration of the birthday of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Stacey Stewart's on the left. Then Ms. District of Columbia [Shauntay Hinton] is in the middle and Maynard Jackson, the former mayor of Atlanta, is on the right. Speaker 1: So he died shortly after that, right? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's-- Speaker 1: He just died in '04 [2004], '05 [2005]. Speaker 2: O' four [2004] or '05 [2005]? No. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: I mean this is a picture taken at Christmas of 2003 with Stacey Stewart on the left, Jarvis Stewart, and Madeleine Stewart when she was not quite one year old. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: This is a picture taken at the Fannie Mae Foundation's Help the Homeless Walkathon in Washington, D.C. in 2006 with the recording artist, Jewel on the left, CEO of Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association], Dan Mudd [Daniel H. Mudd], Stacey Stewart, and on the right Mayor Adrian Fenty, mayor of Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And I'm ready. Speaker 2: This is a picture taken at the Congressional Black Caucus chairman's reception in September of '99 [199] with the then chairman and CEO of Fannie Mae Frank Raines [Franklin D. Raines], Congressman Jim Clyburn [HistoryMaker James Clyburn], Stacey Stewart in the middle, Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordon, Jr.] to the immediate right, and Demetrius McDaniel [Demetrius G. McDaniel] is a fellow partner at Akin, Gump [Akin Gump Strauss Hauer and Feld LLP] with Vernon in Austin, Texas. And over Demetrius' shoulder are the eyes of my future husband, Jarvis Stewart. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's cute. Who took that photograph? Speaker 2: This--I the guy who took all of our pictures, oh, you would ask me. I can't remember his name. I'll, I'll remember it (unclear). Okay. So you-got-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You got to work it. Speaker 2: Okay. This is a picture of Jarvis Stewart on the day of his marriage to Stacey Stewart on October 5th, 2002. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Could you tilt the top forward towards you a little? There we go. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): To make it a little clearer. Speaker 2: He was pretty calm. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, he was (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very secluded. Speaker 1: This is Jarvis Stewart with Savannah Stewart on the left and Madeleine Stewart on the right. And this was taken in 2006..