 Story_ID: 14642 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Mathew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is McCoy Tyner, M-c-C-O-Y, T-Y-N-E-R. Speaker 1: All right, now, you have another name. You're--you have a Islamic name as well. Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah. Speaker 1: Do you want to give that to us? Speaker 2: Yeah, Sulaimon, yeah, Sulaimon. Speaker 1: Okay, Sulaimon, Saud? Speaker 2: Yeah, Sulaimon Saud Tyner. I use that last name. Speaker 1: All right, and what's the proper way to spell Sulaimon? Speaker 2: S-U-L-A-I-M-O-N, and the middle name, S-A-U-D. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Date of birth is December 12--11--'38 [1938]. Speaker 1: Okay. And where were you born? Speaker 2: Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. And, sir, this sounds strange, but what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I play piano, I'm a jazz pianist. Speaker 1: Okay, and what's today's date? Speaker 2: What's today's date? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Today is September 16th, 2004. Speaker 1: Yes, sir, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at the Hilton, New York Hilton Hotel. Story_ID: 14643 Speaker 1: Sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food? I like good food. (laughs) But I, I like, I like--I, I eat, it all depends on how I feel, you know. I, I don't have--I do like vegetables and fruits and that sort of thing. In the morning, I like oatmeal and fruit and, and sometimes for dinner I like fish, you know, I eat fish and vegetables. I mean there's no one particular--I do like Japanese food a lot and Indian food, East Indian food. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color? Let me see, what I have on today (laughs). I don't have a favorite color because I like to match different colors up. I think if everything is coordinated, color wise, I think then you--coordination is very important, not so, not so much a favorite color, but a combination of colors together that, that assist each other that make sense, you see, as far as my taste is concerned, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite of the year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year? Well, I like when my birthday runs and goes around and I like around Christmas, New Year's, around that time, around the holiday season. It's nice, but I tell you what, I--when I, when I wake up and I go out and the sun is shining, and, you know, and the grass and the flowers are, are there, and not much pollution in the air, that's my favorite day. That's my favorite time, you know, so I'm talking in the springtime actually, (laughs) basically, you know, when everything starts to bloom. And you get that, you get that feeling like you want to be creative, you know, and that's what happens here, I feel like I want to write some music or--but I always look forward to going to work, you know, anyway playing. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: It seems like I end up in the Caribbean when I do want to go on vacation, you know. It's not too far from New York, 'cause I'm always flying so I, I don't want something that gonna take me hours and hours to get where I want to go. But the Caribbean is very, very nice, and it's seasonal, of course, but, you know, it's not far. I don't have to fly long, and, and when I get there, it's a lot to do and, I enjoy it. I like the Bahamas, a lot of other places there, islands I've been to I like. Speaker 1: Okay, now the last question is, of this set, is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying? That I'd have to really think about 'cause I never looked at it that way, you know, as a favorite, but I'm pretty sure there's something I could think of that I say a lot, you know. And right now, I'm trying to figure out what that is. Story_ID: 14644 Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you mean her name before she got married or--? Speaker 1: Sure, yeah. Speaker 2: --or, or after she married my father. Her name was Beatrice Tyner, and her previous name before she got married was Beatrice Stevens. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: What was her date of birth? Oh, boy. That's--I wish I had my sister here cause she could tell you. She's real good. Speaker 1: If you can come close, that's--. Speaker 2: Yeah, I wish I knew that cause I could have gotten all of this data and, and, you know. Speaker 1: Well, how was she--(simultaneously). Speaker 2: She was, she was, she was born on the eleventh--I think it was, I think, I'm trying to think what, I think it was, I think it was September the 11th, I think. My sister's gonna get on me, but it's all right (laughs). Speaker 1: About what year? Speaker 2: About what year? See, I never asked her what year. I, I knew generally the-. Speaker 1: Do you have any idea how old she was when you were born? Speaker 2: She must--she might have been in her, she might have been in her, her forties maybe when I was born, maybe a little younger, in her thirties, something like that. Yeah, see I could have gotten mama's data, I tell you what, I'm gonna ask my sister. Give me a set of these questions, I mean, I will--I don't know if that helps though 'cause we're doing Speaker 1: Well, what do you--do you think that she would have been born around the turn of the century, around 1900 or--? Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere in there, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so we'll just put a question mark and go on. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was in her seventies when she passed. Speaker 1: Okay, when did she pass? Speaker 2: It was about twenty years ago, twenty, about twenty-some years ago. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: It's been a while. Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about her side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and do you know much about your ancestors on that side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, we have a family tree. That's another thing, see, I could have brought the family tree. I just, it's a lot of names there. There's Jenkins--my mother's maiden name was Stevenson, that's what it was Beatrice Stevenson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sorry about that, Stevenson--. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Where was she born? I'm sorry, I didn't ask you where she was born. Speaker 2: I think it was Murphy--Murfreesboro, North Carolina Speaker 1: Okay. So did she tell--did you meet relatives on her side that could trace the family back a little further. And you don't have to give us exactly, I mean it's whatever you about it offhand. Speaker 2: Well, I have a family tree, and it's, it's got all of the extensions of the family, you know. Speaker 1: Well, how far back does it go? Speaker 2: It goes way back, I mean, I mean this family tree goes--I, I don't know if it's two or three hundred years ago or something, but it's quite extensive, you know. And I don't know it by heart but I, I looked at it, and I saw all these names, and I recognized Newsome and Jenkins and, you know, and then she married my father [Jarvis Tyner], Tyner, you know. And, but a lot of extensions, a lot of, a lot of extensions. See, a lot of people, they had the Jenkins name or the Stevenson name, which I remember seeing some--the Stevenson name, and then the women--the girls married into another family, and then they took the husband's name so, it just kept spreading out, you know. It's, you know, that kind of thing. But it's, it's, it's a big family. I went to a reunion a couple of years ago, and it was about three hundred and some people there with babies, teenagers and everybody. Speaker 1: Are most of them in North Carolina? Speaker 2: A lot of them are in North Carolina, some of them are in other states, you know. I mean I got family in California. I didn't know they were family, but they--for some reason, because my name is out there, they recog--you know, they heard my name a lot in relationship to music, so, so they find me. If I'm in town, they would show up. And they, and it's just amazing about them, is that they, they're doing various things, various occupations, you know. And that's nice to see, you know, nice to see them developing, and they're very aggressive. I have a very resourceful family, you know, I mean from what I could see. And everybody's something to do, developing something, you know. And I have one cousin who has a doctorate in business, and he's, he lives in Texas. And he's a, he's an amazing individual. And his whole family, his father had a cleaners and his mother taught school. So he came from that kind of en--those genes are in him, no doubt about it, you know. He's very aggressive and a very nice person. Story_ID: 14645 Speaker 1: Do you remember your grandparents on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother, my, my grandmother, whose name was Mary, you know, Mary--and my grandfather, I don't remember, my mother's father, I don't remember his name. You know, I saw a picture of him, you know, but I don't, you know, he had--they had thirteen children. Speaker 1: Thirteen, okay. Speaker 2: I wish my sister was here cause she, she (laughs) knows all this stuff by heart, Emma, you know. But anyway, names, dates and all that stuff. Speaker 1: Well, the names and dates aren't as important as the stories attached to them I guess. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) The stories, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But if you can--now, did your grandparents live Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or did they live in North Carolina? Speaker 2: No, they lived in North Carolina. Speaker 1: So your mother [Beatrice Stevenson Tyner] kind of moved to Philadelphia by herself? Speaker 2: Yeah, she moved to Philadelphia, she moved Philadelphia, and she was young, and my father [Jarvis Tyner] followed her at the time, you know. I don't know if he--I think they got married in Philadelphia, I think. I'm pretty sure, and I was born in Philadelphia. Story_ID: 14646 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: I don't know what that story is to tell you the truth, but I'm sorry I can't provide you with all this information. Speaker 1: Now, did they meet in North Carolina? Speaker 2: Yeah, they met in North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They met at that time in North Carolina, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so they were--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) My father had a lot of brothers, you know. He had a brother named Archibald, and he had, who was the youngest brother. And he had an older brother who was, who also had a lot of (laughs) children, you know. So he had, he had--I knew at least two other brothers that he had, you know. Speaker 1: Did they live in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] too? Speaker 2: They did originally, they lived there I think, yeah, for a while, they lived there. They, his oldest brother lived there for a while. And he, his kids were born there too I think. Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Well, as far as I know, Jarvis Tyner, Jarvis, J-A-R-V-I-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my brother's name is Jarvis as well, so he was Jarvis, Jr., yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, do you--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) And he's younger than me. He's about two years younger. Speaker 1: Can you give us his birth date and place? Speaker 2: My brother's birth date? Speaker 1: No, your father's. We're trying to get your father's. Speaker 2: I guess he was born in North Carolina. I'm pretty sure. Speaker 1: Okay, in Murfreesboro [North Carolina] too? Speaker 2: I think, I think he was born in Murfreesboro cause when I used to go down there, that's, that's where I'd go, you know, to Murfreesboro, to stay with my family. Speaker 1: And do you know about what year--was he older than your mother or about the same age? Speaker 2: I think he was older, but they were close in age. I think pretty close in age. They, they both passed in their seventies. They were close in age, you know, like, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you know much about your father's side of the family in terms of how far back they go? Speaker 2: Well, see, all that's in that family tree. It's all spelled out right there, but I didn't memorize it, you know. That's the thing. I should, I should have memorized some things, but I didn't have time (laughs). Story_ID: 14647 Speaker 1: Did they [parents Jarvis Tyner and Beatrice Stevenson Tyner] ever tell any stories about life, you know, in Reconstruction or back toward, in the Civil War days or slavery or anything? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, see they didn't, they didn't discuss that, you know. They didn't discuss that, but it goes pretty far back, you know, the lineage goes back pretty far. All I know is they had relatives that raised tobacco because North Carolina is a tobacco state. So when I would go down there in the summertime, during school break, I'd have to go out in the fields in the morning and, and pick tobacco, you know. And I remember these tobacco worms, I had to pull them off the leaf, huge things with this red antenna (laughs). And they had this, they used to stick to the leaf. And I had to pull them off. And then they'd take tobacco and roll it up and put it in the barn and dry it out. And then they'd go to auction. Speaker 1: You had to like throw them down and stomp on them or something, those worms? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't do too much stomping (laughs). I, I didn't stomp them, they were huge. Speaker 1: I heard though that's what you had--the job where you're supposed to like pull them off and then throw them down and stomp on them. I don't know--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Maybe so, I, I--. Speaker 1: But you didn't stomp on them? Speaker 2: I don't think I, I don't think I stomped them. I threw them off though, I pulled them off, but I didn't stomp them. But I just remember the food was so fresh down there. The food was just--it didn't taste like food Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] had. I mean I remember that distinctly, and everybody was so friendly and, you know, busy, you know. Like I said, I, I couldn't lay around and relax. I had to get up and go to work, (laughs) or get out there. But it was good. It was really good, and I mean they had corn, peanuts and tomatoes and, you know, just tobacco, of course, and watermelons. They had, I mean they had so much and very, very hospitable people, you know, really knew how to make you feel at home, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You just didn't nothing bad 'cause you--get that switch for me, will you? (laughs). I had an aunt that said "Go and get a switch." (waves hand in air) She'd do like that, "Nah, that's not a good one. Go pick another one," (laughs). But they were beautiful though, I, I loved going down there, you know. Story_ID: 14648 Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother's personality. What kind of person was she and what did she do for a living? Speaker 2: My mother [Beatrice Stevenson Tyner] was a fantastic woman. I mean she was my best friend, you know. I miss my mother a lot, you know. She encouraged me to play piano. And she asked me, she--'cause I was in a lot of musicals in school from elementary to high school. You know, I, I did a lot--you know, had a very, very, a musical interest. And then when I was thirteen my mother asked me--because of that, my mother thought I wanted to take singing lessons. She thought because I was in these musicals. I didn't play piano, but there was, there was a teacher who used to play for the assembly, Ms. Addison, she was an inspiration. I used to walk by and watch her hands. I said, "How in the world is she doing it, doing that, you know, Ms. Addison." And, a matter of fact, you know, she still now and then comes to see me. You know, I haven't seen her in a while--I just hope she's fine. But she used to come see me every time I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you know. But anyway, my mother asked me, she said, do you want to--when I was thirteen, she says, "Do you want to study piano or sing, singing lessons." So I said, "Nah, I, I'd rather take piano." I was from that little voice, they told me, you know, I wanted to play piano (laughs) like Ms. Addison. Speaker 1: Can you sing? Are you a good singer? Speaker 2: Well, I was in the choir. It's funny because Jimmy Smith's first wife was my choir teacher, organ player Jimmy Smith, great organ player. And she told me about Jimmy. But, yeah, I was in her choir, and, you know, I didn't mind that because singing with twenty-five other singers is not so bad, you don't stand out (laughs), you know. I wasn't bad, I was a tenor, yeah. But I, I really was interested in piano, not, not singing, although I do like to hear great singers, I mean, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother was real encouraging? Speaker 2: My mother encouraged me. My mother was a beautician. She did hair. She--I didn't have a piano for about a year, but I had neighbors who had pianos. I, and, and a lot of them were my mother's clients. And I was never refused a chance to practice on their piano, you know. So from thirteen to fourteen I had, I was going from one neighbor to a next neighbor, and I would alternate, you know. And, and they liked my mother so they never refused me, you know. And I'd practice every day after school, you know. And I couldn't wait to get home to practice. I mean piano just, I mean it just took over. (laughs). Story_ID: 14649 Speaker 1: Tell us about your father [Jarvis Tyner]. Now, what kind of personality did your father have and what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: My father worked for a medi--a company that made medicated cream, you know, Mazon, that was the name of the product. And eventually, it was bought by Revlon [Inc.]. But my father worked for them. And then on Saturdays I'd go over and do a little boxing, you know, and the little jars of Mazon, and that's how I made my, my money for the movies and (laughs), and he worked for a nice guy, Mr. Gross. And he, he would throw, he would throw a few bucks my way. And I'd come over and help them, you know, 'cause it'd come off the machine there, you know, and then, and it was great. It was really, it was, it was great. My father was a, my father, he worked, he worked hard, you know, he did. And he, when, when he heard I wanted a, I needed a piano, he was, he wasn't too--he was a little reluctant to buy a piano (laughs). But my mother said "No, we got to buy him one, you know, so he won't have to go from one neighbor to another," you know. Story_ID: 14650 Speaker 1: What's your first childhood memory? Speaker 2: My first childhood memory? Speaker 1: Or your earliest one, the earliest memory you can recall? Speaker 2: That's a very tough question because it, you know, life is so, full of so many events and so many things. I remember when I was very, very little, my mother [Beatrice Stevenson Tyner] tucked me in the bed. I remember that, you know. She, she was a wonderful mother, and she had a lot of love for us, you know, my brother [Jarvis Tyner, Jr.] and my sister [Emma Tyner] and myself. Speaker 1: So there's three of you? Speaker 2: Yeah, three of us, yeah, I have a brother and a sister. Speaker 1: And are you the, are you the--? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: The oldest. Speaker 2: I'm the oldest, but I remember we had to, we had, when people would come to our house, and my mother was so admired in the community, it, you know, people would come over and they'd give her so much respect. I mean I have--she was a very, very hospitable person. She cared, you know, for people. She was a caring person, you know, and everybody knew her, Ms. Bea, they used to call her Ms. Bea. I wrote a song for my mother called 'Ms. Bea', cause that's what they used to call her in the community, you know. And my family members would call her that, Bea, you know. I remember that, my house being a place where families congregated, where family members congregated, and, you know, and, had these dinners and great conversations and sometimes, you know, my uncles would have card games and all, you know. It was an event to have the family over, and they loved to, they loved--and they listened intently to my mother. She was, she was an inspiration for that family. And when she said something, you know, everybody listened (laughs) because she was a very wise woman, very smart. And she started a--I know I'm off on there, I knew you asked me my first memories, but I just--all these memories were conjured up when you asked me that question, you know. Speaker 1: And that's good, I mean--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) It was a place, it was a place of celebration, it really was for my family. Story_ID: 14651 Speaker 1: What neighborhood did you live in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: West Philadelphia. Speaker 1: West Philadelphia. Speaker 2: West Philly, yeah, Fairmount Avenue, that was where our house was. Speaker 1: What avenue, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Fairmount. Speaker 1: Fairmount, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Fairmount Avenue. Speaker 1: All right, so what, okay--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) West Philly. I went to Martha Washington Elementary School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Sulzberger Junior High School [Mayer Sulzberger Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and West, and West Philly High [West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Let me slow down a little bit. Now, this, let me--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Okay, sure. Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about the neighborhood, and you talked about it on some level, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of neighborhood? Speaker 2: Well, I had, I had some great neighbors, and not only because I could play on their piano before I got mine, but we--everybody spoke to each other, you know. I mean I was taught that, you know. If I passed an elderly person in the neighborhood, sitting on the step, I had to speak to them, coming and going. And not only that if they, like there was a lady called Moms Madden--Moms Madding, she used to bake biscuits and rolls. And she would share them with the, I mean she would share them with the community, you know. She'd come over. She'd bring a pan to my mother [Beatrice Stevenson Tyner] or she passed one on to somebody else. It was a real community. I didn't grow up in the ghetto. I grew up on the, you know, a wonderful, black community. But it, you know, it was wonderful. Speaker 1: Now, what did the street look like? Were there row houses or how--? Speaker 2: Yeah, row houses, yeah, row houses that--they were connected, you know, they were connected, which was good, which was okay, you know. It was okay. I mean we didn't have a lot of room for shrubbery or anything like that, you know. We had patches of grass, you know, that kind of thing. But my mother had a beautiful rubber plant in her beauty shop. And that thing just kept growing and growing and growing. But we had, they were, they were row houses, you know, and around the corner from me was another street that had porches, you know. I mean and I knew some people on that street. I'd go sit on the porch and talk, talk with each other. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Well, did you all have stoops on your--? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had stoops, um-hum, yeah, because we, we lived behind and above the shop, the beauty shop, you know. And, which was great, you know. My piano was situated--I had a console spinet and it was like situated in the beauty shop. So when my mother would have clients, and I had, I called a jam session, and it happened to overlap, she would say, "Come on in." And it was a lady sitting under the dryer with a saxophone player right next to her, patting her foot, yeah. So she, you'd get entertained and get your hair done (laughs), 'cause that was an incentive to come to her shop. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, not, only--the hairdo, of course, was more important, but, yeah, we'd have, we'd have a big band in the shop, be jamming right in the shop, when the people would be in there getting their hair done, getting a shampoo. I mean who's gonna ask for more. Story_ID: 14652 Speaker 1: What kind of a little kid were you? I mean what kind of a little boy were you? What were you--how would people describe you, you think, if they were looking at you? Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Beatrice Stevenson Tyner] said I was a nice child, you know. She always appealed to my intelligence, you know. She never tried to talk to me like--I mean if I did something wrong, quite naturally, that strap was not far. But I wasn't, I wasn't a discipline problem. I, I didn't have, I wasn't, I didn't, I didn't make that mistake (laughs). After one time, that was enough. But she wasn't a disciplinarian though. She didn't try to over-do it, you know, but she talked to you. My mother would talk to me. She explained a lot of things to me, you know. She said, "One day you'll be interested in girls." One, you know, and different, just different things, and she was right. I said, "Really?" (laughs). She, she talked to me like sensibly. She kept it real, you know, she wasn't trying to make me be anything other than what I was meant to be, you know. And I, I think I was lucky that way 'cause I know some parents would try to force their children to be something that they thought they should be instead of accepting them for what they were. But she never did that. But like I say, you know, I just enjoyed the family environment, the neighborhood, I--it was a real neighborhood. And that's what I mean, I mean--and people accepting, accepted each other, you know. We had the numbers man in the neighborhood. He was like part of the community, you know. And he was very generous, doing all this, he'd buy food for, for the families that were a little disadvantaged. I mean he was part of the fabric of the community, you know. And, and also there was, there was a candy store called Mike's Candy Store right across from me that had Charlie Parker on the jukebox and, you know, Nat 'King' Cole, and I mean I had a chance to listen to that vintage, that beautiful music, you know, Billie Holiday, you know. And my mother was always interested in music cause she, she loved Billie Holiday and Sarah Vaughan and Ella [Fitzgerald], and, you know, and she was, she was an amazing woman. I mean and that, and that community was amazing. Speaker 1: Now, what kind of things did you like to do when you were a little boy? Did you like the movies or sports or music? I mean on the radio? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah, well, we used to play, we used to play like stickball on, on the empty lots. We had an empty lot not far, you know. They had, it was just--so we'd go there, some of the guys in the neighborhood. We'd go there and, and play ball. Some of them had a half ball, you know, they'd cut the ball in half and had a broomstick, and, you know, you know, a lot of them would do that. Speaker 1: They would cut the ball in half? Speaker 2: Yeah, they would cut the--them times they played, they'd cut the, the ball in half, those rubber balls, they'd cut it in half. It wasn't like a hard ball or, or, you know, one of the other balls. They would--it was just a rubber ball, and they would cut it in half, you know. And then, and then we played, then we'd go to the playground which was the facility where, was accessible to us as children. And they would have softball there, you know, and hardball, whatever they had the proper equipment for us (laughs) you know. But I'm just saying that empty lot was just someplace we could go and just play and have fun, you know. So, it, it was a lot of wonderful relationships and friendships that developed in my community. I mean like I say, you, you weren't isolated, you know. You weren't set aside, you know, or oh, well, that's so and so. You, you--the people welcomed you. And the children got along very well. Occasionally, you had your little rumble, you know, but it was basically very, very--not a very rich community, but everybody made out, and everybody was concerned about each other. Story_ID: 14653 Speaker 1: So you had like a positive upbringing and a lot of positive people around you, encouraging you. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Now, how much a part of your early upbringing had to do with music? I mean when you were little, I mean did they, did you all play a lot of music around the house? And what kind of music did you play? Speaker 2: My mother [Beatrice Stevenson Tyner] did. She played a lot of music around the house. And then she'd take me--I'd go to Sunday school, and then I had to stay for church, some--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) What was the church, what was the name of the church? Speaker 2: Mount Olivet Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and not far from where we lived. And a very intelligent minister we had. And, but there was, you know, I would listen to the choir and then listen to the organ player and the pianist, you know. It was wonderful. My mother wanted me to give a concert in church after I had started playing for a while. So I said, "Okay mother," so I put my tux on, I had a little tux, little tails, you know, and, and I played. She was so happy, you know. And I gave a little concert in church. But she, I mean the encouragement that, that I received was phenomenal. It really was. I mean, you know, everybody used to, "Ah, did you hear so and so?" Story_ID: 14654 Speaker 1: You went to Martha Washington grade school? Speaker 2: Yeah, Martha Washington grade school [Martha Washington Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay, and--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Elementary, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, and that was there in West Philadelphia too, I guess, in West Philly? Speaker 2: Yeah, within walking distance. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All my schools were in walking--were within walking distance. Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of Martha Washington that you want to share with us? Speaker 2: Yeah, Miss Addison, like I was saying, was really--I had some great teachers. And it, Miss Addison was, was an inspiration because she played with the assembly, and a very, very elegant woman, and very long fingers and I used to watch as she was playing. She was very inspirational. And, you know, just being involved in, in the environment there was really wonderful, with the teachers, the various subjects and the encouragement that they gave you, you know. They wanted to make sure that you understood the language, you could speak English, proper diction and using the proper words, you know. And it was a--the teachers were very encouraging. Speaker 1: Now, what was your favorite subject? Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think--well, I was in the choir, and I, I joined the band in junior high school. But I also had my own little combo and a R&B [rhythm and blues] group, you know, but outside of school. But I liked, I liked a science, you know, I liked science a lot. I was very good in biology and, you know, that course. I wasn't bad in social studies. Story_ID: 14655 Speaker 1: Did you start playing in junior high school? Is that when you started playing piano? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I was thirteen so that was the beginning of junior high. Speaker 1: Now, what was the junior high school you attended? Speaker 2: Sulzberger, Sulzberger Junior High [Mayer Sulzberger Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay, that's in West Philadelphia. Speaker 2: Yeah, West Philadelphia, yeah, it was right across the street from my house. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I knew I was close 'cause I was, I'd get over there just in time when the bell--I'd just sit until the bell said, ding (laughs). I figured I was close. That's, that's cutting it close, you know. Speaker 1: So you were telling us before, you know, on the last reel that you were singing in a choir, and your mother [Beatrice Stevenson Tyner] asked you what you really wanted to do, and you said you wanted to play the piano. Speaker 2: Yeah, she asked me if I wanted to take singing lessons since I was in the, you know, enjoyed going since the choir director in junior high school, and like I said, she was Jimmy Smith's first wife. And she told me about him, and, and--but I was really, I got interested in singing, but I really wanted to play piano. And my mother would always, say if we would go to somebody's house who had a piano, she'd touch it. And I thought that she had this feeling of maybe if she wasn't a beautician, she would have played piano. But she gave me that opportunity to make a choice. She didn't say you have to play piano; you have to sing. She said, "What, which would, what would you like to do? Which one would you like to do?" So I said, "Well, I'd like to play piano." Story_ID: 14656 Speaker 1: Now, at this point in your life, had you been exposed to jazz. I know it was, I know at that time, like the big bands were playing, and I think bebop was starting to come into--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, well, I heard Charlie Parker and a friend of mine, his mother took us to, one of the jazz, [Philadelphia] Philharmonic [Orchestra, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] concerts, and Bird was there, Charlie Parker, who we called 'Bird'. And, and Art Tatum was playing piano. I, I knew this man was phenomenal. I, I couldn't believe it (laughs), and then Stan Kenton had his big band then. So that was my first introd--that was before I started playing. So I had to be about, maybe eleven or twelve, and his mother was into--he was a friend of mine, Garvey Merceau. Speaker 1: So when you were that age, Art Tatum was the first person you really hear--(simultaneously)--the first person of jazz--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I think, and I focused on the concert, yeah. I, I had heard recordings, you know, Bird and stuff like that, Billie Holiday, who--my mother liked Billie Holiday, and Ella [Fitzgerald] and Sarah [Vaughan], and, you know, but to hear a live session like that was major, you know. And I remember Bird's sound, his sound was phenomenal. You know, it was just (laughs) amazing, you know--but like I said, we had, I had a juke box across the street from me so I could, I could over there and put a nickel in and you could hear Bird with strings or you heard whatever, you know. You heard--so I heard, I heard a lot of music. And then there were a lot of, a lot of guys who were listening, a lot of people, not just guys, were women, young women and young men who were listening to the music, you know. They were, jazz was very popular in the '50s [1950s], and, you know, a lot of outlets, you know. So it was easy to pick the music of that, of that nature, of that character, of that--the music of that, that greatest cause you did get a chance to hear it. You did hear it. I mean they had pop music and all like that, but it didn't dominate the airways. Story_ID: 14657 Speaker 1: Who was your first piano teacher and what was your first lesson like? Can you remember--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It was an older Afro American gentlemen, Mr. Habershaw (ph.). He taught children, and that's one of the reasons why my mother [Beatrice Stevenson Tyner] asked me, did I want to take piano or singing. But she thought maybe if I want to take piano lessons, I could study from Mr. Habershaw 'cause our neighbor across the street, I used to go to her house and practice on her roll piano, you know, you know, Ms. Betty, she had a roll piano. And so I'd go practice on her piano. And that's when I first saw what a roll piano was. You put a roll in it, and then you press the pedals, and, then it all would press it, oh, this guy's got about, he must have about four hands, you know (laughs). It was like, the roll piano, you know, you could, you could do that, you know. But anyway, her daughter was, was studying piano from Mr. Habershaw. And he was perfect for children because he was very patient, you know. That's all he taught was children, children. He was very patient. And I remember he told me, after I got to a certain, he said, look, he says, "I've taught you all I can teach." He said, "Now, you get somebody and take you a step further," you know. And that's what I did. And then, and then I had--. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) So you were like--how long was it before he told you that was it? Speaker 2: Well, I had, I had studied, I had studied with him--it wasn't that long, maybe, maybe less, maybe less than a year. But, but I would practice like mad. I'd come home, and, you know, like I said, piano really--I was obsessed by it, by it. You know, I'd come home--I mean I did other things, you know, like say, play ball and, you know, what have you, and--but I was--so music took charge, you know, during that time, you know. And, and then I went on to Mr. Baroni. He was an Italian teacher. And he took me through [Johann Sebastian] Bach, [Ludwig van] Beethoven, and all that, [Pyotr Ilyich] Tchiakovsky, you know. I, and, you know, those, the repertoire, the classical repertoire, took me through that. And, and he said I was one of his best students, but a no-nonsense man. You had to come back, and he gave you an assignment. You had to come back and play it well, you know. I liked that about him, but he was very kind, you know. So I had two good teachers, two good teachers, you know. And I went to West Philadelphia Music Center [sic, West Philadelphia Music School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], that's where Mr. Baroni was. Speaker 1: Was that--okay. Speaker 2: It was a school, a small school, you know, but he taught out of there. Speaker 1: Now, that's not the same--that's--music school is separate from high school, right? Speaker 2: Yes, separate, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I didn't take--I didn't study piano in school, not regular high school, no. And I start--I went a little bit to Granoff Music School [Granoff School of Music, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for theory, you know, just--Granoff was a very prestigious institution in Philadelphia. I think it's still there, and they taught theory, but the theory was an older style, music theory, but it was helpful. It, it was helpful, but I mean, every little bit helps, you know. So everything that had to do with music, I took an interest in it, you know. Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite music that you played in those days, when you were first learning how to play? Speaker 2: Well, you know, you had these little vignettes, little small, little competitions, you know, 'Claire de Lune' and some other things, and they were, some of the Bach compositions, and, that I played. But I--. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) I just can't--, Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: --I just can't imagine you playing Bach. I mean with all the notes--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah, yeah, I played, yeah. But, but the thing, I mean what, what written music does is, it can show you the possibilities of what you can do with the instrument, what the possibilities are, you know. But it can't teach you to be creative. It's not meant to do that. It just can take you places that you may not have gone in terms of, music is concerned. It's all notated. See, wherein, you know, what I really wanted to do was, I mean I, I liked studying, but I put the books away. And I took my theoretical knowledge and, and information that I had gathered harmonically, and went that way. Story_ID: 14658 Speaker 1: Now, when did you start creating, you know--? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) When I was about--when I was fourteen I had, which was not too long after I started playing, fourteen and a half, something like that, I had an R&B [rhythm and blues] band. And they were made of, and that band was made up of students that, some of them played in the orchestra in school. And the son of the lady that took me to that jazz [Philadelphia] Philharmonic [Orchestra, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] concert, he played drums, Garvey Merceau. He played, and he lived up the street from me. He played drums in my R&B band, and I had, I had a seven-piece band. Speaker 1: Now, what did you call your band? Speaker 2: What did I call my band? That's a good question (laughs). I think it was McCoy Tyner Septet or something like that. I don't remember exactly. Speaker 1: Okay, you say you played R&B? Speaker 2: Played R&B, yeah. We played like, what we called house rocking, house rocking, blowing your, you know, like 'Blow Your Horn' by Illinois Jacquet [sic, by Benny Green], not 'Blow Your Horn', but another piece that was very famous. We at most recorded, we played, played music like that, and we played 'Blow Your Horn'. We, we won a talent show. We memorized 'Blow Your Horn', which was recorded by Benny Green, a trombone player. And my trombone player memorized that, and we were in a--we were in a talent show at the Uptown [Theater, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And Mantan Moreland was the, he was the M.C. [master of ceremonies] for the show (laughs). You know, Mr. [Charlie] Chan [movie character], you know. Speaker 1: Right, the fastest eyes in the West. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, so he--we won the talent show because at that time 'Blow Your Horn' was Benny Green, trombone player--brother played trombone--he was the, he had a hit called 'Blow Your Horn' and that, and also we had 'Flying Home' was the one, with Illinois Jacquet that my tenor player memorized. So I had a pretty good band, you know, I had trumpet and trombone, tenor, alto, alto sax, trombone and tenor sax, trumpet, had a pretty hot band. And then from there, some older musicians heard me, and they, they asked me to make some gigs with them. So, and that's where I really began to get, be around some real professional, top-notch musicians. Speaker 1: Yeah, now, I read that like Bud Powell and--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah, Bud. Speaker 1: --and Richie Powell--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, Bud Powell, they were from Willow Grove, Pennsylvania, and what happened is Richie was on the road with Max Roach, Clifford Brown then, you know, before they [Richie Powell and Brown] got killed [June 26, 1956]. And Richie had purchased this or acquired this apartment at a place called Trinity Apartments, around the corner from my mother's shop where we lived. And so he went on the road with Max, and Bud was, was here by himself with no piano, you know, 'cause Richie didn't have time, I guess he had to get on the road real quick. And Bud was around there, so one of the lady--the superintendent's wife was one of my mother's clients. So she said, "There's this piano player around the corner. He doesn't have a piano." And so he, he doesn't have anything to practice on. She said, "Can he practice on your son's piano?" So I, my mother [Beatrice Stevenson Tyner] told me about--and finally, I said, "Who, who is it, Mama?" She said, "I think Bud Powell." I said, "Bud Powell?" Yeah, he was right around the corner from me, and he came and played my piano (laughs). Bud came and played my piano. And we used to follow Bud around. We got him, they had a place where musicians could congregate and live there if they wanted to, if they didn't have a place to stay. It was called Rittenhouse Hall, and we'd have dances on the weekend, dancing the bebop, you know, that was what was going on, what they called bebop, but you know what I mean. But anyway, Bud, Bud played my piano, and then one time I was, you know, he had that smile on his face when he'd look at you, you know, and it kind of, kind of scared me a little bit . But then he was, he--one time I was practicing, and put--my mother had this pole, there was a pole outside of, you know, the, the shop, beauty shop. And Bud was standing there listening. I said, oh, I said, "Oh, what is, Bud back there listening to," (laughs). He was something, and I, I, I actually--when Bud came by, I offered him, offered him something to eat. And I saw Bud--he stayed in Philadelphia for a while because like I said, he was from Willow Grove. But he was, he was a child prodigy, you know, and he was all--he was very sensitive. He needed somebody to take care of him, you know. And, of course, all of them didn't do a good job, but I'm just saying. Story_ID: 14659 Speaker 1: I've also read like you had, they used to have jam sessions around there [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with Archie Shepp--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we had jam sessions--Archie--. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Bobby Timmons--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Reggie Workman. Speaker 2: Um-hum, they were from Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Archie and Reggie were from Germantown. Speaker 1: They used to jam with y'all--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, we had jam--see, here's the thing. We had sort of a grapevine. In other words, we would say, somebody would call and say, "Okay, we're gonna have a session down at Mickey Roker's house." We're gonna have a session--and Mickey lived in South Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Bobby Timmons lived in South Philly. Then he said, we're gonna--and then somebody would call and say, well, there'll be a jam session at McCoy's house--shop, at his mother's shop, be, you know, will be there at such and such a time. And then we would, Germantown, up in Germantown, Archie and Reggie, there would be sessions up there, you know. So we had sessions all over, all over the city. And then the Heath brothers, and be down in their basement, you know. Speaker 1: Percy [Heath] and Jimmy Heath? Speaker 2: Percy and Jimmy and [Albert] 'Tootie' [Heath], Tootie was around--was closer to my age. I think Percy had left already and went to New York [New York], you know. Speaker 1: They had a, didn't one of them have a son that became a rapper too or something? Speaker 2: Might have been, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, that was, I think it was [James] Mtume, I think. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so, yeah. Speaker 2: Mtume, Mtume, yeah, he got--he played, he played kubas and we--he was, he was on my record 'Sama Layuca'. Mtume was playing percussion on that. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So we had sessions all over the city. And it's, this one old gentleman, a brother, who was, he was, he lent--his house was always open, we had sessions every night, it'd be was good, he, he played drums, and he liked to sit in, you know. He wasn't great, but he just loved the music. He just wanted it in his house (laughs), you know. So we had a lot of homes like that, a lot of places. Story_ID: 14660 Speaker 1: When you hear about the music in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I mean it just seems like it just was so much going on. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I, what are your--is there any way you account for all these people coming out of Philadelphia? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) You know, I've thought about. People ask me that, you know, because with all the R&B [rhythm and blues] and, you know, jazz, and I mean it was, you know, and 'Dizzy' [Gillespie] had family in, in Philadelphia. And Clifford Brown was right down the road, I think, in Delaware, you know. And we had, and they would come to Philly and congregate. We had some great, they had some great jam sessions before my time, I mean before I started playing, a lot of great musicians that lived there, you know. It's amazing, you know. So, you know it, it's--someone asked me, and I think maybe, maybe, I was thinking because a lot of the Afro-American institutions were established in Philadelphia like the Methodist church, I think was one of--. Speaker 1: AME [African Methodist Episcopal], right. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think the African Methodist church, yeah, it was established there. The, maybe, almost the--not the end of the Underground Railroad, but, but one of the--it opened up-- Speaker 1: (simultaneously) It was an important center with William Still and others--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, and then they went further if they wanted to go further North they could. But I think a lot of institutions were established in Philadelphia, you know newspapers and, you know, what have you, you know, from the African American persuasion. It, it just, historically, even that, if you just look at it in general, we have Valley Forge [Pennsylvania] there and, you know, a lot of, a lot of historical things were there, the American flag was, was first sewn there, you know. Like I say, all those, all those institutions that were set up, you know, in the, in the African American community was phenomenal. Speaker 1: Do you think that--that music education in the schools a high--? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Education--yeah, it was a highly--what should, how should I put it? It was, it was a place that, where the education was very, was emphasized. We had, I mean we had some great institutions in Philadelphia. Granoff Music School [Granoff School of Music, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], we had Curtis Institute [of Music, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. That's where Nina Simone studied. She studied piano there, great school. You had to be brilliant to get in that school, you know. So we had a lot of institutions around there. You know, you can learn, and then we had a jazz scene which was heavy and they were serious, wasn't playing around, you know. You had to know how to play, if you didn't, they would show you, they'd help you. They'd help you. You had to, you know, 'cause then we had--I used to go to Atlantic City [New Jersey], Lee Morgan putting together a quartet. And he and I grew up together. We played fraternity dances, and in Atlantic City, I remember we played Atlantic City, a place called the Cotton Club in Atlantic City, big club, you know. They would have--and we were like the house band. So we had, we were on the front stage then. And then they had the back stage. And I remember Dinah Washington coming through there. Dinah would come--she had Wynton Kelly on piano (laughs), you know, and Jimmy Cobb, I think was, playing drums with them then, I think they went with Miles [Davis], but I think they had--. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) So you're a teenager. You're in high school, and you're playing all the jam sessions--? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we'd go to--and every year, yeah, that's how I learned, through jam sessions, (unclear). Story_ID: 14661 Speaker 1: I mean how was your high school life? I mean did it disrupt your high school life any, having all that activity, cause--? Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I didn't, I didn't let it do that 'cause, you know, I had to--I mean I could have gotten, I guess I could have gotten higher grades if I had really concentrated. I, I didn't fail anything. I just--. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) And where did you go to high school again? Speaker 2: Where? I went to West Philadelphia High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Oh, West Philadelphia High School, okay. Speaker 2: I think Bill Cosby went there too, I think, not real sure. But he's definitely from Philadelphia, you know. Both of us, Philadelphia guys, yeah, I've known Bill a long time, but--. Speaker 1: Were there any other musicians in your school, in your high school that came out with you with that, you know? Speaker 2: Anybody renowned, I, I'm trying to--oh, what's his name, Solomon Burke went to--we went to junior high school together. Speaker 1: R&B [rhythm and blues] singer, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, Solomon Burke, we went to--and he's still out there. And I went, yeah, high school, I'm trying to think. There were some guys who played classical pianos, piano players, when I went to high school, played in the orchestra and some, you know, but I, I don't know what happened to a lot of them. I think a lot of them moved to different places, and I don't know what they're doing. The only reason I know about Solomon because he's still out there, and his name pops up quite a bit. And--. Speaker 1: Now were you involved in things like the marching band and that kind of stuff in high school? Speaker 2: No, I wasn't in any of that, but we had some great, like [Jules E.] Mastbaum [Area Vocational Technical School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was a great, wonderful school, yeah. I think Lee [Morgan] went there, no, yeah, I think Lee went there. I'm not really sure. I'm trying to remember people who went to that school. But we had the music, great musical program. Like I said, we had Reggie, and--Reggie Workman, and we had Lee, and we had, and then had the Heath brothers [Jimmy Heath, Percy Heath, and 'Tootie' Heath] and Archie Shepp, also from Reggie's neighborhood, [John] Coltrane grew up there. He came there when he was a teenager, and he grew up in Philadelphia. Benny Golson and Coltrane used to practice together. And we had--it's so, it's so many--there were a lot of musicians around Philadelphia, played great. We had this guy Hassan Ibn Ali. He was very unique. He came from the Thelonious Monk kind of style of playing. He had his own style of playing. Speaker 1: His name was, again, Hassan--. Speaker 2: Hassan Ibn Ali, I-B-N, Ali. Speaker 1: Oh, Ibn Ali. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Hassan Ibn Ali. And you had Jimmy Golden--Jimmy Golden would get--he'd play like for a lot of the, a lot of the singers that would come through, Jimmy would get the gig, you know. And he, he could accompany singers great, he was great like that. And he could play, you know. But he was really good at accompanying the singers. There were so many of the older musicians that were real men (unclear), you know, a guy named Carson that played trumpet, he was a trumpet player; like I say, and Lee, Lee and I would, would do some fraternity dances in Atlantic City [New Jersey], you know. So, also I'm trying to think of it, it's some other people that were kind of important, that helped me a lot when I was growing up, yeah, a lot of them. You know, they kind of took me under their wing, actually. When they found out you could play, they--oh, come on down, (laughs), here we've got this session, and they'd show me songs and everything like that. Story_ID: 14662 Speaker 1: So you were really staring to get a reputation and a lot of contacts and a network when you were in high school--. Speaker 2: Yeah, networking, yeah, right, cause we had a lot of clubs. We had, we had the Showboat [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was a, was another club, and I had to put my age up, of course, you know, to play in a lot of these places. The Showboat. We had Peps [Show Bar, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which was really the show club. It was a huge club, and a lot of singers would come there, you know. As a matter of fact, Billie Holiday played there, and I had a chance to meet her. I had a chance to meet Lester Young. Lester Young was--I remember seeing Lester, you know, I went to, he was still on a break, and he had his--it was warm, and he had his saxophone around his neck, had the strap on it. He just stepped out there having, you know, take a little break, you know. And he was looking around (laughs), it was wonderful to see him, you know. Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about some of these people? Lester Young always had something to say that seemed to be quotable, and people would quote what--? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, he always had something to say. He, you know, he would, like when he'd be playing, and he took, he would take--I never, I, I never played with Lester, actually. Sonny Stitt, I did do some playing--I, I was like, I became one of the house guys around Philadelphia, and so I would play with, when they'd bring somebody in, like when Miles [Davis] was working, John [Coltrane] would come in, and I would play with him. Yeah, he wanted me to play with him when, when he would come in as a single. So, Lester-- Speaker 1: When did--? Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) So Lester, like if you're playing, and he wanted to, you know, close out the song, and he'd say, well, you know, instead of saying "Let's go to another," he'd say, "Let, let's take the bridge work," 'cause I mean the bridge work, he knew it was the end, so go to the bridge, and, you know, then you'd, you'd take it out, you know. He always had something, like some unique saying, you know, like that. He was something. He was, he was really a, he was a unique person, you know. I didn't know him well. I never played with him, but just, I heard so many stories about him, and then when I met him, I said, I can understand what they--but he inspired so many people actually, you know. He really did. Speaker 1: Now, you--what I read was that you playing at the Red Rooster [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: We were playing the Red Rooster, yeah. That's where I, where I met John, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a club, and it's across from where I live actually. We moved to Southwest Philadelphia, and the Red Rooster was on 52nd Street. And we--I was with Cal Massey's band. Cal and John were friends, and they used to--Cal played trumpet, but he also was a composer. And he wrote 'Fiesta' with Charlie Parker, you know, but he was really a great composer. So he--John came through here, his band. It was me, 'Tootie' Heath, from the Heath brothers on drums, Jimmy Garrison playing bass, and a guy named C. Sharpe, Clarence Sharpe was playing alto sax. And so John came, 'cause we had a matinee at the Red Rooster. And John came by. And I knew who he was, 'cause he, he just had a recording on Prestige [Records], a recording on Prestige, and he'd been working with Miles so I, I knew his name. And I knew, and I knew what he sounded like. But anyway, he was on, kind of on sabbatical visiting his mother. And we were so pleased to meet him, you know, it was great, you know, and when the matinee was over. So the club owner said, "John, are you working next week?" He said, "No, I'm not working next,"--he said, "Would you like to come in?" And he didn't have a band, he was just home with his, his mother. And so he asked us to--that's--the rest of the time I played with John, you know. I was like seventeen years old. Speaker 1: Now, he was playing with Miles Davis before, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he was with Miles Davis in the mid-'50s [1950s]. He was with Miles Davis. Speaker 1: Okay, and you met it, was it '55 [1955] or '56 [1956]? Speaker 2: It was around '55 [1955], yeah, mid-'50s [1950s], yeah. That's when I met him. I think he was--in the early '50s [1950s], he was with Miles. He'd been Miles, I think. I'm sorry, I don't know exactly how long he had been with Miles before I met him, but he was with Miles, I know that. Story_ID: 14663 Speaker 1: We have you meeting John Coltrane, now this is around 1955. Speaker 2: Yeah, '55 [1955], 1955. Speaker 1: Were you a senior in high school or a junior when you met him? Speaker 2: Might have been--. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) 'Cause I read you were seventeen. Speaker 2: Yeah, around seventeen, yeah, so I had to be around--. Speaker 1: You were probably a senior--well, I don't know, were you? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Were you a senior or a junior in high school? Speaker 2: When I met him. I think I was a--well, seventeen, I had to be, maybe a junior--or senior maybe, I think so, I think I was a senior in high school, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and he had been playing with Miles Davis. Speaker 2: He was playing with Miles at the time, but he took a break, mid-'50s [1950s], he took a break from Miles. And that's when I met him, when he came home. And I used to go to his mother's house and sit on the porch, and we'd talk. And that's when he was working on 'Giant Steps' and all those compositions, writing--he was writing, doing a lot of writing during that time. And, and we became, he was like a big brother to me. I used to sit down and talk to John, you know, he took me kind of like a brother, you know. And he was very warm, you know, and I, you know, got to his family a little bit, quite a bit actually. And so whenever he--he went back with Miles in the late '50s [1950s], and that's when [Julian] 'Cannonball' [Adderley] was in the band and Bill Evans and quite a few people. And I mean, a great band. It was a great band, you know, it really was. And so he told me, sometimes, when he'd come back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], he wanted me to play with him. So I, I did what I could, and made as many of them as I could with him. And then he said, well, "When I form my own band, I want you to join the band." So I waited and waited and every time he wanted to leave, Miles would, would offer him a better deal. So he, he, he couldn't, you know, he would stay, as long as he could. Miles didn't want him to leave the band, you know. He wanted him to stay there, but I guess he realized that it had to happen, you know, 'cause he could hear that John was developing something very unique. Speaker 1: Now, about that, now, this is, people have written, I know Kalamu Ya Salaam in New Orleans [Louisiana], who started the, the Heritage Jazz Festival down there, he wrote once in the '70s [1970s] that he thought, he really saw Miles Davis as like a, at one end of a pole (laughs), you know, in terms of his attitude and the kind of music he played, and, and, I mean especially towards the end, and John Coltrane at the other end though of it, you know, in terms of the attitude and how they approached playing the music and dealing with people too, you know. Speaker 2: I mean did that have anything to do with Coltrane splitting away from Miles, you think, or? Speaker 1: No, I think it was just his time to go. He liked Miles, actually. I thought they were, they were good friends, as far as I know. And, but I think it was just one of those things. He just to, he, he had developed--he was working on something all the while he was with Miles. If you listen to some of the later recordings that, that was done before John left, you could hear that he was working on different harmonic approaches, the way he was playing. I mean and extended things a lot. So he had a tendency to experiment a lot when he was with Miles, and it was time for him to get his own band. And so he took the initiative, you know--. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he wanted me to be in the band, although I couldn't join them right away because I was waiting and waiting and waiting, and then I had--and then Benny Golson said, well, look--I went on the road with Benny. I had never gone to California, and Benny Golson asked me to come to California, in San Francisco. They had quite a few weeks out there. And, and so he took me on--I played a concert with, with Benny at the time here in, in North Philly. And he really liked my playing. So he called me, I guess it was about three weeks later or something like that, about going to California. And he--I worked with him out in California, and then he told me, he said, "Me and Art Farmer are gonna form this band." And he said, "We're not sure what we're gonna call it 'cause, you know,"--so what happened, when we got back to New York [New York] after that engagement, he got together with Art, and I had a chance to meet Art. And Curtis Fuller came p with The Jazztet. So I did one recording with them, and we had, we had kind of a hit, 'Killer Joe', you know, on that, on that record. So it seemed like the band was really gonna take off. It was, it was a great band. Benny was writing some great music, and he helped me a lot. He really did. But then Miles--I mean then John left Miles around that time. And I had to, I had to put in my resignation. It was hard because, you know, Benny had helped me quite a bit, and I really appreciated it, you know. And, but him and John grew up together and so they knew each other. That made it a little easier, but, you know. So that was sort of the beginning of my, my relationship with John musically. Story_ID: 14664 Speaker 1: When you joined John Coltrane, you were in your early twenties, I guess or about twenty? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, early twenties 'cause--. Speaker 1: 'Cause it was you, Jimmy Garrison, who played with you in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] too? Speaker 2: Yeah, Jimmy wasn't the first bass player. Speaker 1: Okay, who--? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Steve Davis. Speaker 1: Steve Davis, okay. Speaker 2: My brother-in-law, we were married to sisters at the time, you know, I--you know, when I was married. Speaker 1: Oh, and when did you get married? Now, we don't want to skip past that. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, I got married--around '59 [1959], something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was not too long after high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, but we may have gone together about, you know, three years, something like that 'cause I met her when I was seventeen, and so I got married three years later, it was about Aiesha Edina (unclear). And we got married when I was twenty. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was seventeen when we got married--no, she was eighteen, I'm sorry. She was eighteen, and I was twenty. Speaker 1: Okay, so who was in that first band with John Coltrane? Speaker 2: It was John, and Steve Davis on bass and we had Pete La Roca on drums, and then, you know, he was trying to get the right personnel. And then Pete was with us for a while, and Steve was on--oh, and then he, then he told me about Elvin. He said, "Oh, Elvin, Elvin Jones." Yeah, I had heard of Hank, Hank Jones--pianist, I had heard of Hank, and I think I heard of Thad [Jones], but I had never heard of Elvin. I, he was, you know, Elvin. So John said, "Yeah, Elvin's really something." And later when I found, (laughs), then I knew who he was talking about. But anyway, Elvin did 'My Favorite Things'. He was on 'My Favorite Things'. We did that, that was the first record I ever recorded with John, you know, him and Steve Davis and, and Elvin and John. Yeah, that was a, that was a great--I really enjoyed that recording. A matter of fact, when they--when we were playing at the Jazz Gallery [New York, New York], we had, they gave John about twenty-one weeks spread out, you know. I think it was around nineteen, twenty-one, or twenty-one weeks. And this guy bought 'My Favorite Things' out from 'The Sound of Music'. He bought the sheet music. So I said, you know, I said, "We're gonna record, you, you're wanna record that?" You know, I, and I couldn't figure it. I didn't know what he was, you know, how he was gonna interpret it. But then he came over my house. We didn't live far from each other. I lived in Springfield Gardens [Queens, New York]. He lived in St. Albans [Queens, New York]. So, John--I had my little spinet down in the basement. And John came down there, and he said, "This is the way I want to play. I'm gonna play it like a vamp." So he, you know, like that, he said, "I want you to play it like a vamp," you know. And I played (unclear) over top, and then we had different sections, you know, minor sections and major sections. So that was, I mean that was, and that was the first time recording. And that band was nice. It was a great band. It was really a great band, and then he changed, and then we changed. And Reggie Workman came in the band for a while. Speaker 1: Now, he played bass too, Reggie Workman, yeah. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Reggie played bass, Reggie came in band for a while, and then Jimmy Garrison. Him and Elvin really hooked up, Jimmy and Elvin. They were really good buddies, you know. Story_ID: 14665 Speaker 1: Did you have a feeling, I mean this is like--I don't know, people that like music, I mean this just seems like a powerhouse. I mean did you have any sense at that time that what you were doing was historical. I mean, almost, it started with Elvin Jones. Elvin Jones, I--everybody says, even other musicians, all the musicians I've interviewed or talked to said, he was the best drummer that ever played in a band. Speaker 2: He was unbelievable. his rhythmic concept, all those polyrhythms and he, he was perfect for the band, perfect, perfect for the band. His, and his, and see, by him growing up in such a musical family, and his brother [Thad Jones] played trumpet, and, you know, and Hank [Jones] played piano. And I think, I think he had another brother too that played. But they were so musical. So he, he knew it all by--he was, I think--he wasn't the youngest brother, but he was, he was next to the youngest. Speaker 1: Some say that he's like, they describe him as a melodic drummer. I mean somebody that really--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah, he, yeah, he played--he was very musical, very musical, you know. He listened to everything. He, and he complimented everything that was going on, rhythmically, harmonically. And he was like right there with you, you know. He, he described it like, like a bow and arrow, like with the tension, you know, the tension of the bow, and you pull the bow back, and you feel the tension and want to go--wants to go forward. He said, that's the way he looked at music, you know, it was like, you know, he, he created the tension, you know, you know, and he complemented whatever we'd play. Like I used to listen to him, when--we never, we never rehearsed any endings. I listened to Elvin. I knew when he played something and we end, we'd end together. We were, we were a wonderful rhythm section, me and Jimmy and Elvin, wonderful. It was perfect, you know. And wherever John [Coltrane], I listened to John, I put that little harmonic carpet under him, you know, and then Elvin had the rhythmic thing. He couldn't go wrong. He had a band. And we loved him, man, we loved to play with Elvin. We used to, Jimmy and Elvin used to call him 'The Chief'. Like being with The Chief (laughs), man. And, and everybody respected each other, and we had, we had a lot of love in that band [John Coltrane Quartet, 1960-1965]. We, you know, we were like brothers. It was like family, it was like a family. It wasn't just a band. We were, you know, like, I remember a couple of times I was like, I'd be sitting at the bar. I was just, you know, I knew that Elvin and Jimmy had their little taste. But I'd be sitting in the bar. Elvin would come over and check, to make sure, "What you drinking?" I was so young, I was the baby of the band. I'd say, "I ain't drinking nothing but juice man, I got orange juice in here." (Laughs). But he'd come over and check on me 'cause it was a lot of love in the band, you know. Yeah, I miss that so much, you know. Speaker 1: And he passed last year, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, no, it was, was this year [May 18, 2004]. Speaker 1: This year, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, not too long ago. But just--I mean I was so lucky to be in the company of musicians like that, you know what I mean. Story_ID: 14666 Speaker 1: There's a video that I've seen a couple of times of the John Coltrane Quintet, it's got, this time Pharoah Sanders was joining--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, Pharoah, Pharoah joined the band, yeah. Speaker 1: John Coltrane and it's Jimmy Garrison, yourself and Elvin Jones. It's a fantastic video, I mean, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I just--at the Iridium [Jazz Club, New York, New York] they just had a--oh, not just had, maybe it's been close to, maybe about three, about four months ago, something like that. And it was a Coltrane memorial kind of theme. And Ravi [Coltrane] was there, John's son, who sounds--he's doing his father's part, but he sound like himself, you know, he's really--he didn't say "Well, let me cover my father." You know, I mean I like that about him. And he looks so much like him, I, I was looking him and I said (laughs). Anyway he was there, Kenny Garrett, Pharoah, it was, it was a heck of a day. I think they were callin'--Charnett Moffett, was on bass. But it was, it was big, it was really was nice, you know, to play with Pharoah again. And he did one of my favorite ballads that I recorded with John, 'Say It Over and Over Again', on ballads album--Pharoah played that, you know. So, it's a lot of music involved with that band. It's a lot of music, man. Speaker 1: It was a powerful group--. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was really, I remember going to Chicago [Illinois], McKee Fitzhugh, McKee's over on 61st [Street] and Cottage [Grove Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], going there, and the poor people coming in, I mean (laughs) it was unbelievable. It was like going to visit a neighbor, you know, and the club became like a living room, you know. Yeah, it was unbelievable, you know. That's not there any more. I think they tore it down, McKee's. But it was--the whole experience was phenomenal, you know. I can't believe it. It was like a dream come true or something (laughs), you know, cause we, we could play together, we didn't need no music. We had reached a point where we'd make up music on stage. We didn't no, we didn't need music. Speaker 1: Now, the--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) We created it from, from the first note, when John would play something, and he's say, "Go ahead and play," you know. Speaker 1: The way you described growing up, your family, your neighborhood, you know, people caring about each other and looking out for each other, and the way you described the band in the same sense--. Speaker 2: The same thing, yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, it seems to, it seems to make it so that the themes of the music couldn't be other than what they were. I mean John Coltrane's music is, I mean, 'A Love Supreme', even choosing 'My Favorite Things', I mean everything seemed to be a positive affirmation of life you know, in his music. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, his grandfather was, was a minister, John's grandfather. So he kind of grew up in the church. And Alice, Alice Coltrane, his mother was named Alice too, you know. She, she played piano in church. So, you know, he had, he had a very spiritual background. He was a very spiritual person, not just because of the church, but I'm just saying, it was just his nature. And then growing up like that, you know, with all, around practicing of religion and everything, I mean he really, you know, and, and he didn't stop at one kind of train of thought, religiously or spiritually. He, I mean he got interested in the Asian persuasion, you know, the Middle Eastern kind of thinking, and, and Indian, you know, Buddhism and, you know, he got involved with that, you know. So he really--I liked the fact that he was open minded, you know. Speaker 1: Now, there's a quote, I think on one of Gary Bartz's albums, he quotes John Coltrane as saying that--John Coltrane saying that he wanted to be a force for good through his music and through his work, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, he had, right, yeah. I, I can attribute that to him, yeah. That's, that's exactly what, you know, like that, the text on 'A Love Supreme' was like a testimony. It was like he was saying, he was making a testament, you know. Story_ID: 14667 Speaker 1: We were talking about the themes of music in John Coltrane's band [John Coltrane Quartet 1960-1965] and, well, yeah, any good stories from those days, you know, I mean with all--? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, yeah, yeah, well, you know, we used to drive. You know, John didn't like flying in the beginning. So, you know, he had, he had a couple station wagons. But I remember we drove a lot. We drove all the way to California. And I would, you know, after a while, you know, I would drive cause I would take my family with me, and we would, we'd drive, and they would, and they would fly or they would drive, and whatever. John would drive and the band, the rest of the band would be in--and I had my own car. But, but there were times when, when I'd be--when I've come to California with John driving, and it was great, you know. I mean it was, you know, I mean it was a long ride, but once we got there, it was great. And we, we went by a couple of clubs, you know, when we got there, and hear, hearing Elmo Hope, I think was playing, and, you know, he was in the club rather. And a lot of, a lot of good musicians. We ran across a lot of West Coast musicians who were very, very good, you know, very, very good musicians. And I remember John being, when we'd be in the car, he'd be driving, and then he'd break out in, 'O Sole Mio', you know, he'd start singing, you know, 'O Sole Mio', an Italian, kind of Italian folk song or something like that. And he loved vocalists, actually, he really did. That's why when we did that date with Johnny Hartman, he knew Johnny 'cause they were in Dizzy [Gillespie]'s big band together, so he wanted--he always wanted to do something, I think, with a singer. And Johnny's name, obviously, stuck out, and, and we did that. That was a great album ['John Coltrane and Johnny Hartman']. That's a collector's item now, that album with Johnny. Story_ID: 14668 Speaker 1: Do you remember how, the circumstances around John Coltrane's recording of 'A Love Supreme'? That, I think that's one melody that's like lasted so long, you know (singing) "a love supreme." Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Like I said, that whole, that whole--I didn't know that was gonna a suite. I really didn't, but a lot of times he would bring compositions into the clubs, you know, when we were playing, and he would start playing them, you know. And he'd say okay, and he may have a set of changes there, and he'd say, "Okay, play these," and, and then he'd play a melody on top of that. And, we--he just would, he'd do that, and he'd play it a couple of nights, and then some time he wouldn't play it. I said, well, "John, that's a nice song you played last night." He said, "Yeah," you know, but he would move on. He was constantly moving. He, it was almost like he had a deadline all of the time (laughs), and he was always creating something different and moving from here to there, you know, and always developing something. You know, he was like a scientist in a lab, a laboratory. The laboratory was, was the jazz club, you know. Speaker 1: So, is that how 'A Love Supreme', he just kind of, he just brought it--? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, he brought, yeah, he brought, you know, cause some, some of the pieces we had been playing and some of them we didn't. We didn't play, we didn't play them anymore. And so it was kind of a impromptu kind of a thing, you know, except for a couple of compositions, a couple of songs, you know, during that recording. Speaker 1: And I can't remember, but were you on the album 'Kulu Se Mama' when he did that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I was on there, yeah. Speaker 1: Where they had the Yoruba incantation in the beginning-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah, there was a guy called Juno [Lewis], I'm trying to think of his last name, but he had, he made like, he made percussion instruments. And I think, I think he was on, he played on that, on that record. 'Kulu Se Mama' . And it was, it was interesting 'cause the--one concept led right to another. You know, it was interesting how things do--and it does, even from my own experience with my own bands, and you record something, and then that will take you to somewhere else, and you know, like that. Story_ID: 14669 Speaker 1: In those early days, I mean with [John] Coltrane, I mean did--well, you know, when I look back on it, I, I started listening to music late myself. But those who had gone through, I think the bebop era and a lot of, and you know, there are a lot of themes in music, but it seems as though, you know, Coltrane was always trying to bring some, some positive theme to a setting that not necessarily was considered that positive. Did your family have any reservations about you becoming a musician and hitting the road and that sort of thing? Did they ever talk about "Hey son, watch out for this and watch out for that?" Speaker 2: No, no. They, they raised me pretty well. My mother [Beatrice Stevenson Tyner] was, she was, she was right to the point. I mean, you know, she never had to preach to me about anything because she--the values that were practiced in my home, you know. It's very important, and I had so much respect for her, I, I would have never done anything to, you know, to insult her or, you know, bring any kind of negative stuff, you know, around her. I'd never do that, and I wasn't interested in that myself. I'm interested in music, you know. So I didn't have, I didn't--I never worried about that--and she never worried about me 'cause she knew she did a great job (laughs), you know. And--. Speaker 1: Now, was there a lot of, a lot of corrupt activities around you as a musician? I mean--. When you think of jazz you think about a lot of temptations--? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) We had, yeah, because they emphasize that all the time. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean you got lawyers and doctors who can do more drugs than, than musicians, cause--successful too, you know They can, you know, the got the money, you know. So, and so, but they always talk about jazz musicians, you know, and what we do. And I mean some of us are cleaner than, you know, in terms of lifestyle, (laughs), than, than some of these doctors or lawyers out here, you know, I mean, really. We got, in my generation, you know, there were some people who, you know, did things. But then there were a lot of people who didn't do anything, who didn't, who, who were clean as a whip, you know. And I watched John come through some periods like, you know, his life when he was drinking or whatever, smoking or whatever, you know, and went right, came back through that, and, you know, went somewhere else, you know, and changed his lifestyle, you know. Speaker 1: It seemed like he really was struggling with those two sides of it, I mean in terms--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah, it, for a while there, but then when he got the band together, just before he got the band together in the, during Red Rooster [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], that week, he stopped drinking 'cause Reggie [Workman] was on the gig, and I was--Jimmy, I'm sorry, Jimmy Garrison, and I was on that gig, maybe Reggie at some point too. But I remember 'cause Reggie came in, and, he made a comment or something, and that, that helped to--John thought about it and he said, "Well, you know, 'cause, you know, no drinking is no, no good." (laughs) Speaker 1: What did he say? Speaker 2: No, he just said, that he sort of, I don't know if it was affecting John's plan at the time or whatever, but he said something, after he heard him, and I guess maybe--I don't know if John was, at the time drinking a little bit. But he stopped that week. I mean it was an embarrassing thing. He, he stopped (laughs). He changed his life around completely. I mean I don't if it was because of that statement or what, but it just, you know, he changed his life around. Because as I say, you know, he came up in a religious home, you know, so he knew, you know, he knew what to do. And when he finally got it together, you know, he just, his music just blossomed and everything, his whole life, really beautiful. Story_ID: 14670 Speaker 1: Now at, at some point, as you said before, John Coltrane was interested in Eastern religion and we know Alice Coltrane now, it's like she's a, she's been a follower of the Swami Satchidananda and other--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, she did for a long time, I think maybe, maybe John was interested in that. But then his, his first wife, Naima [Coltrane], she, she was influenced by the Islamic faith. So, and then prior to that, he was, he was a Christian, you know, being raised like that. So-- Speaker 1: Now, that's the Naima that the song was written for? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was his first wife. That was his first wife. Then he married, married Alice, and, you know. So that's good. I mean it's good, almost like a complete circle, very important, to have some continuity, positive continuity in your life, you know, very important. Speaker 1: Now, when did you get interested in Islam? Was this early on in this period or later? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) When I was--yeah, well, actually, the first person that attracted my attention was Malcolm X, you know. And Malcolm was with the Nation of Islam at the time. And then I met my wife and her family was into, at the time was Orthodox Islam, you know. And it was, it wasn't like, national--nationalistic. It was more like, you know, the way it's practiced in the Middle East. Speaker 1: Now, were they members of--? Speaker 2: They weren't members of any--. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Ahmadiyya or--just Sunni Muslims. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) They were Sunni. Yeah, Sunni Muslims. They weren't members of any group, you know. But, you know, but I say it like, you know, like I say, Malcolm introd--you know, what his concept at the time, when he was with the Nation of Islam. Speaker 1: And did you meet him personally or--? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, no, I didn't meet him personally. I just went to one of his speeches, in meetings at the mosque and, you know. And, and then I started meeting, you know, some other people who had either traveled to the Middle East or met people who were from the Middle East that practiced Orthodox Islam, you know. And I, I thought it was interesting myself. I really, I thought it was good. It wasn't about nothing about nationality. It was just, was a, I met people that were all different kind of colors that were Muslim, you know. And I read people in Germany, people in England who were--you know, and all kind of people, you know, different colors, different nationalities. That's, wow, you know, you can go to a mosque, it don't make no difference what you look like, you know, long as you were presentable, you know. And it was, it was enlightening for me. It really was. And, you know, I'm not as, you know, as practicing as I was during that time, you know, but I'm glad I went through it. I'm glad I, you know, you know, became a member and learned some things because it really showed me that, you know, about the Christian era I went through when I was growing up, you know, justified a lot, a lot of that. So I think it's, it's not so much to religion as it is how you are as a person, you know. And if it can help you, that's great, but to use it as a tool to divide people, I don't think it's--that's not what religion's about. It's supposed to erase all those things that separate people. And like a lot of stuff I hear on TV now, I say what are you talking about? I never learned that. I never read that, you know. They're about--because and I met people, some were white as tablecloth, some black as tar, and some people who were brown, light-skinned, I mean all kind of people in the faith, you know. I thought that was beautiful, you know, you know, like they didn't say, you couldn't go here, you couldn't go there because, you know, you, you look this way. I mean that's what's so lovely about the religion that I find, you know. Story_ID: 14671 Speaker 1: Now, you left John Coltrane Quartet and Quintet at one time in '65 [1965]? Speaker 2: Late '65 [1965], yeah. So I was with John about five and a half years. Speaker 1: So what happened, what was the--what happened? Speaker 2: Well, it was a natural transition that took place. It was, it was something that just naturally happened. I mean I was ready to--you know, I think Alice [Coltrane], you know, also, she was poised for the job, and, you know, and then plus, I was ready. I was really ready to leave a year before I did, you know. I was just--the music was moving in a direction that I think was very personal. And I just, I, I was thinking I--I had my own recording career along with recording with John. I--Bob Thiele, who was John's producer, and he later on became mine, and Bob came to me, and said, "Look, don't you think it's about time that you started your own recording career?" And I'm glad Bob told me that because that, that started it. And so I had been recording for a quite a while. And when the opportunity came up, and when I thought maybe, maybe I should leave--I'll tell you one of the things that happened is, Norman Simmons was playing opposite the quartet, or actually, it was more than a quartet. We had Pharoah [Sanders] and quite a few other people playing with us, Eric Dolphy. And so Norman said, that F sharp, you know, he, you know, he--before I went up, you know, he came down, and he, he was playing, you know, opposite me. And he said "That, that F sharp was sounding pretty bad. I--did you notice?" And I, I couldn't, 'cause we had two drummers, Elvin [Jones] and Rashied Ali on one side and Elvin on the other. And I couldn't, I couldn't hear the piano, you know. So I said, "Well, if I can't hear myself, then, then I need to, you know, vacate the position," 'cause he was hearing all this percussion and these horns playing and all this, big sound. So it was just, it was a little overwhelming for me. Speaker 1: Is that about the time they were doing 'Kulu Se Mama', with all the percussion and all of that? Speaker 2: It might have been. It might have been, yeah, sort of the late--you know, it was one of the latter periods of some things he was working on, you know, very free and open and just sort of, you know, he would try things. He was experimenting constantly, and, and some of it was a little bit overwhelming for me, for my instrument, you know. Speaker 1: Well, there were a lot of-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I mean you can't compete with drums (laughs) if you're playing piano, I mean, I mean you either have to work together or forget it, you know. Speaker 1: Those are two powerful drums, Elvin Jones and Rashied Ali, you know. Speaker 2: And they weren't really playing in conjunction with each other. They were, they didn't get along too--I mean their styles were so diverse and so different, you know. Speaker 1: And it's like, it's almost like basketball players with just one basketball, and-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah, that's what I'm saying. Speaker 1: And they can't really, you know. Speaker 2: So it didn't, it didn't work, didn't work too well, but I was in the middle. So I mean that's not a good place to be when you have--when there's lack of communication there, you know, and styles and things and it's hard to put people together that have diverse concepts, you know. Speaker 1: And you've got, well, Pharoah Sanders, blows a powerful tenor sax, I mean he, I mean he filled a lot of space up, when he blows the horn. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, John, sort of, you know, let him open up and play, you know. He, he liked Pharoah a lot. So--. Speaker 1: So, both of them playing like that at once, you know, the same time, right? Speaker 2: Both of them playing like that, and then you got two drummers, and then you got a piano out there, and so, you know, I just didn't fit in like, you know, it didn't happen--later on, I talked to John, and he told me, he said, he missed--after I'd left, and I think Elvin had left and Jimmy [Garrison] was the only one there. He was the last one to leave. And he said that he, he really missed the band, as it was, you know. And, but, but he was the force, you know. He was, he was motivated by some sort of force that kept him going, kept him experimenting, and he--kept him trying to create on a different level. Story_ID: 14672 Speaker 1: So, did you form your own group after '65 [1965]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, after I left him, I formed, I formed a trio [Henry Grimes, bass, Roy Haynes, drums]. Speaker 1: Who was with you? Speaker 2: I think Mickey Roker was with me, and I'm trying to see who else--. Speaker 1: Mickey who, I'm sorry, Mickey? Speaker 2: The bass player, trying to think, (laughs), it's been so long ago. The bass player's name [Henry Grimes], I'm trying to remember, but anyway, I had a trio, and that basically. Speaker 1: So drum, bass and piano, is that it? Speaker 2: Yeah, had a trio. And then later on, I started adding horns and, you know, and everything took it to a different shape. And we, and I moved from there and just kept--and then I got, I got a recording contract 'cause they were--but I had been recording actually, but the, I mean Impulse! [Records] picked up my--my option. And so I was able to spend quite a few years with them. And, and it worked out, it worked out well. I was still recording, and sometimes John [Coltrane] would let me--he would come and he'd want to hear what I was doing, recording-wise, I remember him coming to my house, and, you know, he said, "Oh, let me, you know, see what's going on," you know (laughs). He was, he was encouraging, you know, that's the thing, you know. Speaker 1: Now, between '65 [1965] and I guess about '70 [1970], '71 [1971], now, I've read, and I wasn't listening that intently in those days myself, so I can't go from memory, but it seemed like you kind of dropped, you know, below the radar for a lot of people for some reason. Is this true--I mean would you agree with that or? Speaker 2: In when, the '60s [1960s]? Speaker 1: Yeah, in the late '60s [1960s]. It seemed like it was a period of time when, when you didn't have the high profile--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, it was tough--no, it was, it was tough during that time, you know, because I--first, being with John [Coltrane] so long, and then the type of concept he had, you know. And so I got a little bit of, got lost in the shuffle a little bit there, you know, 'cause I had to establish my own, let people know I--now, although I kind of had established that with my own recordings, but I didn't have a group actually, you know, so when I was working with him. I would do some isolated jobs, you know. But I really needed to establish my own, my own direction. And I did that by forming quite a few bands actually, you know, in the '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 14673 Speaker 1: What are your thoughts or feelings about, you know, John Coltrane's passing? Speaker 2: Well, it, it was, it was, it shocked me because I didn't know that he was that ill, because he never, never let on as being, there was anything wrong actually, you know. But they say he had liver problems, and I thought maybe it might have been from his earlier lifestyle. But then again, he actually got interested in health foods and juices and things like that. He used to carry a juice machine on the road with him, a lot of times. So I thought maybe whatever, whatever could have developed during his, that adverse time period that he would have had the chance to cure his body, you know, of all the things that would probably contributed to his demise. So that was surprising. It really was, yeah, it was very surprising, 'cause you never know, you know. I don't know what kind of damage, he was living--he was very, he would never discuss anything. If anything was wrong, he would never say anything about that, you know. But, but anyway, I really, I really missed him. I still do, you know. I still--he was, he was a major teacher in my life. He taught me a lot just by playing with him, listening to him every night. How could you not learn, you know. So he handpicked the people that worked with him, he handpicked us, you know. He wanted me on piano. He wanted--and eventually, he wanted Elvin [Jones] and eventually, Jimmy [Garrison]. He just, you know, picked, handpicked. But he knew, you know, he had a sense of who should be playing with him, you know. And when he moved to the other stage where, a very free and open stage, he chose people that he thought that could deliver that to him, you know. Story_ID: 14674 Speaker 1: After I guess in the early '70s [1970s], your profile starts rising again. Is there a particular album or event? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, I got a contract with Milestone [Records]. The Orrin Keepnews called me, and he formed a record company called Milestone Records. And I started recording for them. And it was, it was picked up by Fantasy Records, you know, who, they did all those films, you know, 'One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest'. I still have a relationship with them, good company. And, but Orrin got me started, you know, about 1970, something like that. And, and I did a lot of recordings for, for him. Speaker 1: That's when you (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Sahara' was one, 'Sahara'. Speaker 1: 'Asante' [sic, 'Asante' was recorded for Blue Note Records], one--'Asante', yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, 'Asante', and there was also a couple of big groups, oh, yeah, 'Inner Voices'--. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --was done with a chorus, beautiful, 'Inner Voices', you know, 'For Tomorrow', it was a beautiful song. Speaker 1: That's right. I can testify. That's, you know, some beautiful music. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah, it's really very nice, yeah. It's nice when you listen back and, all the different phases that you've gone through creatively. And I've had people, people to tell me they liked it or they grew up listening to such and such a song. And, you know, they played it for their baby when the baby, before the baby was born, they were playing the--very amazing. And one thing, this one guy in Washington [D.C.], he named his daughter Tyner. And I said, "Why did you do that (laughs), that's your daughter (laughs). She's gonna get you next, when she gets older" (laughs). No, but he said, "She likes it," and so I said, "Okay" (laughs). You know, it's funny how people, you know, they have different ways of saying thank you, you know. Speaker 1: That's right. Now, ooh, I had a question right on the tip of my tongue, and I--oh, well, tell me about, now, one album, I know is--they're all wonderful, but one was unique in terms of its, the way it was arranged, I think, and that's 'Fly with the Wind'. A lot of people talk about that, just because of the addition of the strings and some of the other, the cello and the other parts, it's--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, that was the first time I had written for an ensemble, a string ensemble that large, you know. And so I remember sitting up all night writing because I, I even copied the parts, you know, I think, I'm pretty sure on that one I copied the parts. But it was just something I wanted to do. And, but I wanted to write it myself, you know. And I, I can't, I can never forget Kermit Moore's, the cello player, Kermit, his introduction--the introduction I wrote, and the way he played it, it was so--his vibrato. It reminded me of an older gentleman in church or something (laughs), you know, the way, you know, just singing hymns or something. It had a hymn sound to it, you know. And then when the rhythm came in, Billy Cobham was on that and Ron Carter, and Hubert Laws. They were perfect, they were perfect, you know. They just interpreted it so correctly, you know, it just was great, you know. So I, I want to do more string writing in the future, yeah--I don't know-- Speaker 1: (simultaneously) So you haven't done anything like that since that 'Fly With the Wind'? Speaker 2: Oh, not quite like that, that had that kind impact, you know. But, but I, I wrote some things, you know, like--I think on 'Inner Voices' there were some pieces that kind of remind me a little bit about 'Wind', but it wasn't the same thing, you know. That was done with a chorus, you know, 'Inner Voices'. Speaker 1: And this is all beautiful music, but how do you come up with the titles for the--did you, now did you--like 'Fly with the Wind', or you know, 'Walk Spirit, Talk Spirit'? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That's one of the hardest things--yeah, that's one of the hardest things to do. What it is, yeah, I listen to the music and see what it's telling me, you know. And that's--whatever it's telling me is what I use as a title, like 'Walk Spirit' sounded like somebody walking. (Sings the melody). You know, it sound like walking, somebody taking a walk, you know. And so I thought that was appropriate for that song, you know. And it had a kind of a spiritual kind of feeling to it. Yeah, so I think the songs let you know what they want to be called (laughs) and it's sort of, in a way, you know, because if you give a song an unappropriate title, it doesn't seem to lay right, you know. So I listen to it, I think about it, and everybody was saying, the people who were producing it were going, "When you come up with title, a title or when you gonna come up with a title for this song or a title for the, for the CD or whatever." And you're busy listening, saying, "I mean what is it telling me," you know. So, it's, it's alive. It's, it's not just a melody, it's, see it, hopefully has some life in it, you know (laughs). And, and that life is what defines what it is, you know. Story_ID: 14675 Speaker 1: How would you describe your piano playing technique? I mean what is, what's--do you have a--? Speaker 2: I used to practice a lot (laughs). Technique wasn't a problem. I--every day I practiced, you know, scales and exercises, but I think what happened is that I've been playing consistently for years, you know. I think performing is the best way to, it's the best practice you have because you're challenging yourself, you know, and your mindset is different than when you're just at home practicing, you know, scales. So when you're on a stage, you, you, you go for it, you know, and hope that you get it, you know. But you know that you got people out there that want to hear you play, and they want to hear you at your best. So you do the best you can. And you gear your thinking and everything, your concentration is on what you're doing. Speaker 1: But sir, there's another dimension to this that is phenomenal in a sense, I mean from somebody like who has seen you perform and heard your music, and talked to others that have the same impression. I mean what you do is like, it's akin to Michael Jordan dunking or somebody running faster than anybody else. I mean to watch you play, the physical aspect of you, of your playing seems like it's impossible. I mean when people look at it, they often comment, that, how is he able to play that fast and to play so many notes and have them all make sense and (laughs), you know, it just doesn't, it doesn't seem, I mean there are lots of piano players that are really good piano players, lots of them--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, that's true, yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: But I mean I think you have sort of, I mean people--I know you've heard this before. Speaker 2: Yeah. But you see, the thing is, I don't, I don't, I don't try to copy anybody. And I think everybody has something to say. And I've always believed that. As much as I loved Bud [Powell] or, I mean when I was younger, I tried to play a little bit like Bud, but you have to concentrate on you. Your music should reflect your thinking, your feeling, you know. It's not a, it's not something you just, oh, oh, yeah, that's it, you know. It's not about that. I'll give you an example. I was, I went to hear [Thelonious] Monk one time, in the new Five Spot [Cafe, New York, New York], and Don Cherry was playing opposite, and Don, he said, "Why don't come up and sit in," which I very rarely do. But I said, "Okay, Don, I've been doing it for a little while." And so Monk had finished his set. So I went up and played this piano. And I didn't like it. I didn't like the piano. I'm not gonna name the piano, but I just didn't like it. And it didn't fit me. So Monk asked, he said, "How you like the piano?" I said, "I didn't like it." He said, "Well, I liked it." I said, well--see, he was testing me to see whether I was gonna change and say 'cause he liked it, I had to like it (laughs), you see what I mean. But that's what it's, this music is about, self expression, you know. It's not about what somebody else is doing. It's about what do you plan to do? You know, how are you gonna reach your goals musically, you know, 'cause it's not about--it's, it's very personal. It really is, you know, and I think that, that's what I tell young, young musicians, that you follow your, your feelings, follow your ideas, you know, and you'll eventually get there. It's a journey, you know. But you can't get there following somebody else. How are you gonna, how you--they can't set a, set up a plan for you. You have to set that up yourself (laughs), you know what I mean, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, I guess what you do is, though it's almost akin to, though I think it's on a different--I still think it's on a different level, but it's almost akin to [Rahsaan] Roland Kirk playing three, you know, horns at one time or--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, boy that's the one that--I can't even do that. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) And he can't--nobody's figured out how he does, you know. Speaker 2: You know what was phenomenal about him, I remember they had the 'Playboy'--not 'Playboy', I was there, it was another--well, they have a Playboy Jazz Festival, but we're not talking about that. But it was the 'Downbeat' Awards for best pianist, best saxophone, whatever, you know, the readers' poll or whatever it was. So we were there, and a lot of musicians were there, you know, and they wanted us to be there just, not only to accept an award, but, you know, to celebrate the event. So anyway, Rahsaan was sitting, you know, in this room by--we had to go through this room. And I think it was near the dressing room. And he, and I walked in, and he said--he was blind. He walked up, and he said, "How you doing, McCoy?" And I looked, I said, "How, (laughs) how you know it was me?" He could tell, I don't know, with footsteps or, he felt, I mean that's just phenomenal. I mean, you know, I mean he didn't see. He couldn't look, I mean it didn't make a difference if he did or not. (laughs), You see what I mean, but he, he felt something. He was so sensitive. So that, that's what I mean, when you, when you're in touch with yourself, you know, that's, that's amazing. I mean, and that's what it's all about, you know, it's about you. What do you have to say? How are you gonna say it? You know, that's what it is. That's where the answer is, a lot people are looking outside. I mean maybe in the beginning you can look outside for inspiration, you know, but--because when I met Oscar [Peterson] and Teddy Wilson, they were so, you know, the [Benny Golson] Jazztet and, and their manager was the same, Kay Norton. She managed them and managed, managed the Jazztet with Benny [Golson] and Art [Farmer], you know. So, they were so nice to me. It was always thank you--not only thank you for choosing us, but we, we want to welcome you to the fold, you know. We want to welcome you into the brotherhood. Yes, it was, it was amazing, you know. I really, really appreciated that too, coming from them, you know, the great giants of piano. Story_ID: 14676 Speaker 1: How much touring do you do when you--? Speaker 2: Well, quite a bit, I, I tour quite a bit. I wouldn't say half the year, but at least I'd say--well, say then you have isolated jobs, I'd say maybe, I'd say two thirds maybe of the year, maybe I'm doing something, you know, musically; maybe not quite that much, but almost, you know. And I know, because I, I know, I know a lot of times I need a vacation, and I'm too busy to take it (laughs), but I do find, I do manage to get a couple of weeks out of the year to go away, but there are times when I just like staying home, you know, and I do, you know. So when I'm between jobs, I usually do that, but I do travel a lot, all over the place, going out of the country. I mean I just left Europe about, a couple of months ago, and I have to go back in October, you know. So I travel a lot. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Mostly, do you play in Europe mostly when you go out of town or is it out of the country? Speaker 2: No, I go to Japan and Europe, you know, I--I've been to Japan forty-three times. This will be the forty--the first time was 1966. So this will be the forty-fourth time I've been to Japan. Speaker 1: Now, is there a place where you think you're appreciated the most or? Speaker 2: Well, I think Europe and Japan is really, really appreciated there, you know, a lot--Europe and Japan, you know. Speaker 1: Is it the same kind of appreciation you get here? Is it better or what? Speaker 2: The thing is when you, I mean, you know, this is where the music started, what we're doing. And we can go back historically and talk about the African influence, but I'm just saying jazz itself started in America. And when you get an audience that's knowledgeable here, you can't beat it. You really can't. It's--they know, I mean and they can feel, it's part of, you know, their being, you know. But in Europe and Japan, they just, they look, and they're very receptive, you know, they listen to everything, you know. They're very intent, very dedicated to the music because it's not necessarily--it wasn't born there, but they accept it. They've always accepted it, you know, accepted it. Like in France, they adopted jazz like it's--I told them, I said, "Well, you know, I'm glad you all like it," you know, some close French friends I have. I said, "Man, it's American art form" (laughs), you know, it's an African American art form, and they--and what's so nice is to see the, everybody embraces it usually around the world, you know. It just, it's wonderful, you know, that, you know, you know, through all the hard times and things that we've been through, we still manage to come up with a creation like that. Story_ID: 14677 Speaker 1: You have described your relationship to music as being an extension of life, I mean the way you play, I mean you--it's just a natural extension of what you, what you do in life. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You want to talk about that for a second? Speaker 2: Well, I think so. I think it's developing something to say, I mean, you know, if you live, if you live long enough, you're going to have something to say. It's just being able to have the tools and the wherewithal to do it, to express it. That's, that's what I'm talking about, you know. I mean so, you can have information, but how does it affect you personally? What is the, what is it that makes that information vital to you in terms of your expressions? And we all have a story, you know. We all have something to say. It's just being able to say it, you know, and, and this music is, is--it opens you up, and gives you that opportunity to express yourself, without, without barriers, you know. You can, you're an artist, so you, and that's what it's about, you know. And music comes from, from somewhere special, you know. Speaker 1: Now, when you come up with a composition, do you--I mean how do they come to you? I mean how does a melody come to you? Speaker 2: Well, I sit down and play, and, you know, to me, writing and composing is like improvising. It's just that you, I mean when you, when you are playing, performing, you're doc--you're notating anything, you know, on paper. But you're still creating something, and, and the concept applies to when you, when you coming trying to come up with a song, you know, you've got to write it down, you've got to write the melody down or tape it or something so you can remember what, what it is because it changes. It's like, like you were improvising something. Again, it changes just that quickly, you know, moves on to something else. And I think that, that's--that's the way I look at it, you know. It's like I'm improvising when I'm, when I'm--and one thing leads to another. You know, when you look up, and first you get the beginning of the song, and you say, wow, that's beautiful. Then you to pull in the middle, which how, how should you resolve these things? See, that's where this--how you resolve something is not just coming up with something. It's how do you resolve it? How do you make this make sense, you know, and meaningful, you know. And you don't know, always know what it, how it's gonna happen, but it does, some kind of way. And you become a receptacle. Story_ID: 14678 Speaker 1: Who are your favorite piano players? Speaker 2: Well, when I was growing up, I think Bud Powell, Thelonious Monk were the two at the top of the list, you know, and Art Tatum, I should say three (laughs). Those three. They, they were inspirations. They showed you what the possibilities were in terms of playing this music and, and being a pianist. I think that I've, like getting back to, to defining yourself and defining who you are, that's important. That's how you come up with your own sound. Everybody has their own sound. You just have to--if, if you can stay away from copying people, you can admire what they're doing, but if you, if you try to copy somebody, then you're trying to take their story and their sound and make it yours, when you have your own, you know what I mean? So, but like I said, the people that, the pianists I like, like Monk and Bud and, they, they inspired each other. I know Bud learned a lot from Monk and Monk learned a lot from Art Tatum and Duke Ellington, you know. But they sounded like themselves, see, that's, that's the key, you know, to be inspired, but sound like yourself. And those three guys, their, their standards were definitely prevalent. Story_ID: 14679 Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns about the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, we have a tremendous heritage when it comes to music and literature and stuff like that. I think that through our music we were able to sustain a lot of the very important historical events and people through our music. It's a, it's a wonderful, cultural entity, you know, a lot of stories were told by music, (unclear), it just, it helped to sustain us, I think, all these years, you know. It's a very, very element. And I'd like to see the African American community embrace their musical heritage. It's very important, you know. And I think that, I think it's happening with a lot of the younger people, you know, maybe not as fast as we'd like, but it's, I mean it's got such deep roots, again, it could, I don't think we could ever lose it, you know. Story_ID: 14680 Speaker 1: When you look back on your life and all the things that you've accomplished, is there anything that you'd do differently? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I, I think I would have followed the same road map, you know. I think I just, I think I was meant to do what I did, you know. It's not like I was trying to do anything, do something great or I just--I was at the right place and in the right time, I think, you know. I, I think that's the only way I can explain it. You know, I, I can't--you can't plan your life out like that, I don't think. I, I think that's just the way it's meant to be, you know. I don't know if I could have been anything else. I wanted to be a businessman and just a person who had a business. And my mother [Beatrice Stevenson Tyner] loved business, you know, she loved that. And she was very progressive when it came to her thinking in terms of women's--women being able to get involved in a business situation and make it work. I think I got that element from her. So, but I, I don't think I would have changed anything, because now I'm a businessman and a musician. So I'm a combination of both things, you know. But it's been, it's been a wonderful trip, and it still is, you know, I don't want to say it's been, past tense. I mean I haven't got to past tense yet, but (laughs), anyway, it's, it's just, it's a wonderful thing to, to have lived this life and done some remarkable things, and in being in the company that I've been in, people that inspired me. Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned, I think we were off camera, you were talking about the different ways that people appreciate you, and you mentioned a man that named his daughter after you, actually. Speaker 2: Yeah, see, he's gonna learn, you know, live to regret that (laughs). No, yeah, that happened and a lot of people say different things. Some guy said he was in Vietnam, in the, you know, down in the foxhole, and he, he listened to the music, and he said, it helped bring him through the war, that I--you know, if he, if it wasn't my music, it was the music I did with John [Coltrane] or whatever it was, you know. But it's just all those good things, you know. I mean they really make you feel like, you know, you have, you have meaning, that your existence wasn't in, in vain, you know, that it was, that you contributed something. Story_ID: 14681 Speaker 1: Now, what would you see at this juncture--you're still creating, but what would see at this juncture as your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I'm a very supportive person, and I look forward to going to work and supporting, supporting, when I was with John [Coltrane], supporting him in his musical endeavors, and because of that I was rewarded tremendously from being supportive, you know. So I think when you're on stage with somebody, you know, it's about us, it's not about me, you know. It's about us. And we, we're working towards a goal, and, and we're all working to get there. We hope we get there and by, by taking that kind of attitude, we usually do. Something comes out of it, you know. And I think that being supportive and watching it grow and develop and watching it happen, the success from working on a particular thing, but doing it in, in concert with each other and, and working hard and concentrating on it so that it'll happen, I think that's, I mean I think that's a wonderful thing to have some people say or your fellow musicians say, he helped me, you know. And that's what I did, most of my life. I--in, in music, I mean, even if I had my own band, I want a guy, if he's not in, if he's not in my band, I want, you know, after some, after a certain amount of years, whatever or months or whatever, and he wants to go on his own, I want him to leave my band with the feeling that he's learned something. He can--and he can, he can walk away feeling that I'm glad I was in his band. You know, that, that's a bond thing, you know. And a lot of musicians that work with me, they can say that, cause if they don't say that, then what happened? We didn't communicate with him cause I insisted on that, that we listen and support each other. It's not about me, it's about us. Speaker 1: Okay, this last question is similar to legacy, but slightly different, and I think you've almost, you've already answered some of it already, but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, how would I like to be remembered? Well, it's what I think about myself that's important, you know, and that's the only thing, that's the only time you can reflect something positive 'cause if you think you are a positive person, you know. If you don't think that you're positive, then you might be that other thing, you know, the other side. And that's--I, I'd like people to know that there is something to gain when you do the best you can and develop something to utilize your life here 'cause that's what it's for, you know. You shouldn't be wasting your time and your life, you know. You should motivate yourself, think highly of yourself, you know, 'cause we all have a purpose. And I, I think that, I think that's a good legacy to leave, you know, that I fulfilled my purpose for being here. I think I did..