 Story_ID: 115087 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Thomas Jefferson. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Joyce Elaine Tucker, J-O-Y-C-E, E-L-A-I-N-E, T-U-C-K-E-R. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is September 21, 1948. I was born in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. And, ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am the Vice President of Global Diversity and Employee Rights at the Boeing Company, and I'm a lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is May, I think 25th, 2010, May 24, 2010. Speaker 1: All right. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at my office in the Boeing Company. Speaker 1: All right. In the Loop of Chicago, right? Speaker 2: The Loop of Chicago-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --right. Story_ID: 115088 Speaker 1: And now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --requires me to ask of every one and they're kind of a warm up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite food is spaghetti. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is red. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is September, my birthday. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: San Francisco [California]. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: That's a hard one. Actually, no. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 115089 Speaker 1: Now before, well, we, we, we're ready to get started, I guess, not before (laughter). Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: I'm a ask you about your family history-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. I'm gonna start with your mother's side first. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Vivian Louise Ellison Tucker. That's V-I-V-I-A-N, L-O-U-I-S-E, E-L-L-I-S-O-N, T-U-C-K-E-R. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is Chicago, Illinois, and I don't know her date of birth [January 5, 1925]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it's-- no I'm not sure about the date of birth. Speaker 1: Not sure about the year? Speaker 2: Really, I'm not. I think it's like '25 [1925]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that might be, I think that might be it. Speaker 1: Okay. I'll put down here approximately-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --'25 [1925]. Speaker 2: Well, I have written down somewhere-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I don't know it by memory. Speaker 1: All right. Well, what, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? I mean can you trace her history back very far? Speaker 2: My mother's side of the family I don't really know from memory but we have people in the family that have developed the family tree very extensively but I don't, I don't remember it. But she as a young person, young girl, she was raised primarily in Grand Rapids, Michigan. And I think they moved to Chicago when she was about eighteen. But from what I understand, she was born on a vacation in Chicago which is why she was born in Chicago but raised in Grand Rapids, Michigan. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Any stories about what the family, you know, what the family was doing in Grand Rapids in terms of a occupation or? Speaker 2: My grandfather, I think he worked in the service industry. And I remember them telling stories about there were six in her family, two girls and four boys. And I remember them talking about how poor the family was and how sometimes when they wanted something to eat, they would go to a railroad station and they would pick the beans that have fallen out of the bags when people were delivering, and that's what they would cook for dinner. There's a picture that they have of the family standing in front of the house, and we couldn't tell whether the house was leaning or the sidewalk was leaning but there was some leaning action going on. And then we have copies of that photograph and, you know, everybody was standing very, very proudly but if you look closely at the picture you would see that some of the sweaters had holes in 'em, some of the gym shoes, you could tell, you know, that they needed big, they need to be replaced. But the remarkable thing about the picture is that everybody was standing straight and very proud to have their picture taken, and my grandfather was in a suit. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this was during The Great Depression when, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it could have been. Speaker 1: --that your mother grew up. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Now, she, she was born around '25 [1925], she's five years old at, or, or four when The Great Depression hits. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: So the whole country's pretty much suffering then. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: If you were already not well-off, you were probably worse off. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, and the whole country's kind of like that. Story_ID: 115090 Speaker 1: So, any other stories about growing up that your mother [Vivian Louise Ellison Tucker] talked about? Did she get a chance to go to, all the way through school? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. She went to, she went all the way through high school. She graduated from high school. And her family, you know, her mother, my grandmother went to, I think she went to high school, she went to a Quaker high school and I would hear her talk about that, where they had to go to school in starched white dresses. And when you think about it, and I used to talk to my grandmother a lot, and we talked about the education that she got, and you could tell that even with her high school education, that she was very well educated. And she used to talk about being in the ghetto in Chicago and her phrase was, "We may be in the ghetto but we're not of it." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was very strict about correcting you if you lose, use inappropriate language. If you said "dem" and "doze" which was not uncommon in our neighborhood, you know, she, you couldn't even get a sentence out, and she was going "them," "those," so either you were gonna use language appropriately or you were gonna have an abbreviated conversation with her. And my mother would talk about when they lived in Grand Rapids [Michigan] and I guess they would play a trick on her father, you know, he was very particular about how well they washed dishes. And they had a habit of asking him to show them. You know, they'd do something wrong and he'd come in and help, and they'd do something wrong again, he'd come in and help, and next thing you know, he had washed all the dishes. You know, I remember that story being pretty funny. But I knew we couldn't use on that on her because she knew what the trick was. And just listening to her talk about her sister, and as I'm talking to you these stories are coming back, and they're not necessarily coming back in any chronological order. But I have an aunt, her sister, who was a lot younger than my mother. And my mother would go out and go near the playground and didn't necessarily want to take her sister with her all the time, and she said my grandmother would always say, "Take your sister." And as it turned out, my aunt's nickname became Sister because they were always saying take your sister. And my mother said and every time they would take her to the playground something would happen and she got hurt, and so they would say, "Your sister's hurt." And so her name for almost as long as we knew, was Sister. We didn't call her "Henrietta" [ph.], we called her "Sister." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, and she talked about the boys and, you know, different things that that they did. So the stories, even though they were in a poor neighborhood, the stories were always fond memories of growing up and then moving to Chicago. And the story that she talked moving to Chicago was that the suitcase was strapped on the back of, or the top of the car, and the suitcase blew off. And so when they got to Chicago, you know, they had to start all over again in terms of clothes because everything that they had was in the suitcase that flew off the back of the car. And so those were the kind of stories that they told, and really that's all I remember about her childhood. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So about what time did she, how old was she when they moved to Chicago or what year (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: They moved to Chicago when she was about eighteen, I remember her, her saying that. And she finished, I, I guess, she had finished high school in Grand Rapids, and from what I understand she went to either Wright Junior College [now Wilbur Wright College, part of the City Colleges of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois] or one of the junior colleges in Chicago. So she completed some of, I think two years of junior college in, in Chicago. And as I was talking about my grandmother, who went to high school, the Quaker high school. So that was a big deal when you think about the age that she was. Story_ID: 115091 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name is Howard, H-O-W-A-R-D, Malano, and I guess that's M-A-L-A-N-O, and that's Tucker, T-U-C-K-E-R [Howard (George) Malano Tucker]. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His place of birth was New Bern, North Carolina. And I think he was born in '23 [1923], you know, 1923, I'm really, I'm really not sure on those dates but I think it's around that time [sic, September 5, 1924]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now what can you tell us about his side of the family? How, how far back can you trace that side (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I can go probably further back on that side but I did, you know, have a memory about my mother's side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That I wanted to add because my [maternal] grandmother told me that her father owned a, a store. And he was doing very well with that store. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And he was doing so well with the store, that the white folks in the neighborhood just shut it down. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: You know, either you close it or we'll burn it or you gone have a problem. And that's how his store was closed. But my grandmother said he was very successful until he was too successful. And that was the end of it. Speaker 1: Okay. So they just threatened to, they didn't--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: They threatened him. Speaker 1: --and hurt him really or-- Speaker 2: You know, kill him. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: But it was over-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know. And, and I remember that my grandmother talking about that and being upset about it but she shared--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Did she frame it as the [Ku Klux] Klan did it or, or some-- Speaker 2: Uh-- Speaker 1: --organized group of white people? Speaker 2: No, she said the white folks. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, that's all she said. And she was a very religious-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --person. So, it didn't seem like, seem like it was there, but she was working on it, you know, getting rid of the animosity. Story_ID: 115092 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On my father's [Howard (George) Malano Tucker] side, his father was a, from what my grandmother used to tell it, a jack of all trades. He started off boxing, and then he, she said he would be involved in some of everything. He was good at it. He wanted to, to be successful at it but he didn't wanna spend the time, you know. He would, he would jump from thing to thing because when the success and money didn't come as quickly as he wanted it to come, then he would move on to something else. My grandmother was a school teacher, I mean she was someone who valued education. She went to grammar school. She excelled in grammar school. She went to high school. She excelled in high school. She said the thing that she wanted to do was, she wanted to be the best, she wanted to be the smartest, she wanted to be the most talented and she was. She pushed herself to excel. Speaker 1: Now, what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Edna, E-D-N-A, Kelly, K-E-L-L-Y, and last name Tucker. Speaker 1: Okay. So what did she do? Speaker 2: She was, she ended up being a retired, she ended up being a school teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as you probably remember back during that time, being a school teacher, period, but being a black school teacher was a big thing. It was very prestigious to be a school teacher. And she taught all the grades. You know, that's when they had-- everybody was in the same classroom. And she was a strict school teacher. You know, she was tall, she was fairly skinny. She wore her hair pulled back in a bun. And one of the reasons why I never wanted to be a school teacher because I didn't wanna be "Miss Tucker the school teacher," because my grandmother was tall, skinny, pulled back, she was typical, you know, she looked like what a school teacher looked like. And we thought that until we got pictures of her when she was young, she did not look like (laughter) what a school teacher should look like. She was very attractive, and well she was attractive older, but she fit the mold of a school teacher. And she'd often talk about some of the challenges that she had with some of the parents because she expected the kids to do what she said and if they didn't, they got a spanking. And if their parents came up and challenged that, well, you know, they might get a spanking too. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: But, you know, she was very stern. It was her way or that kid was gonna be out of her class. Her father was a minister. And I think, you know, historically that seemed to be what that male line did. You know, he was, I think he was American-- A.M.E., African Methodist Episcopal-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --minister. And her mother was a homemaker, you know. And I do have pictures of my grandmother, great-grandmother who was just absolutely beautiful. You know, she was just very, very attractive lady. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now did your father, any other stories about your father's side of the family that, that, did they own their own land and everything or did they-- Speaker 2: Don't remember if they owned their own land but I got the impression that they, they weren't well-to-do but they weren't as poor as on my mother's [Vivian Louise Ellison Tucker's] side. So I, I think well, they owned their own home, you know, they had their own home. Speaker 1: And that's in New Bern [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: That was in, part of it was in New Jersey. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: I think it was Trenton, Trenton, New Jersey, and then New Bern, North Carolina. Story_ID: 115093 Speaker 1: Okay. Did your father [Howard (George) Malano Tucker] grow up in Trenton [New Jersey] or-- Speaker 2: I think he grew up little part of the time in Trenton but primarily in New Bern, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and now did he get a chance to finish school? Speaker 2: Well, he would always say, "I went to," you know. I remember one time he said, "I went to Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts]." And I said, "You went to Harvard?" He said, "Yeah, I went to looked around (laughter) and came out." So he went to high school and then he joined the service, you know, he, he joined the service and he didn't stay. He said he went there and he went there to learn electronics. And when he got there that was not, you know, they didn't comply with what was advertised to him. They made him a cook, and they put him in the bottom of the ship. So, I guess he was in the [U.S.] Navy. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: Navy, absolutely. Speaker 2: And he said that wasn't where he wanted to be because he knew that if the ship got bombed, then all the blacks who were in the bottom of the ship would go under. Speaker 1: Now is this during World War II? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was during World War II. Speaker 1: It sound like it'd be around that time, yeah. (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right. You know, and when he signed up, you know, he joined, he told them, they told him, "You can be whatever you wanna be." And he wanted to do something with electronics, radios, and as soon as he got in, they made him a cook, bam, that's where he went. He said he never saw the light of the day. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: So, one day on leave, he didn't go back. He said that was it. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) so, well what happened? Did they come looking for him? Speaker 2: They did but somehow he said they let him out, you know. And maybe they let him out because he was so young, but I don't know. He, they didn't put him in jail and they didn't arrest him or anything, they knew where he was but and that's how he ended up in Chicago [Illinois]. But he said that was it. You know, he was not going to, number one they were, he said, they were mistreating them. And he wasn't gonna be the one that went down with the ship. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And he said they also treated them poorly. They disrespected them, they called them the N word and it was very harsh situation. Speaker 1: Okay. So he came to Chicago after he was discharged or after he--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, after he discharged-- Speaker 1: --left. Speaker 2: --himself (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Did he, did he, did he ever get an official discharge from the Army? Speaker 2: You know, what I'm, I'm not--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Or the Navy rather? Speaker 2: --I'm not sure. I'm, I'm sure he did eventually or he would have been in jail. But he, he got something. He, I had to, and I don't think it was dishonorable because, and I think he got some kind of benefits but I'm not sure about that. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 115094 Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Vivian Louise Ellison Tucker and Howard (George) Malano Tucker] met? Speaker 2: Yes. According to my mother that she was walking down the street one day, and this guy came behind her and said, "Oh, you have beautiful legs." And they started talking and that's how she met him. Speaker 1: Okay. So just, just from that? Speaker 2: Just from that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And this is in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: This was in Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think she said she was on her way home from junior college [Wright Junior College, now Wilbur Wright College, part of the City Colleges of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 115095 Speaker 1: All right. Now, when you think about your parents' [Vivian Louise Ellison Tucker and Howard (George) Malano Tucker] personalities-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --and their talents, and their dispositions-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Probably my mother, probably my mother. But-- Speaker 1: Well, why? Speaker 2: Well, because she was one that was focused on education and I'm sure she kind of like drilled it into me. She also was pretty outgoing. And I think, you know, when I meet people who knew her, they always said stuff like, "You're just like your mother." So there has to be some characteristic. And I did, did look like her, you know, so, you know, there was that resemblance-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --there. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So I think that personality. And we used to, we didn't, we never, ever, ever argued but our minds thought alike, which meant that, and my sisters would say, you know, she always challenges you, but she doesn't, she didn't challenge the other two. Speaker 1: Okay. So you had a special relationship with, your mother, mother (unclear). So were you sisters said and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you felt that way too? Speaker 2: Yeah, I felt there was a connection because I, in the family, you know, I liked to spend time with my mother, and I liked to spend time with my grandmothers. You know, and the person that spends the time with the people, are the ones who have the different kind of relationships. It's not like they are singling you out or treating you, you know, preferential treatment, it is they're responding to the people who, who are responding to them. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And I remember one time when someone asked my mother, "If you had to say your kids came from a planet, what planet would you say they came from?" Which is a bizarre question. I mean, who gets those kind of questions? And my mother thought about it and she said that my older sister came, Sharon [Sharon Louise Whitaker] came from the moon because she was quiet and peaceful and tranquil, and she's right. I mean she, hit her exactly right. And then she said my younger sister, Yasmin [Yasmin Bates-Brown], she said Yasmin comes from Venus because she's very exotic, and she's right. And then she thought about it, and she kind of laughed a little bit and she says Joyce comes from Mars (laughter) because nobody knows what she's gonna do, you know, she's unpredictable. And I thought wow, she's right, you know. But it was such a strange question but the answer, I thought, was perfect. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So you, do you consider yourself so, would you a, this self-concept of yourself as being eccentric when you were little? Speaker 2: No, not eccentric but unpredictable. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, I mean, I was the one who was dancing and singing. You know, if it was raining outside and I would put boots on and, and get an umbrella and I would say "Can I go out and play in the rain," and then I would do the "I'm Singing in the Rain" dance or whatever, in the rain. And she would say, sure go ahead. Or I would say, you know, "Mama, I, can I go in closet, you know, because I wanna see how loudly I can scream." And she would say "Okay, go ahead." And I wasn't upset or frustrated, I just wanted to see what it sounded like if I screamed as loudly as I could. And she would not say don't do it, she would say sure go ahead. And I'd go in there just scream my head off 'cause, you know, I just wanted to see what it sounded like. So those were the kind of things that I would wanna do but it would not dawn on my sisters to do anything like that. Story_ID: 115096 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well can you, now what did your father [Howard (George) Malano Tucker] do for a living in, in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: He did whatever. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think he spent most of his time being like a DJ [disk jockey] in some of the lounges or taverns or after night places in Chicago. And he was very good, very good. Story_ID: 115097 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And can you describe for us the neighborhood you grew up in and, and the home you grew up in, and some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, the, the one that comes to mind really is we lived at 2042 West Maypole, and that was on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois]. And the thing that comes to mind about that, that house really is, it was two stories, you know, and my grandmother, no, my cousins, or my mother's first cousins, lived on the first floor, and they were a lot of people on the first floor. And it was older gentleman that we called granddaddy, and he was really my cousins', the ones that were my age, their grandfather, but because he was so old, you know, you didn't call anybody by their first name, he was granddaddy to them, he was granddaddy to us. And then my mother's [Vivian Louise Ellison Tucker's] first cousins, who we called Auntie because their nieces and nephews called them Auntie, they were our age. And then on the third floor, or really the second floor, was my grandmother and her son, daughter, one of the kids, well not her daughter, but two sons and then their cousins. So it was a extended family on the third floor, extended family on the first floor, we lived in the basement. So I just remember a lot of activity all the time. A lot of singing, a lot of playing, a lot of quarter parties when somebody needed rent money then because my father [Howard (George) Malano Tucker] had the music, you know, they would just have the parties in our basement, and they would charge quarters to get in and they would charge money for food, and I always had a lot of money saved so if they need change they came to me. And just a lot of activity going on all the time. Story_ID: 115809 Speaker 1: We were saying off-camera that you lived at Lake and Damen [Lake Street and Damen Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: It was in the mentor, middle of, you know, it was in that area, you know. So, we spent a lot of time walking up and down Lake Street and Damen. And our church was on Damen. Speaker 1: Describe Lake Street for us 'cause, 'cause, only, it's, it's really unique, it's like 63rd on the South Side I guess in the sense that-- Speaker 2: Well, Lake Street was where the L's [Chicago "L"] would go down Lake Street, so it was very noisy. And they had a lot of stores on Lake Street. A lot of barbeque joints, taverns, you know, places that you wanted to go because there was a lot of activity out there. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think we filmed one famous, a couple of famous car chases in the movies-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --down Lake Street because of the L-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --tracks over top of the street and the-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --yeah. Okay. It's like 63rd Street is another street with a similar look. Speaker 2: Similar look-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --right, you know, look. And everything, I mean that was a time where you really weren't afraid that somebody was gonna snatch a kid or at least, well we were the kids so, we didn't-- we weren't afraid of that. Now we, there was one guy who was a drunk, and, you know, we knew who he was. And his, it was, his name was Dot Eye [ph.]. And we called him Dot Eye 'cause I think he had one good eye and one bad eye. But, you know, when Dot Eye would show up, you know, all the kids would run but, and we weren't terrified necessarily but, you know, you would say, "Here's Dot Eye," and then the kids would scatter. So that was the one person that we knew was out there and we should stay away from. And, you know, everybody gave the alert and then everybody scattered. So other than that, we weren't really afraid that anybody was gonna come grab us. The thing that I remember was, we would be playing hide and go seek, you know, at night but we were all in front of the houses, I mean we were outside, the parents would be on the steps, you know, sitting and talking and smoking cigarettes or whatever, and the kids would be (unclear) playing in front of them. You know, we played hopscotch. You know, we just, we always were playing, we were always running, you know, we, a lot of activity but parents all up and down the street. So there was nothing that you could do, that somebody didn't see, you know. And, and the person who saw everything was Mr. McReynolds [ph.]. I do not care where you were or where you thought you were, Mr. McReynolds had a way of seeing it all, and sometimes you didn't even see him, but you would get home, and my grandmother or my mother [Vivian Louise Ellison Tucker's] would be right there with the whole story. And he always told the truth, you know, (laughter) he never exaggerated what you did. But you always did it, you know. And he always would tell on you. And so that kind of moderated what you would do, I mean it wasn't anything horrible, you know, you hit somebody or you did something you shouldn't have done or you called yourself trying to cuss, you got home and it was addressed because he was there. And then sometimes you wanted to do something but you, you knew that you were gonna have to deal with it, and that may have changed your mind a little bit. Speaker 1: So McReynolds is kind of an odd name. Is he any relation to the Kenny Mc Reynolds who is a sportscaster in Chicago [Illinois]? (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: Have no idea who he was (laughter) or anything but we always called the adults Mr., Mrs., Ma'am, Sir, always. And he was, I don't even know what his first name was, he was just Mr. McReynolds. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lived a couple of doors down the street. Story_ID: 115810 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, other sights and sounds and smells? Speaker 2: Well, the house we lived in was, they used to say, do you remember Jimmy Durante [James Francis "Jimmy" Durante], when they would say, "Good night Mrs. Calabash wherever you are?" Well my cousins would say, "Mrs. Calabash is buried in our basement," and we believed them, you know. So the basement was the place that you didn't wanna get caught in. And the thing that would happen when we would go from the basement, through the basement up to where granddaddy lived, the, the worst thing that could happen to you, was you were the last one, and then they locked the door and then you would be caught down there in the basement. And there were cats down there. So the cats eyes would glitter, you know, and you would just, I mean, that, now that was terrifying. So, Mrs. Calabash was buried in our basement. So one night everybody on the second floor was gone. And all my cousins and I were just, I don't know what we were doing on the second floor, but we were walking from the front of the house to the back, and as we were walking through the house, we heard something that says, you know, and it was in a male voice, and it said, "I'm coming to get you." So we thought it was my other cousins. So we went all the way through the house looking for him. Everywhere, closets, under the bed, and everything, couldn't find him. Then we heard a female voice and the female voice said the same thing. It says, "I'm coming to get you." So we figured okay, this is a joke. We know we're gonna find the cousins, we know they're in here. So it was like five of us and the dog and we were looking for 'em. And then this very, very, very, very high squeaked voice said, "I'm coming to get you." And the dog started yelping, you know, (making sounds) and running through the house. And we ran up, we got my grandmother, she came down, she looked all through the house, she looked everywhere, she could not find anybody in that house. And to this day, nobody confessed to doing that. Nobody. We said it was a ghost, nobody said it wasn't a ghost. She said it wasn't a ghost but we didn't believe her 'cause the dog got scared, dog ran away. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Nobody went down there by themselves every again (laughter). Speaker 1: That's a pretty good ghost story. Speaker 2: Don't know but, you know--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: You, you pass that story down in the family? Speaker 2: Every, we talk about it, you know, we get together at family reunions, and those of us who were there at the time, you know. Nobody's been able to convince us, and none of the, I mean, after what, forty years, somebody tells, I mean somebody tells, "It was me, I did it, I scared you" or whatever. Nobody ever, ever, ever confessed to that. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: So we don't know, we thought it was, but, you know. Story_ID: 115811 Speaker 1: Now, was, was TV a big deal? Now you grew up in the age of television, I think. Speaker 2: TV wasn't a big deal-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because we really didn't have 'em. You know, there was, I remember one of the cousins had the TV, so there was one TV in the house for all those people. Sometimes we had one in the basement but most of the time it didn't work. But there was one television and we would watch "Shock Theater," and we'd watch "Sky King," and "Maverick," you know, so, "Ed Sullivan Show." So when the TV came on for those shows, everybody got together and they watched them. But mostly you were outside playing because you really, you had that one television, and as the kids we didn't have any control over it, you know. So it was really whatever the adults wanted to see, which was never what we wanted to see. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: So we never got hooked on television. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now was music a big deal? Speaker 2: Music was-- Speaker 1: In your house-- Speaker 2: --music was a big deal. Both in terms of my father [Howard (George) Malano Tucker] had the music, you know, so he would play mostly jazz. And he would have what you call jam sessions on Saturday nights and he would invite his friends over and they would play music, you know, mostly jazz. And then I had a cousin who was the choir director at St. Stephens, and he had a group and they would get together and they would practice on that second level. So they did a lot of singing and harmonizing and, you know, doo wop singing. And as a kid, I remember sitting on the stairs and watching them and listening to them. In fact, you know, the remarkable thing is I know more of those songs than I know of the songs currently. I mean I can go over every single thing that they used to sing as a kid because you're listening and you're absorbing and absorbing, you know. And, and I told my sister that's where I got, thinking I could sing. You know, I didn't know they sang because they sang well, I just thought they sang. And he passed away a couple of weeks ago and I was telling his son, I said, what I loved to do was, he was a director, so he was always directing and pointing, you know, he's telling whoever to sing, to sing. And I said as a kid, I was always waving my hands and pointing because he was the leader, you know, and that's what leaders did. And, you know, I spent a lot of times trying to get people to do what I said (laughter) because that's what I saw him do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was great. Story_ID: 115812 Speaker 1: Now, now where, where did you start school? Speaker 2: I started school at Hayes [Hayes School], which was on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think Hayes was on Leavitt. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you have a favorite subject or teacher at, at Hayes? Speaker 2: Well, I loved school, you know. And I think my favorite teacher was Mrs. Foster [ph.]. I think she was the kindergarten teacher. And I would watch my older sister [Sharon Louise Whitaker] go to school and I would just really, really, really want to go to school. And when I could finally go, and I think my mother [Vivian Louise Ellison Tucker] probably got me in there early but, you know, I remember being very excited about going to school and it never stopped. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite subject? Speaker 2: I like history. I liked English. I like art. You know, so I, there was really nothing at school I didn't like to do. You know, math, (making a sound), challenge a little bit, but, you know, I liked being in school. I liked learning. And Hayes was, it was, I should say, it was a school, we didn't have a lot in, in the school. And I got two double promotions when I was at Hayes. But I remember that we had books that didn't have all the pages in it. The school was fairly dark, you know. It was, when it rained, our teachers would tell us to put our heads down. And, in fact, when I went to school in Maywood [Irving Elementary School in Maywood, Illinois], the day it rained I put my head down and my teacher said, "What are you doing?" 'Cause we had florescent lights then but it was just automatic all the way through school, it rained you put your head down. Well you put your head down because it wasn't bright enough, you couldn't see 'cause it was dark in the school. It was not unusual to have the ceiling would flake. You know, and you got home and you had to take the flakes out of your head because it was always, the ceiling was always peeling and, and flaking. And shortly after I got out of there, they condemned the school and tore it down. But that's, you know, that's where we went to school. And when you think about it, we should not have been in that school. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, that, that's, this is the era when the population boom was hitting the West Side and Willis Wagons were, was that the era-- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, we weren't, no, we weren't in the Willis well, Wagons, so that might have been a little bit, now we should have been in some wagon when, when-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you think about the quality of the school, the quality of the books. Uh--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Well, well, the issue being the desegregation of the schools because of the poor quality, I mean, allowed to take place on the, in the black public schools. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. We had a teacher in there, and then, you know, of course, I don't remember his name, but he would say, you know, "I don't care whether you learn anything or not, I'm getting paid anyway." You know, and that's what he would tell us, you know, that's what he would tell us. And maybe some people absorbed that, I mean it certainly wasn't anything that the kids should have had to listen to. You know, my mother would always, when I came home, whether I had homework or not, I had homework. And she taught as much as the teachers, you know. It was like you sit up here, you're at the kitchen table, and she would go over stuff. So you, you were gone learn something, you know. And she went over everything, just this is what you should know, and so whatever was missed in the classroom, was not missed at home. So, but and you think about the other kids, they probably didn't have that experience. Speaker 1: Yeah, I, it's true. So, so your mother would, would review the days lessons and, and all that, that's that's-- Speaker 2: The day, either it was in a lesson that I got or it was in a lesson that she thought I should get. Story_ID: 115813 Speaker 1: All right. Now, were, were you involved in the school activities in grade school or-- Speaker 2: Whatever they had. You know, and we had, we would have social center which was the after school activities and. And in social center you had arts and crafts, you had skating, I mean we would roller skate in the gym. So, you know, they provide you with the roller skates and you skated all around the wooden floor in the gym. Then there were movies where they would have Laurel and Hardy [the comedy duo of Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy] and all kind of movies. So there was lots of stuff, which was fantastic because you would think that you had all these kids who really had nothing to do after school, and you had social center to go to. So that was a very structured time for the kids. They would have dances, you know, talent shows. So it was a complete program. And I would say given what they may not have provided in terms of the education, the fact that they provided that structured environment after school kept kids busy, which was, was excellent. Story_ID: 115814 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you remember, now you were ten years old, well, maybe, eleven [sic, twelve], I guess when, the presidential election took place in 1960, a very close election between [President John F.] Kennedy and [President Richard] Nixon, and I know when I was in school we talked about it and stuff. Did, did your parents [Vivian Louise Ellison Tucker and Howard (George) Malano Tucker] have any political affiliation in those days? Speaker 2: Well, then we were in, I remember that we weren't in, on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] and we were in, I think Maywood [Illinois] when that came out. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: Now, the, the election that I remember was Eisenhower. I think that was in '55 [1955] or something like that? Speaker 1: [President Dwight D.] Eisenhower and [Adlai] Stevenson in '56 [1956] (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: All I remember was the headlines saying Eisenhower wins. And that's when I realized that the years changed (laughter), that it never stayed the same year, you know, that it, it switched because as a kid you don't pay attention to it. And I just remember making a connection between Eisenhower wins and '55 [1955] changes to '56 [1956] changes to '57 [1957]. I remember-- Speaker 1: So you were seven then, I guess right, seven or eight? Speaker 2: Something like that. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: I remember the Kennedy and the Nixon elections because someone asked my [maternal] grandmother what, who she was gonna vote for, and she said, "That's none of your business," you know, "That's none of your business." And I was wondering well why can't, why ain't she tell. But she said, "That's none of your business." And I remember them talking about the two. You know, I remember watching television, then we had a television because every time something political came on, they would watch it because she was the person who felt that voting was something that people had to do because she experienced not being able to vote. And I remember her talking about what she was gonna, who she was gonna vote for but I remember her reading all the newspapers, watching it on television, and talking about it 'cause as I recall the discussions, they didn't want, people didn't wanna vote for Kennedy because he was Catholic, and they was talking about that. And, and I think the conversation was what difference does that make? She was very progressive. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she get involved in local politics? Speaker 2: That grandmother did not. My grandmother [Edna Kelly Tucker] in North Carolina, absolutely was always engaged in politics. Now I didn't spend as much time with her then as I did later on, but I remember when she was in her late 70s, you know, I would ask her what she was doing, and she would say she's driving old people to vote. And that would tickle me so much because I was wondering, well who are the old people, you know, you're like 79 (laughter) years old and you're picking people up and taking 'em to vote. But people who were running for election, you know, they would stop by her house. And I would ask her, I said, "Well, why are they coming over here?" She said. "'cause I'm a VIP," I said, "What is that?" And she said, "I'm a V-I-P, they know they better come and get my endorsement." My assumption is, she didn't just get that way, you know, because she was another person who was committed to exercising your right to vote and if you didn't do it, something was wrong with you. But during that time, I spent more time with my mother's mother, and she was politically astute. I mean as astute as you can be when you're on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] but, you know, she was in it. She was reading it, she was making her decisions on who she was gonna vote for. And, you know, what they were doing for the black community. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember what, who some of the politicians were on the West Side in those days? Speaker 2: You know what I, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't. Speaker 1: Now the mayor of the city [Chicago, Illinois] was Mayor Daley, Richard M. Daley (Richard J. Daley), right? Speaker 2: Yes, I remember that. I remember going to like junior achievement fairs and coming home and I would be sharing with my grandmother, because I spent a lot of time talking to her, what the mayor said and how he said it. And I was just amazed that he didn't speak as well as she made us know we had to. And I could not quote him because he would not speak well at all, you know. And she said, "He may be the mayor but you don't talk like that," you know. But--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: It's a famous Daley quote, quote what I mean not what I say (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. And, and he said some things that were, I remember when he was having a challenge with his kids and who took the test for him or whatever, and what he said, "If a man can't help his own kids, who can he help?" Bam, issue over. People stopped talking about it. And I remember thinking well he may not be able to talk but he make a point (laughter). He makes a point. But I remember the mayor, that mayor, you know. And I just remember seeing him at functions where I would participate in and he'd be there talking. Speaker 1: Okay. I mean in person and stuff (unclear) Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He'd be in person. Story_ID: 115815 Speaker 1: All right. Now in, the family moved to Maywood [Illinois] in what, what year? Speaker 2: We moved to Maywood, I think we moved to Maywood in '60 [1960], in '60 [1960]. Now we'd left the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] and moved to Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. That's probably around the time that I started living with my uncle. So we left Maywood, we moved to Hyde Park and then when he-- Speaker 1: So about what year did you all move to Maywood (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Let's see. So we moved to Maywood in-- Speaker 1: You said 19-- Speaker 2: --'60 [1960]. Speaker 1: '60 [1960]. Speaker 2: '60 [1960]. Speaker 1: Yeah, you already said '60 [1960]. Speaker 2: So we had to move to Hyde Park in maybe '59 [1959] to '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: Okay. Well that was before you moved to Maywood? Speaker 2: Before I moved to Maywood. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right. (Unclear), okay. So did, when you were at Hyde Park did you go to school in Hyde Park? Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Reavis. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --Grammar School [now Reavis Elementary Math and Science Special School in Chicago, Illinois] and Kozminski Grammar School [now Kozminski Elementary Community Academy in Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. And so the family moved to Maywood in 1960. Now, that's like west of the West Side. It's like a western suburb of Chicago. Speaker 2: Which one, Maywood? Speaker 1: Maywood, yeah. Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah, yeah, west. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: All right. So, now you were still in grade school, right? Speaker 2: Yes, I was in grade school. Speaker 1: Was that a better school system than Chicago? Speaker 2: Yes, you know, very much better. You know, that's when I was saying that when it rained and I put my head down, the teacher was going like what are you doing? You know, it was reflex. And I didn't connect, it was dark so I put my head down. But that's when I realized we were putting our heads down, not nap time, it was dark at Hayes [School]. I could see at Irving, you know. And we had books that had all the pages in. I mean, the, the, it was unbelievable difference. You know, we had, the quality of the teaching was better. The facilities were so much better, you know. The bathroom at Irving had all the features that it should, you didn't go in the stall and there was no toilet in there but that's what was going at Hayes. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And the ceiling wasn't crumbling in your head, you know, in, at Irving. Speaker 1: Okay. This is Irving [Elementary] School in Maywood? Speaker 2: Right, in Maywood. Story_ID: 115816 Speaker 1: Now you went to high school at Proviso--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Proviso East [High School in Maywood, Illinois]. Speaker 1: --East. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Proviso East, okay. Now these are integrated class, classes now at Irving [Elementary School in Maywood, Illinois]--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes, at Irving-- Speaker 1: --and Proviso East? Speaker 2: --and at Proviso East, were integrated schools. Speaker 1: Did you have any black teachers? Speaker 2: At Irving, they probably did but I didn't have any. You know, my seventh grade and eighth grade teachers were not black. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well, tell us about Proviso East. What was it like? Speaker 2: Well, to me, I mean, you're talking to a person that loved school, so Proviso was, was great. I mean what, what it was, was you had, when we were in grammar school, there were activities for the boys, not so much for the girls because the boys had baseball, they had basketball, and the basketball games were held with all the grammar schools in a certain area, District 89. So you had, you, you saw a lot of these kids because you saw 'em in basketball. Now the girls were either cheerleaders or we just went to the games, but you see the kids. Proviso was when all of the kids ended up at one school. So all of us from all of the different schools ended up at Proviso East. So a lot of the kids already knew each other, and I kind of knew some of the people, not all of them. And it was just an adventure. You know, there was lots for you to do in terms of extracurricular activities. And I got in whatever there was to get in. You know, it was Girls League, Thespians, anything. If there was a talent show, I was in it. Anything that you volunteered to be in, I was usually volunteering to be in. There was minorettes. I didn't know how to twirl a baton, I held it the wrong way, but they had auditions and I auditioned and got it, you know. Speaker 1: Called the minorettes? Speaker 2: Minorettes. There were minorettes and majorettes. The minorettes were what you did before majorettes. Probably no minorettes ever in, in period but that's what we had at Proviso. And then you marched, you were in parades. And then for the football games, you know, the minorettes would do a routine. You know, we'd have a section, and then the majorettes would get the best costumes and everything. They got the major attention, we got the minor attention but everybody, you know, got attention. So there was lots of things. The teachers were pretty good. Now as we got out of Proviso and we reflected back on some of the things that happened there, they weren't fair necessarily, you know. My girlfriends and I took an exam for some kind of award, I can't remember what the award was, but it was scholarship. And five of us qualified but neither one of the five were told about the second part of the exam. And then we went to tell the tea--, you know, we went to the counselor to say, "Wait a minute when is the second part of this test gonna be?" She said, "Oh, I forgot to tell you." Well, that was kind of unusual because five blacks, we're all friends, didn't get told, but everybody else got told. But we also knew that out of the group that took it, there was one (laughter) in the group who was absolutely brilliant. I mean she got a hundred on every single test she took. She would have passed it. You know, we might have made a good effort, come close, maybe, maybe passed it but absolutely she would have passed it. But none of us were told. Story_ID: 115106 Speaker 1: Now, now what is this lady's name, I mean, her name? Speaker 2: Her name is Kathy Walker [ph.]. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Walker. Speaker 2: Now, she's Kathy Owens [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she's Kathy Walker. Speaker 1: And she was a very retentive and schol-- and a good student who-- Speaker 2: She was a fabulous student. And it was sort of like she had a photographic memory. Because I remember one time we were roommates in college, and she woke me up at three o'clock in the morning, asked me what was on page seventeen of some book in high school (laughter) and I was like, I don't know what's on page seventeen. She said, "Think about it, close your eyes and remember," you know. I said, "First, you wake me up at three o'clock in the morning. Secondly, my brain is not like, like yours. I can't remember this." "Oh, yes you can. Close your eyes and remember." So we had a lot of words before, you know, I went back to sleep. But it, she just figured that everybody had the same talent-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --that she did. Speaker 1: Yeah, that kind of indicates that that's what she did, close her eyes and (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right, that's what she did. I mean it was there. Anything that she learned, she knew it. Anything that she read she knew. You know, and she knew, she was a tutor for some of the stuff, she was incredible in math, every other thing. And I remember I was challenged with this math class because I just couldn't get it, I couldn't get it. And she says, "Okay, you know, I'm a give you the formulas. When you see this, think this, when you see this, do this, when you see this, do this. And she said, don't think about it. If you see this set up, this is what you do. If you see this setup, this is what you do. You can't figure it out, this is what you do." Hey, for somebody that never even opened a book all semester, I got a C (laughter). I was like that was pretty good 'cause I hadn't studied anything all semester. So I studied for the test the day before the test, she said "What don't you know?" I said, "What's in that book" (laughter). And she just, she would, she could do that, you know. It was like, she knew what patterns that you setup. And she was great at pool because it was geometry. She would look at that table and she would, you know, you know, the, she was making lines, whatever, and she'd get over there bam, because she knew the angle and the place on the ball that you need to hit for it to move around that table. So when she, she didn't play pool but she knew how to play pool. So when we were in high school we had that incident, then we, because we were thespians, we would try out for plays. Speaker 1: Well, let me go back to the incident, about the test (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Right, with the test. Speaker 1: Did you ever get a chance to take the-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --test as a make-up? Speaker 2: It was over. Speaker 1: What, what was it like the SAT or the (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: It wasn't the SAT-- Speaker 1: ACT? Speaker 2: It was some type of scholarship where, here's your opportunity and you had to get, you had to take the test and I can't think of the name of it, a certain time. So it was a state test but the school didn't have control over testing you but the test was given at the school. So if you missed it, you missed it for life, done, gone. And all the, our, all she could say was, "I'm sorry." But we realized there was something wrong with that because maybe if one of us knew, but none of us knew? You know, we're all black and none of us knew. Come on. Story_ID: 115107 Speaker 1: Okay. Now with the-- Speaker 2: Something wrong with that. Speaker 1: --thespian situation-- Speaker 2: Okay, with the thespian, we were all trying out for thespians, everybody. And so you figure that one, two, three, four, five trying out, somebody would get it, somebody, we were kind of good I thought, but what the, teacher who was over the thespians would say, when we were sophomores, the seniors had to have the opportunity to be in the plays. When we became seniors, then the sophomores had the opportunity to, had to have the opportunities to be in the plays because we were graduating. And the other thing he would say was that, "Well, you can't have," if it was a family play, you can't audition for a sister because these are a white family. "So you couldn't have a black sister with a white family." You know, so, almost every reason that you could think of, for us not to be in the plays, he came up with. And there was one play where my girlfriend, Shelvin Hall [HM Shelvin Louise Hall], well two plays. Irma [ph.] got in one, and I'm trying to think of it, but this, the, wasn't "The Sound of Music," it was the other musical-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --I can't think of it. But she got a bit part, and she was incredible and, and she was in all the plays when she was in Chicago [Illinois] at Marshall [Marshall Metropolitan High School in Chicago, Illinois]. She got this little small role where she said maybe two lines. And then Shelvin got in-- Speaker 1: This Shelvin Hall-- Speaker 2: Hall, right. Speaker 1: --who is a judge now. Speaker 2: She is a judge now-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and one of our, she was part of the five, one of my best friends (simultaneous_ Speaker 1: Shelvin Louise Hall, yeah. Speaker 2: Shelvin Louise Marie Hall. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: She was one of the group, you know, our, our group of five. And she got in, it was a Shakespeare play, and she got to say like two lines. I think the one that we knew was the, the worst, and we said it was unfair. At the time, you know, we weren't saying it's racist, it's this, it's that, it was, but we were just saying, you know, this is wrong, this is, this is unfair. But when Cathy Min [ph.], had a cutting, a Peter Pan cutting, and she could change all these voices, I mean she had like five different voices, she could go in and out of these, she can still do it, the last time I saw her was about a year or so ago, she could still switch off. And we were in contest and she was winning first place, first place, first place, winning all the contests. Then it was time to go to State, I mean this girl had won everything, and the teacher said he needed somebody more seasoned, somebody with more experience. So he took her cutting, gave it to somebody else, wouldn't let her do it, gave it to somebody else, of course, they didn't win, they did not win, they went in there and he took hers and gave it to, this, she-- Speaker 1: What was this teacher's name? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh. It'll, I'm sure it'll come to me. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: I'm sure it'll come to me. I can't think of his name right now. And it, you know, we still talk about that, you know, we were like what 17, 18 then, because she really had worked hard on it and it was just natural for her. And so you get somebody trying to do what she did, as well as she did it, it was hers. They couldn't. They couldn't. And so she's sitting there watching this, you know, and watching that opportunity go. And I guess he thought it was in the cutting and not in the talent because it was in the talent. And that's when it was like, you know, we kind of like said, hey, we won't do this. You know, something's wrong here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so your interest just goes away. Story_ID: 115108 Speaker 1: So, did you run for class office at all? Speaker 2: No, unh-unh-- Speaker 1: (Unclear), okay. Speaker 2: --never did. Speaker 1: Did you feel that something like that was kind of futile to do (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: You know, I never thought about it, you know, just didn't. Speaker 1: What about Shelvin Hall [HM Shelvin Louise Hall] or (unclear) Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: (Unclear) okay. None of them. Speaker 2: No, we didn't run. Not in high school [Proviso East High School in Maywood, Illinois], you know, in grammar school was a different thing. But no in high school we didn't. I mean we were busy being busy (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, were, were, did you have a high grade point average in high school? Speaker 2: It was pretty high in high school-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: --you know. I was, you know, I was the kind of person that I was gonna get high grades but I wasn't gonna obsess over it. You know, if I needed it then I said okay, I need an A because I need this average to be, and I need to write an A paper. So I gotta write a A paper. But it was an expectation and I did it. But I had, my older sister [Sharon Louise Whitaker] was, she'd lose sleep, she'd sweat it out, she'd get an upset stomach, and it was like I'm a get it 'cause I'm supposed to get it but it's not gonna, it's not gonna bother me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it, it didn't because it wasn't, the only subject that bothered me was math. But the rest of it, if, you know, I could write; social studies, I could remember; French, if I focused on it I'd get an A, if I didn't, I didn't but I was not gonna get below a B. Now if I got a C, that was a problem. But other than that, it just, you know, it was okay. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 115109 Speaker 1: Well, when you was on the verge of graduation-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --what were your prospects? Did you have colleges lined up or what did your counselors tell, tell you about college? Speaker 2: Well you know what, the counselor, after the business with the scholarship, we didn't have much confidence in the counselors. And the expectation was, there was never any expectation that we weren't gonna go to college. I mean it was a given. So we knew that, that that was, you know, my uncle was a doctor, and my grandmother valued, and my mother [Vivian Louise Ellison Tucker], they all valued, in our family, it was a family that valued education. My grandmother [Edna Kelly Tucker] in North Carolina, if you sent her a letter and it's grammatically incorrect, she'd send it back. And you're going what (laughter), you know, who sends your letter you send them back, you're not gone get very many. But so that was an expectation. So it was, "Okay what college are you going to?" And my girlfriend, you know, Kathy Walker [ph.] was my best friend, we loved sports. So we, we didn't tell anybody but the schools that we were narrowing down depended upon which one had the best basketball team and the best football team. Now I could not tell my uncle, that. But I was looking at Michigan State [University in East Lansing, Michigan]. You know, we were looking at U of I [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in Urbana-Champaign, Illinois]. We were looking at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles in Los Angeles, California]. And really the criteria, what was your basketball, football team like. Speaker 1: Now how did you become such a big sports fan, I mean you were always (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Loved it. Absolutely loved it. Because we went to all the games, and I think Kathy's father was a basketball player in school, you know, in, in college. But we loved, we went to all the basketball games. All the football games. And did that, the basketball part, did that in grammar school. And in high school, you know, we went to the football games and the basketball games. So, watched them on television, you know, college ball. I and, and I can say nobody else in my house did it but if they had a ball and I had the TV, that's what I was looking at. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And it was, well I still enjoy it, but I was just possessed then. Speaker 1: Now, do you remember, now you, you might not remember this, but there was a, we just, last week we just interviewed, week before last we interviewed some people in Houston, Texas and they were talking about the western Texas [Texas Western College of the University of Texas, now the University of Texas at El Paso, in El Paso, Texas] team that beat Kentucky [University of Kentucky in Lexington, Kentucky] in the NCAA Tournament in 1966 the year you graduated from high school (laughter). Do you remember that? Speaker 2: You know, what probably, I don't. You know, I remember Lew Alcindor-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --you know, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar. I remember the Boston Celtics [Boston, Massachusetts] at the time, you know, they had a fantastic team. So I remember some of the players, you know, I don't put 'em with a team, I just watched them. You know, I remember Downtown something Brown-- Speaker 1: Freddie Brown. Speaker 2: Freddie Brown [Fred Brown] (laughter). Speaker 1: The Seattle SuperSonics [Seattle, Washington]. Speaker 2: Yep, I remember him. Speaker 1: He played in, yeah (unclear) now and then. Speaker 2: And I mean he could do, well that was before the three point, you know, and he could shoot from as far back as people could shoot at the time. You know, so it was just, and then there were those real short players ah, Spud Webb [Anthony Jerome "Spud" Webb], well that was not, that was later on-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --but, yeah. I mean I'd watch 'em, I didn't necessarily connect them, well, the L.A. [Los Angeles, California], watched them a lot. But it was just something that I enjoyed, I understood, and I would always try to do splits because I'd be doing cheering and trying to do the splits, cheering. And yeah, I pulled a muscle in my leg, you know, just cheering and, and my uncle would say, don't you ever (laughter) do that again. Well, I saw it on television so I thought I, thought all you had to do was do it, you know. So that's how we got interested in, and we never missed a, a game. We never missed a basketball game (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Now (unclear) who were the stars of Proviso East [High School in Maywood, Illinois] and did you have any-- Speaker 2: Well, the stars at Proviso, we had, oh, geez, this is so hard. Well, we had Chris Owens was, was a star, sort of. And then this, on the football team and Carl Burrell was the star on the football team. And then we had, oh, geez, you know, the names will come to me as we're talking 'cause I haven't thought of 'em. Um, they'll come. I can't think of 'em right now but, you know, how it's right in the back of your head and, you know, 'em, you see 'em, and, you know, what they're doing. But they were, you know, we, we liked them. Story_ID: 115110 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So you chose the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in Urbana-Champaign, Illinois], right? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And, and was that because of the team, the team (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: They had a pretty good team at the time, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, trying to go to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles in Los Angeles, California] but my uncle's wife asked me who was gone pay for it. Well, my uncle said he was but it became, you know, it was gonna be an issue. So the University of Illinois was closer but not a problem either, that was great. They had a good team at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. In 1966, I can't remember who was playing for them but--(unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: You know what-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --it didn't matter. They were playing well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) (unclear) Speaker 1: All right. So well, so how did you like the University of Illinois? Speaker 2: It was good. I mean it was, it was a, I liked school. It was a great school. You know, we were, the interesting thing about the University of Illinois was blacks were less than one percent, so there were fewer than 300 blacks down there with 30,000 students. And we all knew each other, you know, at least we thought we all knew each other, but pretty much, you did. You know, you knew everybody in your class. You probably knew everybody in the next class. And then I stayed on men's residence hall side of campus, which was where the football players and the basketball players stayed 'cause that's what I was doing, I was going to the games and you see the jocks all the time, you know, and it just seemed to be, to me the place to be. And my girlfriend, Kathy [Walker Owens (ph.)] stayed Pennsylvania Avenue residence, which was all the way over on the other side, so she spent a lot of time on my side of campus. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So did you have a, what was your major? Speaker 2: It was psychology. Speaker 1: Okay. Psychology. And were there any, you know, key personalities or, you know, and, or teachers or students there that you remember that you (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: --not the students. I mean not the teachers because they were, I mean there were so many teachers, and the teachers didn't really connect with the students, you know. We had a lot of student advisors but, no, I didn't really bond. Speaker 1: Were the classes to large or what? Speaker 2: Class was, the classes were large and the teachers were just distant. I mean there wasn't, there was one teacher that I had for, I think it was Black Studies, when we pushed to get Black Studies in and I was doing, working to do research on blue, the blues. And that, and it was another Tucker in the class, she was white and me, we bonded and we did research together, but he, and I don't even remember his name, but he was the one that connected us with some of the professors down there that had a blues collection, but there was not a lot, you know-- Story_ID: 115111 Speaker 1: There was one teacher who, it was an, I think it was in a history class 'cause I liked history a lot, and we were talking about the movement, then, you know, we were wearing our fros and everything. It wasn't a positive experience but we were talking about what had happened to Fred Hampton. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And the teacher and the students were taking the position that Fred caused the problem. You know, that Fred and the Black Panthers had shot out of their, the apartment building. And when I said, you know, "I grew up with Fred Hampton. I know Fred Hampton and what I know is, he would never put himself in danger. He wasn't stupid. He did not shoot out of there, you know. He got murdered." And, and the way it started was one of the white students was talking about, "This happened, this happened, a friend told me this, a friend told me that," and I said, you know, (unclear) "Your friend who didn't know Fred, is telling you something that he doesn't know but I personally have known this person since we were eleven years old. I wasn't there but I know I know more than you." Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And the teacher and everybody in the class kind of like turned on me. You know, it was like they were attacking me for my position about Fred and the Black Panthers. And the other thing we were arguing about the same time was Jackson State [University in Jackson, Mississippi], Kent State [University in Kent, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: So we were discussing this whole thing at Kent State and I said wait, wait, wait what about Jackson State, that's what I wanna talk about. They didn't even know it happened. Speaker 2: (Unclear) happened the same spring. Speaker 1: Yes. They didn't even know it happened. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) about 1970, and Fred Hampton, for the record, was December of 1969. Speaker 1: So we were talking about the same, you know, we're talking about all these issues, and they just like attacked. And what I knew was well there went my grade but that's okay. Speaker 2: Did you, now this was a history classroom? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And well what did happen to your grade? Did it suffer? Speaker 1: Well it went down. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Laughter) it went down. It was not, because it was, it wasn't like a test or anything, so pretty much subjective. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: You know, it wasn't what I thought it should have been. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: But my position was, I'm gonna say what I wanna say. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: You know, and I don't care that I'm the only one with this position and that I'm sitting here being, really being attacked. Speaker 2: And subsequently the case of Fred Hampton revealed-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that he was attacked, just like I said. But if you know a person, if you've known a person, and you know their personality, personalities doesn't change between the time he was eleven and when he was in his 20's. Speaker 2: Now this is a time--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Weren't gonna happen. Speaker 2: --of great social change in the country-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --and all that. Fred Hampton was a, from what we can see in newsreels and read about, was a brilliant young man. He, I think he was killed at age 20, right, so it was about (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: He was older than, yeah he was-- Speaker 2: Twenty-one. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So he, was he older than you? Speaker 1: No, we were in the same grade. Speaker 2: Same, same class. All right. Speaker 1: Same class-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --grammar school, and high school. Story_ID: 115112 Speaker 1: What was he [Fred Hampton] like then in, in school? And was he unusual in his political views as opposed to other black people? Speaker 2: No, he wasn't. He was very ordinary. You know, I mean if you look at, I mean Fred wasn't in with the in crowd, he wasn't an athlete. You know, Fred lived across from grammar school [Irving Elementary School in Maywood, Illinois] and was late every day. You know, we couldn't figure out, he said, he lived across, your door and the schools door lines up, Fred, why are you late (laughter) (unclear) but he was. You know, so he wasn't in the in crowd, he wasn't a leader, you know. It wasn't until we got to high school [Proviso East High School in Maywood, Illinois] and we were planning the high school picnic that Fred started rapping and coming out and, you know, we would go to the planning parties just to listen to Fred. So we were a little bit surprised that he had developed into that much of a leader, the people who went to school with him. Now the guys, and what we knew was, if there was a fight at the party he might start it but he was wasn't gone be there for it. You know, he wasn't going to put himself in jeopardy at all. You know, he, sometimes he'd be an instigator but not in a bad, negative way. I mean he got along with people. He was friendly. As he got older and in high school was when he started developing, and it was his senior year that he really started doing a lot of talking and rapping and rhyming. And so we weren't that surprised that he was followed, that he was a leader. And when we, when he started talking, you know, when he came down to University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in Urbana-Champaign, Illinois] and he started talking about the Black Panthers and we said, whoa Fred, you know. So it was an evolution, you know, very, very positive evolution but it was something he was totally committed to. But we knew, we knew that he was not going to, he wasn't stupid, he was not gonna put himself in jeopardy, at all. Stupid. If you said that's a dumb thing to do, it wasn't something Fred did. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: You know, and we knew that. And so when they started saying this, anybody who knew him, knew that wasn't true. That was not true. Speaker 1: How did this, did it feel that they were like two consciousnesses in college in terms of the black students and the white students, did you feel that they just could never understand what, unless they had some experience (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: No, they couldn't, they couldn't understand it because we used to get asked all the time, "Why are the black students all sitting at the same table," you know. We were on, on my side of campus there might have been ten of us on that side of campus. Well, we never saw each other, I mean in order to see a black student throughout the day, we'd make appointments with each other. We would say, "Meet on the Quad at noon." And then you see your friend and you just wave at 'em, you know, 'cause you just wanted to see somebody else. But 300 to 30,000, you could go the whole day without seeing anybody. And so when we were at lunch, most of us didn't get up early enough to go to breakfast, when you were at lunch or dinner, you would say wait for me, wait for me. And you were happy to see your friends, you know. Now I had two white roommates, you know, when I first went in I had a triple, and then when we split up from the triple my roommate, Rebecca Sue Lively, my white roommate, we were very tight because she was responsible. If I asked Becky to wait for me, she'd miss dinner waiting for me, you know. But she would wait 'til the last minute. Some of my other friends, I say wait for me and I come and they're leaving (laughter) (unclear) 'cause they saw somebody else. So she was very, very reliable. And we parted when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got murdered. You know, and that's when blacks became, black black and-- Speaker 1: Now this is before the murder of Fred Hampton-- Speaker 2: Uh-- Speaker 1: --in '68 [1968]. Story_ID: 115113 Speaker 1: Now April 4, 1968, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed. What was, what was it like on campus [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in Urbana-Champaign, Illinois] when Dr. King (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: When he died? Speaker 1: How did you find out about, tell, tell us what your experience was (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, we were, I think we might have been, I think I might have been in my dorm. I think my grandmother may have called me, you know, I'm not sure 'cause the memory, you know, that, that was so traumatic. But I think my grandmother may have called me because she always said, something bad was gonna happen. She was always very, very fearful because of where he was and what he was saying. I mean, she loved him absolutely, but she was very fearful and she would say stuff, she wouldn't talk about it a lot, but she would say stuff that let me know, that she thought somebody was gonna kill him but we never said they gone kill him but something's gonna happen, something was gonna happen. And I was in my dorm and I remember getting a call from her, and hearing her say "They killed him," and she was crying. And I knew, who they were, and I know who he was. And it was just devastating, just devastating. And what happened was the black students, I mean it was like nobody said "Go to the Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority] House," but we all heard it because we all wanted to be together. We all wanted to be together. And you saw everybody, you know, we were calling each other and then all of a sudden the few of us that there were, we all got together, and I'm sure they got together in different places, but we got together, the group that I was with, and we all went to Alpha House. And then everybody said, "We're going home, we're going home." And that's what we did. We all, bam, whatever was going on, packed our bags, caught that train, went home. And what was going on was also some of the white kids were walking around saying, "Your King is dead," you know. And then there was a lot of Curtis Mayfield songs, "We're a Winner," and they would say, "Well who's a winner now." So it was, I'm not, I'm not saying it was all of 'em but there was that negativity there. Now my roommate, and I don't think Becky [Rebecca Sue Lively] was my roommate then, I think she was, I think she was, so she was upset too. You know, so you had white kids that were crying like we were crying, and, you know, all the black kids were crying. And we, I don't know whether we were fearful, that might have been some of it, because 300 to 30,000 what you gone do? But we wanted to be together and we wanted to be away from there, and that's what we did. And then when we came back, you know, black was strong black 'cause Becky would wanna go and eat lunch with me or dinner with me and she'd be so upset because it'd be a whole table of black students and she'd wanna sit down. And there was a lot of hostility there, and I would say, "You don't wanna do this." And she would go, "Why?" And then I would talk to her, I said, you know, "Becky, you know, you're my roommate and, and I'm cool but you don't wanna do this." And she said, "Why, why can't I sit with you?" And I would say, "You just don't wanna do this." I said, "People are not feeling very good right now." You know, and it just broke her heart because she was a good person, you know. And she was a Christian. She just couldn't see it and I was trying to tell her, you, you don't wanna, you know I was protecting her because not everybody was as polite or as kind and they were gonna do something to hurt her feelings. Story_ID: 115817 Speaker 1: Here we're talking about the death of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --so what were things like when you came back to campus [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in Urbana-Champaign, Illinois], you said there was more solidarity than before? Speaker 2: Right, yeah, there was more solidarity with the black students. I mean there was more militancy, you know, with the black students. There was a hostility that weren't there. You know, we were mad. You know, and some people demonstrated it differently than others. You know, where they didn't like the white students, and, you know, they exhibited it. And that was, you know, my friends were white. You know, they were my friends before, they were my friends after, 'cause I didn't have, you know, I think my friends were genuine. So it wasn't like I was mad at 'em but I wanted to be, you know, with the black students more so than before because you just felt a sense of wanting to be more connected. Speaker 1: Did you ever, were there some white people that you felt really understood what you all were feeling at the time or had a more, had a, a closer, tuned? Speaker 2: You know, what-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --I don't know if I felt like they understood but I felt that they were sympathetic to and they felt bad-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --you know. And, and that was Phyllis [ph.], who was, Hasbrouck [ph.], and then Becky, Becky Lively [Rebecca Sue Lively], and then Naina [ph.], Sharon [ph.]. And, 'cause when I moved, when I went down there it was, I had a triple and then across the hall was another triple. And so we were close to that triple. And I was the black one in the group. And, you know, we were just very close. I mean we went to lunch together, we went to dinner together. And sometimes I got teased by some of the black students like what are you hanging around those white kids for? I'm like, "That's my roommate" (laughter), you know, "Hey, they're cool." And it was like you're not gonna convince me that these people are not my friends because they were. You know, and I ran into Phyllis like years later, maybe about three or four years, you know, we've connected at different times, and it's still there. Speaker 1: Was Val Ward on campus then, [HM] Val Gray Ward the, I know at what, at some point she was involved with Black Studies on the campus at the University of Illinois (simultaneous). Speaker 2: You know what I remember the name. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I remember the name. Speaker 1: She was a founder of Kuumba Theater here in, in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right. I absolutely remember the name but I don't remember what context but I remember her being on campus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so to put this in context so, Dr. King killed by-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --an assassin, a white man [James Earl Ray] is arrested for the crime-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --people still trying to figure out who did it, on some level, but he was arrested and convicted for it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: When Fred Hampton is killed there are still people that don't believe that the Chicago Police could have killed Fred Hampton, right? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: They find that hard to believe and-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Right. Speaker 1: --and then later on-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --when the killings occur at Jackson State [University in Jackson, Mississippi]-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --nobody even knows about it. Let alone-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) right, absolutely. Speaker 1: --takes umbrage to it-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --because they, you know, it's overshadowed by the media coverage of Kent State [University in Kent, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Right, absolutely. Speaker 1: So, okay. So it was just a time of a lot of (unclear) Speaker 2: Lots of, and then we had the Vietnam War. And then we had the tanks coming down and the National Guard with the guns, you know. Speaker 1: On the campus of--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: On the campus-- Speaker 1: --of the University of Illinois. Speaker 2: --University of Illinois, right. Speaker 1: Now, when did that occur at the University of Illinois? Speaker 2: I don't remember what year. Speaker 1: Was it towards that, was it after Kent State or-- Speaker 2: Um-- Speaker 1: --before Kent State? Speaker 2: I don't know because it was about Vietnam, you know. It, that was the issue and the issue was, it had to be later because I think it was either later my junior year or the first semester of my senior year because I remember the people saying "We're not going to class, we're gone boycott class." You know, and I remember saying, I'm getting an A in this class (laughter) this is what I'm going to, you know, it's like you all can take the risk if you want to. But we weren't, and, and the black students were on the fringe of that, you know, because we were not brought into that. You know, we were like that was, we understood it, but nobody included us, you know, in that debate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: Dr. King got involved in it at one point but it wasn't necessarily, it was as highly publicized though. Speaker 2: Well probably not, but we didn't get that message at the University of Illinois. You know, it was not, it's not a message that our leaders or the sorority and fraternity leaders were included. Story_ID: 115818 Speaker 1: So was there a Black Student Union on campus [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in Urbana-Champaign, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I think by that time they had created a BALSA [ph.] Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Balsa. Speaker 1: That stood for-- Speaker 2: Black Association-- or well maybe it wasn't BALSA but it was a Black Student Union that they, we brought in, they brought in Black Studies, African America Studies. And then we had a black menu every now and then they would serve greens and spaghetti and barbeque--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: In the cafeteria? Speaker 2: In the cafeteria, in one of the cafeterias. So not in every cafeteria, you know. That was in one cafeteria, if you wanted soul food then you could, you didn't have to go to your cafeteria, you'd go to that cafeteria and your card would work. Speaker 1: Okay. But you had good grades throughout, I take it, 'cause you were concerned (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Pretty good. Speaker 1: --about them. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know. Speaker 1: What about your friend Miss Walker [Kathy Walker Owens (ph.)], did she (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Oh, please, she had straight A's, you know. Mine were, I remember one summer I tried to study on the Quad with the guy I was dating. So we would be out there under the tree trying to study. Needless to say, one of the grades didn't come up the way my uncle expected. So I went home and I was ready for him to just rant and rave and rant, and when somebody's ranting and raving, you feel pretty good because you, you feel like they shouldn't treat you that badly. So you're not dealing with you, you're dealing with them and how they're treating you. But he said only this, "Don't waste your time or my money." The end. Well now you feeling really bad 'cause he not fussing at you, you know. Don't waste, he just looked at it, and he looked me, he said "Don't waste your time or my money." And it was, okay, done. That was worst that anything he could have possibly done. And it was like, okay. You better do something and that was it. Story_ID: 115819 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So now, were, did you date some of the athletes or did you date an athlete, pretty much or-- Speaker 2: Not really. I did date the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], you know, some of the, the, now in high school I did, high school football player. You know, high school my girlfriend [Kathy Walker Owens (ph.)] and I looked through our yearbook, it was the junior, it was the summer right before our senior year [1965], and we said that summer we were gonna date one of the football players. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We didn't know him. But we looked at the yearbook and we picked out the person we were gonna date. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: And so (laughter) we figured out the strategy, how we were gonna meet him, and it worked. But what happened was we went to school, that school started and we looked at 'em, you know, and I said I don't like this one. And she said we can switch (laughter). So we did, we switched. And so what we did was we went to their homerooms and we found out who we knew in their homerooms, and so we asked them to give us their schedule. And we got their schedules and we would just position ourselves in places throughout the day, we never spoke but we just would show up. You know, we would be in the upper gym, we would be in the hallway, we'd be, it was a lot of work. And one day, I mean this took a long time but we're just showing up, you know, we'd run down the hall show up. So I remember one time we were standing up, upper gym, and one of the guys looked and they said to each other they said "Who are they? Everywhere we look we see 'em, who are they?" And we, it ended up that we were at a football game and one of my girlfriends, who was the informer, said at the game she's making, she says, "He's number 18." Now she said this at the game and loudly and, and everybody's jumping up, "Joyce Tucker likes Carl Burrell, Joyce Tucker likes Carl Burrell." So at the dance Carl said he wanted to know who this was that everybody was talking about. And he walked over to me and he tapped me on the shoulder and he says, "I'm Carl Burrell. Can I walk you home?" And it was like (making sounds) and then the other one Chris tapped Kathy on the shoulder and he said can I walk you home and that's what happened. Speaker 1: Well that's what-- Speaker 2: And she married him. Speaker 1: --you know, guys hear that they're being plotted against but they really don't really know, you know, so. Speaker 2: Well the difference was-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --and I think what intrigued them, was that we were the bookworms-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --they were the football players. They were on varsity and everybody kept saying stuff like, you all are not supposed to be with these girls, they're bookworms. And their philosophy was why can't we be with these girls, I mean, what we're not good enough for 'em or whatever? And so they started, reacting against the people that were telling them who they should date and who they shouldn't date and then next thing you know they got caught up and Kathy [ph.] and Chris [Owens], oh, my goodness, they've been married forever. Speaker 1: Did their grades go up, the athletes? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. And Carl's mother said you should have been dating her for a long time (laughter). And the mothers were just delighted, you know, just delighted because we were well-mannered and we were different and they, they were just delighted. And their grades did go up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ours didn't go down (laughter). Speaker 1: That's good. That's the good thing. All right, so. Speaker 2: Right. But they were very, I mean very nice. And Carl and I are still very good friends, best friends. And Kathy and Chris are married, have two kids. So, it turned out just fine. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 115820 Speaker 1: So, so you're a senior in, in college [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in Urbana-Champaign, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --what were your prospects for a job or did you intend to graduate school or what were you thinking? Speaker 2: Well, as a senior in college the prospects were very challenging. I mean, when we graduated from college [1970], we, it was very, very, very hard to find a job. You know, we went looking all over in a lot of different areas and couldn't find anything, nothing. Kathy [Walker Owens (ph.)] decided that she was gonna go and get a master's degree, you know, Chris [Owens] was, at that time, he was down at Western Illinois [University in Macomb, Illinois], so she went to Western. And I was looking all over and Kathy's mother was a school teacher, so she told me about getting a job as a substitute teacher. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Which I did and then I-- Speaker 1: Was this in Chicago [Illinois] (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: This is in Chicago Public Schools. And at the same time, an opportunity came available to work in mental health. And I took a test and I was working in mental health. So for the first year, I did both. You know, I taught in the daytime and I went to mental, from 3 to 11 I worked at Tinley Park Mental Health Center [Tinley Park, Illinois], and during the day, I taught school. Speaker 1: The sub now, having been a sub for a while, well, how was it being a substitute teacher in the Chicago Public Schools in those days? Was it very-- Speaker 2: It was-- Speaker 1: --painful or was it? Speaker 2: --horrible. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, you, I had a classroom that didn't have enough books for everybody. I was teaching primarily reading. I had kids in there who could not read at all and I was supposed to be the average reading class. And I would go to the principal and I said, "You know, I have kids in here that can't read at all. They need to be in another class." And she would say well the other classes are full. I said a full class that's providing some kind of remedial assistance is better than a class where I'm not giving this kid any assistance at all. You know, nothing. This is a problem. They wouldn't change. They wouldn't change. I had a class where every day the chairs would be set up in fours. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, if you got a class of thirty-five you don't need 'em in fours because that's conversation. Every day I would make a line, every day the janitor would square 'em up again. I mean this was for the whole time I taught. I'd go to the principal and I said, "Look I'm, trying to set this classroom up so I can teach. I talked to the janitor about it, he said he was setting it up so it'd a be easier to clean up the room." She wouldn't change it. She wouldn't change it because she didn't wanna fight with the janitor. Speaker 1: So the custodian trumps the teacher? Speaker 2: Trumped me. You know, I would put the garbage can by my desk, he'd put it by the door. He said it was easier to just reach in and grab it, and I said, "But I don't use it at the door." So, I mean we fought every day. This was every single day that I was there. And it was very, very clear, that as a teacher, I lose. You know, well I didn't give up, you know, I just did it, every day I had the kids: line 'em up, and every night he'd put 'em back. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And for the whole while I was there. So, the other thing that I found was the teachers would say things I didn't like, you know, "I don't like this kid, I don't like that kid," I don't, and I would say how can you not like the kids, I mean, and it was a strong dislike for the kids. And that was a problem for me. You know, I had a gym teacher come in and, and point out a kid in my class and said, "This is a bad kid." And I would say, "There are no bad kids. There are no bad kids." And I would walk out and I would tell them don't you come in my classroom with this, don't you dare. You know, because that was disruptive, it, to me as a teacher and I'm twenty-one and so these were older people. So needless to say, I didn't make friends and influence people but it didn't matter because my philosophy is these kids first, they have feelings and I was not gonna let anybody cause a problem for my children. And I told them nobody, nobody is a bad kid. I don't have a problem with anybody, you know, so let's understand that. You know, all I want you to do is learn. And that was something that they weren't used to. They were not used to a teacher that didn't mark them, that didn't label them, that didn't-- you know, I didn't. Story_ID: 115821 Speaker 1: Were you assigned to a West Side [Chicago, Illinois] school or, or-- Speaker 2: No, I was on South Side. Speaker 1: South Side, okay. Speaker 2: On, I think it was like 81st [Street] and Chappel [Avenue] or 88th and Chappel, it was Horace Mann [School in Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Horace Mann, right, yeah, right. Speaker 2: It's like no, no. And-- Speaker 1: The father of American education, it's named for him. Speaker 2: When you think about it, it, it was just, you know. And one of the kids I, I called the parent and I told her I said, "You need to get your kid out of here." And she thought I was doing the same thing that the other teachers were doing. And I said, "She's marked. She's marked. I mean, she was labeled. I'm not trying to get her out of here, you know, I, she's fine with me but if you got a kid that carries a label, bad kid throughout the school, there's nothing she can do to change it, nothing. She's labeled, nothing. She's gonna be a failure at this school." And she took her out and-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --yeah, she took her out. Speaker 1: --you had a long term sub assignment that year at--(unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, I was at Horace Mann-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --for-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --the longest. And then I bounced around. Well, I should say I bounced around and then they assigned me to Horace Mann. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, you know, bouncing around was the same thing. You know, what you saw at that time, you know, I don't know whether it's different or not, but what I saw at that time was a problem for me. And because I was young, I, I didn't fit. You know, I didn't fit because I spoke my mind. I didn't fit because I had a different philosophy. I, I got along well with the kids 'cause I looked like them (laughter) but I, I just. And at that point I just said when the, the job came open at Tinley Park Mental Health Center [Tinley Park, Illinois], it was like hey, working with mentally disturbed kids in that environment where you have full control, is better than this. 'Cause I'm tired of fighting with the janitor, not getting support from the principal. I'm tired of not being connected with the other teachers, you know. Parents, you couldn't keep a kid after school, you know. There, the things that you might want to do, you really couldn't do. You really, and you didn't have the, I had to buy stuff, you know, personally. Speaker 1: So- Speaker 2: It was frustrating. Story_ID: 115822 Speaker 1: All right. So, Tinley Park [Tinley Park Mental Health Center in Tinley Park, Illinois], Chicago-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --when they talk about sending you to Tinley Park everybody snickers and stuff 'cause, you know, it's where people with mental issues (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: They were mentally ill, mm-hmm. Speaker 1: So, and then I guess like, one of the city's that always named for a facility that way (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So but what were things like at Tinley Park? Speaker 2: In Tinley Park I worked with the mentally disturbed preadolescents from 6 to 13. And so I was with the kids from 6 to 12. And then my background was psychology and, and at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in Urbana-Champaign, Illinois], not that what you learned in school helps you at all (laughter) when you go working at a mental institution. But it was pretty interesting and most of the kids, there, the folk we were all between like 22 and 25, 26. And we were working there and, you know, you were wearing your cutoff jeans and trying to deal with the kids. It was more of behavior modification with the kids. I would say most of the kids were black. And I was the only black professional there. The other black workers were either technicians or cook or, you know, housekeeper. And the other thing was, it was, you know, race played a part there because the kids were from the city. And so I remember one of the kids talking about when he got big he was gone get him "a deuce and a quarter." And they were writing 'em up because he was making up words and he was, you know, and it was, I'm listening to this kid talk and he's using slang, I mean real slang, and they couldn't understand him. So they've got there, writing up this psychosis or whatever he's doing, he's speaking words that didn't make sense. And I said they don't make sense to you but they make sense. "A deuce and a quarter" is Electra 225, you know, and I was decoding all of this stuff, and it was like whoa, this kids in trouble because the staff didn't understand it, at all. So the kid is having this breakdown or something. Then we would take the kids out to dinner in Tinley. The kids would say, "Everybody's staring at me, everybody's looking at me." So the staff would say the kid is psychotic or whatever. And I would say unh-unh, they're staring at me to, they're staring, they're staring. And they, I said okay, I'll tell you what. Let's go to Soul Queen, which is on the South Side. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So I organized a trip to Soul Queen, all the white staff, me, and the black kids, maybe we had two white kids, we went to Soul Queen. So we came back and they said, "Everybody's staring at us." I said, "Do you understand it now. You know, you're, you take the kids in a different environment all white, these are black kids, people are trying to figure out where they're coming from," kind of know the mental hospital, so they think something wrong. I said, "You all bust up in Soul Queen and they're saying who are these people with all these black kids?" I said, "Now, do you know, do you know?" So it was, it was sharing that kind of information and it was trying to educate them to the black kids, but the black kids were suffering because they didn't know. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Just different. It, it was a learning opportunity. Story_ID: 115823 Speaker 1: Now about this time, were you privy to the, or had they started organizing the Association of Black Psychologists? Speaker 2: I wasn't privy to that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: All right, did, did you ever become a member of that? Speaker 2: Uh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. You know, we were like, basically providing direct patient care to the kids. Speaker 1: 'Cause a lot of the observations you made kind of, about your experience in Tinley Park [Tinley Park Mental Health Center in Tinley Park, Illinois] were made, you know, on kind of national level-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --with the Association of Black Psychologists. And that, that was formed in the early '70s [1970s] I know and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --have been around ever since. So (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, it's probably good it was formed because it was the labels. You know, I remember one black kid who attacked his father with a knife, his stepfather with a knife, he was beating his mother. And he got a label psychotic or whatever was the most extreme label that you could get a kid. Then a white kid came in that next week who attacked his stepfather with a hatchet 'cause it, you know, and he got something acute whatever-- Speaker 1: But he wasn't-- Speaker 2: He wasn't labeled the same. This was not gonna be a problem on his record, this was. And I asked the question I said wait a minute, I am not understanding this. Hatchet, knife, same behavior, why is one getting this label and this one getting this label. Speaker 1: They say a hatchet is heavier. Speaker 2: A hatchet is-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --is heavier, to me it does more damage. I mean, you could just really. But I couldn't understand it. You know, and I saw all of this subjectivity, you know, and it's like I need to do something got a little less subjectivity to it, law, you know, works. Speaker 1: Was [HM] Dr. [Roderick] Pugh from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] out there at that point, at that time? (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: That doesn't sound familiar. Speaker 1: We interviewed him and I know he was assigned to Tinley Park, you know, doing psychological evaluations and stuff like that. Speaker 2: That doesn't-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) he was a doctor of psychiatry, I think. Speaker 2: I don't remember anybody doing very much evaluation then. It was milieu therapy, your environment is supposed to help you get better. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And they had medication, you know, the kids had medication so I don't, you know, they were in school-- Speaker 1: Now what would be the difference between sending a youth to the Audy Home or to Tinley Park? Speaker 2: Well, I think Audy was for bad kids, you know. Speaker 1: Well, so you're attacking your father with a knife (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right and-- Speaker 1: So would that be considered as criminal? (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: --so it depends on what was going on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, I think if they thought you were hallucinating or you were mentally ill, but if you were just bad, disruptive, or whatever, you didn't go to Audy, you went to a mental hospital. Speaker 1: I was wondering 'cause some of the behaviors you described could be considered criminal or (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Could be. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: You know, it depends on if you were talking to yourself, if you were hallucinating, if you were doing other things, right. But not always did they make the distinction, you know, sometimes they sent you to the mental hospital when you should have been in the Audy Home. But we tend to get the more extreme cases, you know, when people are having problems. You know, and then they ended up on some type of psychotropic medication. Story_ID: 115824 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, so this is 1972 to '74 [1974] when you're, you're at-- Speaker 2: At Tinley. Speaker 1: Tinley Park [Tinley Park Mental Health Center in Tinley Park, Illinois], yeah. And so in, from '74 [1974] to '60 [1960], you now, what, in, in 19, now what happened in '74 [1974] when you, how did you become Coordinator of the Illinois Department of Mental Health Affirmative Action Equal-- Speaker 2: Well, what happened-- Speaker 1: --Opportunity (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --when I was at Tinley Park and there were four, five mental health specialists, well, maybe another title, and an opportunity came along to promote four of the five. And actually my work had been reported as being, you know, on the higher level. And so my supervisor decided he was gonna promote the four and I wasn't one of the four. And I asked him what happened, why was I not one of the four promoted, and he said he felt more comfortable with the four. And I'm going like well explain that, you know, I've got the best--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: And they were all-- Speaker 2: They were all white. And I kept pressing him for an explanation and then he said well, "I'm a male chauvinist pig, I can do whatever I want." And I said, "You think so?" So I said no, I'm gonna file a grievance. Well, you know, union people file grievance and professional people didn't. Didn't mean anything to me 'cause I went to the union, they took the grievance. They said join, and I joined, and they said we'll take your grievance. So my boss said, you can't do that, you can't join the union, you're a professional. I said well maybe I shouldn't, but I did and I'm filing a grievance. And so I filed a discrimination grievance. And the head of labor relations for mental health came out and he heard it. And it took him a year to make a decision but he made the decision that I had been discriminated against, I should have gotten a promotion. So he gave me the promotion and back pay and one kid, well two kids to supervise. So I had two kids and a staff, one staff person (laughter). So that kid, those two kids got plenty of care. 'Cause they, they couldn't take the position from the guy, so they had to create another position. So they created a girls group and we only had two girls. Story_ID: 115825 Speaker 1: All right. Yeah, we were talking about the discrimination case that you filed [at Tinley Park Mental Health Center in Tinley Park, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --and the resolution to that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So they, they filed in your, they, they judged in your favor? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And gave you a, they had to give you a-- Speaker 2: I got the promotion, I got back pay, and then I got a group to supervise. And the group was the Ladybugs. So it was the two girls and then I had one person to supervise. So each one of us had one kid which was unusual because you've got two kids and two people managing those kids. Speaker 1: Okay. So, okay now this is, okay. So, you do this before you become the coordinator, so this is as the coordinator of the (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: No, this was the position that I had at Tinley Park. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I filed a grievance with the Labor Relations Organization. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And John O'Leary who was Chief of Labor Relations heard the case and gave me the back pay and everything. So it took about a year to do that. About a year after I won the grievance, he called Superintendent [Harold] Piepenbrink who was a superintendent out there, and he asked, "What's Joyce Tucker doing?" Because he decided that he wanted me to interview for really and get a position as the coordinator of Affirmative Action for the [Illinois] Department of Mental Health. And when he called, you know, Piepenbrink, the superintendent, called and said that John O'Leary had a position for me and he wanted me to be considered for it. Well, I thought it was a way to get rid of me because when you took a new position you go into a probationary period and for six months they can get rid of you for really anything. But, you know, I talked to my grandmother and she said well, it's time for you to get a big girl job and, you know, you're out there wearing shorts and shoes and whatever, so you need to do something different, you, go interview. So I went downtown, and at that point I was in law school [John Marshall Law School in Chicago, Illinois], I was going to law school at night. And, you know, he was a lawyer so he was impressed by that and he interviewed me and he said, "Well, you know, it's your job if you want it." And my thought was "Well, I'm going on vacation so I can't take this job" (laughter). And he said "Well, you can go on vacation and you can come back and, and take the job." He says, "It's yours if you want it and I want you." So, I again, my consulted with my grandmother and I talked to her and she said well, you know, you should think about it. You should, you should probably take it. So I took the job. And I was in charge of Affirmative Action work, over the whole Department of Mental of Health, which was, at that time, mental health was the largest facility in the state. And what was really fun was I got to go out to Tinley Park and interview the people on what they were doing for affirmative action. So I was no longer the person who was working for my supervisor and the other folks, I was the one who they had to report to for affirmative action. Speaker 1: So the Department of Mental of Health in the state of Illinois at that time was the largest department in the state--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: It was the largest department in the state. Speaker 1: --government? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is no longer true, right or-- Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: --or is it? Speaker 2: --they've merged agencies and stuff but I think, well, at that time-- Speaker 1: Is it Health and Human Services now or what, what is it? Speaker 2: It was, it's something different but mental health was, it was, the Illinois Department of Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities. Story_ID: 115826 Speaker 1: Now this is on the national scene, [President Gerald] Ford is the president, '74 [1974], right? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: It was the transition, either [President Richard] Nixon, the latter part of Nixon or early part of Ford, going into [President Jimmy] Carter, I guess, you were (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --in that job, I guess. And is Thompson governor of Illinois? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Jim Thompson [James Thompson, Jr.] is governor of the state of Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Right. And when I became coordinator, when I first became coordinator, Walker was the governor. Speaker 1: Walker, right, Dan Walker. Speaker 2: Yeah, Dan Walker was the governor. Speaker 1: He was a Democrat, right. Speaker 2: He was a Democrat. Speaker 1: And he got in a lot of, tell, tell us what happened to him. Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember what happened, you know, we, you're so far down-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --in the-- Speaker 1: Well, he got in a little trouble and had left-- Speaker 2: --hierarchy. Speaker 1: --and had to, he left under (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: All, you know, is this person was governor and now this person is governor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember-- Speaker 1: I think he went to jail, actually, for something. Speaker 2: I think he did. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then Thompson was elected [in 1977]. Speaker 2: Thompson became, and what happened was the job at [the Illinois Department of] Mental Health grew. Well, the first promotion I got [in 1974] was I was just over affirmative action [Coordinator of Title VII Programs, Illinois Department of Mental Health]. Then I got promoted [in 1976], I was over affirmative action and Title VI [Chief of Equal Employment Opportunity and Affirmative Action Programs for the Illinois Department of Mental Health], which was delivery of service to the patient. Then I got asked to, well there was a person who was over the Department of Equal Employment Opportunity for the state and they left the state, you know, earlier, probably than they wanted to, but they were looking for a Director of the Department of Equal Employment Opportunity. The very interesting thing happened was one of the guys who used to be a supervisor at Tinley Park [Tinley Park Mental Health Center in Tinley Park, Illinois], who also testified on my supervisor's behalf at the hearing that I had, was now a special assistant to the governor. And he said they were looking for someone to replace this person and he recommended me to the governor. So he said I think there's somebody who you should look at. And he recommended me and I did an interview with the governor's staff for that job. And I was kind of lukewarm because now I'm going to law school and I think I wanna be this fantastic attorney and I'm not really interested in taking another job, now, because I had a job. And what the Director of Mental Health said to me, he said, you know, what I think you oughta take this job. So I'm gonna give you a leave of absence from your job, so if you take this job and you don't like it, then you've got a year to come back and I'll give you your job. What that meant was, I had to do both jobs for at least six months, you know. So I was upstairs half the day, down stairs, whatever. And-- Speaker 1: Were you finished with law school by this time? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I realize, wait a minute, I think I'm a keep this job. So I decided to keep the job as the Acting Director of the [Illinois] Department of Equal of Employment Opportunity. And they filled the job that I, you know, Dr. [Robert] DeVito filled the job that I had, and I was doing the one job. During that time, the legislation passed, Harold Washington was the cosponsor of the legislation to create the Illinois Department of Human Rights, and the Governor's office asked me to help coordinate the transition of the three agencies that were forming Illinois Department of Human Rights. And in doing that job, I had to interface with [Mayor] Harold Washington and the other legislators and people from the Governor's office and people from the various committees that were formed to, to implement the new legislation. Story_ID: 115827 Speaker 1: What was [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington like? Speaker 2: He was fabulous. I mean he was fabulous. He was definitely committed to equal employment opportunities, civil rights. He was brilliant. I mean his, his concept of language and he was a fighter. And when I was working on helping deal with the, the implementation of the legislation and the, getting the budget for this agency [Illinois Department of Human Rights], I'm working with him all the time. You know, and I'm not understanding that a senator is someone that you are supposed to ask permission to meet or whatever. When I would go by his office, if I, if I saw him, I went in. And he was available. I mean he never told me, you're not supposed to do that. Now his staff would look at me like I was out of my mind but it was like Harold, bam, I was, I was in there before they could come get me. But I never knew that there was any protocol or whatever. You know, if I need a person, I see the person, I go talk to the person. And with senators and legislators you're supposed to make an appointment, you do that but I think Harold kind of enjoyed that naivete. And the fact that, you know, I believed in what I was doing. And I never really let anything be a barrier 'cause I really didn't know I was supposed to. So while they were doing a national search for the director, the Governor [James Thompson, Jr.] mentioned to me, he said Harold Washington is recommending that you become the director of Human Rights. And I said "Really, I didn't know the search committee recommended me" and the Governor said, "It is my job (laughter) so I'll decide who get it, who gets it." But as I was setting up the staffing plan and I was, you know, coming up with the criteria for the director, and I was giving the search committee what I thought the criteria of the director should be, I looked at it and said "Well, that looks like me." And then I resigned from some of the committees that I was on because I thought it would be a conflict of interest but the people on the search committee told me that my chance of getting the directorship was slim to none. There was no way that I could be considered because one lady said I didn't pay my dues. And so I asked her, "How much are they?" (Laughter) that didn't go over too well. But, you know, I mean I felt like if you want something, you go for it or you asked yourself for the rest of your life "What would happened if I--" You know, the, the worst that could have happened was I would have been turned down. Well, I didn't have it anyway. And the best that could have happened was I got it, which I ended up getting it. But they were, you know, there's no way. So Harold recommended that I get, the governor consider me for the position and I think it was on a Friday the 13th, governor was supposed to announce the position on a Monday and the Thursday the 12th, his, one of his staff people caught me in the train station going back to Chicago [Illinois] and said, "Governor wants to interview you tomorrow morning." And my first response was, "That's Friday the 13th," and they said yeah. And then I said, "Well, I don't have any clothes." "Look, governor wants to see you tomorrow morning 9 o'clock." So I did whatever I needed to do, got a room, you know, went to the Governor's office, interviewed, and he said, "Why should I give you this job?" And I said, "Well, Governor, because it's the only thing that makes sense, you know. I know the budget, I know the staffing plan, I know the legislature, I know your staff." I said, "Anybody that comes in to this position, I'm gonna have to train." And he said, "Thank you," and that was it. That was the interview. And I'm thinking, like okay. I mean, I've never had an interview that short. There is no way I got the job. So I remember going on the train writing him thank you for the interview because I knew someone else was gonna get this job. So I get a call that Monday on my direct line and I pick it up, and I hear "This is the Governor speaking, congratulations Director." And I went like, "who is this?" This is the Governor speaking. And I'm going like, "yeah, yeah, who is it?" I mean I didn't know it was the governor. He says, "Joyce, you got the job." And I said oh--and he goes, "Why did you say that?" I said, "My grandmother says be careful what you ask for, you just might get it." Story_ID: 115828 Speaker 1: And I became director [of the Illinois Department of Human Rights] and he said we're flying down to Springfield [Illinois] and we're having a press conference. So went to Governor's office, you know, they drove us to the airport, got on the plane, flew to Springfield, had the press conference, Harold [Washington] and the other people were there, and he announced that, you know, I had the job. And then people start asking you hard questions, and someone said to me, "Well you got the job, so are you gonna pass the confirmation hearing because the people who were, had a problem with it, you know, they was like the House people were having a problem, they didn't want the legislation to pass. And I said, "As far as I know, the Governor appoints and the Senate confirms." And Harold whispered in my ear, "You don't have to say everything that comes to mind" because really I had dissed the House, in essence, I said doesn't matter what they think because they don't vote. And he was saying, Harold was saying, you need to keep your mouth shut (laughter) 'cause sometimes you, it's true, you're thinking it, but Joyce, you don't have to always say it. And so I got the job and then Harold ushered me through to make sure that I talked to the Senators that I needed to talk to, so the confirmation would go through, you know, and it did. And then after that, I didn't know anybody. You know, I mean I'm staff person, I'm running this agency with fifteen people, now I'm Director of Human Rights, and he took me around to all of the politicians. You know, I met Stroger [HM John H. Stroger, Jr.]. I would go to meetings with him, so when he had meetings, he'd take me, and he'd introduce me. And he'd say, "She's ours, we're gonna take care of her." And I met [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson [Sr.], Harold took me to PUSH [now Rainbow/PUSH] and he took my hand, put it in Jesse's and he put his hand over it and he says, "She's ours, we're taking care of her." Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And that's what he did. I mean to everybody that I needed to know. He made sure they knew that he was supporting me. That they made a commitment to him to take care of me, to make sure I was okay. Speaker 2: Now, now, is, is this the time when you had to fill out the-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --the paperwork (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: So, for the confirmation-- Speaker 2: Tell, tell that story, yeah. Speaker 1: --for the confirmation, they give you an application, and you have to put all your stuff down, and so it said down there party. And I called Harold and I said, "Harold, you know, it says party, you know, I've never filled a form out, you know, it, what should I put down?" He says, "what's the Governor?" I said, "Republican." He said, "that's what you are." And that's what I became. Speaker 2: Okay. With just a signature (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Because, you know, Harold was, he really was a mentor, you know. And during the time when he was there, he would call me up, he says, "Tucker you're going to Springfield?" I said, "Yeah." He says, "I'll, I'll pick you up." 'Cause I lived in South Commons at that time. And he'd pick me up, we're driving to Springfield that's a good four hours, and he'd be teaching the whole time. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: "This is what you need to do. This is how you shake hands. This is what, you know, don't take pictures in front of somebody's sign because you look up and it's in some advertising, and you've endorsed the candidate you haven't even endorsed." And just all kinds of things that you wouldn't even think of. He'd just talk and explain and, you know, and I'd just absorb. You know, so when he went to Congress [U.S. House of Representatives], he did the same thing, you know. I would always get invitations to the Black Caucus. Whenever I was in Washington [D.C.] for any reason, his door was open, I'm in there, you know, running passed staff, they were going crazy. But he just was a great person and mentor. Speaker 2: Okay. That's what, you know, people always talk about-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what, that's what he did. And he would say here's my home number, you can't me in the office, call me. And I did. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, now this is 1980, this (unclear)? Speaker 1: 19-- Speaker 2: Or '79 [1979] (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: I got the job in, yeah, 1979, 1980. The confirmation, right, 1980. Speaker 2: All right. Story_ID: 115829 Speaker 1: Okay. So you're thirty-two, this is pretty young, I think (unclear). Speaker 2: Right, right. I got the first job I think I was twenty-eight, you know, working for the governor. And then thirty for that one, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you were the first black woman to serve in the Governor's [James Thompson, Jr.'s] cabinet? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's true, right? Speaker 2: Right. And they said with Senate confirmation, I think there may have been somebody temporarily but not permanently. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Well, tell us about the job in terms of what, you know, what were some of the, the (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, the job was fantastic. You know, one thing about Governor Thompson was he told me, he said, "Joyce you do the job, you leave the politics to me." And he was really, really clear this is not a political job. You do what you know needs to happen. And when people were questioning his appointment, he said, "I know she's capable," and then he said, "and I like her," you know, so shut it down (laughter). And he always said to me, "If you have a problem, you come to me. If somebody has a problem with you, you send 'em to me." I put you in that job. And it was really easy 'cause people were, you know, challenging me and I said, "Go talk to the Governor." And sometimes I would say, "Go talk to 6 foot 6," you know. He put me in there, you don't have a problem with me, you have a problem with him. Go talk to him. That would shut down the conversation because a lot of times they just try to pick at you, you know, and, and cause a problem. But what we had to do was, we had to write the regulations that implemented the new law, which if you're thinking about having a job, it's incredible to have a job at the beginning because you get to do everything, you get to develop the staffing plan, you get to decide how the agency is being organized, you have to make relationships with the community that aren't there, none of those things were there. So I had to travel around the state, you know, having meetings and briefings sessions so people would understand that the agency the, the stuff that they heard about why the agency should not have been created was really political. And talk about the agency had an increase in budget over the three agencies that were put together. We had more power, we had subpoena power for investigating complaints. It was a big deal. And figuring out how to do it and being brand new, you know, I think back now and you go like, oh, my goodness, you know, this is an awesome responsibility but the fact that it was done based upon what you believed and there was no politics, number one I didn't know enough to deal with politics but I was told by the Governor this is, "you leave the politics to me," you know. So he was not saying pay attention to what somebody thinks you should or shouldn't do, you do what you think needs to be done. Story_ID: 115830 Speaker 1: Now this is, today we, we live in a very partisan-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --era in 2010. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Republicans are, say are, basically miles apart-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --from Democrats-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and about most issues. And affirmative action-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --would be an issue where-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --no Republican would want-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --any part of that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But this is 1980-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --it's different, so give us an idea of (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well there was-- Speaker 1: --what it meant to be a Republican or Democrat (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: There was partisan politics, you know. There was, when I was going to lobby for votes there were Republicans who were very insensitive and mean, and it was real clear I weren't getting votes there. But there were others who support the Governor [James Thompson, Jr.], you know, and the fact that this was legislation that was introduced by the Governor. They were supporting the Governor which meant they were supporting the legislation. There were Democrats who were angry with the Governor because he had introduced legislation that they said was Democratic legislation. What do you mean introducing a Civil Rights Bill to create a civil rights organization? That's a Democratic issue. Now they didn't necessarily say it that way, but they were attacking him. That's why Harold [Washington] was one of the cosponsors in the Senate. He said this Governor did something good, he did something good, and I am supporting it. Harold was the Democratic Senator [in the Illinois Senate]. I mean he was the one that stood out there in front on most of the civil rights stuff, at least during that era, and he was right there supporting it and fighting the battle. Most of the battle came from the House and not the Senate because they weren't gone fight with Harold Washington. They were lined up to support Harold Washington. And then Harold Washington was whooping 'em back in the House, you know. And there were lots of African Americans who were fighting it on political grounds. And Harold was going like what? You know, you, there was legislation in the state of Illinois that I guess if you violate civil rights that you're going to jail. And Harold said, and they were fighting because the Human Rights Act had repealed it. Harold went like who's going to jail, who ever went to jail? It may have been there but it was worthless, so why are you fighting this. You know, more money is going into this agency. So Harold whooped 'em up a little bit in the House. But it was more the political thing in the House. And I mean I fought for about ten years fighting the fight because they didn't want the bill passed, the Governor ran over 'em like a steam roller, of course he was. And they were mad because they lost significantly, significantly. So, the fight was with me. And I kept telling them "Don't fight me, fight the Governor. I'm the person who is director of this, I didn't implement the legislation. I'm running the agency so why are you fighting with me?" But they were picking and gnawing and aggravating for almost the whole ten years that I was in the position. But it went out, it got out of the House because there was more support than those people who were against it. But they were very aggravating for the whole time. You know, some of the people, when my bill would come up they'd take a walk, they never voted on it because they would go, when we called it-- Speaker 1: These are the black ones? Speaker 2: --take, well, yeah. Take a walk. And they'd just take that walk. But we knew it was gonna pass. And you know, we went, and we talked to 'em (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Was there, was there a leader of the black opposition to it-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --that you can remember? Speaker 2: Not that I can remember. It was just a group. They were, like I said they were aggravating but I knew that when Harold was there, I was gon' get the support in the Senate. You know, I mean this, in fact, it was really weren't a problem when he was there, now when he left, they were a little testy. Story_ID: 115831 Speaker 1: But at the end of the day, one of the guys who was a great supporter was Hastert. Hastert was one of my sponsors. Speaker 2: This is Dennis Hastert? Speaker 1: Dennis Hastert. Speaker 2: Who is, who became Speaker of the House [U.S. House of Representatives]? Speaker 1: Speaker of the House. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And when he went to Washington [D.C.] and he became Speaker of the House, I called him up to congratulate him, he says, "Come on over," you know. Big deal. Again, I didn't know what a big deal it was until later. But I went over and we talked, you know, we talked about old times. The other person who was a senator who, [Chicago] Mayor [Richard M.] Daley. When I was having all the challenges with the bill and everything, Daley came over to me and he said, and it wasn't an audience there, he says, "I'm backing you, I support you, anything you need come to me." There was not, he wasn't getting any brownie points from anybody. There was no media around there. He just stepped up. And I felt very good for that because I needed as much as support as I could get. And I just appreciated it, continue to appreciate that he stepped out and said, "I got your back, you know, you need support." But not, it didn't die down to much but we knew, you know, we, we're challenged. The Republicans felt like, "You can't be a Republican number one, you're black and you spend too much time with the Democrats." The Democrats, some of 'em, felt like, "we can't trust you because you're Republican." So it was, you know, caught in the middle, caught in the middle. The Governor was a great boss, and then I had some really good support. But being black and Republican and female during that time was, and being young, was a challenge. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: But it was worthwhile. Story_ID: 115832 Speaker 1: Now, now you had a, like a personal tragedy in '86 [1986]-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --right. Well, what happened? Speaker 2: '85 [1985]. Speaker 1: '85 [1985]? Speaker 2: Well, '86 [1986] and '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In '86 [1986] my sister had a brain aneurysm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Now you have two sisters or-- Speaker 2: There's two, one left. I had an older sister Sharon Tucker Whitaker, and she's two years older. And then I have a younger sister, Yasmin Tucker Bates-Brown. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is this--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: And she's five years younger. Speaker 1: Okay. Are these all the siblings (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: That's it, just-- Speaker 1: That's it, okay. Speaker 2: It's the three of us and I was the middle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. And so in '86 [1986], so I guess it was August 4th because she died on August 5, 1986, my sister had a brain aneurysm. And I got a call, I guess at two, must have been two o'clock in the morning, and my sister's husband called and he says, "Sharon is dead," you know, my sister is dead. And I'm going like what, you know, I mean what, he'd been drinking. And I just, you know, somebody tells you, she was forty and he says she's dead. And I'm going, he said, "I came home, the door was open," and he said and then, you know, I got a call, and she's dead. So I'm going like, no, this ain't, this is not true. So I called my younger sister and amazingly she's up, she picks up the phone, I said, "I got this weird call, you know, from Linus [ph.] and he said Sharon was dead." And she said, "Girl that can't be true." And I said "Okay. I'm gonna call the hospitals and you call the hospitals and then let's find out." I said Kenny [ph.], you know, where Kenny is? Don't know. Kenny is my sister's eighteen-year-old son. So we called different hospitals and I called, I think it's Little Company of Mary [Hospital in Evergreen Park, Illinois] and I'm calling everything. I don't even know anything, I'm just going down the list. And so I called them and I said, "Is Sharon Whitaker there?" And they said, "Well we can't release that information." You know, I said, thought I said, "Well, she must be there." And I said, "Is her body there?" And then they said yes. So by that time my sister called me up and she said Kenny just came over here, he said, no, she said. "I just got a call from one of Kenny's friends mothers, and she asked me was Sharon dead." Now you got somebody calling a sister with gossip as far as we knew, and she said everybody's crazy 'cause we just didn't believe it. And I told her that the hospital said the body was there, we still didn't believe it. Then she said, "Kenny, my nephew, just came in the house and he said his mother was dead." Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: So that's how we found out. And we went to, I think we went to the hospital, and then they start talk about doing the autopsy at Cook County Hospital [now John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital of Cook County in Chicago, Illinois] and I'm telling her, I don't want it done at Cook County because we didn't hear anything good about Cook County Hospital. So they told us if we called a politician, you know, somebody who was important, they could say we could get it done some place but we had to get it done because she died suddenly. So I called the mayor [of Chicago] and he was up. It's like 3:30 in the morning. Speaker 1: This is Harold Washington? Speaker 2: Harold Washington, he was up. And I said, "Harold this is Joyce," you know, I told him my sister had died and I didn't want her to have an autopsy at Cook County. He said, "Call John Stroger" [HM John H. Stroger, Jr.]. So he gave me Stroger's number. I called John Stroger, he was up. And I said, you know, "This is Joyce Tucker, Harold Washington told me to call you I, my sister is gonna get an autopsy, I don't want her to have it," and he said, "Let me tell you about Cook County," he said, "When my son died this is where I had it. It's a state of an art, they, I'm gonna have whoever was the top person, he says, I'm not just gonna have anybody do it, the top person is gonna do it, they're gonna handle it, don't be concerned," I mean he really coached me. You know, I mean I'm waking people up and they're talking to me, you know, like I'm a family member. He says I'll have him call you. So he called Stein [ph.] or whoever it was, he called me up, woke up another person, he says, "I'm gonna do it personally, don't worry about it." I'm gonna take care of it. And by that time, you know, as, as well as you can feel about a horrible situation, you calm down. I just totally calmed down because I knew they were taking care of it and that she was gonna be treated the right way and the autopsy would be treated the right way. Story_ID: 115833 Speaker 1: But the story was my nephew took her [Sharon Louise Whitaker] to South Shore Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] and he parked in the emergency, he parked in the, the driveway of the emergency and he took her in, and she was talking crazy 'cause her brain is frying, the doctor came up and said, "She's drunk, this is something you could have handled at home, and then besides that you need to move your car." So he had to carry his mother back to the car, move the car, and come back in. Then they said she's at the wrong hospital, she needs to be at Little Company of Mary [Hospital in Evergreen Park, Illinois]. You're supposed to take anybody that's in a critical situation, anybody you're supposed to take 'em, they didn't. When she got to the hospital she was DOA [dead on arrival], DOA. And I started a lawsuit for my brother-in-law but, you know, we couldn't sue and it didn't go the way it should have. But I mean, it was like we had to pray, we had to let that go 'cause it was nothing we could do. But to say she's probably drunk, my sister didn't even drink, you know, why would you do that? Why would you do that? So we had to deal with that, [HM] Reverend [Jesse] Jackson gave the eulogy, you know, for her 'cause she used to go to PUSH [now Rainbow/PUSH] with me all the time so he knew her, so. We're, we're handling that and then a year, it was a year later, my, I got a call from my sister [Yasmin Bates-Brown], my younger sister, she said, "Sit down," I said "Why?" It was either a year or two years, I don't remember, and I said "Why," you know, "if you're gonna tell me to sit down something is going on. So you need to tell me what's going on," and she says, "Mom [Vivian Louise Ellison Tucker] is dead." And I said she can't be dead. I said, "This is August 5th, she can't be dead," that's the same day my sister died. So I'm going like "There's no way, there's no way," and she had an accident. I said there, there's no way. I mean it really, and she kept saying, yes it is, yes it is. But I'm thinking August 5th, August 5th. And then the next August 5th my sister called me up and she said "Come over here now," it's like 3 o'clock in the morning. And I went over there and I said, "What happened?" You know, I didn't ask what happened before I came, I just went. And she said I was, it was storming, it was still storming," she said, "I was getting ready to move the patio furniture off the patio and her son started crying and he says, "Mama please don't go out there, please don't go out there." And she's going like, "You're being silly, you're being silly, I'm going, I'mma move the patio furniture 'cause I don't want something to happen to the furniture. And as soon as she put her hand on the door knob, lightning hit the tree, split the branch, the branch fell on the furniture, and if she'd walk out there it would have fell on her. And we said three is it, you know. And then we didn't get scared about August 5th any more. But we were terrified, no matter where we were, we had to talk to each other, we had to, you know, make sure that, so it had to be two years, we had to make sure that we knew where each other were 'cause when you lose two family members on the same day, but when the tree, the lightning hit the tree, the tree fell on the table where she would have been, then we relaxed. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: But that was, you know, that was a time everybody was dying. My grandmother died, and a lot of stuff was happening. A lot of stuff was happening. (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: That is a strange, a strange story, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. You know, August 5th, it's like what is going on. And I don't remember most dates as you can tell, but those are the dates I remember. (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: You, when August 5th rolls around now do you--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: I'm not as anxious. Speaker 2: --is there any kind of (unclear), you're not as-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: I mean sometimes I'm not paying attention but before I couldn't sleep, I'd pace, you know, I'd call people, you know, and I'd be trying to figure out where everybody was, all the significant others, you know, "Where are you, what are you doing, you know, where are you." Speaker 2: That's a strange and tragic-- Speaker 1: It was. Speaker 2: --story, yeah. Story_ID: 115834 Speaker 1: Now I didn't, I just was reminded in the course of this discussion, that I did not ask you about the [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington campaign which is the singular campaign that marks the existence--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --of anybody from Chicago [Illinois]--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: It was-- Speaker 1: 1983. Speaker 2: --fascinating. And, and what was interesting was I would go to Harold, and I said, "Harold do you wanna be mayor?" And he's go like, "I got the best job in the world. Why would I wanna be mayor?" He said, "I'm in Congress [U.S. House of Representatives] everything is there, everything is available. Things are at my fingertips." He says, "up until now I've been flying by the seat of my pants." He said, "I love this job." He said, "but what I told 'em is if they get so much money and they register so many people, then I'll run for mayor." Guess what? They did it. They did it. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Speaker 2: I'm looking at him and I'm going like, you know, this, the Congress was his dream job. You know, and Lu Palmer [HM Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II] and [HM] Jorja Palmer were having all these meetings, I was there, everything. Right in the middle of everything, right-- Speaker 1: Show up sites and (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Going to raise the money or whatever. And then we got called, I think there were like four blacks, and we got called into the Governor's office and the Governor's chief of staff said, Governor [James Thompson, Jr.] doesn't want anybody taking a high visibility position in Harold Washington's campaign. And we said we can live with that. You know, we're working for the Governor, we're Republican, he didn't say don't, which he knew would be a problem, he said not high visibility. So we're walking around with all our buttons on the inside of our coats (laughter). We're flashing buttons, you know, going to all the meetings, which nobody knew about, you know, they didn't, they didn't pay attention to what the black folks were doing. So going to a Lu Palmer-Jesse Jackson meeting was not gonna give you any visibility. 'Cause number one, they didn't think he was gonna win. He was a sleeper candidate until they had the rally at the University of Illinois [in Chicago, Illinois] and all them thousand people showed up and all of a sudden, whoa this person could be a threat, and he was. Speaker 1: Do you have an analysis of, of how he actually won 'cause blacks (unclear) are not the majority in Chicago like they are in some of the other cities where they have black mayors like Detroit [Michigan] or Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Well, you know, what it was? It was a crusade. You know, it was a grass roots crusade. It was grass roots. Black people, working with grass roots, white people working with grass roots, Hispanic people, you know, working with someone who genuinely were talking to the people. He had a message that other people didn't have. He was a seasoned politician but he didn't give a seasoned politician's message. He gave a message to the people and they believed that he was going to do the thing that needed to be done, and he was. And then what happened with Bernie Epton [Bernard Epton] and his campaign song, "Bye Bye Blackbird," you know, that got real nasty. And people did not appreciate it, people, and then the other thing when the Democrats, if you won in the Democratic primary, you were mayor but the Democrats decided, no, no, no we're not doing this. We're gone switch over to the other side. It was a lot of that behavior that turned people off of them and turned people on the Harold. And people were working, I remember I had cousins on the West Side and, you know, you called them up on the telephone and you're going like we got to, we got to, you know, Harold, Harold, Harold. And people who were not engaged ever in their lives, were engaged then. Were engaged then. I got so excited about working, voting for Harold, I came to work with two mismatched shoes, you know, (laughter) I just jumped up, put my shoes on, went out there to vote, and when I got at the office I went like, I had on one blue shoe and (laughter) and one black shoe. But what was really funny, I had told my staff 'cause at the victory party, you know, down at McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois], we were all talking to each other and, you know, Governor said don't take a high profile position, everybody wanted to go but we figured, we couldn't go. We couldn't go to the victory 'cause, can't take a high profile position. Then I said I don't care, I'm going. So I go down there and five of my staff and I hit the door at the same time (laughter). We all did, and we all lived in different places. We all converged at the same time and we just fell out laughing. I mean it was a celebration that was just, you, you, you remember for the rest of your life, you know. And then I called Harold up and said "Okay, Harold, you know, what's my job, what's my job," and he said, "Joyce, we can't all be in the same place. You are where you need to be." And I said, "But I wanna work for you." He said "Uh-uh, you're where you need to be." He said, "we all can't be Democrats, some of us have to be Republicans, and we all can't be in the same place." And he was smart 'cause the conversation changes when you're in the room. Story_ID: 115835 Speaker 1: Now did you, were there any particular insights from the Republican side of it when Bernard Epton ran for [Mayor of Chicago, Illinois in 1983], now Epton had a reputation of being a liberal Republican until that campaign. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --did, you know, him very well (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Didn't know him very well but he didn't have a lot of credibility. I mean he ran and nobody ran a strong person against the Democrat in Chicago because it was just wasted effort. You know, a Republican wasn't gonna win. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And it was understood. And so when you think of Epton, you thought of, he, he was not taken seriously by Republicans or Democrats. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And if it wasn't for the fact that a black man had the opportunity to be mayor, he wouldn't have been taken seriously at all. Speaker 1: Now for those who are watching this in the future who have no idea what Chicago politics were in 1983 or even now-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --could you tell us like how many Republicans are in city council today in Chicago? Speaker 2: I don't have a clue, you know. Speaker 1: Do you think there might be one? Speaker 2: That might be a stretch (laughter). Speaker 1: There probably isn't. That that was my point. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Probably is not-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --even one. Speaker 2: Right, right, right, yeah. 'Cause Chicago is a stronghold for Democrats. You know, and they would run someone who wanted attention but that's all it was. You know, and then for that person to be a credible candidate to have strong backing with a campaign song, "Bye Bye Blackbird." Story_ID: 115836 Speaker 1: So anyway, so do you have any anecdotes about [Mayor] Harold Washington you haven't told already that are good that, you know. Speaker 2: I, you know other than--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: He stayed there until '87 [1987], I guess, right (unclear)? Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: He stayed mayor until May, the fall of '87 [1987], he won the won the '87 [1987] campaign but-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --he died in office. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. And that was, I was having a meeting with one of the Republican senators in, in my office and someone came in and they said, "Harold Washington died." And, you know, immediately I said, "No, he didn't." You know, it was just total denial. And I turned the television on and they were saying that he was in the hospital and they were trying to figure out what his condition was, and they said, then you get the report Harold Washington died, you know. And I just shut up, went home, got in the bed, pulled the covers over my head and just stayed there. You know, I don't think I ate, I don't think I did anything. It was, it just, you know, it, it was just horrible. You know, it was a friend, a mentor. You know, it just shut me down. You know, and really everybody else, you know. Then we started watching council wars, where there was a fight between Sawyer [HM Eugene Sawyer] and Tim-- Speaker 1: Tim Evans [Timothy Evans]. Speaker 2: --Tim Evans. You know, and they were pointing in Sawyer's face you will be the mayor. And he was getting sick and throwing up and it was, you know, that was bad too. It was just, just crisis. I mean the black community went into crisis. Harold would walk in a room and we'd just jump up, it was like you had an invisible string on your head. And you didn't plan to jump up but if there were 200 black people in the room, and some white folks, we just were up. You know, and he goes here's Harold. And people were just thrilled and, and we stayed that way. And then when he died, we were all devastated because we lost a connection. We lost, it's like somebody cut your heart out, you know, you lost that connection. And it, it, it just was terrible. You know, and it took a long time, you know, before you adjusted to it. You know, you were still in shock. I think about it, it's like, you know, it's kind of hard to believe. And he was here and then he was gone. And he was gone right when he had the ability to deal with the city council in the way there wasn't a fight every day, every day. And I'd call him up and I said, Harold this is terrible, you know, how do you feel about that? And he goes like, it's just a fight, and, you know, I'm a boxer. You know, it's just a fight. It's not a problem at all. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. I think it's been written that he seemed to enjoy the (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah that's, that's, that's what he said-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --it's just. You know, and when, and when something was really, really, really bad, you know, I'd give him a call. And he goes, ah don't worry about it. You know, don't worry about it. Speaker 1: Were you surprised when he won again in '87 [1987] after all of the council wars in the previous four years? Speaker 2: Uh, no. 'Cause I just felt very confident that he was gonna win again. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a (unclear) once again he basically consolidated-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the city council the second time he ran. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Basically. Speaker 2: And then it was gonna be a good council then. You know, he was gonna be able to do stuff more than just fighting, because the first one, it was a fight, every single day it was a fight. You know, they were boxing and fighting and, you know, saying horrible things. Speaker 1: Does it, does the present situation with [HM President] Barack Obama remind you of council wars (unclear)-- Speaker 2: In a way. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: You know, in a way. You look at it and you see the fighting, you see the division. Congress in, in Washington [D.C.] is a little bit more polite. In Chicago [Illinois] I would say, Chicago is a town where people don't stab you in the back. They stab you in the chest. They want you to know who did it. Ain't no sneaky about Chicago. "I did it, I'm proud of it, I want you to know." In Washington [D.C.] they stab you in the back and they tell you what wonderful friends they are. You know, so in Chicago you always know where you stand 'cause people don't have a problem telling you, "I hate your guts." They'll tell you, you know, you know. And the politics are more, you know, they're problematic but they're honest. You don't have a question about who's on your side or not in Chicago. Speaker 1: Did, did you have a, was, was there any particular meeting to rally Republicans around Ed Vrdolyak when he decided to run as a Republican? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. You know, I was, not that I know of. And, and I had a position that people will say political position [Director of the Illinois Department of Human Rights] but I wasn't in politics. You know, so I wasn't in the mix. Speaker 1: Okay. All right-- Story_ID: 115837 Speaker 1: Okay. So what, okay. You served in this, the position, the Governor's position [Director of the Illinois Department of Human Rights] until 1990? Speaker 2: For ten years. Speaker 1: Ten years. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: What, what would you consider to be your legacy from that ten years? Speaker 2: Well, I think strong, well a strong, efficient, unbiased Illinois Department of Human Rights. You know, I told my, and excellence above all. You know, we were not accepting anything that was not excellent. I was not accepting work that was not the best it could be. I wasn't, we trained people so they could be the best that they could be. And I told my staff all the time, we are not biased. You know, we're not plaintiffs, we're not respondent bias, your job is to enforce the Illinois Human Rights Act. Call it like you see it. If you don't call it, you know, it, it, that means you don't see it. But some people wanna be biased. You know, any time complaint comes in, they win, you know. The respondent, which means the company is wrong. I said, "No, they're not. What do the facts tell you? What do the facts tell you? And the respondent is not wrong. What do the facts tell you?" And a lot of times your civil rights agencies advocate the complainant's side of view. We advocated the Human Rights Act. That's the only advocacy we do. We're not an advocacy agency. We advocate the fact that people should not be discriminated against, they should be treated fairly. That's what we advocate. And you had to convince people, we're not one-sided. We had credibility as an agency. You know, and I think the credibility of the agency is important. People felt like they could be treated fairly, either side, either side. Speaker 1: Is there any one case that stands out as a, as one that you can discuss with us about (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, the one case I think that we took the most aggressive action, was the City [Chicago, Illinois] was purchasing buses and we felt that they needed to purchase buses that were equipped for people who were disabled. And at the time they were purchasing it, we had a problem with the fact that it looks like they were getting buses that didn't have the lifts on 'em. So we went to court and got a temporary injunction, "Stop City, you can't buy these buses." Whew, it hit the newspaper, you know, Department of Human Rights temporary injunction against the City. Nobody knew it. I get calls from everybody in the Governor's [James Thompson, Jr.'s] office. "What are you doing? What are you doing?" (Laughter) and it, the Governor's office is like, "What have you done?" I said, "Enforcing the Human Rights Act." "Why didn't you tell anybody?" "Well, it's my job." Well, we kind of knew that it was better to beg forgiveness, than to ask for permission, that if you went up there, somebody was gonna say don't do it, and it wasn't what we should have done, we should get the City's attention. And I described the Human Rights Act. I described all the communication with the city. I described everything that we were supposed to do. And the Governor, who is a reasoning person and is a lawyer, understood it. We got the City's attention, they did what they should do. But when you think of a little bitty agency going against the City, but we were, you know, pushed to the wall. We had to do it. And we ended up working everything out. So that was one of the cases. And we were, you know, pretty, we were committed. I had one person I was talking to when I walked away, and they said, "She really believes that stuff" (laughter), and I did. You know, and I wasn't thinking of consequences, political problems, or whatever. This is what the law says, this is what we oughta do. No politics. This is what the law says, this is what we oughta do. No fear. I wasn't worried about was I gone lose my job or not 'cause when you believe you're doing the right thing, you do it, and you're not afraid. You know, and that is, I see now that that's probably people thought that was very unusual but that's how you do a job that you believe in. You do it the way you think is right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 115838 Speaker 1: So what happened in 1990 that you left the--, what happened (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Well, I was the Director of [the Illinois Department of] Human Rights, and as a 706 Human Rights Agency we interface a lot with EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], which meant we interface a lot with Clarence Thomas who was the chair of the EEOC. And we were an aggressive agency then, I mean we set some things in place that other agencies modeled in terms of how we enforce the Human Rights Act. We were, Illinois was one of the bigger human rights agencies, so we kind of stood out. I was the, had been president of the Illinois Association of Official Human Rights Agencies which were all the 706 agencies. And we kind of like made a mark for ourselves. And, Har--, Clarence was a friend and so he was going to the Appellate Court [United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit] and he asked me, he said, "Do you wanna take my spot at EEOC?" And I said, "Well I don't know if they would give it to me or not." He says, "Well I told 'em you're not like me. You know, (laughter) you're not conservative like I am." And he says, "You want the spot?" I said, "sure." He said, "Send me a resume." So I sent him a resume, he sent it to the White House, and they called me and they asked me to come in for an interview. Well the same thing happened when they called me at home and said this is the White House, I went through that "Really, who is this, give me your number I'll call back." And so I called back, it was the White House. And they said we wanna interview you, you know, Clarence sent us your resume and we wanna interview for, you know, Clarence's position. And I went in for an interview with Chase Untermeyer [Charles Graves Untermeyer], who was Chief of White House staff [assistant to the President and director of the Office of Presidential Personnel]. And, you know, he interviewed me and all this stuff, and then finally when the interview was over, I said, "Look, I am a supporter and advocate of affirmative action. I can't work for anybody who doesn't like affirmative action because that's what I do." He showed me the White House Affirmative Action Plan under Bush. And he said we have no problem with that, you know. Speaker 1: Now this is [President] George Herbert Walker Bush? Speaker 2: George, right. Speaker 1: The, the older Bush. Speaker 2: I served Bush I. Speaker 1: Bush I. Speaker 2: And then he took me through a tour of the White House. Now everybody told me when you meet Chase Untermeyer, don't have a problem because he's gruff, he doesn't any personality, he's cold, he's distant, he's all of these things. With my interview he was the nicest, warmest, kindest, friendliest person ever. And they couldn't, really couldn't believe it was the same person. But we connected, you know. It was, it was a great interview. And that's how I ended up getting that job. I filled his spot. I wasn't designated chair, you know, 'cause they gave that to someone who was more conservative than me. But I became one of the commissioners. Speaker 1: Okay. For the EEOC? Speaker 2: For EEOC. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And it was a challenge. You know, it was a challenge when the Republicans were in the majority, it was a challenge when the Democrats were in the majority because I had been raised to think that these kind of jobs weren't political. That you don't look at the politics of the situation, you do the job. And I came there with a civil rights background, you know. That's what I did. And not everybody who gets appointed to those positions brings the same kind of background. Story_ID: 115136 Speaker 1: All right. So, I was asking off-camera who were some of the people that worked with you? Speaker 2: It was Tony Gallegos, Ricky Silberman [Rosalie "Ricky" Silberman], Joy Cherian, and Evan Kemp [Jr.]. They were the first group. And then it was, there were, when the Republicans took over the two that were, came in I can't remember their names but they were two Democrats. One, I should say when the Democrats-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --came in. Speaker 1: Now did you meet, I can't think of her, her name now, the, the young lady that, that contested with Clarence Thomas in the-- Speaker 2: Did not know Anita Hill. Speaker 1: Anita Hill, right. Speaker 2: Did not believe Anita Hill. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, because the story number one, if you listened to the hearings, you heard her say I never said he sexually harassed me. I said he was sexually inappropriate that's what she said. The media flipped that into sexual harassment. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If you look at what sexual harassment is, there even if he were sexually inappropriate, which I doubt very seriously, it would not be sexual harassment. Harassment is when you try to make somebody do something and they don't and then you impact their jobs negatively. If you don't do this, I'm not gonna promote you, I'm gone fire you, I'm gone do this, or you put your hands on 'em, or you're around them and you're speaking sexually all the time. You know, where you make the environment hostile where the person cannot work. You don't call a person as many times as she did, you don't go visit the person and try to have them give you rides and you give them rides somewhere. You don't do all that stuff, and claim how many years later? Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, yeah, several years later. Speaker 2: Right. You, you look at it and, you know, it, and you say, and then if you know the person you're going like eh, you know, I'm not seeing that. And I spent a lot of time around Clarence. And-- Speaker 1: What was he like? How would you analyze him? I know he's been pariahed in the black community-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --for many years. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And but, but what was he, what was your, with, we've, we've interviewed people that went to college with him-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --and other people-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --that knew him and people that knew him as a student-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: [HM] Margaret Bush Wilson talked about-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --her interactions with him when he was a law intern-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --you know. Sponsored by [John] Danforth of St. Louis [Missouri] and that sort of thing. What, what was your impression of Clarence Thomas? (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, he was a great Chair of the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission]. He enforced the EEO laws. Now he did not believe in affirmative action, and when he was chair of the EEOC and he started talking about affirmative action, I told him you need to shut up because EEOC has nothing to do with affirmative action. So why are you talking about something that you have nothing to do with. And, and actually he did. You know, Clarence Pendleton who was at the Civil Rights Commission [United States Commission on Civil Rights] talked about it more, and they used to get mixed, the two Clarences mixed up. But shortly after he became Chair, he stopped talking about it all, at all. And his philosophy is that affirmative action stigmatizes people, and we shouldn't deal with that stigma. And my position was unemployment stigmatizes you too. And if you're black in America, chances are you're gone be stigmatized one way or the other, so why not have a job. And the other thing is, it's never been preferential treatment. You know, if it were preferential treatment, we would not have so few people in these higher level positions. It would have been taken care of. It's never been a quota. A quota says you put a black in the job. Has that ever happened? No. Usually you are, you exceed your competition if somebody's gone put you somewhere and nor should you defend it or feel bad about it. I disagree with his philosophy, that's his philosophy. My philosophy is, if you got one person on the court that has that thinking, he's not the only vote. What are you doing about the other four? If you're gonna dog him out, dog the other four out. If you're gonna say bad things about him, say bad things about the other four. Don't single him out and that's the only one you talk about. You know, maybe that's the one that the black community thinks should be different because we expect different things from black people, okay. But talk about the others too. Story_ID: 115137 Speaker 1: How did you feel, I mean about [President] George H. W. Bush, who seemed to be fairly moderate-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --appointing [U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice] Clarence Thomas to fulfill a seat vacated by [U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice] Thurgood Marshall? Now, people will say that's not so, necessarily the black seat but it is-- Speaker 2: Right, right. No, it isn't. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, that's the only one we got. Speaker 2: No, it isn't. But it wasn't the black seat. And it was filled by a black person but we don't have a seat that says "black" and they have white and there's no Hispanic seat. I mean that, he should not have been expected to live up to the high, lofty standards of Thurgood Marshall. He was appointed by a Republican. Did we really think that this President was gonna replace this job with somebody who had those beliefs? And if you did, something is wrong with your thinking because he was gonna put somebody in the job that held to the same beliefs that he held. Speaker 1: Do, do, do you think that he really had the same beliefs or 'cause some would think that Clarence Thomas is to the right of George H. W. Bush? Speaker 2: Could be. Speaker 1: But I, I don't know. What do you think? Speaker 2: Could be. But he certainly wasn't gonna put another Thurgood Marshall in there. I mean that was not gonna happen. One of the things that I've said often, Clarence's beliefs are Clarence's belief. He's not mimicking [U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice Antonin] Scalia. He's not, he, he has his own mind. So to suggest that he is listening and he's being persuaded by someone else, really is not true. You know, if you don't like his beliefs, give him the credit for having 'em himself. But to try to say he's somebody else's puppet is wrong, you know. If you don't like the decisions, it's his bad decisions that you don't like. But it's not Scalia's bad decisions that he's mimicking. But if you don't like him and you don't like what he does because of what he does, add the other four in there but don't target him by himself. The decisions are made five to four, he's amongst that group. So take potshots at all of 'em. Include him too if you don't believe in it, but don't single him out. You know, if any one of 'em changes and then you got another five to four the opposite way. But do I like his decisions? No, I don't. Do I like him as a person? Yes, I do. Does his decisions sometime impact the other things? Yeah, more like, now wait a minute. This is a problem for me. But the person who I know, I like but sometimes I have to work with, I don't like this decision, it's impacting us very, very negatively very (unclear). You almost have to compartmentalize the stuff. This is not a bad person. These are bad decisions. But all the rest of 'em are bad too, so I'm not gone single him out. Story_ID: 115138 Speaker 1: Okay. So now, you were, the [President George W.] Bush Administration appointed you to the [White] House Initiative Advisory Board for [sic, on] Historically Black Colleges and Universities, and-- Speaker 2: The second Bush. Speaker 1: --well, yeah. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: The second, oh, the second Bush. Speaker 2: The second Bush. Speaker 1: So George W. Bush? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Didn't know that. So we just had the wrong dates down here, that's why I don't (unclear). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, so when was that done? Speaker 2: That was in 2001. Speaker 1: Okay. So we're jumping ahead too far, I guess. So-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Now what happened in the, so you served-- Speaker 2: From '90 [1990] to '96 [1996] as the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] Commissioner. Speaker 1: '90 [1990] to '96 [1996]. Okay, okay. All right. Speaker 2: And then I was up for reappointment and [U.S. Senator] Trent Lott held it up. And, in fact, my position stayed vacant for the entire term, so for five entire years that spot was not filled. Speaker 1: So, in 1996, now this is two years after the, what they the Republican revolution in Congress and, and such. But, but in, in the Senate when Newt Gingrich-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --installed a Republican majorities but they're holding up your position and they're the Republicans (laughter). Speaker 2: Absolutely. The White House had said, you know, we'll sign the papers as soon as the Republicans, you know, [President Bill] Clinton, we'll sign the papers as soon as the Republicans send 'em over but we can't appoint her because she's a Republican, this is a Republican spot. So everything that needed to be done with the Republicans, with the Democrats had been done. Denny Hastert [John Dennis "Denny" Hastert"] had all of the Illinois Republicans send a letter to the President saying they supported my reappointment but the problem was they were Reps and the Senate had to send it forward. And Trent Lott came in and did, had done it 'cause at that point it was up for him to send it in. And I can't think of the other one, [Bob] Dole was ready to send it in but he was in transition, so I got caught up with Trent Lott. And, you know, the problem was he never said he wasn't gonna do it but when somebody doesn't do it, they say they're not gonna do it, they don't have to tell you anything. You know, they either do it or not when they don't, that means they don't intend to. And I think the issue was I was not conservative. Speaker 1: Okay. So, does this kind of mark the time period when they start sorting people out in terms of who's more conservative or conservative enough in the Republican Party? Speaker 2: You know what I, at the time this happened I don't recall they had moved that far into that, you know, when I was coming up. So whatever philosophy they had, we didn't know about it. Speaker 1: That's years of the Contract for America and the-- Speaker 2: I don't-- Speaker 1: Gingrich and Dick Armey [U.S. Representative Richard "Dick" Armey] and all those (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I don't remember thinking I got caught up in that. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: It's just that, it just seemed to be something he wasn't gonna do. Speaker 1: Okay. So you, you blame it on Trent Lott himself? Speaker 2: I didn't know anything else that was going on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was in his hands. Story_ID: 115139 Speaker 1: Okay. So in 1996 you were appointed Consent Decree Monitor for the landmark 34-- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: For Mitsubishi [Mitsubishi Motors Corporation]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What I did was started a consulting firm [Tucker Spearman and Associates]-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --with my, the person who was my Chief of Council at EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission]. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And we went, I think we spent, so it was about '97 [1997], we spent a year trying to figure out what we wanted to do. Speaker 1: So did you start this consulting firm while the time, near the time that, that [U.S. Senator] Trent Lott was holding up your employment? Speaker 2: No, it was after. You know, when it became real clear that nothing was happening, and I was looking for jobs and people were saying you are too qualified, you're overqualified, you're this, you're that. And I just decided well, you know, if I'm that overqualified, and then I was going to a law firm, you know, discussing it with one of the partners at a law firm, and one of the positions that they said was, "You know, black people don't bring in business." And I said "Well, you know, [HM] Vernon Jordan brings in business." And I named some other successful blacks, "so why wouldn't I be one of them?" And then they said, "Well, what you should do is give us your business plan." And I said, "I'm not giving you my business plan. I will give you my business plan, I don't have a commitment, you don't have a commitment with me, so you can just take the business plan and implement it and I'd still be looking. There is no way I'm giving you my business plan without some kind of commitment." Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And then I thought, you know, and my sister [Yasmin Bates-Brown] says I should phrase things more positively. And I said the greatest revenge is success. I'm gonna be your worst enemy. I'm gonna be the competition. So my partner and I decided, you know, we're gonna set up a consulting firm, we're gonna be in EEO, affirmative action, diversity. And we're gone be good. And we're good, not only good, we're gonna be great. And we got the Mitsubishi, I got the Mitsubishi contract. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: So this is, is this, so did you set up the firm in '96 [1996]? Speaker 2: '97 [1997]. Speaker 1: '97 [1997], okay. So the contract with Mitsubishi didn't happen until-- Speaker 2: Until '97 [1997]. Speaker 1: '97 [1997], okay. All right. (Simultaneous). Speaker 2: Because we spent a year just, you know, I was taking photography classes and just trying to get my head in order. What is it that I wanna do and I'm not going to be pressured any more. You know, I'm just gone take time, gonna figure it out, and I'm gonna do all the things that having a job kept me from doing. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) took photography? Speaker 2: Took photography class, took painting class, volunteered at a hospital, just did stuff. You know, and just to let me reduce the craziness and anxiety, and I'm not gone do anything. I'm not looking any more. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so, so you had this consulting firm until-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --when, how long did you-- Speaker 2: Until 2002 when I came to Boeing. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Well, some of your clients for your firm were American University [Washington, D.C.], Blue Cross Blue Shield, and Detroit Edison [now DTE Entergy Electric Company], (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Bell Atlantic [now Verison]. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, I have a list of about, about (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --twenty something over here. Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yep Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 115140 Speaker 1: (unclear) Was there any major landmark event that took place during this time that you [Tucker Spearman and Associates], I mean or, or-- Speaker 2: That I can talk about? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No (laughter). Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Other than Mitsubishi [Mitsubishi Motors Corporation]. And we, you know, the great thing about my sister saying, you need a business plan, you need this, you need that, and I just said I'm not writing that, you know. My plan is to get business. Where, everywhere. Doing what, everything. And so she says you won't be successful and then you need to get a loan to, to track your pay back. I said I'm not getting a loan. And so she told me I need to, after we were very successful, you need to write a book on what not to do and still be successful. She said, "You did nothing right. You did nothing right, this shouldn't have worked." I said well, you know, I wasn't gonna spend all that time writing stuff up because I had the plan in my head. You know, I knew what I wanted to do, I knew where I wanted to do it, I knew who the clients were. And I looked at the, the template for the business plan, it just seemed like a waste of time. We had great clients, particularly Mitsubishi [Mitsubishi Motors Corporation] because if I gave them a bill on Monday, I had my money on Friday. Later, Monday, so we were paying bills. We had great cash flow. And all of my clients were, except one, were the same, gave 'em a bill, got my money. You know, it was on time. They didn't question, we billed very significantly. You know, I billed like I was the senior partner at a law firm. And when there was a case someone wanted me take a look at, they had to pay me to look at it. You know, I wasn't gone spend three hours looking at a case to say yes or no. Spent three hours looking at a case, bill $325. If I spent five hours looking at it and decided no, I still got my five hours. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And we were, knew that we were being hired because of our credibility, and if the case was not something that we wanted to be involved in or we felt it compromised our credibility, we didn't take it. You know we did a lot of expert witness. The compliance audits, you know. And we did very, very well. And the, the clients came in word of mouth. You know, if you do quality work, people refer you. You know, and they, we did quality work. Story_ID: 115141 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, okay. So in 2002, you came on with Boeing. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And how did that take place? Speaker 2: Well, a consulting firm was looking to fill this position, Carrington and Carrington. And I was at a PUSH [now Rainbow/PUSH] conference putting on a program on the glass ceiling. And they came up to me and they said, you know, Joyce, we have a job that's perfect for you. And I said I don't need a job. I got a consulting firm [Tucker Spearman and Associates]. And they said, ah, but you would love Boeing. And I said I'd love Boeing for some contracts but I am not interested in Boeing. And what seems to happen is, when you turn down something that somebody thinks is wonderful, they pursue you. And they kept calling and I kept saying no. And I talked with my business partner [Charles Spearman], he says why don't you go on the interview because we might get a contract. And I said well, you know, I don't like going out and I know I don't want this job. He says, you should go. And my sister [Yasmin Bates-Brown] said, "Joyce if you're gonna say no to something at least you need to know what you're saying no to." That made a lot of sense. So I went on the first round of interviews and, of course, I had the second round of interviews and I felt very confident in the ability to perform. And, you know, the interviews went very, very well, as they should have, because they were looking for someone who had a deep background and who had expertise. And it was like well, you know, not too many people have as much or more than I do. So I kind of knew that it fit with what I've done in the past. But I was still torn, you know, the money was fantastic but the job that I had, the consulting firm was fantastic too. And so I went and I talked with my business partner, and we're still great friends, and I said, "okay this is what they're offering, you know, it's in Chicago [Illinois], we've talked about opening up a, a office here, with Tucker Spearman, and I said, you know what, I got problems, you know, I'm just really torn." And he says, "You would be crazy not to take that offer." And he says, "You gotta give up the guilt, you know. I'll be okay. We'll be okay. And it was hard for both of us. You know, he says, but give up the guilt. You know, it's a great job. I want you to take it and I'll be okay." And I must have cried every day for a month (laughter) but, you know, he was, he was right. It was a, it was an incredible opportunity and it fit me, you know. And it was home. It was in Chicago. And then, you know, and it was, you know, they made an offer I couldn't refuse. And, and it worked, you know, it really worked. Story_ID: 115142 Speaker 1: Okay. So this is in 2002 Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So what, just explain what, what do you do for Boeing? Speaker 2: Well, I manage the EEO [Equal Employment Opportunity] which means we do internal investigations of discrimination. The fantastic thing about that is that my group makes the decision as to whether there's corrective action and what the corrective action should be, which is really different than in a lot of places where you have other people intervene and impact the decision or whatever. We make the decision. There is an appeal, you know, so the employee can appeal and management can appeal to me. So they're not appealing to anyone above me. They're appealing to me. And what that does for us is that the people on the inside know we're unbiased, we're neutral, and we're independent. So if you're filing a complaint internally and you think someone in different levels are influencing that decision, you don't trust it. But when, you know, that the organization doing the investigation is making the independent decision without being influenced by the outside, you trust it. And what happened was we found that employees who were going to EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] or the state agencies, they don't, they come here because they're gonna get a fair decision and they can appeal if they don't like it. You know, sometimes we give too much discipline, they appeal to me, I reverse it. Sometimes management says wait a minute, you didn't do what you should have done and we deal with it. But when it's, when it's finished with me, it's over, it's over. You don't take it to my boss, you don't, it's over, that's it. They know it. And that kind of independence makes us very trustworthy. And it makes us feel good because we're doing our job. We deal with the external discrimination complaints. We develop the responses to, if someone goes to EEOC. And if they do, we're gonna look into it and resolve it. You know, and the regulatory agencies know that. We handle the Affirmative Action Programs, where we're constantly looking to see, do we have the right representation of minorities and woman at the various levels. If we don't, what can we do to fix it, you know. We also look at all the policies and procedures. Are they a barrier to opportunity? Is there something going on here that we think impedes minorities and women from moving up? And if it is, then we have to develop and propose ways to change it. We deal with the culture diversity inclusion, which is what's the culture? Do people understand that there's different communication styles. Black people have what the, the anthropologists say is a truth before peace communication style. Can't be any peace unless I tell the truth. Caucasians usually have a peace before truth. I wanna get to peace first, I'll deal with the truth later. I don't like conflict. So let's not deal with the conflict. Blacks say conflict doesn't bother me because getting rid of the conflict is the way I can get to the truth. Hispanics, Asians, other people have different styles. If you understand those styles, then you get along with those people. You know, we won't be labeled as creating unnecessary conflict but we will be truth seekers. So that's, that impacts evaluations, it impacts interactions. If you know that about yourself, you dial down 'cause you know sometimes people are threatened by how you say something, you're not mad but someone may perceive it. Do you wanna be heard or you wanna use the same communication style. So we rolled that out across the enterprise and people are getting along a lot better because they understand the styles. Then we deal with alternative dispute resolution which is a, a way of trying to mediate disputes without a formal complaint. And finally we have corrective action. All corrective action. No matter what the infraction is, the policy of handling it is done by my group. So it's fairness, you know, are you treated fairly. And the great thing about it is we're on every single task force, succession, planning, promotion, rotation, we're there looking at it as its being crafted to make sure from the beginning it's fair. Not, "Here's a policy, look at it, Joyce, what do you think about it?" Because it's hard to change it after it's been developed but as it's being developed we'll go, unh-unh, that is gone be a problem. You know, that is a barrier. Doesn't mean that everybody agrees with everything we say, but what it means is we're at the table. And my group is pretty independent. You know, they're, they do their homework all the time. We all do. We know your side of the story. If people have different positions, I bet I'm going in there knowing what everybody's position is, doing all the research. 'Cause we don't get a chance to say, "and another thing," and "I'll tell you that later." You better have your arguments at the table when the discussion is being held. Story_ID: 115143 Speaker 1: So that's what we're doing here. And right now, part of what we're doing is we're working on international diversity. Countries have different policies and laws, many similar to ours. So where Boeing is located, we're working on how to address those issues. And we're located in many countries. Speaker 2: Okay. That can be pretty tricky right with all the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Fascinating, fascinating. But there's laws, they're affirmative action laws in Canada. There are discrimination issues in Canada. They're affirmative action laws in Australia, and discrimination issues in Australia. There are laws in Japan, China. You know, so we're, we have a book that outlines all of the laws. And then dealing with the culture. You know, one thing consistently, no sexual harassment, no sex discrimination. We have core values that we deal with. Now in Saudi Arabia there may be some things you do differently. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: You don't wanna put anybody in danger but you look at it so how can you accomplish these laws and deal with the local custom, unless the local custom is something that violates our core values. So that is really fascinating. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All of it is. Speaker 2: All right. Well are there any, are there any specific cases you can talk about at all, you know, around that? Speaker 1: Not really. I mean they're, all of them are, they're very similar to what I was doing at the State of Illinois, you know. And we never have a dull day. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know, people are people and when you've got about 149,000, you see a lot of things. Speaker 2: So, so I imagine the job entails a lot of travel? Speaker 1: Yeah, entails a lot of travel. And I guess one of the things we're really proud of is we have an internal diversity summit where all our leaders come and speak. Before cutbacks we had about 1,500 Boeing employees, now we have about 500. The great story is, we still have it. You know, because when you're looking at what do you need to trim back, well one of the things we haven't trimmed back is the summit and that's really where we got the grass roots movement. And it's the hottest ticket in the Boeing Company. I mean we put it out there, people sign up. You know, they wanna be there. They wanna learn, you know, and they wanna be the change agents. So we're working with leaders and employees. Story_ID: 115144 Speaker 1: Okay. How, how big is your staff [at Boeing]? Speaker 2: We have an about 98 to maybe 100, 102, and we had about 106. Again, the great thing about any reductions that we've taken, there hasn't been any additional focus on, we're gonna hit the diversity office because that's not something we need. We've not taken any more hits than anyone else. And when I came here, you know, I looked at our budget, you know, everybody's budget is reducing a certain amount, just you need to be prudent. But I looked at the budget and I said this is the first time I've worked in this kind of field where the money that I had was what I needed to get the job done. I mean, I can't say I need this and I don't have it. You know, for what we need to do the job, we have the resources which are fantastic, that's just great 'cause if you look at what goes on with state agencies and what goes on at certain other organizations, when it's time to cut, where do you cut it. You know, you, you cut there. And we're not a target of any cuts that we don't have to deal with as an organization. Story_ID: 115145 Speaker 1: Okay. Well let me go back to something I asked you about earlier-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --and that was the, the Historically Black Colleges and Universities-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --board of advisors. Speaker 2: Right, Advisory Board. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: To the White House [President's Board of Advisors on Historically Black Colleges and Universities]? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Now that's 2001, right? Speaker 2: 2001 up until now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, they just replaced the board when [HM] President [Barack] Obama came in. And our job was to look at the federal government agencies and make sure that they were allocating the appropriate percentage of their budgets to support the HBCUs because that's what they were supposed to be doing. And without that kind of monitoring, it wasn't gonna happen. So primarily that's what we did. And we worked with HBCUs in some other areas, you know. Sometimes there needed to be focus on fundraising. Now that really wasn't primarily our job but when you have the presidents of the universities there and you're discussing things, you discuss a lot of things. You know, accreditation, what happened, why didn't this one get accredited, and what did they need to do, how can you share best practices, those kind of things. Story_ID: 115146 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Let, let me, let's see. Well, tell us about some of your volunteer activities at this point? Speaker 2: Volunteer activities have been many and varied, and I really like 'em. One of the ones is the Boys and Girls Club. And I'm with the [Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr. Boys and Girls Club on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. And I was given an award, I guess, several years ago for contributions in the area that I'm in. But I listen to the kids, who are members of the Boys and Girls Club, talking about, talk about what a significant impact the Boys and Girls Club had on them, and it was just inspiring, you know. And when they asked me if I wanted to be a board member it was like a no-brainer, yes, of course. And you look at what they're doing for these kids, they've got classes for the kids on communication. They have a school that the kids are sponsored to go to, you know, in the city. One of the, I should say not a leap but the schools different from their neighborhood kids. They work with the kids who are in college, you know, helping, coaching, and mentoring them. So, and they're on the West Side of Chicago. And they're, they're, give the kids a place to go after school. So I see that they're, they're filling a void. They're filling a void, void. And we on the board are helping, you know, we're not doing the day to day management but we're helping them address things that need to be addressed. Make sure that the budget is managed well, make sure that the programs are what they should be. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And fascinating, you know. Story_ID: 115147 Speaker 1: So--what is, we always ask this question. What, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I was talking about it today. I mean there's so many things that we need to address. You know, one is crime in our community because if we don't do something about that, I mean if, if we can't figure out a way to help our young people stop killing each other. You know, years ago I used to do a thing on the radio station it's, it was answering the question why Johnny can't read? And my philosophy for it was, Johnny can't read because Johnny doesn't have the time to stick his head in a book 'cause if you put your head in a book, you're not gonna be focused on what's going on around you. You know, Johnny has to go to school, worry about getting out of that classroom, walking home, going home. You know, if, if your concern is your safety, education is secondary. You worry is somebody gone shoot me. You know, am I gonna go home? Is my mother gone be beaten? You know, there's so many things going on with kids that they really can't focus on education. I should say certain kids in certain communities. So then they're trying to fit in somewhere. Who are they fitting in with? The gangs. You know, they're, many of 'em, not all of 'em, but many of 'em are not getting the support that they need, they're not getting the nurturing that they need, so they're trying to belong, belong where? Belong to that entity that is reaching out to them because they're not getting reached out to in other places. So I gave a speech years ago at Proviso East [High School in Maywood, Illinois]. It was about, it was a Martin, it was a Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speech. And I asked the kids, you know, what did they dream of? What was it that they wanted? You know what many of 'em said? "I want that nobody else in my class gets killed. You know, I want to be able to, to walk home safely." I mean, they weren't talking about I wanna grow up and be a doctor, I wanna go to, they were talking about just day to day not getting killed. So that was the priority, the thing, that they were thinking about. So I just want people to stop killing the kids. I want 'em to stop killing everybody but the kids, you know, you ask the kid, you know, "Are you afraid of getting killed?" And the kid said, "I'm dead now." You know, this is a, this is a kid. "I'm dead now." You know, children planning their own funerals, they're nine years old. Speaker 1: Well, well this is being recorded at a time of unprecedented-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I guess, violence in, amongst teenagers in, black teenagers, especially in Chicago [Illinois. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean it, you know, I look at it, and it just tears your heart out, you know. That's, I think, that's one of the things. You think about education, you know, I mean, I want kids to be educated but if they're dead, they're not gonna be educated. You know, so it, it seems like if you deal with, I want babies, and I was in a situation recently where none of the girls were over twenty, they all had babies, of course, they weren't married. They all babies and tattoos (laughter) and I thought well is this an initiation, you know, what do you do, you have one then you get the other or you got one and you get. But so when you are raising, when a kid is raising a kid, you teach 'em what you know, which is a not a whole lot. So that may be part of what's shaping what's going on with these kids because the parents, and twenty was old, many of 'em are having kids younger than that. So, you know, I think about who's raising the kids, how they're raising the kids, where, are they gonna survive? Because that really is our future. And if we don't start doing something about that, the future is gonna be pretty dismal. People who have are gonna move around, move away from those who have not. There's not a whole lot of value being in a community and you're scared to go outside. You know, so people who can be in safe communities that's where they're going. Story_ID: 115148 Speaker 1: Now, now, I've neglected to ask you earlier what denomination are you, if any, and did, does church, did church play, church or home, you know, which, which one played the most pivotal part I guess in your own moral--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: --guidance when you were coming up? Speaker 2: --both. When we were growing up, we went to Sunday school every Sunday. You know, and at that time we went to a A.M.E. Church, African Methodist Episcopal. And we didn't have to go to church church but we had to go to Sunday school. If you didn't go to Sunday school you didn't go to the show, I mean you didn't do anything, you know. If you didn't go to Sunday school on Sunday you're pretty much locked up in that house, don't be talking about going outside. You were sick you couldn't go to Sunday school, you're not doing anything but staying inside. So we were involved in church plays, Sunday school camp. So we were involved, and my grandmother was, read The Bible, quoted The Bible, sang church songs. So the foundation was there. She didn't preach The Bible to us, but you knew that's where it came from, you know, 'cause it was in her. And, and my other grandmother [Edna Kelly Tucker] used to write sermons for the preachers (laughter) at her church, the one that was the VIP. But so it was there as a foundation. But what we got it from was how they lived, what they taught, what their expectations were. What was, you know, you didn't tell lies, you didn't even say the word "lie," you know, I mean that was a curse word. You said they told a story (laughter) or they didn't tell the truth. And you didn't say that about an adult either. But no way, you know, you, you, you know, they, you may have felt they didn't tell the truth but you didn't. You respected your elders and you respected your peers. So that was drilled into you. So you knew, you had foundation, you had integrity, you had principles. One time I wanted to go see a movie, actually it was "Hush...Hush, Sweet Charlotte." And I told my grandmother, you know, I wanted to go see it and she says, "Why do you wanna go see it?" I said, "Everybody's going to see it." She says, "If everybody's doing it, it's too common for you." You don't do, it's clear, you don't do anything that everybody's doing. So the next time I wanted to do something, she says why and I had to give an explanation of why I wanted to do it. Now she would be more persuaded, I don't think she said yes, but she was persuaded because I made the decision based upon what I wanted to do and not what the crowd wanted to do. So I never responded to peer pressure. You know, it wasn't everybody's doing it, didn't work at my house, you know. And I didn't want to do stuff because of what everybody was doing because I was conditioned to want to do it because of me. And that's the kind of training we got. So you had a foundation there. You know, we weren't followers. Weren't always leaders all the time but we were guided by our own beliefs and expectations and what we wanted to get out of it. So it was there. My mother [Vivian Louise Ellison Tucker] was the same way, although I usually grew up with my, my grandmother. My uncle, you know, who I lived with who was a retired physician, was the same way. You know, what he did was he taught us to think, to think. I remember I was mowing the grass and the lawn mower stopped. And I went to him and I said the lawn mower is broken, I was twelve. He said, "What's wrong with it?" I said, "I don't know," you know, I was thinking I'm twelve. He said, "Go tell me what's wrong it." So I'm looking at it and then I looked, it was out of gas. And so I said, "It's out of gas." He said, "So what do you need to do?" And I was going like I'm really getting upset now but I can't show it, can't make a face, can't roll my eyes. So I go and I said, okay. It needs gas. I need to get it from the gas station. It costs thirty-two cents a gallon. I need to mix some oil with it, whatever. So I had to take him the solution to the problem and not the problem. And so took all this to him and he says, "Okay." And then I didn't have to go back and forth 'cause every time I brought him a problem, he sent me back until I brought him the solution to the problem. Done. Well when that happens to you enough, you learn I can't deal with the problem without a solution. I may not have the ability to deal with it, if I wanna go downtown, I can't say it's downtown, I have to say where downtown, what bus I need to take. How much it costs and he would say, you can get all that information, you can get all that information, you can get it all. You know, so you had to figure out, call CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] get directions. So we were taught to figure things out. That was an expectation. And it is now, you know. You don't deal with the problem, and that's kind of what I deal with my staff. It's like don't bring me a problem where, what's the solution, what do you think we oughta do and then let's talk about it. So that was a good, at the time, oh, my goodness it seemed to be the meanest thing in the world (laughter) but it was a purpose, you know, and, and it worked. Story_ID: 115149 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you've received numerous awards-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --and one that was a legacy award [Legacy of Opportunity Aware] from the Black Student Law Association [at John Marshall Law School in Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And when you look back at everything you've done to this point in your life-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: What today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, first it's just hard, you know, you go legacy, you go like oh, my goodness I'm getting old, you know, now I'm a legacy. But I think it, it's, it's all in the area of civil rights. You know, it is enforcing. You know, it is a life dedicated to making sure that people are treated fairly and without discrimination. It is leading organizations that are efficiently and effectively run. You know, I always feel like in order to change something that, that I've set in place you have to blow it up because it is ingrained in the culture and the policies and the way we do things. So when you walk out of there, you know, people are gonna remember you because what you've done is still there. It's lasting, it has principles, and it's done the right way. Human rights [Illinois Department of Human Rights], EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] and working on the same thing here [Boeing], you know. I've set up the guidelines, the principles, the policies in a way that they don't have to be changed because they were done right the first time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, and I, and I try to model it by the people that I touched. Where ever I am there's a, we have a joke, that once you work for Joyce Tucker, you always work for Joyce Tucker. No matter where they are, they feel connected because I've told my staff, all of 'em, "I want you, each one of you to be successful." I said, 'cause I might get old and need something. If you're not successful you can't help me. So every person that has come under my wing has picked up that same type of philosophy. So you leave it in people, you know, you, you guide people, you instruct people, they know you care, you know, and they're not gonna say they didn't learn anything. Well, now I talk more than I did before. There's always a lesson, you know, this is why I did this, this is how, this is the process, so if they're coming in my office talking to me they're gonna leave with an understanding of what I did and why. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Probably more information sometimes than they want, but they're learning all the time. And that's what you leave, you leave it in them. Story_ID: 115150 Speaker 1: Now and when you look back again at everything you've done is there any major thing that you'd do differently now if you could? Speaker 2: Probably not. You know, I got that question one time before, "Would you change anything?" No. Because I think one thing is connected to the next is connected to the next. If you move something, if you move an ingredient, you change the end product. So even the things that I look back to say weren't as smart as I liked them to be, they were connected, you know. They were connected and fortunately for me, you know, even when I would send a note to someone and say "patronage needs to be abolished" which is what I did. And I was the affirmative action person for mental health and Al Raby [Albert Raby] called me up and he goes, "What in the world is wrong with you? Do you know you can't do so and so and so and so." Well, you know, what if I hadn't sent that note out I wouldn't have met Al Raby. If I hadn't met Al Raby, he would not have intervened. You know, he listened to me and he says, "She believes this, she's committed," she's whatever. And he asked me, well how would you change what we're doing? And I told him how I would change it and he worked for the Governor, Governor [Dan] Walker, and he implemented it. Now if I hadn't made that mistake and sent that note out, he wouldn't have called me, he wouldn't have listened to me, he wouldn't have been convinced that I was committed, he wouldn't have asked me what I did differently, and he wouldn't change how they handle political appointments. So I wouldn't say I would change that note because it would change the end result. So there's nothing that I think I did, no matter how problematic it seemed at the time, that if you look back it wasn't in the chain of things that ended up with good results. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 115151 Speaker 1: Well, tell us a little bit about your family today now. What, what does your family consistent of? Speaker 2: Small family, you know, my family is my uncle, and his wife and my two cousins. And my aunt, it's only two of them left, and her kids. My two nephews from my sister [Sharon Louise Whitaker] that passed away. And his daughter, named Sharon Whitaker, after my sister, she's my grandniece, she's eight. And my older sister's son, who's like twenty-five. So you could fit us all in this room. And on my dad's side, it's my first cousin that is, he was the manager of National Airport [Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport in Arlington County, Virginia], so he was the first black airport manager, and then his kids. And everybody else, and my cousin, David, he's like a third cousin but he's like a close, very, very close. So you could fit us all in this room. You know, very small. And many of the people didn't have kids. You know, so it's not, there's one out of my nephews, out of three, one kid. And then my cousins and I, we don't have any. You know, many of us are not married. So but we're very close to each other but we're very, very small, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we've been getting together, we put on a family reunion, the Ellison family reunion in Chicago [Illinois], and we've been spending time, you know, and I had an aneurysm last year-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --that was the discovered by accident. I was eating a peanut butter sandwich, jelly sandwich, and I didn't drink any milk, and I felt my throat was closing up. And so I went to [Adventist] Hinsdale Hospital [Hinsdale, Illinois], and the guy said, doctor said, I don't see anything wrong with your throat but I better do a CAT scan because I don't want you to have a problem. He did a CAT scan and they found an aneurysm. And I had surgery like a month later. Now, if I hadn't eaten that, eaten that peanut butter and jelly sandwich and went to bed (laughter), I had no symptoms, nothing, nothing. They wouldn't have found the aneurysm, which my sister [Sharon Louise Whitaker] had, that killed her. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: So I think things for me have been all connected. But after the aneurysm the family even got closer together, you know, 'cause they were there and my best friends they were there and so we're, we've even bonded more. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, so things, there's a chain of things that always end up for me in good results. Story_ID: 115152 Speaker 1: All right. Now is the anything I haven't asked you that I need to ask before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I think pretty much you've gotten the significant thing. You know, the fascinating thing is every story leads to another story, it leads to another story. So I think you've gotten all the significant stories that I can possibly think of. And you, you've asked some very good questions. Speaker 1: I'll think of ten more tonight though. Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Speaker 1: But, well the last question is similar to legacy-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I always think of so what's the best trait I have. And to me it's being a good friend. You know, a friend, daughter, aunt, all of those characteristics because that's what I wanna be. You know, I think I'm the best friend a person could ever have, I'm the best sister a person could ever have, best auntie, because those are the things that are important to me. That I really, best boss, because I've tried to make every interaction the best that it can be. You know, best administrator, best lawyer. You know, the, whatever it is that I am, I don't wanna be mediocre at it, you know. I mean I wanna do, set the bar. You know, if I do it, you know, it's good. If I'm involved, you know, it's good. Not good, excellent. And that's what I've strived to be, you know. And it's not gonna be because the effort wasn't there. And I think as long as the effort is there and you give the best you can, then you've accomplished it. You know, and that's who I am. And if anybody says I'm not, then they're not judging me right, and, and I'm saying, I don't have to own that because that's not who I am. I'm honest to a fault, truth before peace, and people know that. And so this is who I am, this is what I am, and you don't have to question it. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: All right. Okay..