 Story_ID: 369894 Speaker 1: --The HistoryMakers, I will be the interviewer [Shawn Wilson] today. And this is Neculai Burghelea, he will be the videographer today. Now we'll just tar- have you start by stating your name and spelling it out for me? Speaker 2: All righty. [HistoryMaker] Sister Francesca Thompson, O.S.F [Third Order of Saint Francis]. F-R-A-N-C-E-S-C-A, T-H-O-M-P-S-O-N, O-S-F. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: October 3rd [2006], the feast of the Little Flower of Jesus [Saint Therese of Lisieux]. Speaker 1: The location of this interview? Speaker 2: My apartment "Convent" 2511 Wilson Avenue, Bronx, New York 10469. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I am recently retired. I have been employed at Fordham University [New York, New York] for the last twenty-four years as assistant dean/director of multicultural programs. I like to think of myself first and foremost as a teacher. Story_ID: 369895 Speaker 1: So I'm going to start by asking you five pop culture type questions, and these answers appear on our website. So the very first one is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food? I have two, chitlins and lobster. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) New life. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Heaven (laughter). I don't have any particular place in mind. I love traveling. I am particularly fond of Assisi in Italy, because it's the home of my Holy Father, St. Francis. I have been lucky enough to spend two or three weeks at one time in retreat in Assisi. And so I would have to say I love Assisi because of the history. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My God and my all. Story_ID: 369896 Speaker 1: So as we were talking off camera, I said we'd start by talking about your mother and your mother's side of the family as much as you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All righty. All right. Speaker 1: --have been able to research. And your mother's name was? Speaker 2: Evelyn Jarvis [Evelyn Preer]. Daughter of Frank [Frank Jarvis] and Blanche Jarvis. My mother was born in Vicksburg, Mississippi. She and her mother and a brother and sister migrated to Chicago [Illinois] after the death of her father. Her mother had said she had two very, very light-skinned daughters that she was not going to trust to the racism of Mississippi. So because she had relatives in Chicago, she moved to Chicago. My mother's brother and her sister subsequently died, as did, from what I understand or what I've been told by my father, all the other members of her family. They died of pneumonia. It was the cause of my mother's death. Speaker 1: Do you know what year they migrated to Chicago? Speaker 2: My mother--it was before high school, so if she was and then we have to add, if she was thirty-six when I was born, that was 1932. So if she went to Chicago when she was ten-ish, what date would that be? Speaker 1: That would back it up to the '20s [1920s], around the '20s [1920s]. Speaker 2: All right then. No, no, no earlier. Speaker 1: Becau- no you were born in '32 [1932]. Speaker 2: I was born in '32 [1932]. They migrated to Chicago when she was about ten or eleven. Speaker 1: Oh so, this is--in the teens [1910s] then, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I--but I do not know an exact date. Speaker 1: So, thinking about your mother's side of the family, were there any legends you'd ever been told about, any--the ancestors in the family, were there any slaves in the family any-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --any legends about that? Speaker 2: Well my father [Edward Thompson] had told me and I, you know, children at least, this dumb child didn't ask the right questions and I wasn't interested in the right thing. But he had told this story once, because there was a lot of talk about how light my mother was, how light complexioned. And my--both my grandmother [Susan Knox], my paternal grandmother and my father told me that my grandmother too was very, very fair and in fact, my grandmother had often suspected that she was white. And my father said never, never would she ever say that she was nor would she even intimate that she was. My mother had an aunt, my grandmother had a sister, who married a prospector, a black prospector from Alaska. They did not have children. So when my mother died, she contacted my grandmother right away and said we would love to take Evelyn's child and raise her. Never again was there any contact that I know of, but I am sure that my grandmother made up her mind I will cut off all ties so that there's no chance that anybody would take this child from her. And I'm sorry about that, but being raised by my paternal grandparents, I would have to tell you, they definitely supplied everything that I needed for parents. I knew my father was my daddy. I had this handsome daddy who was a movie star and that was wonderful. But Momma and Poppa [Thompson's paternal step-grandfather, Elwood Knox] were mother and father to me. And never as a child, never once, did I ever say oh I wish my mother were alive. Isn't that strange? Now I'd heard people talk about my mother. Paul Robeson came to our home when I was nine years old and fa- walked in a circle around me, talking about how beautiful my mother was. "Oh child, your mother was the most beautiful woman that I've ever seen. Don't tell my wife, but she was even more beautiful than my wife. She was gorgeous." So as a nine year old, I started to preen, waiting for the complement that I knew was soon to follow. Finally he stopped, looking at me very intently, looked up at my dad and said, "God Eddie, the kid looks just like you." And that's all I've ever heard, that I look very much, very much like the Thompsons. The Thompsons were all very dark-complected and I'll show you pictures. But they couldn't deny me, because from here up I'm pure Thompson. Story_ID: 369897 Speaker 1: So speaking about your mother [Evelyn Preer] and Paul Robeson, your mother then was an actress? Speaker 2: My--both my parents were actors and members of the first black dramatic stock company in the country, the Lafayette Players [Anita Bush Players; Lafayette Players]. Now people will challenge that. They say to me, oh but remember, yeah we had the African Grove Theatre in New York [New York] with Ira Aldridge and James Hewlett. Well, listen to everything that I say, it was the first black dramatic stock company. No other group called themselves, or at least I can't find any notation about them, dramatic stock company. So I go--I stick to that claim. When I wrote my dissertation on the Lafayette Players for my Ph.D. at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], I did 178 years' worth of microfilm reading. So when I finished my 300 pages, I defy anybody to tell me that what I have written is not as accurate as I could make it. Speaker 1: So what did you discover about your mother and the Lafayette Players? Speaker 2: Oh it was wonderful. Because as a dummy, I had never asked my father [Edward Thompson], as I said, the right questions. I knew about the Players. My father had regaled me with stories all my life, I'd heard about them. I have met many of his friends, Lawrence Criner, Uncle Monte, Monte Hawley, people that had belonged to the Players. So I knew all about them, but I didn't ask the important things. I didn't know the theaters where they played. I didn't even know how my father's career began. When I first let it be known that I was going to do my dissertation on the Lafayette Players, I got lots of advice from people. Oh my goodness, you know, there's just so much information and they were so wonderful, and people thought they were wonderful. By the time I started the dissertation, I was already two years into my doctoral work and I thought if my father's dead and all of his friends are dead, I better start looking for people or it's going to be too late. So I was given the name of the head of the Schomburg collection [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] at that time. I don't know if I should use his name or not. Speaker 1: Is it Mr. Dobbs [ph.]? Speaker 2: No, no, we're talking, son we're talking '68 [1968]. You know, I--go back, go back. Dr. Kaiser [Ernest D. Kaiser] was his name. And everybody that I'd talk to, you've gotta go to New York [New York], Sister. Gotta talk to Dr. Ka- he knows everything. He's at the Schomburg collection and he can answer all your questions. So I got a travel grant from Michigan and I came to New York and met with him. Got an appointment and met with him and he looked at me in great, great despair and said, "Oh Sister, the Lafayette Players were wonderful. And I can remember as a child, people in Harlem [New York, New York], you know, were enthralled by them. But whoever wrote anything down? I don't think you ought to try this. I bet you couldn't get ten pages." I said, "You've got nothing to tell me, there's no place where I can begin?" And he said, "No." So I went back to Indianapolis [Indiana] where I was teaching at our sisters college at that time, Marian College [Marian University, Indianapolis, Indiana], and I cried for two weeks. I jus- I was devastated because I had talked to my mentor, my advisor at Michigan and he was so excited. Doc was a big historian, Dr. William Halstead. And he we--ah, you know, "Sister this will be wonderful to do something that nobody else has done." And so to have him tell me I couldn't do it. And then I sat up and stopped crying and I said, "Who the heck?" Because nuns--that's how nuns talk, "Who the heck is he to tell me I can't do it?" Story_ID: 369898 Speaker 1: So I advertised in every black newspaper in the country. I sent out one hundred requests. I gave my sad nun's story, "I don't have any money, I can't pay you, would you run an ad and I certainly will give you credit for helping me dig up a very valuable part of black theater history in this country." I got ninety-nine responses and I don't want you to think I'm vindictive or I'm a person that, you know, wants to get even, but there's one black newspaper that ain't ever going anyplace. But the ninety-nine responses were wonderful and they ran my ad. Many of them even ran a picture that I sent them. Now I didn't get the great response that I had hoped for, but I got very valuable information. Because of my ad, I met Anita Bush who started the Lafayette Players [Anita Bush Players; Lafayette Players], I never even knew her name. Because of the ad I met Clarence Muse who was in the original group and worked with my mother [Evelyn Preer]. He played Porgy to my mother's Bess, years later. It was--it--it became like a piece of detective work. Every name that I got gave me another and I learned more and more, and as (laughter) the other nuns were dragging themselves to the library, one of my friends was writing her dissertation on the use of commas and parentheses in Shakespeare [William Shakespeare]. I was skipping off to the library every day. But the smartest thing I did, I started my research while I was still taking classes. So by the time I was ready to sit down and write, I was finished with research. I had everything there in front of me. And as I said, Dr. Halsted [William Halstead] was wonderful, got papers for me. I found out subsequently, poor Dr. Kaiser [Ernest D. Kaiser] had not told me, the New York Age sitting right there in the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York], the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] sitting right there in the Schomburg, wealth of information about the Players. The Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], the Chicago Defender, and excuse my bias, the Indianapolis Recorder [sic. Indianapolis Freeman] started by my great-grandfather, George L. Knox, former slave. After my father [Edward Thompson] joined the Players, every week in the Recorder there were three and four pages on theater. So that was a big, big source of information for me. Story_ID: 369899 Speaker 1: When did your father [Edward Thompson] join the Players [Anita Bush Players; Lafayette Players], what year did he join? Speaker 2: My father joined in 1917. I have a picture of him that Anita [Anita Bush] shared with me. She was wonderful. She said, "Anything I have two of girl, you can have." And she let me take whatever I wanted from her. She had about fifty scrapbooks to Xerox. I spent all day January 1st in the office of a large magazine where a friend of mine happened to be one of the assistant editors, and she and her sister and I spent all day long, January 1st, 1969 Xeroxing. Anita was wonderful. Because of her, I had pictures. And she told me her story about how she started the Players. I wrote an article about her at the time of her death that they published in Lerone Bennett's magazine [sic.], Black World [Negro Digest; Black World]. You probably are not familiar with that. Speaker 1: I've heard of Black World. Speaker 2: Okay. I--I wrote an article about her. It's wonderful what she did. You know, a young black woman that had no credentials other than that she had been a singer and dancer with the famous Bert Williams dancing company. Speaker 1: And Bert Williams was--was the-- Speaker 2: Ziegfeld Follies. Speaker 1: Ziegfeld Follies. Speaker 2: He came back from Europe, they went to Europe, came back from Europe. Ziegfeld came up to Harlem [New York, New York], saw him and said, "I'll make you famous." And as far as I know, the first black recognized member of the Ziegfeld Follies. Now they had lots of people that were very fair skinned who, as what do we say, passe le blanc. But Bert, of course, there was no passing for him. Everybody knew he was black. But he disbanded his group and Anita tried to keep it going. She was only like eighteen, nineteen years old. And because in those days they had no unions, there wasn't much protection backstage. So they traveled up and down the East Coast in the cities that had black theaters, Washington [D.C.], Howard Theatre. They went to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and one night while in Pittsburgh, she ran backstage to get on the other side, bumped into a ladder, those very tall wooden ladders at that time, fell on her, broke her back. So that was the end of her dancing. She said, "Not good for a hoofer." So she was in bed, flat on her back for a year. And that whole time, she thought about her dream. Her father was a costumer and well known by many of the best-known actors, one of whom was John Huston. And she and her sister used to get on the trolley and go out to Brooklyn [New York] to the theater. And blacks weren't allowed in the theaters of course, but he said to her--her nickname was Bushy: "Bushy, you and your sister go up in the balcony and if anybody says anything to ya, you tell 'em you're my guest." So she sat there and watched them do Shakespeare [William Shakespeare]. Had never seen anything like it before, all she'd ever seen was blacks do song and dance stock. And she thought, "Why can't we do that?" So while she's on her back, she's thinking, "Why can't I start a group," but didn't have any idea how to do it. So the first thing she did when she was feeling better, two black theaters in Harlem, the Lincoln [Lincoln Theatre, New York, New York] and the Lafayette [Lafayette Theatre, New York, New York], and the Lincoln had just been refurbished, redecorated. So she asked her mother could she go. And of course, the theater was almost empty, that--things were changing, 1915, vaudeville was dying. The burlesque theater was dying. So she looked around that theater and felt, how terrible, that this beautiful theater is going, you know, unattended, not paid attention to. So there was a white woman named Marie Downs who was proprietor of the theater. After the movie she went backstage and saw her, and said, you know, "Miss Downs couldn't I bring my dramatic company in here? The theater is so beautiful and you don't have anybody in the audience. I'll get you an audience if you let my group come in." She said, "Well what kind of group?" She said, "We do dramatic plays." She said, "I've never heard of that." She said, "No we're the first." So she said, "All right, bring them in to see me," it was a Saturday afternoon, "bring them in Monday morning and we'll talk about it." So she said, "All right." And she said as she left the theater, she thought that God was probably going to strike her dead for lying. And she thought who am I gonna get. She knew that there was a play being produced downtown on Broadway directed by the great Jewish director, I'll think of it in a minute. She knew that that play was opening and she had taken costumes. So she thought I can get a script from them. And the first person she ran into was Charles Gilpin [Charles Sidney Gilpin]. So she, "Charlie how would you like to be a member of my dramatic group?" "Oh what kind of group you talking about Bushy?" And she said, "I've got a dramatic group, stock company." He said, "I've never heard of that." She said, "Well of course not, but you know, would you like to join?" "Oh," he said, "I, Bushy I'm doing tab shows." Story_ID: 369900 Speaker 1: You know what tab shows were? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: They were in between the burlesque shows and in between the vaudeville. They would have maybe two or three people that would do skits and they were called tab shows. So he [Charles Sidney Gilpin] said, "I've got a partner and we're doing tab shows." She said, "Oh but this would be something different." And he said, "Oh heck Bushy, I'm not really doing nothing, all right." So she was thrilled because he was known in Harlem [New York, New York], very popular in Harlem. The next person she ran into was Andrew Bishop who was the son of a Bishop from Harlem. A very, very good looking young man that had done some vaudeville and some burlesque I think. And so she asked him, he agreed. And then she ran into a girlfriend of hers, Carlotta Freeman who had never done anything on the stage before. Anita [Anita Bush] said, "I can make you a star." And so--she thought that was exciting. She's a wife and a mother, she said well sure she'd like to do that. And then she ran into someone that her father knew, that she knew very well. She knew he wasn't an actor because he was a song and dance man. But she asked him because she thought he can play the comic and he said yes. Now, you may not know him or you may think you don't know him, but you were to meet him many years later when Ingrid Bergman said to him, "Play it again, Sam," Dooley Wilson. So Anita had her five people. Went downtown to Broadway, went to the theater where 'Girl of the Golden West' ['The Girl of the Golden West,' David Belasco] was playing and took a script. Speaker 2: What was the script? Speaker 1: 'Girl of the Golden West.' Speaker 2: 'Girl of the Golden West,' okay. Speaker 1: 'Golden West.' She changed the name to 'The Gambler's Daughter.' And on Monday morning, they rehearsed all day Sunday, they went in, met Mrs. Downs [Marie Downs], she brought a lawyer in and they signed a contract. And she promised her that they would be ready to open by November 15th, which I think gave them three weeks, and they did. Huge, huge reception by the black people in Harlem who had never seen black folks do serious theater before. So I--she has often been called the little mother of drama, and I think she deserves that title. She birthed it. And she said--I said something to her about the title when I had my interview with her, and she said, "Well no mother ever had the birth pains that I had." She's a wonderful person. I didn't meet her 'til she was in her '90s [1990s]. And very, very actressy. She's very small and had hair as red as this (points to her shirt) and she wore a black velvet Chinese robe. And--and you know, glided into her apartment living room and just gracious as she could be. And she kept saying now, "I didn't know that Edward [Edward Thompson] and Evelyn [Evelyn Preer] had a child?" And I said, "Well it took 'em ten years, I wasn't born until they had been mar- or eight years, they'd been married eight years (laughter)." And she, Miss Bush. And she said, "Oh my took 'em a long time to get around to it." She was just darling, but so generous, that's what I appreciated. Story_ID: 369901 Speaker 1: Now you said that Clarence [Clarence Muse] had worked with your mother [Evelyn Preer]? Speaker 2: Yes, Clarence Muse. And he responded to me. Sent me a telegram and I had said, "You know, give me a pho- I'll pay for anything." And telegram said, "I don't have a phone, don't want Negroes lying to me. If you're gonna lie to me, come lie to my face, come see me." And (unclear) how I'm gonna get. He lived in Perris, California. I'd never heard of Perris, California, P-E-R-R-I-S. Had his ranch, the Muse-Awhile Ranch. Got another travel grant the next year and went to visit him and do some other interviews in Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: What did he say about your mother (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I spent a week with him, which was wonderful. He was married--Clarence was in his early eighties by that time and he was married to a beautiful young woman, thirty-six, Ena [Irene Ena Muse]. She was Jamaican. And he kept saying, "She good looking, she good looking, I married a good looking one every time, one better looking then the next." Because when he worked with the Players [Anita Bush Players; Lafayette Players] he was married to his first wife. And then evidently had a second wife. Ena was the third one and utterly devoted to him, utterly devoted. So I went with my, Brenda Starr attitude. I'd had my notebook, I took my tape recorder and I'm gonna ask him questions. Well dummy, I didn't realize he couldn't answer my questions. So he did what I think he was accustomed to doing, he laid the angst on me, you know, I would say, "Now what theater did you perform in with my mother in Kansas City [Missouri], Mr. Muse?" "What theater, hell girl, how do I know? The blue-eyed boys don't know, put down anything. What they gonna do, drive out there to check on it?" He was hysterical. So I asked him a question, I have my tape recorder, "May I record our conversation?" "Nope." I--g- (laughter), "What do you mean, no?" And he said, "You like the blue-eyed boys, wanna take what I say and make some money off of it. No sir. You write down what you want, I'm not talking into any box for you." So devastated, devastated. Now I only had a week. I stayed there at the ranch, only had one week. He had, just like Anita [Anita Bush], at least 75 or 100 scrapbooks with pictures of himself done up the way he had envisioned himself, white makeup with a blonde wig that he had gotten a German wig maker to make for him. And I said, "Why did you do that Clarence?" And he said, "I don't know, I guess all those high-yellow Negroes in the Players intimidated me and I wanted 'em to know I was just as good as they were, even if I wasn't white." Then he told me a wonderful story. He acted with my mother in a play at the Howard Theatre in Washington [D.C.]. And there was a scene where he's supposed to talk off scene--off stage, come on stage and embrace her. She had on a black evening gown. So the people recognized his voice off stage. He walks in and this white makeup and this blonde wig, strutted across the stage, grabbed my mother and then let her go. And somebody in the balcony yelled aloud, "Hot damn Clarence, don't even rub off on black." Needless to say, his performance did not get the biggest applause. But he told wonderful stories. He also, and this meant a great deal to me, gave a eulogy at my mother's funeral. He did 'Go Down, Death,' James Weldon Johnson's, 'Go Down, Death' and he did it for me and I have that on tape. It's very, very precious to me. He told me stories. He said, "I was interested in your mother, but she wouldn't look at me. She was interested in your no-good father [Edward Thompson]," and said, "just 'cause he was better looking then I was, that was all." But he--he just was delightful. Story_ID: 369902 Speaker 1: I was there about four days and getting time to leave, and in giving me, you know, carte blanche to go through his [Clarence Muse] things, I came across a pamphlet, it had a green cover, and the title of it was: 'The Dilemma of the Negro Actor' by Clarence Muse. It was maybe twenty-five, thirty pages with a question that could have been asked yesterday, "What does a black actor do? Do what white folks want them to do, play the fool, play the--a 'coon role or artistically do for him or herself what is aesthetically satisfying?" It was wonderful. So I said, "Oh Clarence I'll drive," I had rented a car, "I'll drive into Perris [California]," about twenty miles away, "could I Xerox it?" "I told ya girl, you don't do nothing like the blue-eyed boys do, you want it, you write it." So as he always went to bed early, maybe eight-ish, I can't remember exactly, but it was eight--ish o'- like that. I sat up all night and I copied the booklet. So I'm exhausted, it's been an exhausting week, I'm a nervous wreck, I'm not gonna get all this information. I'm not getting the right information. So I'm really tired. Ena [Irene Ena Muse] gets up the next morning and here I am at their kitchen table writing. And she said "Oh," she said, "you must get some rest." I said, "No I wanted to get it finished." Ena, you know, I wanted to get it done. Well, she must've gone in the bedroom and told him that. And I don't know if that impressed him. So he walks out and he said, "Okay girl, you wanna use that machine, you can use it. But if I tell ya to turn it off, you turn it off when I tell ya to." "Anything, anything Clarence, just--." So here's my brand new tape recorder, brand new tapes, my recorder wouldn't work. So I went to pieces. I mean I really went to pieces. Ena goes, "Don't you cry, don't you cry. I've been in this house eighteen years, I never shed a tear. I shed my last tear. Clarence don't like no women to cry. Don't cry, you upset Clarence." I said, "Upset Clarence (laughter)?" I said, "Ena, you getting ready to see this black nun have a nervous breakdown." (Unclear) upset Clarence. Oh she said, "You tired, you tired. You go take a nap." So I did, I went back in there wherever I was sleeping back in the back of the ranch [Muse-Awhile Ranch]. And I guess I slept for quite a while. And when I woke up I could hear him yelling, "That isn't the right button, I told ya you push this button. Well how dumb are you?" He was just carrying on. I walk out. There's a brand new Wollensak recorder. He'd had it all the time. Sent Ena into Perris to get tapes and I'm sure it was because I had sat up all night copying this book. And he said, "All right you can use it girl but I'm telling you when I say turn it off, you turn it off." So he never did. I taped him for the rest of the time that I was there. Story_ID: 369903 Speaker 1: We were talking about the Players [Anita Bush Players; Lafayette Players]. I wanna talk a little bit more about, you had a list of the plays that they--they--you--that--that they did (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That they did that I copied from the microfilm. Whenever there were ads about a play, I wrote down the title of the play. Speaker 1: So what sorts of plays were they doing? Speaker 2: Exactly the same plays that were being done on Broadway. My mother [Evelyn Preer] and father [Edward Thompson] once did Eugene O'Neill's, 'Desire Under the Elms.' The famous yellow ticket. A Belasco [David Belasco], I couldn't say David Belasco's name. David Belasco did a show on Broadway, 'Lulu Belle' and I don't know if you're familiar with that. And it's a story about a black woman. Now he wasn't brave enough to cast my mother. He cast his favorite star of the hour, Lenore Ulric. But he went to the Lafayette Players and took talent to do background things. Well must've fallen madly in love with my mother. Said to my mother, "Evelyn I'll take you to Europe. We'll stay there a couple of years and come back, and nobody need ever know you're colored." And my father said she laughed and she said, "Mr. Belasco, I don't want to pass for white, what would I do with Eddie?" Oh he said, "That, you know, that wouldn't matter. We'd either put him in the background someplace." She said, "No, you take me like I am or you don't take me." So when they went to Los Angeles [California] he was in Los Angeles directing other things, Lenore Ulric did 'Rain' [John Colton and Clemence Randolph]. I don't know if you're familiar with that play. Ulric had done 'Sadie Thompson' it was called, when it was made into a movie. The story of a prostitute on a boat. She's been put on a boat because she's been expelled because it's a sailor's port and she's dangerous for the sailors. And on the boat there was a minister and his wife going to Africa. And of course when they--she's laughing and smoking and drinking in her stateroom and all of the men on--on board are going into the stateroom and the wife is appalled, the minister's appalled, so he takes it upon himself to convert her. And so he goes--starts praying with her and telling her she's got to change her life around and he does, and she's very repentant. And then he finally, you know, he can't stand it any longer. The night before they dock he goes into her room and rapes her. And of course the next morning then, here's the loud music and here's the raucous laughter and these guys coming out of Sadie Thompson's room. Now Lenore Ulric, you know, got lots of publicity for doing this role. Belasco wasn't brave enough to do it in the daytime. He rented the theater and at night after eleven o'clock when the curtain was down, he had my mother do Sadie Thompson in 'Rain.' Did a special production. What's his name, Charlie Chaplin was coming. And he said to my mother one night, "Now Charlie's coming Evelyn. He'll sit in the front row but he'll make a big to-do and leave before it's over. He always does that, nothing is good enough for him to stay all the way for." My father said not only did he stay, he leaned on the stage and he was rapt, just rapt. Theodore Dreiser saw my mother do Stella Mae [ph.] and he wrote a letter, which I have a copy of, saying that never had he seen such talent. Called my mother, the jewel in Ethiop's ear. And just so obviously these people were talented. They had no opportunity to be well known. Story_ID: 369904 Speaker 1: How had your mother [Evelyn Preer] become a professional actress? Speaker 2: All right. When she--according to my father [Edward Thompson], she was always interested in performing, even when she was in high school. And there was some little musical group that she had joined and they even traveled. And there was a black man who, Frank Preer, owned a big nightclub in Chicago [Illinois] and he hired her to sing for him. And I guess he was enthralled with her and asked her to marry him. So--'cause her mother was, my grandmother [Blanche Jarvis] was an Apostolic. She helped by street preaching to build Chicago's first black Apostolic church. And my mother, who could cry on cue, was her biggest asset. They'd stand on street corners, my father said, and my mother would--her grandmo- her mother would say, "Sinners come home, come home to Jesus," at which point my mother would start to cry. So Frank Preer saw her, enamored of her and hired her to work in this night club. And Oscar Micheaux was a friend of his. He brought Oscar Micheaux to see her and of course, he, "I--I want you in the movies," and she had to ask her mother for permission. And her mother, you know, was devastated 'cause that--Apa- Apostolics didn't go to the theater. No makeup, no nothing. And she said two things I ask you, don't ever go on stage smoking Evelyn and don't, for God's sake, please don't take off your clothes. So she got permission. But I don't know how long she was married to Frank Preer, but evident--my father said it was just a--I think to keep her mother happy 'cause she was going off with this man. They never had children or whatever. And so it wasn't very long after she did this movie 'Within Our Ga--.' No there was a movie before 'Within Our Gates.' 'Within Our Gates' was 1920. So she did her first movie in 1919. Then 'Within Our Gates' which is the only extant movie of hers with Oscar Micheaux. She starred in eleven of his nineteen movies [sic.], and the only one we have left is 'Within Our Gates' and that was found by a white movie historian researcher. He was in Spain a few years ago and he saw it in what was comparable I guess to their Library of Congress. And he made a switch with them. They'd give him something if he'd get something for them. So that's how--and then of course people got in touch with me. He gave it to the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] and I have my own copy now. But they did a showing of it at Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] a few years ago, maybe ten years ago now. The time goes so fast and that was a big thrill for me to see it on a big screen. It's a silent movie, it's not a talkie. But just to see her move around. I'd heard her sing, she sang and I have several of her tapes that were on records. But I'd never seen her move around so that was a big thrill. Story_ID: 369905 Speaker 1: So in that film ['Within Our Gates'] did she [Thompson's mother, Evelyn Preer] play a black woman? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Oscar Micheaux didn't do white movies. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay. Speaker 2: No Oscar Micheaux definitely, first black film producer and film director. And you know, did--Paul [Paul Robeson] did his first movie with him. But he made my mother his star. And she performed, you know the name Lawrence Chenault, all right she performed with Lawrence Chenault. He was crazy about Lawrence Chenault evidently according to Anita [Anita Bush]. And Lawrence Chenault had been her leading man in the Players [Anita Bush Players; Lafayette Players]. But he drank. So he had been intoxicated several times and they didn't get to perform. So she said she fired him. She said, you know, "I'm not gonna take this. We can't do this." Well the women in Harlem [New York, New York] were crazy about him. He and the other one, Andrew Bishop, very good looking guys, good I guess. So she said, "I went crawling back to him and I asked him to come back. But I told him, this is it, one more time and you're out." So they were performing in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], either Philadelphia or Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], it was Pennsylvania one Friday night and he was so intoxicated he held onto the curtain and he pulled the curtain down. So she said, "That's it," and the--she closed the show. And he said, "Don't worry Bushy, you'll come crawling back like you always do." So she came home on the train, cried all the way back to New York [New York] thinking, "What am I gonna do?" They were to open in a new show that Monday. And she didn't know. And--and she said, you know, "I'm not going back. I won't take him back, I don't care, I won't. I'll just get another show." Well Saturday afternoon she's sitting in her office. By this time she had left the Dunbar Theater [sic. Lincoln Theatre, New York, New York] and going to par- yeah, she had gone to the other black theater, the Lafayette [Lafayette Theatre, New York, New York]. She said Marie Downs said to her-- Speaker 1: Or was it the Lincoln Theatre? Speaker 2: Pardon me, it--it should be Dunbar-- Speaker 1: Should be Dunbar, okay. Speaker 2: --I said Lincoln, Lincoln [Lincoln Theatre] in Washington [D.C.], Lincoln [Lincoln Theater, Los Angeles, California] in California. Dunbar. She went to Miss Downs or Miss Downs came to her because everybody was coming, the theater was full. "You know what Anita, people know me better then they know you. Why don't we change the name, 'cause she called them the Anita Bush Players, "to the Marie Downs Players?" And Anita said, I don't know, I just got on my high horse and I said, "Indeed not." You know, "And I'll leave here." And she said we had a very loose contract. She broke it and she moved over to the Lafayette, where Lester Walton [Lester Aglar Walton] was the stage manager. Now Lester Walton was subsequently to become the drama critic for the New York Age, and he's--his writing, if you read his reviews, they were wonderful. So by this time, they were in the Lafayette Theatre and she said, "I don't why and I don't know why I didn't get upset about it, but Lester Walton just started calling us the Lafayette Players and I didn't care. I just didn't like Marie Downs telling me that she was gonna use her name." All right, so Anita said she's sitting in her office, just sick at heart 'cause they were to open Monday, "We can't open, you know I'll never find anybody," and there was a knock at her door. And Creighton Thompson, my great uncle, walked in with a very handsome young man who was nineteen years old [Thompson's father, Edward Thompson]. And he said, "Bushy, I want you to meet my nephew from Indianapolis [Indiana]. His folks sent him as a graduation present. He just graduated from business school." She said I looked up darling and there was an answer to any maiden's prayer. Story_ID: 369906 Speaker 1: I said to him [Thompson's father, Edward Thompson], "Do you ever think about going on the stage?" And he just kind of laughed because his mother [Susan Knox], my grandmother, had said to him, "We're gonna send you to New York [New York], but you stay away from those Thompson Negroes 'cause they're all mixed up with theater people and you know that theater people are wild and terrible and awful." So he said I--, "I've thought about it," 'cause his Uncle Creighton [Creighton Thompson] was a concert singer. His own father, DeKoven Thompson, was a musician/writer. My grandfather wrote for Madame Schumann-Heink [Ernestine Schumann-Heink]. Course didn't get any credit for it 'cause she couldn't say she had a black man writing music for her. But any way, and I had an aunt that I never knew who was a dancer and taught dancing. So he--she said to him, "Have you got a good memory?" And Uncle Creighton must've said, "Oh he has a photographic memory," which he did. And she said, "That's wonderful." Handed him a script, said, "Will you be here tomorrow to rehearse?" Rehearsed all day Sunday, maybe Thur- Saturday night, I--I remember the all day Sunday and opened Monday night. He never went back to Indianapolis [Indiana], much to my grandmother's, you know, sorrow. When we threw him, we threw him to these people. But that's how he started. And then Anita [Anita Bush] was contacted by Leon Motts, do you know that name? He had the Pekin Theatre in Chicago [Illinois] which was the black theater at the time. And he said, "Why don't you come here and start another group of the Lafayette Players? We could use them. I certainly could use them. It won't be a rival group, it will just be part of your group." So Anita went herself to Chicago and started the Chicago group. By 1924, there were four groups. The Chicago group at the Pekin, the group that stayed in Harlem [New York, New York] at the Lafayette [Lafayette Theatre], a group that traveled up and down the East Coast like she had started with her dancers, and then a group that traveled the country, the TOB booking agency. They used to call it, tough on black actors. My mother [Evelyn Preer] and father in 1924 became the leads of that traveling group. They were married in 1924. They met in 1922-- Speaker 2: In Chicago? Speaker 1: --and were married in the Chicago group. By that time, my mother who had made these movies with Micheaux [Oscar Micheaux] had been asked to join the Lafayette Players. Story_ID: 369907 Speaker 1: Now where were you born? Speaker 2: All right. As the Players [Lafayette Players], they came back to New York [New York] and the Players were dying. Other people had bought the company at various times. One time Andrew Bishop was--had owned the company, but they remained Lafayette Players. So the Christie minstrels [Christie Film Company, Los Angeles, California] that were to become Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation] movie producers bought the company and they went to Los Angeles [California] and opened in the Lincoln Theater [Lincoln Theater, Los Angeles, California], the black theater in L.A. And they--that's where my mother [Evelyn Preer] got pregnant. And after I was born, things were hard, but they were still pushing trying to stay alive. Speaker 1: And things were hard because we were--the country-- Speaker 2: The Depression [Great Depression]. Speaker 1: --the Depression and-- Speaker 2: You know whites were suffering so you know black serious actors were going to be suffering. So when she died, she got sick on Saturday. She went for a photo shoot and I have those pictures, it was the last pictures taken of her. She was sick. The woman that was--they had a nanny, a maid and nanny, and daddy was in Chicago [Illinois] performing. And she told my father [Edward Thompson], it was pouring rain, and she said, "You know, Mrs. Preer I don't think you ought to go." She had had a bout with pneumonia the year before and 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] was going to Europe and she was replaced by Edna Lewis [Edna Lewis Thomas]. And Edna told me the story of being her understudy. She was wonderful, too. She's a good friend of my father's and came to Indianapolis [Indiana] often because she had a very dear friend there. So I knew Edna and I knew Uncle Monte [Monte Hawley], who as I said I knew some of them. But I didn't ask the right questions. But Edna was alive and I did get to interview her and she told me this story about going to Europe because she replaced my mother. She got the pneumonia and of course she died. The maid told daddy--the nanny, she said, "It was raining hard and I--the taxi didn't come." And she said, "I'm gonna run to the corner and I can catch a cab better at the corner." She said, "I kept looking out and she was standing out in that rain." So the photographer said when she got there, obviously having trouble. She had fever and she couldn't breathe well. And he said, "Oh, Ms. Preer we don't have to do this today." "No," she said, "you're all set up and I'm here already, let's do it." She went home in a cab. The nanny put her to bed Saturday evening. She was running a very high fever. By Sunday, she sent her to the house to call daddy and she sent her to the hospital. She went into a coma and she never came out of it. She died Wednesday morning. She came out at the newspaper. I read all of this in the newspaper. My father never told me this. She came to at one point and said, "Where's my baby?" And then they had a wonderful article. My first--I call it my first headline or--they interviewed her after she announced she was pregnant. She was afraid to say it at first 'cause she was thirty-five years old, you know. And she had had so much trouble in the past she was afraid to say she was pregnant. When they announced it, they interviewed her for the Los Angeles Eagle [sic. California Eagle] and they said, you know, "Ms. Preer what do you want?" You know, she said, "I'm having a girl and I'm going to make her an actress." So that--Doc [William Halstead] was so impressed with that, there's a headline, "Evelyn Preer, Stork Visits Actress," or something like that. Story_ID: 369908 Speaker 1: How did your father [Edward Thompson] become an actor? Speaker 2: I just told you. Speaker 1: Well he-- Speaker 2: Anita Bush. Speaker 1: Anita Bush found. So he--I got it--I got it now. Speaker 2: Never studied. Never intended. He was very good in math and had his degree, his business degree in math. Speaker 1: Right. So he was--oh I--okay I missed when you said--I--I get it, he's the one who came in that Anita-- Speaker 2: Anita Bush. Speaker 1: --Bush, okay. Speaker 2: That's right. That was my, Uncle Creighton [Creighton Thompson] took him, the great uncle, it was his Uncle Creighton, my grandfather's [DeKoven Thompson] brother. Speaker 1: Okay got it, right. And she looked up, okay, I'm with you now. So, once you were born and your mother [Evelyn Preer] passed away, you're three months, your father decides that he's-- Speaker 2: Seven months old. Speaker 1: --seven months old. He decides that you're goi- he's going to move with you-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: What happens? Speaker 2: My grandmother [Susan Knox], his mother, great patriarch, matriarch, came running out to California, "I'll take her, I don't want her being raised with all you crazy theater people." But my father left the legitimate stage, never put foot on the legitimate stage again after my mother's death. He was, you know, Laurence Criner, Uncle Monte [Monte Hawley], they all begged him and he wouldn't do it. He said he could not do it. So he stayed in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and tried to do the movies. But in 1932, if you weren't Stepin Fetchit, you could not make it. He was too dark to be white and he wasn't gonna pass for white because of your mother saying what she did, "I wasn't about to pass for white." Uncle Monte did. A lot of--the Lafayette Players, you can see them in the old George Raft movies. I have a picture of Uncle Monte in fact. But he--he made up his mind, I can't stay and he came home, back home to Indianapolis [Indiana] and did what my grandmother, his mother had always wanted him to do, he went into politics. When I think about it now I think he must've hated every minute of it and never said that. But his friends, he stayed in touch with a lot of his friends, Uncle Monte. When they did--many Lafayette Players were in the 1943 production of 'Anna Lucasta' [Philip Yordan], [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee's first big starring role. And they came by the house. He had a party for them. They came by our house. I have a picture of Ruby. When I showed it to her many years, she said, "I've forgotten I was ever that young (laughter)." It's a beautiful picture of her. Story_ID: 369909 Speaker 1: So your father [Edward Thompson], you said, went into politics? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And this is in his hometown or in Indiana (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well he was born in Chicago [Illinois] and raised in Chicago. Momma [Susan Knox] had been--my grandfather [DeKoven Thompson] died. Momma had been told, "Don't ever give a boy a stepfather, don't." So she had lots of proposals and she wouldn't listen to anybody because of daddy. Well, when he was sixteen, she--her best friend and her husband lived in Indianapolis [Indiana], Aunt Marta [ph.], Uncle Ruby [ph.]. You know, you call people aunt and uncle when they're not. So they invited her to come down for the Fourth of July and she went. And Poppa Elwood Knox, the son of George Levi Knox [George L. Knox], was there, was Uncle Ruby's best friend. So I guess they were trying to fix it up. And he--Poppa always said, they met in the circle [Monument Circle], the center of Indianapolis just like Times Square in New York [New York], is the circle, the Indianapolis circle and they had a big water well where people could dip water and Poppa was dipping a sip of water and Uncle Ruby said, "We want you to meet somebody." Would he, and Poppa was al- Poppa was very dramatic, he--I looked--, "I turned my eyes toward heaven and I saw an angel standing there." So he--she went back to Chicago but he courted her assiduously. Evidently wore out the road going back and forth. And so at thirty-four, she married him. And so he became the only father really that my daddy had known and loved him, he adored poppa. They were married and at thirty-eight she had my uncle, George Knox, III [HistoryMaker George Levi Knox, III]. And George was to become a Tuskegee Airman later. And then had my aunt, my dad's younger sister at forty. And that put me closer in age to them then my father was. So I grew up with them and they were like my older brother and sister, and I just, my grandmother I adored her. At one time as Susan Knox voted, so did 98 percent of the blacks in the State of Indiana. She was the first female, first black, now they have another name for them now, but in those days they called them juvenile court referees. They're the ones that decide where a child goes if there was a divorce or abuse, et cetera. There was always somebody coming home to live in our house. Phyllis [ph.] came for two weeks and she was there for six years. Otis [ph.] came for maybe just a brief while. Otis stayed and became--due to Momma--became Indianapolis' first black detective. She was always doing for somebody else. And my father said, "Well it's too bad that Momma's not crooked, we could've been millionaires." Never took a cent for getting people jobs or always looking out. And--and was recognized as such, and I--I'm proud of that. She died, we sent momma to heaven at one hundred and her funeral was packed, packed with either people that she had helped or people who had known her. Birch Bayh, Senator Birch Bayh who had been one of her little boys for years, even though he was very, very good friends with the Republican mayor, Alex Clark, Mayor Clark. Momma said, "The only good Republican I ever met." Birch Bayh flew into Indianapolis. A friend of mine picked him up, came to the funeral, left--and spoke to me and flew right back. Andy Jacobs [Andrew Jacobs, Jr.], young Andy Jacobs and old man Jacobs [Andrew Jacobs, Sr.] who was Momma's running buddy. The place was filled with--and it was just a great source of consolation that that many people would remember what she had done and been to them. There was one gentleman that she had been responsible for him becoming a detective, he wasn't the first one, Otis was the first one, but Jack got in trouble and was arrested. And Momma went to bat for him and she got him out of prison earlier. So he had just recently been released from prison when she--he called up. And he said now, "Edeve [HistoryMaker Sister Francesca Thompson] I--I know you and Victoria[ph.]," that's my aunt, my uncle was dead by that time, "I know that you all are going to have this funeral for Mrs. Knox and I don't want to embarrass you, but could I just do something? Could I maybe direct traffic, uh--I just want to be a part of it. I know--I know you probably don't even want me in the church." Oh I said, "Jack are you crazy? I said how would you like to be pallbearer?" And he was just floored. 'Cause we had two ex-mayors, certainly more important people that. So at the--the pallbearers sat in the front row and I chose as the gospel, you know, the beatitudes, "Blessed are those who--," and when they got to "Blessed are they who visit those in prison and do good to those that are," and Jack turned all the way around to me and bowed like so. I just thought it was a great tribute to my grandmother. My great-grandfather, Thompson James--Edward Thompson [ph.], built Chicago's first black Anglican church and it is still in existence. St. Tho- not the building. They've, you know, rev- have redone it. But St. Thomas [St. Thomas Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 369910 Speaker 1: So let's talk about your childhood some and your introduction well you--who was it, refresh my memory, who had started the apostol- church (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Apostolic church. Speaker 1: Apostolic church. Speaker 2: That was my mother's mother [Blanche Jarvis]. Speaker 1: Your mother's mother, okay. Speaker 2: My maternal grandmother was an Apostolic. And daddy [Edward Thompson] said she adored my mother [Evelyn Preer], but never walked in a theater to see her. And they'd come--she'd stay up--my mother bought her an apartment building and she'd stay up. When they came home and she'd say, "Tell me everything that she did." You know, what--, "What did she do?" And she read the newspaper articles. They had--the New York Age ran a half--no a whole page advertisement of Stella Mae [ph.] and the advertisements are hysterical. "The most beautiful colored woman in the world," you know, my mother. And so daddy said she just loved that. She would not go in the theater. But that she just--you didn't do that. Speaker 1: Who--or what is recollection of religion in your childhood? Speaker 2: All right. Anglican, Episcopalian, everybody. And we went to--we had a black Anglican church in Indianapolis [Indiana], St. Philip's [St. Philip's Episcopal Church]. And that's where we went, that's where my family went, everybody. And then because Indianapolis was so prejudiced, my father called it the most--what is it, the most segregated city north of the Mason-Dixon Line. Indiana was the other only northern state to go for George Wallace when he ran for president. They'd only one black high school. And you know the Big O, Oscar Robinson [sic. HistoryMaker Oscar Robertson], Attucks High School [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]. Attucks became famous because the Big O went there. But in my day, you had to go, no matter where you lived. And I would've had to take like three buses or something and they both--both my mother and fath- Momma [Susan Knox] and my daddy said no. By this time Poppa [Elwood Knox] died when I was a sophomore in high school. But mom--they decided to send me-- Speaker 1: Your pa-- Speaker 2: When I say momma and poppa those are grandparents (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the grandparents, okay, so Poppa died, okay. Speaker 2: Had died. Story_ID: 369911 Speaker 1: But they decided to send me to this Anglican academy run by black Anglican nuns in Chicago [Illinois]. And I guess as the time got closer Momma [Thompson's paternal grandmother, Susan Knox] did not like this going away. Now, she had worked in politics for years and by this time she was no longer referee, I think. Well maybe she was, anyway she had a white secretary. And she said to her now, you know, "Ms. Knox I know you don't wanna send Edeve [HistoryMaker Sister Francesca Thompson] away and I know you're not Catholic, but my girls went to Catholic school. The sisters really give them a good education." So I guess that didn't look so bad to her at that time. And believe it or not, in that day, Catholic schools were just burgeoning. They were filled. So the archbishop said, "Don't take any non-Catholics, we've got too many Catholics (laughter)." Those days are gone forever. So we went to--or she went to two different academies, the first one said they didn't accept blacks, that was the most hoity toity one. And then the next two academies said we've been told not to take non-Catholics. That was a good excuse, I guess, I don't know. Then this woman said, "Well St. Mary's [St. Mary's Academy, Indianapolis, Indiana], Mrs. Knox, it's not as ultra-ultra as the other two, St. Agnes [St. Agnes Academy, Indianapolis, Indiana] or Ladywood [Ladywood School, Indianapolis, Indiana]. But the--the sisters are really wonderful teachers. So like a week, week and a half before school opened, we trudged together over to St. Mary's. It was an older sister that opened the door. And she said, "Oh I'm sorry, nobody's here." And Momma said, "Oh we came to register, wanted to talk about getting my daughter into school." "Oh," she said, "I can do that." Sister Philomena [ph.], God bless her, she's about eighty years old or at least over seventy-five, and she was the housekeeper. And the sisters, we have a college in Indianapolis [Indiana] and it was because there were so many nuns, when school was getting ready to open they had a big picnic out at the college. The nuns all came up to--to scrub the floors and get the curtains ready, do the beds. And so the nuns walk over to Marian [Marian College; Marian University, Indianapolis, Indiana], but the Sister didn't go 'cause she couldn't do any work. So the nun--she took the registration, Momma paid her for the whole year. We--that night, the Sister, I only heard this years later, they said well, "What'd you do today Sister Philomena?" You know, and she said, "Oh I took a nap and oh I cleaned the kitchen and then I took a nap, and oh I registered a young girl." "Oh you did?" And the principal said, "Oh my goodness Sister Philomena, we're packed, you know, what to cu--." "Oh," she said, "she's lovely and her mother was with her, and she's just so lovely and she paid already, she paid for the year." "Oh well, all right, you know, but don't do that again, we can't." "And she's as nice as she can be even if she is colored." The principal goes, "Colored (laughter)?" You know, and then she, oh she said, "We'll have to call them and tell the archbishop said we couldn't take any non-Catholics." And three of the younger nuns that I subsequently became very friendly with said, "Sister, you're doing that because she's colored, that's not right. And if you do that," the one said, "we'll write to Reverend Mother and say we wanna be changed. Can't do that sister." So I guess she very reluctantly gave in. I always say I got segregated into the Catholic church. Story_ID: 369912 Speaker 1: You were about to tell us you were at St. Mary's [St. Mary's Academy, Indianapolis, Indiana]? Speaker 2: I was segregated into the Catholic church. Went to St. Mary's, had not had anything to do with Catholics. Had a cousin, a distant cousin, that was Catholic and that was it. So I knew very, very little. And being of dramatic bent, I am sure that God used that inclination to urge me. You know, the Catholic church is full of drama, the liturgy, all the costumes worn by the nuns, as well as by the priest. I fell in love with the whole idea of catholicity. And of course by--before the freshman year was finished, I was begging my father [Edward Thompson] to allow me to be baptized in the Catholic church. And he was staunchly against it. He said, "Honey, the Catholic church has been there a long time and it'll be there an even longer time, so why don't you wait?" I think he thought that I was jus--it was a passing phase and I'd get over it, but I didn't. And the year after the summer, after my freshman year, I was terribly, terribly lazy I'm afraid. I'd sleep in all the time. We had a lady who worked for us and Ethel [ph.] had to wake me up by noontime. I was not--I was not a morning person. I've always said to the nuns, "I think it's because my folks are in the theater." And they comment, "Fifty-four years and I still can find so much to do past midnight." If I could, I would sleep in. It's just that I don't have the time to sleep in. But I got up every morning and went to six o'clock mass, and it was a good little walk from where we lived. And the lady that worked for us must've talked about it to my father and my grand-, "I don't understand what's got into Edeve [HistoryMaker Sister Francesca Thompson]? You know, she's running over there to church, six o'clock in the morning." I think that impressed her. So the next year was my sophomore year, at Christmas, he said, "I think you're serious about this, so if you wanna do it, I'll let you do it, but you have to tell Momma [Thompson's paternal grandmother, Susan Knox], I'm not telling her." And of course she was just adamantly against it. She sent me to speak with our pastor, the Anglican priest, and he made a big mistake. I think if he had given me just some encouragement, I was so happy that I felt I had found God and I had a relationship going with God. I--the Sisters had a chapel in one part of the academy and I used to love to go and sit in there in that chapel and pray. And I felt that that was a great thing for a girl of fourteen years old. I didn't have any friends that were, you know, that religion bent. So when he talked to me, it was everything to discourage me. "Do you know how terrible the Catholic church is, Edeve? They have just done awful things." And I think he even went back talking about the Spanish Inquisition. So of course I saw that as an attempt to, you know, swipe the church which was a mistake, because it made me more--I had read the stories of the saints and the martyrs and how people hated the church. He became an enemy. And I'm sorry because he was a very good man, but I didn't appreciate what he said. Shortly after our talk he was changed and a new priest came that I didn't know and had nothing to do with. And I'm sure that had a lot to do with it. But I became more and more entrenched in wanting to be Catholic. So I took instructions after he said I could and my grandmother very upset, blah, blah, blah. I was baptized in May of that year, the end of my sophomore year. Story_ID: 369913 Speaker 1: Then I started thinking about going to the convent. I was smart enough to know that I better not talk about that. So I waited until the beginning of my senior year. Several of my friends had entered and were going. I had gone down to Oldenburg [Indiana], the mother house, to visit them. Picked out my grave site. We have a beautiful cemetery and I picked out my grave underneath a spreading tree. I want you to know that that grave was filled in 19--Sister Murielle [ph.] is there in 1960. So we have many, many more nuns that have died since then. But I loved Oldenburg. The first time I went, there was a sister that had died who had been at St. Mary's [St. Mary's Academy, Indianapolis, Indiana] and the sisters, needed--they could not drive. We had a habit that was extended and they couldn't get driver's licenses. So they were asking for drivers and my daddy [Edward Thompson], course I volunteered my daddy. The funeral was just--I just thought it was heavenly and beautiful and sat in that chapel and said, "God let me die here." And I made up my mind that day, but when I brought it up, I thought my father was gonna die. I thought he was gonna die. Just--just threw, literally threw a fit. You know, how God took my mother [Evelyn Preer], now He was gonna take me and oh just. So I said, "Forget it, forget it, you know, I don't really want to do this." And in my mind said, "I'm just like all the other martyrs, I'm gonna have to suffer for my faith. I won't say anything, I won't go to the convent, I won't do anything 'til everybody's dead, then I'll go." So at the end of my senior year, I was supposed to go to Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York], had already had my appointment with somebody, et cetera. And was just so sick of heart because I knew I couldn't enter. I said well, "If I can't go to the convent, will you let me go to college here at home, the sisters college [Marian College; Marian University, Indianapolis, Indiana]. Now he was not happy about that, but Momma's [Thompson's paternal grandmother, Susan Knox] delighted because I'm not leaving town. So I lived at home and went to the college and did miserably. Never in my life had I gotten the grades that I got my freshman year in college. And so he said to me at the end of the year, he said, "Baby it would take--." I dated, I got pinned. I did all the things I thought I was supposed to do. Dated a young man who was the grandson of one of Momma's dearest friends, so this was wonderful. His father was--I don't know--dean at the col- at Attucks High School [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]. Very, very well-respected family. So they were very happy about that. I couldn't have cared less. I went out with him so I could say that I went out. At the end of the year when my grades were so awful, daddy said, "It would take an idiot to see that you're unhappy." He said, "So I'll let you go," but he said, "honey you haven't seen the world, I don't feel like I've done right by you. I want you to travel. So if you spend this summer in Europe, then maybe we'll think about you going." Story_ID: 369914 Speaker 1: I didn't--just to hear him [Thompson's father, Edward Thompson] say it was possible for me to go, that's all I needed to hear. So I went to Europe for nine weeks. I went with a group. Bad mistake, every church, every cathedral that I went in, "Oh God please let me go to the convent, please let me go to the convent." People said to me, "Your father's trying to buy you off, Edeve [HistoryMaker Sister Francesca Thompson]." I said, "He wouldn't do that." I got a car as a graduation present, one of the few people in my class that had their own car. "Your dad's buying you." "No, no, no, no." So I go to Europe. They came to New York [New York] to meet me. We were going to visit relatives, some of the Thompsons. So I got off the plane, in those days people could walk right out, you know. Daddy ran up and you, you know, hugged me and the first thing he said to me was, "You still want to go to Oldenburg [Indiana]?" And I knew they were right and I said, "Oh more than ever." So I was allowed, my [paternal] grandmother [Susan Knox] I just thought she was going have a fit, but I think Momma thought I'd get over it. I--I really think that was her idea. But, our Reverend Mother, I go to talk to her and Mother had only been in office a year. She was determined that the Sisters [in the Third Order of Saint Francis] get their degrees, which was smart. Most of our nuns were sent out right from the novitiate. You went out and taught. So she was pushing that and I--unbeknownst to me, there were four other girls that had asked to enter. Two she made graduate, they were seniors and one in my class. She said, "Why don't you finish your education first?" Two in my class, one was so upset with that she left the college and went home, and never ever tried. The other one graduated and then entered. I couldn't believe that she was telling me to wait. Here I got permission and then she's telling me to wait. Two of my dearest friends had been refused in the communities that they chose, not mine, thank heavens, the year before, because they were black. So I used it. I said, "Mother, if I have to tell my daddy that I can't come, then he's gonna think you don't want me because I'm colored." We didn't use the word black. And she was just--you could see the expression on her face, she said, "Well that has nothing to do with it." I said, "I believe you, but I don't know if my daddy will." And then I started to cry, I'm a great crier like my mother [Evelyn Preer]. When daddy said my mother could cry on cue, I may not be able to cry on cue, but I cry. So she--we were sitting in what was called the French Room at the college [Marian College; Marian University, Indianapolis, Indiana] and she told me this later, she said, "I have to think about it, Edeve because I have told," and then she mentioned the people, then she said, "they have to wait, then I think that you should wait." And I'm sobbing, I--but, you know, "I don't want to," blah, blah, blah. So there was a monsignor, an older priest that had been at the college for years and very well respected. Mother respected him a lot. She told me that she went in and talked to him. "Do you know Edeve Thompson well, Monsignor?" "Oh, I had her in class." "What do you think about her?" And he said some very complimentary things, I was bright, I was articulate, blah, blah, blah. She said, "Do you think she has a vocation?" He said, "I don't know." And she said, "Well, she's asking to enter and I've made," and she told him so and so, "to wait. But she says that she's afraid that her people will think it's because of her color and I don't want--," she said she just sobbed. And I didn't--, "The rest of them didn't carry on like that. So I don't know what to do, do you think I ought to take a chance on her?" And he said, "Well, I certainly would think so. Mother," he said, "I think she's got the makings to be a very good religious. And if she's crying then I think she must be upset." And so, "Well, thank you Monsignor, I--I guess I have to think on it." Then Mother said she got to the door and Monsignor said, "Now, Mother Severus [ph.], you do remember Edeve's an actress (laughter)." Mother said, "I didn't know what to think. I walked out of there, and I thought now what do I think?" Anyway, she told me that I could come. But you have to know Mother Severus, she had to have the last word. She said, "I'm gonna let you come, but only at the end of the first semester. You have to do--," she--, "I want you people to be as educated as you can be." And at that time, the rule was, as long as you had six months of postulancy, that's what your first year was called. So she said, "You can come February 2nd where there are some others that will enter then." I didn't care. I'd heard all I wanted to hear, "You can come." Story_ID: 369915 Speaker 1: So I floated through the next months, just ecstatic. And my daddy [Edward Thompson], I think put on one of the greatest performances of his life. Because when I told him that she had said I could come he said, "Oh I'm so happy for you," and he hugged me. I don't believe that at all. But he was a good enough of an--of an actor to fool me. Two years--no eight years later, I entered in '52 [1952], 19--and I--I'm forgetting the time, 1958 my father converted. Now I never encouraged him, I never--he did that on his own and I was thrilled. Of course, my mother--my [paternal] grandmother [Susan Knox] didn't seem to be upset by that. I think because he was never a big churchgoer. He did not go to church with us. But he did and--and that just thrilled me. And I think he was really happy that I was in the convent. He said to me one time, well, he said, "You know, I don't have to worry about some Negro grabbing you by the hair and dragging you through the gutter." And I said, "No, you don't. You know, Jesus wouldn't do that." But he loved the nuns and used to drive them around a lot. Momma came to love, she wouldn't convert 'cause she said, "I go--I couldn't give up the Anglican church because of Grandpa Knox [Elwood Knox], but--Grandpa Thompson [DeKoven Thompson]." But she said, "I--it's close enough, it doesn't make any difference." And I had to laugh at God's irony. When Momma was dying, the pastor of her church, St. Philip's [St. Philip's Episcopal Church, Indianapolis, Indiana] was an ex-Catholic priest. He had left the priesthood and married. And you know what the Catholic church says, sacerdote seni ternim [sic.], once a priest always a priest. So when she's getting the last rites, I said, "Well momma, I got you in the Catholic church after all." I--I just was always happy about my conversion. I certainly know that there are things that are not right in the church, but do you know any human institution where everything's perfect? You know, we are not seraphic yet. And so there is room for improvement. I have been very critical of the church. I have been very critical to several cardinals face-to-face. And people know where I stand on the things that I think are wrong. I think racism has run rampant. I am unhappy that we had not done more to staunch the racism. I am very pleased with the two groups that have been formed, the black priest caucus [National Black Catholic Clergy Caucus] and the Black Sisters' Conference [National Black Sisters' Conference]. I think that that has done a great deal to help black girls that entered white communities or black fellows that have gone to white seminaries. People have asked me, "How did you stay in a German community?" I think I was so vain and so arrogant and so conceited I thought my white girls sat up all night long clapping their hands when they heard I was coming. And I've said that out loud. Story_ID: 369916 Speaker 1: I was invited to speak, are you familiar with LCWR, Leadership Conference of Religious Women [sic. Leadership Conference of Women Religious]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: I was invited to speak, well several times. But the one time that I spoke, my administration was there and one of my best friends was sitting over to the side and somebody said to me or asked, "Sister, can I ask you how can you, as a black woman, keep your feeling of self-identity in a white community or don't you feel put upon or put down?" And oh I said, "Sister, I've said this before and I'll say it 'til I die I'm sure, I was so conceited," I said, "my novice mistress had been my mistress at the academy [St. Mary's Academy, Indianapolis, Indiana]," at the high school where I went and she subsequently became the novice mistress. I said, "Sister knew me so well. She's so busy trying to slap some humility into me I never had time to think about people looking down on me because I felt so superior to everybody else." And Sister Julie [ph.], a very dear friend of mine, stood up and said, "And she's telling the truth, she's telling the truth (laughter)." I feel that God blessed me in a great way that I've never felt inferior. People say well why did you enter a white community, you know, why didn't you go to a black community? My community was the only community that I knew well. I knew the other white communities that were in Indianapolis [Indiana] and my friend had gone to school with other communities, but they were the ones that taught me. And I never even considered going to a black community. I had seen black sisters at the CSMC [Christian Student Mission Club], it's a national, used to be a mission conference, Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] had about forty thousand youngsters every other year and I had been president of the Indiana CSMC. And I spoke at Notre Dame. You know, Monsignor Sheen [Fulton J. Sheen] who subsequently became Bishop Sheen, the TV star, they're talking about canonizing him now. I was invited to speak at the--no, no--I went to the conference and Monsignor Sheen gave the keynote address and it was on vacation--on vocations. And he said, "It's so distressing to me, as a priest, as a religious, that you young people are not answering God's call. I know that he is calling you, why aren't you listening, why aren't you responding?" "Why? I just had two of my best friends refused by white communities." And in front of forty thousand people and Bishop Sheen I went to the microphone when he was finished and I said, "With all due respect Monsignor Sheen, I beg to differ with you. I think that there are some people that are not only listening, they want to answer, but what do you do when you try to respond to God's call and white people tell you you're not good enough to answer?" And you could hear a collective, (makes noise) from the audience. Well then he said, "I'd like to talk to you about that, if that is true, that there are people that have been refu- that is an abomination. So I'd like to talk to you, young lady." Well afterwards, I mean nuns surrounded me. Oh 'cause they thought I was talking about myself, "You want to come, you--we'd love to have you, you come to us." I said, "Sister, I'm not talking about me, I'm talking about people that I know and love." Anyway, when he talked to me he said, "I have a book." No that was later, that was later. He asked Monsignor Fricking [ph.] who was the head of the CSMC and the national office was in Cincinnati [Ohio]. So Monsignor Fricking knew me. He asked him what I was doing, did I really go to the convent? And after I was in the convent six years, Monsignor Fricking asked our reverend mother if I could give the keynote address at Notre Dame, 'cause here's a living example, a girl that was a CSMC member and I, you know, became a sister. So I gave my talk and Monsignor Sheen was there. So he said afterwards, "I never forgot you, I always prayed for you." He said, "I've got a book I'm getting ready to publish, Sister, would you consider giving a chapter to the book?" It was 'Twice Called' [ph.] was the title of the book, people that were converts that had entered religious life. So he held the book until I finished a chapter that I named "Thrice Called" [ph.]. I said, you know, I was born black, I was given the gift of faith by God, I am a convert and now I am a black Roman Catholic religion--a religious. So I feel I have been thrice called. But he--I always thought I wanted him to get canonized so I can say I had a personal relationship with a saint. They later took that chapter out of the book, the Vocation Conference [National Religious Vocation Conference], the national and asked if they could make a pamphlet out of it. So they made a pamphlet with a picture of me on the front as a girl. Story_ID: 369917 Speaker 1: So did you fight within the church during--I mean within the convent during the younger--your younger years--in the early years against racism, were you-- Speaker 2: I have to tell you I was dumb, because I didn't suffer. I wasn't aware of what other people were going through and I would have to tell you when I went to the Black Sisters' Conference [National Black Sisters' Conference] the first year I was invited to attend and I thought what a black sisters conference, what are black sisters, you know, getting together for, what are they going to talk about? I think it changed my life. You talk about a life-altering experience. It altered my whole life. I--and I vowed I would never keep my mouth shut again. I just felt that racism didn't hit me and I had not suffered any ill effects because of racism. Yes, Indianapolis [Indiana] was prejudiced. Couldn't go to movies, couldn't go to get your hair done at a white department store, beauty parlor. Couldn't try on clothes in many stores, couldn't go to restaurants. But I was taught when I was younger, my daddy [Edward Thompson] said to me and I can remember it, and I was very young, I heard the word nigger for the first time. And he said, "Honey, I want to tell you, there are many idiots in the world who think they're better than you because they look differently than you do. There are many ignoramuses that think they are better than you because you're not the same color that they are. That's their problem, baby, don't ever make it yours." And I ge- I imbibed that, so yeah, I heard the word nigger. I knew there were sisters at St. Mary's [St. Mary's Academy, Indianapolis, Indiana] that were prejudiced. I only had distain for them. But after I--I knew there were sisters that were prejudiced when I entered the community. So when I went to the Black Sisters' Conference and I heard these other women tell their horror stories, I was appalled. And I spent--it was a week long. I spent the first few days thinking aberrations, malcontents, you know, there are white nuns that are malcontents, these people don't belong in the convent. Only to find out I was the aberration. And I was held in suspicion and probably still am to this day because I wasn't complaining. I must be an Aunt Jemima or an Uncle Tom if I got along in a white community, if I felt I was accepted. One sister said, "I never open my mouth to say anything because they don't listen." When I got back to Mar- the nuns were all waiting up for me, I got in late. And the sister that had been my scholastic mistress, that's the nun--you have a novice mistress in the novitiate, postulant and novice years. Then a scholastic mistress before you make final vows. Sister Carolyn [ph.] happened to be station at Marian [Marian College; Marian University, Indianapolis, Indiana] at that time, so she's waiting up. And I said, "You should hear these nuns, one after the other got up and talked about how they never even been allowed to speak, nobody let's 'em talk." Sister Carolyn said, "Sister Francesca [HistoryMaker Sister Francesca Thompson], I hope lightning bolts hit you if ever you would say that you haven't been allowed to speak. The rest of us have been suffering listening to you for many years (laughter)." You know, jabbing, said it in jest, but I know that it's true. I feel like there are people that have suffered because of me more than I have ever suffered because I'm black. The fact that I was sent on to school, the fact that I went to our college, the fact that I was sent on in theater, I can't tell you how different that is to do something that you would have chosen to do. Story_ID: 369918 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about those things one at a time. You completed school and you or you were sent off, tell me what--what happened? Speaker 2: All right. Once you enter the convent, get through with the novitiate, the people that were stationed in Indianapolis [Indiana] went to Marian [Marian College; Marian University, Indianapolis, Indiana] for Saturdays. If you were outside Indianapolis and the reverend mother had decided you were to finish your degree as soon as possible, we did independent study correspondence. So I finished Marian in 1960, two years after my final vows. I made final vows in '58 [1958]. And then, I don't know, I--I never thought about going on to grad school, I really didn't. I was not an outstanding scholar and the sisters that were sent on were usually very intelligent people and stood out as scholars. But I got the word that I was to go to grad school, to go to Xavier [Xavier University, Cincinnati, Ohio]. I was floored. And I thought because most of the sisters and many of my friends, by best friends were so--we had an orphanage and mother--that's was Mother's idea of vacation. She says, "A vacation is a change in occupation." So if you were teaching you got sent to the orphanage; that was a vacation. If you were teaching in high school and you got sent off to give religious instruction that was a vacation. So I thought I was going to the orphanage, that's where my friends went. And when the word came that I was supposed to go Xavier, I thought there's a mistake, I don't want to go. But it--had a delightful time, loved my summers and was told what to take. And I was to get my master's in education with a concentration in theater. Story_ID: 369919 Speaker 1: You were to be the replacement? Speaker 2: But I--that was not said to me. Speaker 1: That was not said to you? Speaker 2: No. They--Mother wanted me to get my master's [degree] so sh- I could teach in high school. I went from St. Joseph [St. Joseph Catholic School] all-black--no predominantly black inner city school in Cincinnati [Ohio] to our academy [St. Mary's Academy, Indianapolis, Indiana] to teach high school and that's what she wanted me ready for. Then--I was at the academy six years and then I was sent to the college and told that I was to go on and get a Ph.D. Speaker 1: So when did you come--when did you discover the Jesuits or come in contact with them, I read something about the Jesuits had changed something about their way of teaching or you discovering them? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unh-uh, no. Speaker 1: Oh okay, not important, okay. Speaker 2: Jesuits taught at Xavier [Xavier University, Cincinnati, Ohio]. I think I only had one. So they did not have really any influence on me at all. But then when I started giving lectures, I started, well when I went to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] that was the first time in '59 [1959] I guess and then from then I gave talks because that led--every talk led to some other invitation. So I always lectured. And the Jesuits invited me, I happened to be invited to Fordham [University, New York, New York] to give a talk, Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York], downtown. And the next year they invited me up to Rose Hill [campus] and both times, the presidents at both places said, "Sister, if ever you decide to leave your sisters college, give us a look." Well Momma [Thompson's paternal grandmother, Susan Knox] was ninety-six and I wasn't interested. The next year, the president said, "Sister do you ever think, maybe you could come just for a year, be scholar in residence?" I said, "Father I'm really not interested." I knew that I wasn't gonna keep Momma much longer, I wanted to be there. God was good. The last fifteen years of her life I lived ten minutes away from her. And if ever I was away giving a talk, the nuns went to see her. Every day she had somebody to see her. And I just--I didn't wanna leave. So when we sent her to heaven at one hundred, I had five offers. And Fordham was the only Catholic school. Not only that, I was asked to teach the acting class at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] when I was getting my Ph.D. and I had some wonderful, wonderful students, Gilda Radner, Christine Lahti, Ann Crumb that I got to vote for to get a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] when I served on the Tony board [Tony Awards Administration Committee]. So I got--I got all these kids, kids, pounding the pavement in New York [New York]. I had a relative here. I had a very dear friend who maintained an apartment here, even though she didn't live here. And I thought that would be fun to teach theater for a year. And I'd never had a sabbatical. So I asked my superiors if I could come for a year. They were happy it was a Catholic school blah, blah, blah, didn't like me leaving Marian [Marian College; Marian University, Indianapolis, Indiana]. But there was another sister being prepared in theater and I--in my mind was, "Jan [ph.] would take my place." So I come, at the end of the year the two presidents, downtown and uptown, made me an offer I couldn't refuse, that was twenty-four years ago. I stayed twenty-four years. But they really didn't, there was no kind of forming me because of the Jesuits. Story_ID: 369920 Speaker 1: So why do you think you were called by God into--into and I don't wanna--into the convent into the sisterhood, I mean? Speaker 2: I--I think that's very hard to answer. I wrote a poem on the occasion of my twenty-fifth jubilee and I thought that poem said it very well for me. You know, you talk about being called and you talk about being chosen. And I feel like I chose God, more than God chose me. Certainly not because I was special or because I was better than anybody else. I think that God likes the idea of proving what he can do with nothing. And, you know, it says in the Bible, one of the prophets said, "Just think of what God--," oh in the Bible one of the prophets [sic. judge, Samson] used the jawbone of an ass to fight a battle and he won. Saint John Vianney, a Catholic saint, was to say many years later, "It's so encouraging to me to think that God could win or triumph with the jawbone of an ass. Just think what he can do with the whole body?" And I guess I really, I'm very sincere when I say that. I feel that way. There is nothing about me that makes me better or makes me more precious in God's sight. I think He chooses, the Blessed Mother's 'Magnificat,' "He chooses the low that He can exalt them with His own power." So I know and it is very humbling and it helps me from having the head that is sixteen times larger than it should be, mine is only eight times larger. To know that all that I do or anything that I co- accomplish that's positive comes from God. And I have felt that, actually felt, actually felt, if I'm giving a talk, yeah sometimes I'm on and I know that it's a good talk, other times I'm just not feeling up to it, just not feeling like producing and so I say to God, "Okay you got to take over." And I have felt that. I give a talk and people talk about it, a wonderful talk blah, blah, blah. And I think, where did that come from? 'Cause I didn't feel that way. So I feel that I have felt God's presence in my life. Everything that I've done that is negative is Francesca's [HistoryMaker Sister Francesca Thompson], everything positive is what God has helped me do. Story_ID: 369921 Speaker 1: I had this retirement party my president gave me, this huge retirement party in May. I was very happy for many reasons, but the thing that made me happiest, there was a table of my students from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]--two tables. A table of students from Marian College [Marian University] in Indianapolis [Indiana] and I'm gonna cry. A table of eleven of my students from St. Joseph's School [St. Joseph Catholic School, Cincinnati, Ohio] that I taught in the second grade fifty-two years ago. They heard about the party, called up my president, one had said, "You know Father, you didn't invite us I know, but get ready for eleven, put eleven more peas in the pie. We were there at the beginning and we think we ought to be there at the end." He was so impressed. So he, they came on Saturday, the party was Monday. I had eighteen out of town guests, but I got tickets, a very dear friend of mine produced a show and I--she gave me eighteen eighty dollar tickets for them. I had a soul food dinner waiting for them here. We went to the theater. Sunday they went out sightseeing, et cetera, and then Monday night was the party. After Father announced it, people kept coming up. There--about almost three hundred people at the party. "Francesca [HistoryMaker Sister Francesca Thompson], where'd you find them, fifty-two years ago, where did you find them?" I said I didn't have to look for them, they never left me. They--they've held on all this time. I've got pictures of some of them right here. My jubilee year, 19--2002, they got up a petition and they had the mayor of the city give me the keys to the city. There was a big banquet, a fundraiser for St. Joseph's School. I got the keys to the city from the mayor, a commendation from the governor, a commendation from the senator presented to me by the senator himself. I got the medal from the Underground Freedom Railroad museum [National Underground Railroad Freedom Center, Cincinnati, Ohio]. At that time, only three of us had it, Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] and me. And they did that. So that night when I looked out and I thought there's my life, there's my life from St. Joseph, the very beginning 1952, my first mission. Marian, Michigan, my Broadway stars, I had a table of my Broadway children. I--I thought what a wonderful thing to have behind me and I know it's not Francesca, God did that. And that keeps me humble. I can't say, your interview was so well, I was--or I gave a very good talk. I--I can't say that. God and I gave the talk. And I believe that to my toes. People say, you know, "How could somebody like you be happy in a convent Francesca?" I--I feel like my life has just been full of pluses and certainly there've been hard things. You--what is that spiritual, I've never seen an eye that did not hold pain. So of course there have been difficult things, but I feel like that the overriding thing has been God and God's grace. The hardest thing in my life has been burying people that I loved. The deaths of people that are close to me. And a few years ago, I had fourteen in a row. I couldn't believe it. Fourteen, one right after the other, and I said, "God, what is the message here? I know there's a message, but you gotta stop using sign language and speak in plain English because I ain't getting the message." So I'm not saying that there haven't been difficult things, I don't think you can live life and be realistic, but I mean overall, to lie down at night with my head on the pillow and say, I know that I did the best I could today to get closer to you, to try to bring other people close to you. And I--if I have failed, and I know I have failed, my failing is in not doing that as perfectly as possible. Story_ID: 369922 Speaker 1: Let's talk about some of the highlights during your teaching years, some of the programs you implemented, some of the things you're most proud of? Speaker 2: All right, okay. I'd say Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], just to be asked, as a student to teach that advanced acting class. That was a big joy to me. And I could hardly wait to get out of bed in the morning to get to school. And there were so--at the University of Michigan they had this huge theater department so they--we had to cap the classes at twenty. I wasn't allowed to have more than twenty in the class. So I had to cap them at twenty. But to have these people, 98 percent of them hoping to go into theater, it was so important to them. I had classes on Sunday. They would come on su- you know say, "Can we rehearse our scene Sister? Can we do--." The one Sunday, there were maybe eight or ten of them rehearsing and the head of the department, Dr. Halstead [William Halstead], my mentor, was there. He said well, "I see that Sister's holding drama Sunday school." I did--it just was a thrill to me that the students were so excited and the fact that they've held on all these years. I had Gilda [Gilda Radner] until she died. I was close to Gilda. Speaker 1: I read that she said about you that you were one of the few professors at the university who called her by her name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By her name. She did, she did. Thirty-eight thousand people, you know, and so many of these kids came from smaller schools. Gilda had come from a very ritzy, private, Jewish school. But she, they had how many, one of the teachers had an English class with 316 students. You know, but the theater classes were smaller. So yeah, I knew people. You know, shame on me if I couldn't, now the people at Fordham [Fordham University, New York, New York] will laugh 'cause I have a hard time, I kept calling one of the boys Alfred one day or something and his name was Thomas, let's say. And he said, "Sister have you had, do you have a deep burning desire to have an Alfred in this class?" I said, "I'm sorry, I'm sorry." But I--I don't know that I've done anything wonderful. I would say that one of my biggest joys is the fact that they hold on. I have a student that graduated from Fordham twenty years ago, Erica [ph.], she's married now. She just called me last night. "I heard you're leaving Fordham Sister, I wanna take you out before you leave." I taught Erica, what 1990. You know, so, they have people that--that remember and act as if even if their acting that what you did was worthwhile. I have a couple of students that say they would never have stayed at Fordham if they hadn't had the contact. And again, I don't think that's me, I think God uses you. I love, there's a song, it's a Catholic song, and it said, one of the lines is, the person is talking to God, "I am your song." And I--that just struck me and I often thought I don't wanna be a blues number, I don't wanna sing no dirges. You know, the spiritual, I wanna live the life I sing about in my song. And I just think that's what a Christian ought to be. You know, who--would you ever be attracted to a religion where people are walking around with, you know, sad faces and everything is gloom and doom and oh drag your cross after you. I--I don't think that's what God is about. Jesus said, "I come that you may have life and have it more abundantly." Then to me, that abundance is the joy in living, doing for other people. You know, anybody that sits in their house with all their belongings and their money or whatever and does nothing, nothing to--to say you were there. I love what Maya [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] says, I'm sure you've heard that she said that, "I think that my life ought to be the rent that I pay for the space I take up on earth." I love that. And I--I don't know how people can live and not give. So I hope that my life has been about giving. And I'm not telling you I've always succeeded. I know that there are times when my God and my all has become Francesca [HistoryMaker Francesca Thompson] is all. I just have to keep working on it. Story_ID: 369923 Speaker 1: When you arrived at Fordham University [New York, New York] after a while you--tell me about the mult- multicultural department that you either founded (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right. They created a position for me and it was called director of minority affairs. Well I don't like the word minority. I think it has a bad connotation. People that are called minority absorb that thought when you say minority you immediately think under, beneath, minor. So I thought I got to change it. And I heard about a program at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], I think or Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] and it was called AHANA, A-H-A-N-A. I decided to steal it and I made it AA, African American, Hispanic, Asian, Native American [Office of African American, Hispanic, Asian, and Native Americans]. That takes care of all us brown folks. So it took me about eight years, but I even got the president to use AAHANA. Never. If people would say I'd like to, "We're having a meeting about minority students, Sister, would you come?" And I came back, "I have no time," until the people got the message. So I was in that position for eighteen years, but I insisted on teaching. I said to Father, "I--I'll take the job and I'm happy to take it if I can teach. Because you know how it is with administrators, faculty don't trust you, the kids have nothing to do with you and then you sit in your ivory tower thinking you know everything." So I insisted on teaching. I've been in three universities and that was true at every single one, my small college in Indianapolis [Indiana], Xavier [Xavier University] in Cincinnati [Ohio], which was larger of course than Marian [Marian College; Marian University, Indianapolis, Indiana], University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], and then at Fordham. And it's true, I--I don't find it different any place. So I insisted on teaching. I said to Father Finlay [James C. Finlay], who's deceased now, I said, "Father, I don't think nuns ought to make threats, I don't believe in making threats. If I can't teach, I'm leaving." He said, "Oh what do you want, what do you want, you can--," and the next semester I was teaching then at the English department, taught drama. Then the African American studies department came to me, said, "What are you doing teaching in English, you ought to be teaching for us." So I added two African American studies class as drama, black drama. Then the communication department 'cause we didn't have a theater department said, "How would you like to teach acting as a form of communication?" So here I am, just--the dean who was my boss called, he said, "Sister, you know I know you want to teach, but you know, you're not in your office very much can you--" so I had to cut down. I teach on--I taught one class each semester, black drama, a class that I devised myself and I was proud of that. I called it Shades of Value. And I compared ten black playwrights with ten white playwrights that explored the same theme. And my point was without hitting them over the head, we have more things that bind us together then we have that people create to separate us. No I don't look like you, I don't talk like you, I don't sing like you, I don't eat what you eat, but we're all human beings, we all cry, we all laugh for the same reasons. Cultural differences do not a split make in our humanity. Story_ID: 369924 Speaker 1: So I compared Willy Loman in 'Death of a Salesman' [Arthur Miller] with Troy Maxson in 'Fences' [August Wilson]. Two guys at the lowest end of the totem pole economically got the same problems, they're both nonrealistic and both going outside the place where they should be happiest to find, you know, some joy. Same story, and it was wonderful to have the kids come to that realization. The white kids were always, they had no sympathy for Troy. You know, he drank and he cheated on his wife and he treated his son badly. Well what about Willy? Oh, you know, "Poor Willy Sister, he--he reminds me of my daddy or reminds me of my uncle, he's a victim." Black kids, "Poor Troy he was black, he couldn't make it. Willy Loman, heck the cat was white, he could've made it if he tried, he's so stupid." Until they come to the realization that race is what made most of Troy's problems. Wonderful to have 'em come to--at one point I had the kids yelling at one another, screaming at the top of their voices, which I--where else are they going to talk about color? Where else do they get a chance to say what they think? One of the kids one time, what was he talking about. He was talking about a black character and he was a white student, and he said, "I just--I just--," oh I know--Bigger Thomas, 'Native Son' [Richard Wright], "I don't have much sympathy for him. I--I hope I can say this. I--I just feel like he was stupid. Oh, I hope that's all right, Sister. I feel like he was so dumb to kill this girl. Now I--I think that they ought to have electrocuted him. Oh God, I hope I don't flunk this class." It was so funny. But, if they don't say what they think, the white students, how can you ever refute? And I've had, I'm happy to say, do you remember, are you from New York [New York]? Speaker 2: No ma'am. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Neculai [Neculai Burghelea] is. When the black guy went berserk on the Long Island express [Long Island Rail Road Company]-- Speaker 2: Oh I was he--I've been here a long time now. Ferguson [Colin Ferguson]. Speaker 1: Ferguson, Ferguson was his name. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: That was happening while I was having class [at Fordham University, New York, New York]. So I was saying something about, "I don't expect you to feel sorry for blacks. I don't expect you to--," ah--I--I don't know how I said it, but the point was all I ask you to do is understand. You don't have to be a member of a juror and let some black kid off because he was poor and didn't have a coat so he shot a white kid to get a coat. I'm not saying that you have sympathy or that you let him off, he pays for his crime. I'm asking that you have some kind of understanding and I hope that many of 'em get that. This kid said, "Sister, I, you know, I'm scared to say this but, you know, I'm Italian. In our family we all get together on Sundays and this Sunday, oh my dad and all uncles were talking about this Colin Ferguson. And you know, they just think that the guy's crazy and they ought to just, you know, put him underneath the jail or either kill him, hang him. My folks would be for lynching him. And I--I can--I understand where they're coming from." I said, "Did you hear what you just said? You don't like what your dad said. You don't like what your uncle said, but you understand where they're coming from. I want you to look at Colin Ferguson. You don't like what he did. You don't agree with what he did. You don't think it was right what he did. I just want you to understand where's he's coming from." Story_ID: 369925 Speaker 1: And I--I just--of course I didn't make converts all together, but I would say my last day of class, I saved my big talk. I said, "All I hope this class has done for you, by black students, as well as my white students, made you look at the other guy and feel some sympathy." I took them, I always--especially if there was a play that was an author that we had studied. So Dustin Hoffman was in 'Death of a Salesman' [Arthur Miller] and I took them to see that. And they said--one kid said to me, "You know what Sister, I thought the cat was just really awful and I had no sympathy for him whatsoever, but you know, Dustin Hoffman made me feel some sympathy for Willy." I said, "Great, that's all I want is that you, you know, you don't like him, yeah he's stupid, yeah he's dumb, he's no hero. But know where the poor guy's coming from." Victim of the American society's dream that doesn't exist. I compared 'Soldier Story' ['A Soldier's Story'] with Captain Queeg, bounty, 'Caine Mutiny' ['The Caine Mutiny'] bounty. Two officers a white one and a black one, both of them crazy, but crazy for different reasons. Both of them dreadful officers, but for different reasons, but just alike, otherwise. I compared 'That Championship Season' [Jason Miller] with 'Sophisticated Gents' ['The Sophisticated Gents']. You got two coaches, the white one telling his guys, "We hate this guy, he's out of the circle," because when they were in high school they won the state championship, first time it ever been won by a small school. And they won it because they were playing a black school and the coach said to Miller, the black school had a black player that was just unbeatable. He says, "Go out there and make sure you break his arm." That's how they won, 'cause the guy got disabled and couldn't finish the game. So this Miller has become an alcoholic. He's the brother of one of the other guys, but he doesn't come around. He came to the coach maybe about two years after graduation drunk. And he said, "We ought to give it back, we ought to give it back, we didn't really earn it coach." And so the coach says to the boys, "He's not a real team member. We don't want his kind." So now he's not well--they meet at the coach's house every year and the coach is awful. The mayor of the town is one of the guys. He had him get his wife sleep with somebody to get his vote. The superintendent of schools has a child who's mentally challenged, had a hydrocephalic baby. Had him lie to his wife, say the baby died and put it away, with the wife thinking--he's a dreadful man. Black coach, do you know 'Sophisticated Gents'? You know the black guy, Swoop [Swoop Ferguson], gets in trouble 'cause he kills a policeman and the other guy said, "Oh God we don't wanna--wanna have anything to do with him. We hope he doesn't come to the reunion." And what does the coach say, "You know what," he said, "no black man should be out there alone. Swoop's one of my boys just like you and we got to help him. Nobody should stand alone." So to have these two coaches, you know, say entirely different things, it's wonderful to have the kids realize that. And then I compared 'Zoo Story' ['The Zoo Story,' Edward Albee] with 'Dutchman' [Amiri Baraka]. You got two victims, killed for different reason--alienated. Jerry's completely alienated from society and he kills this guy because the guy represents everything that he doesn't have and he wants to make waves in that society where he's not accepted. Clay and Lulu, Clay represents everything that Lulu despises. You know, he's black, he's underneath, he--she thinks he's trying, "What are you doing wearing a three-piece suit? Your granddaddy give you the right to put on a white man's suit." You know, sh- so you got two victims for the same reason, but one happens to have race wrapped up in it. So I loved teaching this course, loved it. And I--I felt like because I started it, I initiated it. I had been teaching a black drama course, just black drama. And one year, at the end of the semester one of the girls said, "Sister," she's a white girl, "I don't want to hurt your feelings, but oh God I'm glad this course is over." I said, "Really?" She said, "I've never felt so put down, so looked down on, I just felt like, you know, if you're white you're just awful, dreadful, so I'm glad to get outta here (laughter)." And so I thought now what can I do so that the white kids wouldn't feel that way. That's when I devised this. And I--I loved the course. I can't tell you that they loved it, but I did. Story_ID: 369926 Speaker 1: Back to one of the greatest joys of teaching? Speaker 2: For the final exam I changed it every year, just so it wouldn't get stale and so word wouldn't be passed on. So I told them, I want you to pick your favorite play and tell me why. And we had certain criteria to judge the literary value of a work. And I want you to pick your least favorite and tell me why. Use our literary criteria, as well as your own personal criteria. I said, "Now don't think you're going get," I always said, "Vanilla points," I didn't talk about brownie points. "Don't think you're going to get any vanilla points by telling me you like the things I like. I know you know what I like. Don't think that. I want to know what you really think and I think I'll be able to tell by the way you write about it." So one of my female students, not particularly bright or outstanding, in fact right now I can't remember her name and I pride myself on remembering student's names. She said, I don't remember what her favorite play was, but her least favorite play was 'Native Son' [Richard Wright]. And she said, "I guess I don't like thinking that I have helped to create Bigger Thomas'," because my point about the play is, 'Native Son,' Bigger Thom- you know this story, and that he was made the way he was by the racism in America. We created, that's one of the reasons Richard Wright called it 'Native Son.' America created Bigger Thomas. Are you a part of that creation, okay. She said, "I guess I don't like thinking that I have created Bigger Thomas'. I go on the subway every day to Manhattan [New York], I take the D train and I know when we stop at 125th Street I scrunch up in my seat, put my head down as low as I can, preferably in a paper or a book, hoping that nobody black looks at me and trying hard not to look at any of them. I know that they frighten me and so I ignore them. But I know that from now on, I will never ignore--." Remember Bigger says at some point, "They don't even know I exist." He said, "I don't--." She said, "I don't want anybody to ever to think that ignored them. I will recognize them as human beings just like me." I loved it, I loved--and this wasn't--I would have expected it from somebody bright or whatever, this wasn't even from one of my brightest ones, I thought that was great. I thought it was--it gave me joy unending. I hated to have to give the papers back, but I had promised to give 'em back. I just thought that was wonderful. If one person could come out of that class with the idea, hey there is no they in me, they in us, it's we. And I guess that's what I've tried to do. I don't know that I've always been successful. Story_ID: 369927 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you a couple more things and then we'll start to wrap it up. But you mentioned the Tonys [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], that you were on the Ton- Tony board [Tony Awards Administration Committee]-- Speaker 2: Twice. Speaker 1: --how did that come about? Speaker 2: All right. 'Cause God takes care of poor, dumb, black nuns. I had a friend whose hus- I met her through Fordham [Fordham University, New York, New York]. Nancy [ph.] worked at Fordham for a while in the admissions office. And her husband was head of the theater wing. So then, you wouldn't be aware of this, you're not in theater, some years ago, ten, twelve years ago, they had a big basket upset. The actors were complaining that the big producers and the real important people on the Tony board did not come to the shows. They get to vote, how can they vote when they haven't seen all the show--it was a big deal, like almost a scandal. One of the people on the Tony board was the editor of The New York Times. They said what the heck does he know about theater? He only goes to the big shows, the big musicals, blah, blah, blah. So the board, Harvey Sabinson who was the big boss and Roy Somlyo got--they said, "We've got to do something, you know, we gotta shut them up," because they were protesting to the point of standing outside the door when the Tony board was voting. So they said, "Okay, clean sweep." So I guess Roy got home and said to his wi- he was saying, "I don't know what we're gonna do? You know, I don't how to satisfy them, who do you put on, they wouldn't be happy if we put Jesus on." Nancy said, "Speaking of which," so she said you know, "Look at Sister Francesca [HistoryMaker Sister Francesca Thompson], look at all the credentials she's got, Ph.D. She goes to the theater all the time. Her family, she comes from a theatrical family, blah, blah, blah." And Roy had met me, I've been at their home. So he said, "Well let me see what Harvey says." 'Cause Harvey Sabinson was big boss. Harvey didn't know me from Adam. Harvey's Jewish, of course, wife Catholic. So he said, "Well I know something I can do to make her happy. Let's put her on." So they--Roy asked me would I like to be--I couldn't believe it, "Would I like to be on the Tony board? Is the pope Catholic?" I said I'd love to. He said, "You're not going to get in trouble about this?" Oh I said no. You know, the--the--he said, "The cardinal" 'cause Liz McCann [Elizabeth Ireland McCann] who's now head of the league, Liz was then only--no, I'm not gonna say she was the only Catholic, but she was big--she said I don't know, "The cardinal's not gonna be real happy I bet about that." That was Cardinal Cooke [Terence James Cooke]. So I said, I said, "Oh Roy." No, no it was cardinal, the next one, O'Connor [John Joseph O'Connor]. I said, "The cardinal's got so many important people to worry about, Roy he's not going to know about me." Well, about a week later, Alex Witchel, do you know that name? She wrote the drama column for The New York Times. Married to Frank Rich. Her name meant nothing to me. My secretary says, "Sister, an Alex Witchel called and she wants to interview you about being on the Tony board." Well there were six new people put on. I said, "Why me?" she said I don't know, she why wants to. I said, "Just call her back and say thanks, but I don't give interviews." And I didn't know she worked for The Times, I didn't know who she was. This was like a baddy, I shouldn't have done that. Meanwhile, Roy calls me. He said, "Sister I'm afraid that--," he said, "people are just, they wanna know everybody new that came on and we're asking everybody not to give any interviews 'cause we don't want it to look like we weren't in charge." I said, "Fine." Story_ID: 369928 Speaker 1: Picking up with, you can't do interviews. They say we don't want anybody to know--you just can't do them? Speaker 2: I--so I was the message she [Alex Witchel] got. The next Friday in her column, the whole half a page in The New York Times, do you remember the song from 'Sound of Music' ['The Sound of Music'], "What do we do with a problem like Maria?" The headline was "What do we do with a problem like Sister Francesca [HistoryMaker Sister Francesca Thompson]," and then the article: "Who is Sister Francesca? Newly appointed to the Tony board [Tony Awards Administration Committee]. She doesn't give interviews. She refused to speak to me. Who is this nun? We've heard this about her: she comes from a theatrical family. She has a Ph.D., she teaches theater, she takes her students to the theater. Does this qualify her to belong on the Tony board? She can replace the editor of The New York Times who's certainly more qualified in so many ways than some obscure nun. We do know this, she is pro-choice, but does that qualify her to be on the Tony board," and then maybe three or four other sentences. All we can tell you is, "She's pro-choice, does that qualify her for the Tony board?" Blah, blah, blah. The whole article. I talked to several producers, none of whom have ever heard of her and she mentioned some of the most--the biggest and most important producers, "Never heard of her, no I don't know anything about her." Then Cy [ph.] from--one of the producers that just died, God bless him, one of the biggest. "I don't know her, but I think it's a very good thing to have a nun on the Tony board. They are accustomed to suffering. That means she'll go to every show. They're accustomed to staying awake and praying a lot, that means she'll stay awake at every show. Nuns are accustomed to telling the truth, we'll get a fair and a truthful assessment of plays. And next spring when we vote for the Tonys [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], there will be no conflict of interest." They have people having to get off because of conflicts of interest. "There will be no conflict of interest and because she's a nun, look what we have to look forward to: heavenly nominations." Anyway, she ended with, "But all we know is that she is pro-choice. Does this qualify her to be on the Tony board?" Well Liz [Elizabeth Ireland McCann] went right away to Roy [Roy Somylo]. She said, "You just lost your nun." He said, "Why?" And--he--she said, "The cardinal's [John Joseph O'Connor] not gonna stand for that." Well he called me up, I said "Roy don't give it a thought. I have a not, I won't hear from the cardinal." I said and he said, "Well when did she talk to you?" I said, "She never talked to me." "Oh," he said, I--, "it sounds like she talked to you." "How did she know you're pro-choice?" I said, "It's something that she made up." So I went to my president because I worried about that and I said--no I didn't--I didn't. I went home, came back later, two weeks later here's a letter from the cardinal and the Office of Vicar for Religious: "We are disturbed, as you can imagine, about the article in The New York Times about your quote. Could you come in and speak with the cardinal?" I was floored. So that's when I called my president. I said, "Joe, I think--," Fordham [Fordham University, New York, New York] was not the top of his favorite list anyway. I said, "I'm sorry about that." He said, "Well Francesca, I'll be honest, I was surprised that you would give her that quote." I said, "Joe, I never talked to the woman, that's why she's upset with me. I never had an inte-," he said, "You didn't tell her that?" "Never." He said, "Have you ever said it in class?" I said, "I don't have any reason to talk about choice or pro-choice in my class." "Oh," he said, "then don't worry about it." I thought he said the priest had been talking about it, they thought you told her that. So when--I gave one of my greatest dramatic performances, said to his eminence, "Your Eminence, my good--no wonder you hate The New York Times so much. They just make things up don't--." "Oh, then we'll get her to withdraw it." Well get her--I said, "I thought about that Your Eminence, but why sell more papers? People who know me know that I would never do that." "Oh" he said, "well I feel better and if you, you know, I'm just so sorry." He said, "I'm so sorry." I walked out of there after I had wiped a tear from my eye, but I was furious with her. And I thought I'll never get a chance to tell her how furious I am. Story_ID: 369929 Speaker 1: I got calls from people all over the country, people that I taught. "Sister you got a thing from--a article by Alex Witchel." Well join the crowd 'cause she doesn't like actors. Well ho- how was it. I--it was practically the end of the year--oh I know, the first thing that happened to her she got fired from the paper [The New York Times]. Not because of me, but I think because of other things. She--from now on Alex Witchel has asked to be in charge of the dessert section. She did recipes for desserts. Then the next thing was she had gone to England for six weeks to interview Julie Andrews. The--Julie Andrews was giving her an exclusive interview for Redbook. And she was paid I don't know how much money. She lived in a hotel in London [England] for six weeks. Got off the plane in New York [New York] to see Julie Andrews' face on the front of Cosmopolitan exclusive interview with Julie Andrews, which was a bad, didn't get a cent then for the other article. People come--, "Sister, now you've got to leave the poor woman alone. You're responsible." I said, "I had nothing to do with this, honestly." But it became like a joke. Well God put temptation in my way, and that's what I mean when I say I haven't always been as kind as I should've been. I go to the theater one night and I had taken a friend of mine. Who comes and sits in front of us? Frank Rich and Alex Witchel. I had never seen her in person before, only seen pictures of her. Her pictures did not do her justice. She's a very attractive woman. I'm sure I didn't see the first act of that play. I sat there thinking about what I was going to say to her at intermission. And sure enough, I said to my friend, "You may not want to come out with me 'cause I'm going to talk." "Oh," she said, "I wouldn't miss it for a million dollars, Francesca [HistoryMaker Sister Francesca Thompson]." We go out and I--they were right in front of us. I said, "Mr. Rich," and he turned around, "Yes?" I said, "I'm Sister Francesca, Tony board [Tony Awards Administration Committee]." "Oh, oh, oh, oh, yes, yes, and this is my wife." And I didn't even look at her, I looked right at him. I said, "I know who she is." "Oh well, we wanted to meet you, we wanted to meet you." And I said, "And I've wanted to meet her for a long time." "Ah, ah, oh, oh, well are you here tonight Sister, is this enjoyment or--or are you working?" I said, "Oh I'm here as a Tony board member. I see every show, Mr. Rich." I said, "That's one of the reasons I make such a good member of the Tony board," and then I looked right at her and I patted him on the arm. I said, "You've still got a column, pass the word along for me, won't you? Do enjoy the rest of the show." And I turned around and walked away. And then my friend, I'd said, "You left me standing there!" And I said, "Well I thought you were going to walk." I said, "What did they do?" She said, "She just shrugged her shoulders and he just looked at me and waved his hands around." Now I did have the good--I can't tell you how good it made me feel. I got to say it to her, I got to. And--but it was terrible, I shouldn't have done it, but I couldn't resist the temptation. Well then when they came back, I'll tell you I had the good grace to keep my head down in my program. I didn't look at them again. And when they left, I didn't, I just didn't pay attention. But, that word went all--I called Roy [Roy Somylo] and I said, well I've done it now. She hates the Tony board, wait 'til this Friday and I told her what I had done. I said, "Roy I'm sorry, I'm sorry, she'll probably tear us to pieces on Friday." He said, "Oh God Francesca, hurry up and get off the phone I can hardly wait to get the word out on the rialto." I gu- he must've told everybody and his brother. I got phone calls from all over. "You told Alex Wit--" 'cause everybody else scared to do it because of, you know. So Chris [Christine Lahti] was in a show and her agent called me. And says, "Sis- Sister, do you have a--a ticket to go?" I said, "No I really want to see it but I don't." He said, "Sister, Chris wants to give you a comp ticket, thank you for from all the actors in New York for your ou- interchange with Alex Witchel (laughter)." So, you know, God I was not good. I should've been good and kept my mouth shut, I couldn't do it (laughter). Story_ID: 369930 Speaker 1: Because you see so much theater and you see so much current theater, what do you--and I'm--I'm--I'm mean I'm just gonna ask you, what do you think your parents would think about the state of black theatre today? Speaker 2: Oh I think that my father [Edward Thompson], particularly--my mother [Evelyn Preer] had written in an article that she thinks that the movies would open the way for colored actors--for actors of color. So I think they both had a lot of hope for the future because of their work. And my dad, I know had a great deal of hope. 'Anna Lucasta' [Philip Yordan], Uncle Paul [Paul Robeson] did 'Othello' [William Shakespeare], came to Indianapolis [Indiana] when he did 'Othello.' I think he thought things were just going to get better and better. And I don't feel that they have. We are still, as Clarence [Clarence Muse] said in his little booklet ['The Dilemma of the Negro Actor'], beating against doors that refuse to open for us. Now we certainly ought to be encouraged by what's happened in the movies, Denzel Washington getting Academy Award nominations, et cetera. But to think of the years that had to pass between Sidney Poitier, who was a star of one, belonged to a group, a committee of one, that that much time has to pass or that black actresses that are so very good aren't acting all the time. I think Alfre Woodard is a wonderful actress. Why isn't she just, you know, in movie after movie? I think that we still have battles to fight. I think it's why Spike Lee might sound so angry to many people. They--, "What is he complaining about? He's making money!" I think Spike knows that we still have, as my [paternal] grandmother [Susan Knox] used to say, "A firm piece to ride to get to the promised land." I think that Hollywood is a closed society and it might be more open than it was fifty years ago, but look at the battle that Steven Spielberg has had as an outsider. Look at the battle that Barbara Streisand has had as an outsider. So if you're white and you're struggling, what do you expect for our black actors and directors? Story_ID: 369931 Speaker 1: Stepping outside of that world and using the same formula, what are your--what are your hopes for the black community at large? Speaker 2: I would hope that we would reclaim many, many of our values that were given up with integration. There so many things that I don't want integrated away from us. When I was growing up in a poor or dirt, you know, certainly not a wealthy neighborhood went to a black grade school, all eight, from kindergarten through the eighth grade had wonderful black teachers. I can name them all by name. My quilt back here, my life quilt that was made by a friend of mine since kindergarten has pictures of our teachers on this side. Wonderful woman who encouraged me to be what I was. We learned about black poets. We learned about black scholars. We had a teacher who had been taught by a peanut farmer-- Speaker 1: Carver? Speaker 2: Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. George Washington Carver. Talked about him all the time and what he said in class. I knew every black poet that was in existence. Learned James Weldon Johnson's, 'St. Peter relates an Incident of the Resurrection Day,' which is four pages long when I was in the second grade. They taught us and they taught us about black history. They taught us about black heroes. I've had college students, when I say to them, "Who was Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?" "Oh yeah, he--he was that guy--do--he talked about dreams." That's all they know. "Oh, he got killed." They don't know our history. They haven't been taught our history. Not only do the white students not know black literary artists, but black students don't know them. It's why I decided to do my dissertation on my parents [Evelyn Preer and Edward Thompson], on the Lafayette Players. I sat in a graduate class at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], 20th century companies and the teacher of that class said, "And you know we can all be so grateful to Hallie Flanagan." You know that name? She was the director that Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt]--she was a part of the WPA [Works Progress Administration] project and really gave blacks a big opportunity. He said, "If it hadn't been for Hallie Flanagan we would have no black actors, because nobody before her had ever done anything to put black actors on the stage in serious drama." And I did a very un-nunny thing, I screamed out loud, "That isn't true." You know, "Wh- wh- wh- what do you mean Sister [HistoryMaker Sister Francesca Thompson], what do you mean?" I said, "You never heard of the Lafayette Players?" I was just appalled. "Well no, no, Sister, well thanks for telling me that." I made up my mind that day, nobody was going to teach in a graduate level and say that Hallie Flanagan in 1934 was the first person to do something for black actors. So my hope is that we as a group, as a AAHANA [Office of African American, Hispanic, Asian, and Native Americans] group get together with trying to make family important again. With trying to make the values that were instilled into us. When I was growing up, Little Orphan Annie was the only thing I knew about orphanages. Somebody had a uncle that drank or whatever. On our block, every house had somebody in it that didn't belong there. In my house, it was me. I was raised by grandparents. You never heard about people going to nursing homes. If people were old and infirm, they were taken care of at home. When did we start the nursing home is the first answer? Now what did they say this Japanese woman had eleven children and she went to a nursing home. And somebody said, "How did you get here?" She said, "Because I take care of eleven children but I am too much for eleven children to take care of." And I just think it's not a part of our heritage that we don't take care--a girl got pregnant, the baby was taken in by some relative. We didn't know about adoption agencies or sending them off to homes. That was not a part of we, as black people were. So my biggest hope is that we regain what we have lost. And I feel like we've lost a lot with integration. And I'm not saying we go back to segregated schools, I'm saying equal and we know that hasn't worked. Story_ID: 369932 Speaker 1: When you look back over what you--what you've accomplished, what would you like to be remembered for? Speaker 2: There is a poem by Robert Frost, 'The Hired Hand' [sic. 'The Death of the Hired Man'] and the wife is speaking to her husband about him and she says, "It's so sad" or something to that effect. "He has nothing to look backward to with pride and nothing to look forward to with hope." Well I have nothing but prideful occurrences in my family. People talk about slaves, I'm not ashamed that I come from slaves. My father [Edward Thompson] could remember his great-grandmother talking about being a slave. I'm not proud that we were slaves, I'm proud of how far we have stepped up from that lowly position. How do you stand up and walk when you have only been taught to crawl? People that say, "Oh you know, blacks are ignorant. You don't have literature, you don't have great operas, you don't have great paintings." Our people were so busy trying to survive, how did they have time to sit down and write a poem, write a play, write a novel? So when you think of our literary heritage in spite of what we were and how we were not allowed to even learn to read and write, then you accuse us of being ignorant? To me it's like saying that there's a group of people that can't fight a war and nobody gives them any guns to use. We didn't have the correct ammunition. Now I'm not saying that we haven't been at fault. Yes, I think that we have had occasion to be at fault, but it's a long, long road when you have only been told you got to crawl. People will talk about why don't you, you know, "Sister, my family was Irish and they were discriminated against, my family was Jewish and people hated them, why don't blacks just pull themselves up by their bootstraps?" Hard to do if you don't have any boots. So I will take up for my people in that regard. Give us equal education, give us equal job opportunities, give us equal and then see how far we can go and how fast we can go. I think it's wonderful that we've come as far as we have considering all the obstacles. Speaker 1: So what is it you would like to hear from Saint Peter at the pearly gates? Speaker 2: Well not from Saint Peter-- Speaker 1: Oh is it Saint Peter or is it-- Speaker 2: Saint Peter is at the gates, all I would like for him to do is open the gates. I want to hear from my Lord and my God, "Well done." I want to live the life I sing about in my song. And my song is, "I sing because I'm happy. I sing because I'm free. His eye is on the sparrow and I know, I know my God watches me," ['His Eye Is On The Sparrow']. I want to live that. Speaker 1: Well thank you very much. Story_ID: 369933 Speaker 1: --Indianapolis, Indiana. Speaker 2: Edeve Thompson [HistoryMaker Sister Francesca Thompson] approximately four years old, Indianapolis, Indiana, photo studio. Speaker 1: Evelyn Preer, actress. Publicity shot, Los Angeles, California approximately 1930, '31 [1931]. Speaker 2: Sister Francesca Thompson and the President Nelson Mandela, Washington, D.C. Metropolitan Baptist Church on the occasion of President Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] first inauguration 1994. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Two. Speaker 2: Ninety-two [sic. 1993]. Speaker 1: Oh pardon me, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Susan Knox, Sister Francesca Thompson's paternal grandmother. Keeper of the keys and vigilant keeper of her home, Indianapolis, Indiana, approximately 1976. Speaker 1: Susan Knox, paternal grandmother of Sister Francesca Thompson, at the age of sixteen, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 2: Susan Knox, grandmother of Sister Francesca Thompson, to the extreme right with her two sisters, Daisy [ph.] and Emma Craig [ph.]. Lincoln Park, Chicago, approximately 1902. Speaker 1: Sister Francesca Thompson and her mother, the actress Evelyn Preer at four months of age, 1932. Speaker 2: Sister Francesca's family starting at the right, second row, her grandfather the music writer DeKoven Thompson, next to him her great aunt Emma Johnson [ph.], next to Aunt Emma, Sister Francesca's great-great-grandmother, Grandma Red [ph.], next to her Sister Francesca's great-grandmother, Lula Craig [ph.], next to her a cousin, Cousin Jimmy [ph.]. In the first row sitting, to the extreme right, Jimmy's sister, next to her Sister Francesca's grandmother Susan Thompson at that time and the child in front Sister Francesca's father, James Edward Thompson [Edward Thompson]. The picture was taken in Chicago, Lincoln Park approximately 1908. Speaker 1: Sister Francesca Thompson's father, James Edward Thompson, actor. In his first play with the Lafayette Players, New York [New York] Lafayette Theatre 1917. Speaker 2: Edward Thompson, father of Sister Francesca Thompson. A publicity shot sent to a fan. Speaker 1: Edward Thompson and Evelyn Preer, parents of Sister Francesca Thompson. In a movie, a short that used black face for their actors if they felt that they were too fair. The woman in front is Roberta Hyson, I do not know the other three gentlemen. This was Los Angeles approximately 1928, '29 [1929]. Evelyn Preer signed a contract for five movies, they did not tell her that she and her husband, Edward Thompson, would have to wear black face or speak in Negro dialect. So she broke her contract and would not continue. Ms. Hyson, Roberta Hyson, her understudy moved up to star in the next two films. Speaker 2: The movie 'Melancholy Dame' starring Sister Francesca Thompson's parents, Edward Thompson to the extreme right and Evelyn Preer to the extreme left. In the middle Roberta Hyson. The name of the movie is 'The Melancholy Dame.' Speaker 1: The parents of Sister Francesca Thompson starring in a short titled 'The Melancholy Dame' produced by the Christie movie company [Christie Film Company, Los Angeles, California]. Edward Thompson to the extreme left, Evelyn Preer to the extreme right. The actress in the middle is Roberta Hyson. I do not know the other actors in the picture. Speaker 2: This is a picture of the Lafayette Players, their traveling group taken in 1924 in Nashville, Tennessee. Starting at the left and seated is Andrew Bishop, above him Sister Francesca Thompson's father Edward Thompson. I do not know the next actors. The older gentleman with the white hair holding a script was Charles Moore. The woman seated is Susie Sutton. The woman with her arm around Ms. Sutton is Sister Francesca's mother, the actress Evelyn Preer. Speaker 1: This is a picture of Oscar Micheaux's, 'The Conjure Woman' starring Sister Francesca Thompson's mother, Evelyn Preer. She often said this was her favorite movie. She starred in eleven of Oscar Micheaux's eighteen films [sic.]. Evelyn Thompson to the extreme left, Lawrence Chenault, I do not know the name of the other actors. Speaker 2: This is a picture of the Lafayette Players when they were called the Anita Bush Company [Anita Bush All-Colored Dramatic Stock Company]. This was one of the first plays that Edward Thompson, Sister Francesca's father, was in. Edward Thompson is to the extreme right with her arms on his shoulders is the head of the company, Anita Bush. Speaker 1: Oh, this is a picture of a movie, these movies used to be called race movies usually starring Ralph Cooper. In this picture kneeling, Monte Hawley, next to him to the right the actor Laurence Criner, standing and in the middle is the father of Sister Francesca Thompson, Edward Thompson. I do not know the other actors. He was the one that was responsible for my honorary degree. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou and Sister Francesca at a luncheon given by Dr. Angelou at her home in Winston-Salem, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Sister Francesca Thompson's retirement party from Fordham University [New York, New York], May 1st, 2006. Picture taken with the previous president, Father Joseph O'Hare [Joseph A. O'Hare], responsible for giving Sister Francesca an honorary degree from the university of Fordham, 2002..