 Story_ID: 650985 Speaker 1: I'm Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Eunice Brewer Totter [HistoryMaker Eunice Trotter], E-U-N-I-C-E; Brewer, B-R-E-W-E-R; Trotter, T-R-O-T-T-E-R. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: June 15, 1953, Indianapolis, Indiana. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I am the CEO of the Mary Bateman Clark Project. I am also a communications specialist working for American Senior Communities and other clients. Speaker 1: Okay. You would consider yourself a journalist, though, by trade? Speaker 2: That's my number one job. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today I think is April the 7th, 2013. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are now at my home in Indianapolis, Indiana. Story_ID: 650986 Speaker 1: All right. Now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up and they-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --only require a short answer. The first one is: do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: Spaghetti. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yeah. Black. Speaker 1: Okay. You have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, summer. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes, Caribbean. Speaker 1: All right. And the last question is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. If you don't have a hammer, use a shoe. Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter) I like that. Story_ID: 650987 Speaker 1: So, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Charles Brewer, Jr.] side. But we'll ask about them separately so we can keep them, you know, distinct. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then we'll bring them together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Henrietta Ellington Brewer. Speaker 1: Can you spell that? Speaker 2: H-E-N-R-I-E-T-T-A; Ellington, E-L-L-I-N-G-T-O-N; Brewer, B-R-E-W-E-R. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born on July 19th, 1917, I think; 1917 in Indianapolis, Indiana. Speaker 1: Okay. And now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what are the stories about their activities? Speaker 2: Well, my mom grew up in Sabetha, Kansas. Her parents-- Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: Sabetha, S-A-B-E-T-H-A, Kansas. It's in northeast Kansas, not far from Topeka, Kansas. Speaker 1: Sabetha, Kansas. Speaker 2: Sabetha, Kansas. That's where she grew up. And her father [Oliver Ellington] and mother [Elmira Martin Ellington] were part of the Exodusters, their parents were. They were descendants of Exodusters. I'll put it like that. Speaker 1: So was Sabetha a black town? Speaker 2: Sabetha had a black community back in the late, mid and late 1800s. There were several black communities in Kansas. Speaker 1: You know Nicodemus [Kansas] is a black town. Speaker 2: Nicodemus is a black community. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Town actually. And so she went to school there and grew up there. And she moved here as a teenager. And I remember her telling me that she had never been around so many African Americans until she came here, it was frightening to her. She went to all-black Crispus Attucks High School [Indianapolis, Indiana] when she came here. And her parents were, like I said, of--part of the offspring of the Exoduster Movement to that area. Speaker 1: And that was--for the record, just tell us about that. Speaker 2: Well, I believe it was in the 1860s, not long after slavery ended. There was a recruiting of black people from Kentucky to move to Kansas to work on the railroad. And so thousands were recruited, and they did go. And when they got there, a lot of them found that there were no jobs, there was no place to live, and there was no food. Families helped some of those newcomers, and churches helped, organizations were formed to help. But many returned to their home cities because of the poverty they faced once they got there. And there was such a movement it was related to the Book of Exodus. And that's the reason they were called the Exodusters. Speaker 1: Right. I always thought it had something to do with the dust too (laughter). Speaker 2: Probably so (laughter). Because it is dusty there. Speaker 1: There's a book by--well, there's a book called the 'Exodusters' ['Exodusters: Black Migration to Kansas after Reconstruction'] by Nell, Ir- Nell Painter [HistoryMaker Nell Irvin Painter]. Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, I've hear- I've seen that book. Speaker 1: Yeah, she wrote a book about the--she's a historian out of the East Coast, and it's--covers their story. Story_ID: 650988 Speaker 1: Is there a story as to why--a specific story about why your mother's parents [Elmira Martin Ellington and Oliver Ellington] moved to Indianapolis [Indiana] or what, what brought them to Indianapolis? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think, work. I think my grandfather's brother came to Indy, connected with the [U.S.] military, because, you know, Indianapolis was home to Fort Benjamin Harrison. And he was connected to the military and came here initially. And I think that his brother, which would be my grandfather, came here, and my mother [Henrietta Ellington Brewer] was born here, and then they returned to Sabetha where she grew up. Speaker 1: Okay. So your great uncle, then, was he a part--well, did he serve in World War I [WWI]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. At Fort Benjamin Harrison. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And this name will figure prominently in this story (laughter). Speaker 2: Really. Yes, it will. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. So. All right. So your mother went to famous Crispus Attucks High School [Indianapolis, Indiana]. Speaker 2: She did. So did my father [Charles Brewer, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Here in Indianapolis. And so what did your mother say about, you know, when she said that she had never been around so many black people--I guess the population was so thick, you said it scared her? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, compared to Sabetha, Kansas, you know. Sabetha, Kansas, or its population is six hundred. So, and then that's an exaggeration. I think there're more people than that there. But it's a small town. And it's pretty integrated that you don't have a black community in Sabetha anymore. I think, pretty much the people there would kind of mix with the other communities there, including the Native American community and Caucasian community. And so her life daily was an integrated life. It wasn't a segregated life. There was no one group of people that she was exposed to-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --like she faced when she came here in Indianapolis. And Indianapolis, at that time, she said it was segregated. So they lived on the Eastside of Indianapolis, which was predominantly black. The schools were segregated, the neighborhoods were segregated, churches were segregated. So she knew a lot of African Americans, only what, you know, she heard or she gleaned through conversations of adults, so. We tease her. We ask her all the time when she was living, "You didn't know you were also African American?" (Laughter) And she says, "Not really," 'cause that was never an issue for her. Race wasn't an issue for her growing up. So. Speaker 1: Interesting. So your mother went--so she finished at Crispus Attucks, did she go on to college? Speaker 2: No. She didn't finish either. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She dropped out of school. She got married to my dad. They didn't have babies for ten years after their marriage, but she was a good wife to my father, which was an interesting pair because he was so opposite her. And she, again, she was very much an integrationist; my father was very much a segregationist. They traveled all over. They went to Ch- you know, Chicago [Illinois], New York [New York]; everywhere together. They just had a good time for some years. Story_ID: 650989 Speaker 1: Tell us about your father's side of the family. Can, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: His name is Charles, H for Henry, Brewer, Jr. [Charles Brewer, Jr.]. C-H-A-R-L-E-S, H-E-N-R-Y, B-R-E-W-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his birthday is January the 19th, 1912. He was born in Vincennes, Indiana. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is in southern Indiana, right? Speaker 2: That's in southern Indiana. It's one of the first metropolitan, so to speak, communities of the--this part of the country. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So-- Speaker 2: And this part being the Midwest part of the country, which used to be as far west as you would go in America. Speaker 1: Yeah. This was the western frontier at one time. Speaker 2: This was the western frontier at one time. Speaker 1: And you were telling me before, I think, that Vincennes was a French town. Speaker 2: Yes. It was a French town. A Native American and French town. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then the British came. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then you know there was a struggle for the control of the land here. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Do they--can you trace them any further, I mean, to another place other than Vincennes? Speaker 2: Well, I've been able to trace my father's family back in Vincennes to the late 1700s, 1790s. So his family, his maternal side, goes back to the late 1790s. And before then, the matriarch of his line came from Louisville, Kentucky area. Prior to that, I don't know. Wish I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Was that a typical pattern in those days, to come to Indiana from Kentucky? Speaker 2: Well, not necessarily, but I know that there are a lot of African American and Caucasian families who are--living here in Indiana from Kentucky. You know, we're neighbors, and we were brother and sister states, so to speak, from way back, even though Indiana was considered a northern state, particularly southern Indiana is a lot like the Old South, when it comes to the politics and the culture and the people. So, that's where my father grew up. He grew up there in that environment. And he left when he was a teenager. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did your father say about growing up in Vincennes? Speaker 2: Well, my father talked to us a lot about his boyhood and his young years. And he told us a lot about the racism he was subjected to there. He-- Speaker 1: Is there specific stories that you can tell us? Speaker 2: Well, there's one where he did not want to sit in the balcony of the theater in Vincennes, and so he decided he was going to sit downstairs on the main floor. And he was ejected from the theater for that reason. And so he never went back. We never visited Vincennes when, you know, as we grew up. We just heard the stories about it. And interestingly, with his father [Charles Brewer, Sr.] it was the same. His father, who I didn't know very well because he died before I was old enough to know much about him; but his father passed along those same stories about Vincennes. Speaker 1: What, what was his father's name? Speaker 2: The same. It was senior (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, the same. That's right. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: He was a junior. That's right. Story_ID: 650990 Speaker 1: Now, you were telling me during--there're two stories I know associated with your father's [Charles Brewer, Jr.] side that I guess we need to tell. And this is probably the time to tell them. One is the story about Mary Clark [Mary Bateman Clark]. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, Mary Clark is my [paternal] great-great-great-grandmother. She was born about 1795 in Kentucky and was brought to Vincennes by Benjamin Harrison in about 1815. She was emancipated, because she was a slave, and Indiana forbid slavery and involuntary servitude. Speaker 1: Now, Indiana has a--I mean, it was the Northwest Ordinance, right, was what prevented Indiana from establishing slavery, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. That--exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so eventually so did the state, the territorial constitution. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she was brought here in 1815, and she was emancipated, but then indentured, even though indentured servitude was also forbidden. Speaker 1: Now, this was a ruse to get around slavery, right? Speaker 2: It was definitely a ruse to get around slavery. Again, though, you have to look at the time. Who was going to enforce the laws? Who was going to--so--you--we got around slavery, but we didn't get around indentured servitude. In fact, we said we were going to go ahead and practice indentured servitude regardless of what the constitution says. Speaker 1: So the same result is that she was working for nothing, right? Speaker 2: That was the result. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so she got--she was sold. Her indenture was sold to a man by the name of General Washington Johnston. And Johnston was the founder of Masonry in Indiana. He brought the charter here. He was one of the first lawyers here of the state. He was a judge, he was the speaker of the House of Representatives [Indiana House of Representatives], he was--and so, therefore, he was a legislator. And he purchased her indenture, and she sued him in 1821 to be released from that indenture. She lost it on the circuit court level in Vincennes, Indiana, and it went to the state supreme court [Indiana Supreme Court], and she won it on appeal to the state supreme court. It was a hard fought battle. Her attorney was beaten as a consequence of him handling this lawsuit. His name was Amory Kinney. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he also handled another case, a slavery case. It was the Polly Strong case that involved slavery. So the Mary Clark case and the Polly Strong case were what is considered bookend cases and-- Speaker 1: Polly-- Speaker 2: Polly Strong. Speaker 1: -P-O-L-L-Y? Speaker 2: Yes. Polly Strong. Speaker 1: Polly Strong. Okay. Speaker 2: These cases were bookend cases. Speaker 1: Were they the same basic case that--was Polly Strong indentured or (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was a slave. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: She was a slave. She was a slave who was born into slavery, so the question is: if you're in a free state, can you be born into slavery? And on the circuit court level, the answer was yes. So he took that case to the supreme court and it was settled, I believe, also in 1821 [sic. 1820], the same year the Mary Clark case was settled [sic.]. Speaker 1: Let me go through this again just to be clear. That--so your great-great-great-grandmother sued because she had been a slave, was brought into a state that outlawed slavery, and Benjamin Harrison just changed her status to indentured servant-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to get around the law. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: So she was suing to have that status removed so she could have freedom. And Polly Strong was born into--by, I guess, a slave mother here-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --here in Indiana? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So the question was: can--if you're born--if your mother is a slave, would you be a slave in a free state? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: If you were born--if your mother was a slave. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 650991 Speaker 1: So that's a--okay. And-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and, now there's a question that--it's in the Dred Scott case [Dred Scott v. Sandford, 1857], there're historians that raise the issue, well, are these and was Dred Scott or was Mary Clark [Mary Bateman Clark], or did they, you know, come up with this idea themselves, you know, or were they perfectly satisfied in slavery (laughter), somebody came along and asked them to file a suit; you know. I mean, that's that kind of story that-- Speaker 2: I understand. And we debate this, over this Mary Clark case [Mary Clark, a woman of color v. G.W. Johnston]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because my position is, and just from the work that I've done, is that she had to be complicit in this. She had to want to do this, because can you imagine the kind of pressure she would get filing a lawsuit against her boss and she's was working in the same house with him? The kind, you know, as I mentioned to you, her attorney [Amory Kinney] was beaten. So it was not a friendly lawsuit because I think there's some who would want you to believe that these kinds of cases were just friendly cases to settle disputes, you know, over, you know, whether you say (pronunciation) tomato or tomato or something, you know. But, you know, it was much deeper than that. And I think that she had to be in agreement. She wasn't complicit. I mean, she was not a passive party in this action. And the reason that I know that she could not have been is because, even though she won--even after she won the case, she continued to pursue the financial decision that she received, which was $21.44 and a half cents. So--and so she continued to-- Speaker 1: That's the money that she was owed for her labor? Is that what-- Speaker 2: That's the money that the-- Speaker 1: --that they awarded her or what? Speaker 2: That's the money she was awarded for her cost and for the case. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so-- Speaker 1: But the--he refused to pay it? Speaker 2: Yeah. He refused to pay it. So, now the lawyer did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's not a friendly situation. Speaker 2: --get paid. Speaker 1: That's not a friendly situation at all. Speaker 2: No. No it's not. Speaker 1: And I'm thinking if the lawyer got beat up, then what happened to her? Speaker 2: Well, that's right. Speaker 1: You know, I mean-- Speaker 2: That's right. So, you know, and not just what happened to her in terms of the treatment that she received, say from her master, but from other black people who probably would have, you know, asked her, "Mary, why you doing this, causing trouble for us?" You know. Speaker 1: It's hard for me to imagine her filing a suit and living in the same household with the person that she's suing. Was she arrested or something or was she held in violation of--because she's in--she would be, I guess, if she was--they were saying she was legally an indentured servant, and she refused to serve, then she could be arrested for, you know, violating the contract or something, you know. Speaker 2: Well, but she could--should be--because--and this case is still cited today. The issue in this case is, can you force someone to provide personal services under a contract and it not be involuntary servitude. So that case, I think, was last used in the '80s [1980s] as a contract dispute case. So, and the answer is no, you can't force somebody to provide personal services they don't want to, 'cause if you do, then they must be an involuntary servant. Speaker 1: Okay. So this case was settled in 1821, right? Speaker 2: Yes. In November 1821. Speaker 1: In her favor. Speaker 2: In her favor. Speaker 1: And so did she live the rest of her life relatively free and so forth? Speaker 2: Yes. She did. She had twelve kids. She and her husband, Sam, who was at the Battle of Tippecanoe, were founders of the Bethel A.M.E. Church of Vincennes, Indiana, which is, I say the oldest A.M.E. church [African Methodist Episcopal] in the state. Speaker 1: So he would be Sam Clark [Samuel Clark], or? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 650992 Speaker 1: I know the Battle of Tippecanoe is the battle that secured, I guess, white ownership of this territory I guess, from the Indians' [Native American] in this (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly. Large, large amounts of land concessions arose out of that battle. Speaker 1: That's supposed to be the definitive battle of this, of the Midwest-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --basically. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: With Tecumseh. Yeah. So this is--this is big history here. And Benjamin Harrison became the governor of the state, didn't he? Speaker 2: Yes, he was. He was--he was the governor of the territory--of the Northwest Territory. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And--or when all of this was going on, he had--he was governor. Now he eventually left and went to Ohio. Speaker 1: And his descendants become the president of the United States [sic.] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. That's his grandson. Speaker 1: --and was mayor of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And there's one big theologian I was telling you about in New York, but all went to Miami University in Oxford [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The big (laughter), long trail of them. Speaker 2: That's interesting. There're more that's still here, too. There're more Harrison family descendants of him still here. Speaker 1: His--and there's even--there's more of the history about the Harrisons of--in the Underground Railroad history in Detroit [Michigan], believe it or not, there's one of the black leaders of the Underground Railroad was the barber for [President] William Henry Harrison down at Tippecanoe (laughter). Speaker 2: Wow. Really? Speaker 1: Yeah. He helped shepherd people out of Detroit through the Second Baptist Church [Second Baptist Church of Detroit]. But there's a--there's a lot of history in this. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Yeah. So. Speaker 2: I know you were telling me some things I didn't know about him, 'cause I never researched him. Once his descendant, which was Benjamin J. Harrison, and the J for Johnston, because he was the nephew of General Washington Johnston, once I, you know, left that relationship, when she no longer was controlled by him, I didn't pursue that anymore, that line. But that history is really interesting too. Speaker 1: Yeah, it is. There's something--if you Google them, you can get all, most of this information about the Harrisons. They were a powerful American family. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 650993 Speaker 1: So for your [paternal] great-great-great-grandmother [Mary Bateman Clark]--I mean, the, the black people in this territory [Indiana Territory] owe a debt of gratitude, because she allowed herself to, you know, she sued-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she did. Speaker 1: --and was able to not only solve, solve her case, but probably solved, you know (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no other cases had to go before the supreme court [Indiana Supreme Court] again. This--her case didn't automatically mean the end of indentured servitude and slavery in this state. But there were others, who then went to court on a circuit court level, and they won and they were released. And even the threat of it, you know, caused them to be released, because there had been a precedent set at that point. So that is her legacy. And, in fact, we have a marker at Vincennes [Indiana] now, at the courthouse. And, interestingly, it was placed at the rear entrance of the courthouse because there's a parking lot there that people usually use to, you know, access the courthouse. Well, the courthouse is now under reconstruction--remodeling. And they're thinking about changing the entrance. But the newspaper [Vincennes Sun-Commercial] there raised the question about what was going to happen to the Mary Clark marker. And it never should have been in the back anyway, it was at the backdoor. So this has caused a big stink down there now about where that marker is placed. So it's kind of funny. So Mary Clark still lives. Her--she still lives. Speaker 1: Still causing trouble, for those who are trying to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes she is (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. So this is--and there's also, there's a DVD [digital video disc]? I mean, there's a video made about her life that you participated in. Speaker 2: Yeah, we did. We were very pleased to be part of a documentary that's now airing on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] about her life. It's called, 'Mary Clark: A Woman of Colour and Courage' ['Mary Bateman Clark: A Woman of Colour and Courage']. And I have a manuscript now that I've been trying to find a publisher for about her that's a historical fiction and mostly fact, I always say. So I'm hoping to be able to get that published. The documentary is used as a teaching tool now in some of the schools here. And it's an hour long documentary, but for the schools it comes in segments, fifteen minutes segments. So there're four fifteen minute segments that the schools can access now, and so that's good. We're happy that this history now is going to be told, so. And it has not been in the history books, so. Speaker 1: Well, that's great. This is good. And your sister [Ethel Brewer McCane] portrays your great-great-great-grandmother, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, she does. We do reenactments. She and I do reenactments all over the state. And my sister has portrayed Mary Clark. She's a theater person, and so she has--we, we didn't know her, of course. We didn't--we don't have a picture of her either, you know, because at the time there weren't any pictures. So we've, we've done our best. And my sister, particularly, has done her best to depict her as what we thought she would have been, based on historical records and the information that's been passed on down about her, so. Story_ID: 650994 Speaker 1: So, just finished telling the story about Mary Clark [Trotter's paternal great-great-great-grandmother, Mary Bateman Clark]. Now, your dad [Charles Brewer, Jr.] came to--are there any other stories on that side of the family? Speaker 2: With my dad? Speaker 1: Yeah. On your dad's side. Speaker 2: Well, I always--you know what, I just--I like to tell the story of my father because he was such a--he had such an impact on my life, on my family's life--lives. He came to Indianapolis [Indiana] when he was a teenager. His mother [Bertha Brewer] and father [Charles Brewer, Sr.] separated and eventually divorced. So he was reared by his father from the time he was a young thirteen year old. And somewhere along the way, he became so angry about race relations, which is really interesting because his mother is Caucasian. And so he was a mixed child. But when he came to Indianapolis and had such a tough time, I think, and dealt with so much on the Westside of Indianapolis, and then, like I said, he eventually met my mom [Henrietta Ellington Brewer] and all that. He impressed upon us his position of staying segregated, which was so opposite my mother, who was the integrationist. He did not want us to be subjected to any race anything. So we lived in all-black neighborhoods, we went to all-black schools-- Speaker 1: I mean, but in Indianapolis, just to interject what I think is reality, right, it's kind of hard not to, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I mean in a segregated city-- Speaker 2: Well, but-- Speaker 1: --and the only way that he didn't segregate, you know-- Speaker 2: --but, yeah, but even though--well, the point where there were opportunities to integrate, he wouldn't allow it. For example, if--you might remember a long time ago the insurance people would come and collect your insurance payments, your life insurance payments. You'd have delivery people who would come to your neighborhood (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) Or to a white (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --you, the grocery store owners, they would be--we couldn't, you know, go there to shop, you know. We couldn't let anyone who was not black in our doors, you know. These were rules of the house. We couldn't, you know--we never associated--now, yeah and no, in terms of the integrated or segregated Indianapolis, because Indianapolis, while segregated, was--it also had areas that were not, you know, and also had opportunities for integration. I'll put it like that. There were also opportunities for integration in Indianapolis, and he didn't want us to take advantage of any of those, period. So he was a Garveyite, and -- Speaker 1: Okay. So he actually joined the Garvey movement? Speaker 2: He was a part of the Garvey movement. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. In Vincennes [Indiana] or here (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Here in Indianapolis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As far as I know, because he would have been too young in Vincennes. He moved from Vincennes when he was a little boy. So he, you know, he was a early teenager when he moved from Vincennes. So it would have been in Indianapolis. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, he definitely was a self-sufficiency person. He was a self-employed electrician. And so he never wanted to work for anyone else. Speaker 1: Did he ever join a union? Speaker 2: He--I don't know. I think he was a part of the electrical workers union [International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers]. He had a business face. I'll put it like that. We lived in a house in the hood (gesture), and the front part of our house was his electrical business. It was his shop. And it had a sign, Eastside Electric Company [Indianapolis, Indiana], and the other side of the house was for our residential area. That's where we lived. Speaker 1: Now, what did he call it, Eastside? Speaker 2: Eastside Electric Company. Speaker 1: Eastside? Okay. Speaker 2: Eastside Electric Company, uh-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eastside Electric. Okay. (Pause) Okay. So you lived in the other part of the house. Speaker 2: Yeah. We lived in the other part of the house. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 650995 Speaker 1: That make things really tight? Because he--I gue- so did he occupy the front room of the house? Speaker 2: Yeah. There was a--the house, it apparently had been a business before, and so the front of it was a place where he kept his tools and his desk, you know, junk; that's what it looked like to me (laughter). The back is--you know, we would come--would enter on the side of the--a side street actually, 'cause the house was on the corner. So you had two entrances. And that's where we lived. And that's, you know, that's where our kitchen and living room and--we had--we were poor. We didn't realize it, but we were. You know, we had a coal bin, and then we moved up to oil, so. We moved up to oil and small, tiny bedrooms. I--before that house was torn down, I looked at it, you know, a few times. I thought, how did we all live in this little, bitty house, you know. But-- Speaker 1: It was two story house or-- Speaker 2: It was a two story house. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. It looked--little, bitty, tiny house. And it was on the Eastside of Indianapolis [Indiana], and the Eastside of Indianapolis has a lot of history. And it was--it was an early black neighborhood centered around a park called the Douglass Park for Fred Douglass [Frederick Douglass]. And, you know, again, it was pretty self-contained. So every day, the neighborhood, you know, there was two elementary schools, numerous churches, a movie theater. And then there were Jewish owned small stores, a hardware store, and a couple of grocery stores. And my father [Charles Brewer, Jr.] would not like us to go to those stores at all, ever. We, we would have to go out of the way to, to the store. We had our own garden, so we had to do that. Speaker 1: So he made sure you went to the black owned stores? Speaker 2: He, he wanted us to support black business vendors, period. Speaker 1: Well, it's not unusual rhetoric, you know. Even today people, you know, are known to admonish the black community for not supporting black businesses. Speaker 2: Well, he was definitely one who did. I know what's interesting, because I would always say, "What? We could just go right across the street," (laughter). "No, we're going to go somewhere else." Blocks and blocks away. Story_ID: 650996 Speaker 1: So Indianapolis [Indiana], yeah, the Eastside is interesting to me that the name of, you know, Crispus Attucks High School [Indianapolis, Indiana], I mean, and Frederick Douglass Park [Douglass Park, Indianapolis, Indiana], you know, speak to--attempt to--by the black leadership, I guess, try to identify, you know, with the hero that were raised in this (unclear). And-- Speaker 2: And, you know, Crispus Attucks was actually--and I don't know all this history because I didn't go to Attucks. That's, I think, the only one in my immediate family who didn't. All my siblings went. My parents [Henrietta Ellington Brewer and Charles Brewer, Jr.] went. But Crispus Attucks was actually created for the black community by the establishment community here, and it--it's always been an all-black school. That's why it was built. So. And you know, some of the buzz names there, like, [HistoryMaker] Oscar Robertson. It was an interesting school because of the time. The teachers there were high caliber or top quality teachers in that, you know, they had doctorate degrees and master's degrees in--because--and they couldn't get jobs in other places, so that they got them there, and these were the kinds of people who taught the students who went there. And so it's been renowned for the quality of their teaching staff down through the years, so. And interesting, my grandkids go there now. Story_ID: 650997 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, this is a--now, it's a interesting state, Indiana, as in the sense that--I know 19--I think it's the only state in the Union where the governor [Edward L. Jackson] was actually the grand dragon of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] at the same time. Speaker 2: At one time. Speaker 1: This is 1928 when your parents [Henrietta Ellington Brewer and Charles Brewer, Jr.] were children. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, so, now I know it's a--I know it's not all that good, but it's got its tough--it's got its tough segregationists white element. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, you think of my father being born in 1912, and 1928 when the grand dragon or the Klan was so rampant, he would have been sixteen years old; very impressionable age, and probably helped form some of the opinions that he had, you know, going forward, because, you know. I remember when I was sixteen years old, it was around the time when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated. And I never will forget where I was or what I did. I was at the park when Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] made the speech, you know, about King being assassinated. So, you know, I just know that at sixteen, you know, pretty much things that happen to you leave this indelible mark on you. And I think that's what happened with my dad. Story_ID: 650998 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Henrietta Ellington Brewer and Charles Brewer, Jr.] met? Speaker 2: You know, I'm trying to remember what my mother said. It wasn't anything that really had a high significance to me. My mother was very ladylike and genteel. And, like I said, she loved everybody and she couldn't see why anybody possibly would not like someone else for no reason. And I think they met out at a dance; something like that. And it was something very, you know, formal, and they began to date, and they didn't marry. They were able to enjoy each other for ten years, I believe my mom said, before any of us were born, so. And so, and I have three other siblings, so. Speaker 1: So they would have been married in, what do you say, about 19--in the mid-'30s [1930s] or? Speaker 2: Yeah. In the mid-'30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't remember the exact date, but yep, I have their license. It would have been in the mid-'30s [1930s]. Story_ID: 650999 Speaker 1: Now, when you think about and you've--you talked about this to some degree, but when you think about their personalities, and their sense of humor, and their attitudes, and the way they look, and you know, walk, talk--who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Probably I'm a blend. I'm a pretty good blend of both of them. And I've tried to instill that in my daughter [Nicole Holder] too and my son [Nolan Smith, Jr.]. But I probably have the fire of my father [Charles Brewer, Jr.] and his line. My mother [Henrietta Ellington Brewer] was--again, she was very passive, you know. My attitude growing up has been, "No, you're not." (Laughter) And my mom was always, "Okay." You know, or, "Sure. Whatever you say." But, I also respect my mother's gentleness because it's a good quality for keeping the peace and holding families together. I always say that I respect my father for making me understand the value of family, but it was my mother who showed me how to keep it together, because there is an art to keeping your family together. And it has to be one that includes tolerance and patience and kindness, and those are the kinds of qualities that my mom had, so. I'm like them both, you know. I tried to have characteristics work for me that come from both of them, so. I think that if, if anything, in terms of my professional life, it has to be my father's fire and perseverance and intolerance of the status quo that allowed me to accomplish some of the things that I've been able to accomplish. Story_ID: 651000 Speaker 1: Now, can you name your siblings for us and put yourself in the order, you know (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right, okay. Well, my oldest sibling is the boss of the family. Her name is Ethel Brewer McCane; and my number two sister is Charlesine [Charlesine Brewer Ford], she was named after my father [Charles Brewer, Jr.], Brewer Ford; then me; and then I have a brother, Oliver Len Brewer [Oliver Brewer]. And, interestingly, he now lives in the Vincennes [Indiana] area (laughter). He (unclear) and then he moved to this southern part of Illinois. Actually, he's in Lawrenceville, but it's right across the bridge from Vincennes. Speaker 1: Now, did he go there intentionally or just (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He got recruited to come there. It's weird. He got recruited to go there about five or six years ago. Speaker 1: And he has--then he--I'm sure he realizes his family roots there and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yeah, he does. Yeah. So. And we still have some relatives there. We're, we're trying to run--they're distant, but they're still there. So he's, he's living in Lawrenceville, Indi- Illinois, Lawrenceville, Illinois now. Story_ID: 651001 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Makes sound) Memory of what? Speaker 1: Oh, anything. The first thing that you remember. Speaker 2: Well, what popped in mind was our trips we used to take. We used to go on trips all the time in my father's [Charles Brewer, Jr.] cars, and he had a lot of different cars, so. We were--I was young enough that I could stand up in the backseat on the floor without my head touching the top of the car, so, I don't know how old I was; about three or four years old. And we would go to Kansas every summer, and I remember one year we went and there was a tornado threat. You know, Kansas is known for tornadoes. And unlike the basements of today, when a tornado blew in, you'd go outside and you'd go down into the cellar, which was accessible, you know, through doors, you know, on the ground. And that memory kind of sticks with me, not wanting to go down there, but I had to go down there anyway. And it was creepy, so I remember that, and it was smelly. But you know what, it was good, because we heard stories, you know. So they were trying to entertain--my parents was. So they entertained us with stories and songs while the storm was blowing up above ground. So that's an early memory I have. I remember the fruit man coming by and the iceman, and things people--young people don't have any idea about today. Speaker 1: Now, did they sing in those days? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: You remember them singing? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: I thought I'd mention that 'cause it's something-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --we don't hear anymore. But tell us about that. Speaker 2: Singing when we'd be in the base- or when we were in the cellar or just singing period? Speaker 1: Oh, I was talking about the men, the fruit--you know (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the fruit men when they would by? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. They would sing a song. They would--they had some kind of song. I can't remember them, but, you know, you couldn't half understand them, but you would know they were coming because it was like a horn. But it was their own vocal cords making the noise. And they'd come by--we had one in a horse and buggy would come through the neighborhood with fruit on the back, and you know, it was a pleasure to go out and look it over and see what my mom [Henrietta Ellington Brewer]--to see what she was going to get off the back of that. They'd have huge watermelons. It seems like then all the fruit was bigger than it is today (laughter). But so, huge watermelons. And our neighborhoods were full of fruit, too. So there weren't a lot of different fruits he could sell except stuff that wouldn't grow, you know, cantaloupe, that kind of stuff. But, 'cause in our neighborhoods were trees--pear trees, apple trees, grapevines; you know. People grew their own gardens, so we had strawberries and other, you know, goodies, so. Yeah, the iceman would also come along. He'd be in a truck or on a wagon. And I don't think this was a animal powered one. He actually had a vehicle that he was in. But the iceman would come by, it was a truck, and he would sell huge blocks of ice, and these ice blocks were then put into an icebox. And that's why people would call refrigerators iceboxes, because that's, you know, they kept the icebox, you know, the box cold so the fruit would stay, you know, fresh. And not--did I say the fruit or the food? The food would stay fresh; food period, because it was a refrigerator but without the power. We had a juice, the juice man came by. He would bring milk and bottles of juices. I don't remember if or not, whether or not he would bring other products like eggs and that kind of stuff, but I remember the milk and the juice. Story_ID: 651002 Speaker 1: And, you know, again we, we lived--does it matter where in the city? Is that relevant to you? Speaker 2: Well, just tell us. I mean, it might be, because you, you didn't live in the same place the whole time? Speaker 1: No. We didn't. But growing up 'til I guess it may be ten, twelve years old. We lived at 20th [Street] and Columbia [Avenue]. And 20th and Columbia, it's in an area that was an industrial area actually. They found out within the last ten years that a lot of those families there breathed in this polluted air, the dirt and soil was polluted. I was-- Speaker 2: So what did they make there? Did they make any particular--I mean--? Speaker 1: It was a metal processing plant there. And then there was a chemical plant over there, too. Speaker 2: Okay. Now this is not the house where you had--he had the shop [Eastside Electric Company, Indianapolis, Indiana] in the front, is it? Or that's not the-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: This is the place--oh, okay. Speaker 1: Same area. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now we had moved to other places. My father [Charles Brewer, Jr.] was a electrician, and he loved for--to move us to huge houses, because he liked these big houses, but they were raggedy (laughter). You know. They might have six bedrooms; two or three fireplaces, none of them worked, you know; the bathrooms didn't work; so (laughter), you know. He would buy the houses, these houses that--on contract, because that's how a lot of people bought houses during that time when they didn't have credit or whatever. And he bought it on contract, and they would be as is, and they'd be big junked, raggedy houses, so. He bought these houses. Speaker 2: But they would have enough room for his business--his different--electrical work, supplies, tools? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. That was--yes, yes, yes, yes. Speaker 2: What kind of work did he do? Contracting labor for, you know, construction of new places or mainly repair of electrical? Speaker 1: You know, as time went on, he did work mostly for individuals. So I tell my kids [Nicole Holder and Nolan Smith, Jr.] that, I remember being a little girl and go with him sometime to some of his jobs, and he was the electrician who would wire the door, the buzzer doors for these places where you go to gamble (laughter). So when you pushed the bell, you had the door--you know, you would open the door through a buzzer system. So he would do those kinds of jobs. But he also did residential jobs. So he would rewire houses. Then he'd have to chase the people down for his money or, you know, it was just a never ending circus about getting paid or completing a job. My father became an alcoholic, and he started drinking quite a bit. So a lot of jobs he would do he wouldn't finish. So the people were calling, calling, and calling, and we learned how to give excuses to the people, you know, who called, and we'd tell them, "Well, you know, he's not in the city at this time. Can we take a message and we'll get back with you?" You know. But that alcohol got to him. That's what eventually caused his death. But, you know, during the time that he was, he was working and not drinking, he did do commercial electrical work and then he moved in residential--residential combination, commercial for the smaller kind of jobs, and then not at all, so. Speaker 2: Okay. Now--so, this happened over time. So had things kind of--I mean, were things tougher for him when you were in high school [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]? Speaker 1: Yeah, they were. Yeah. By the time I got to high school, things were very tough for him. I went to work when I was in high school to help the family. And, I think my first job was at Burger Chef. That's what it was called there. So I must have been about fourteen years old. And so, you know, I worked, and I continued to work from then--forward somewhere to help the family. So I would have a bill to pay, whatever it was--a phone bill, light bill, whatever, to, to help out. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then I would take care of my own school costs, so, you know. Story_ID: 651003 Speaker 1: We normally ask what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up, but you, you pretty much answered that already. But, in case you want to add something to it? Speaker 2: Well, in, in terms of those--the sights and--as a teenager, we lived in a neighborhood with lots of large families. So, again, it was a time when James Brown was singing, 'I'm Black and I'm Proud' ['Say It Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud'], and, you know. We lived in an era--area where there was a lot of poverty. So there was a lot of drug addiction, there was prostitution, all of that. So that's what I saw growing up. You know, I saw police actions, you know. I saw domestic disputes, you know, that were on the street. You know, like I said, we had a house of prostitution a block away. So that was our entertainment, to watch who went and came--came and went from that house (laughter); wanted to see if any big shots ever went in and out of that house. Speaker 1: Did you see some go in? Speaker 2: Probably, just didn't recognize them (laughter). But, I think all that was, it made me stronger, it made me and my peers stronger. And it showed us then, and I say it to kids now, just because you were growing up in it doesn't mean you have to be of it. You know, you don't have to be what you're around and what you see out there. And when people start giving me these sob stories about, "Oh, the drug addicts, they're all around, they're going to influence, you know, us, and we can't help ourselves," is baloney, because I know what we went through. We saw it, we were around it, you know. Speaker 1: In those days, though, my guess is the Eastside [Indianapolis, Indiana]--was the Eastside like a lot of other black communities where you had all classes of black people in the same neighborhood? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And restricted by housing codes, so they couldn't leave? Speaker 2: At one point. By the time I got to be a teenager, though, there was flight of upper class blacks out of those areas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And housing had opened as, you know, by the time I was sixteen years old, which would have been 1968, '69 [1969]. There were, you know, there were black suburbs in Indianapolis [Indiana] at that time. So the professional people, the educated people, the people with the good jobs, so to speak or the driving businesses, did get out. Speaker 1: They had figured that out, you know. It may have been--it probably wasn't but maybe five or six years before, you know, '68 [1968], that they started making that move. Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: Now, what was the main--was there a main street for the black communities (unclear) the Eastside, you know? Speaker 2: On the Eastside? Speaker 1: Yeah. I know it usually is in communities where it's segregated, there's a main, you know, like, North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska] or the west side of Dayton [Ohio], or the East Side of Columbus [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yeah. One of the main streets on the Eastside, in the old Eastside--now this is when I--this would be in the late '50s [1950s] or early '60s [1960s]. It would have been a street called Martindale [Avenue]. That was the main street. Martindale became Andrew J. Brown [Dr. Andrew J. Brown Avenue]. On Martindale were lots of residential areas as well as churches, businesses; one of the larger black funeral homes was on that street; Douglass Park [Indianapolis, Indiana] was on that street; a popular ice cream parlor was on that street. So Martindale would have been a main street on the Eastside. On the Westside, it would have been Indiana Avenue. And Indiana Avenue was a street of businesses as well as culture. That was were Madam C.J. Walker had her theater [Madame Walker Theatre Center, Indianapolis, Indiana] as well as her commercial shop [Madam C.J. Walker Manufacturing Company]. Speaker 1: Okay. It's being repaired and everything. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. So that was the main street on the Westside, Indiana Avenue. And then from that street, all the residential areas fed off of. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Later, College [Avenue] would have been a main street for the African American community. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: West Street, which was--has three or four different names: Northwestern [Street], Michigan Road--West Street does. MLK [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Street] now. That was a, a main street, too. Story_ID: 651004 Speaker 1: Now, was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yeah. I think I mentioned to you that Mary Clark [Trotter's paternal great-great-great-grandmother, Mary Bateman Clark] and Sam Clark [Samuel Clark] founded Bethel A.M.E. Church [Vincennes, Indiana]. And we were Methodists growing up. And, you know, A.M.E. stands for African Methodist Episcopal. So we grew up Methodist. My mother's mother's parents founded Scott United Methodist Church [ph.], which was not called United Methodist at the time. It became United Methodist as those denominations merged. It was--it used to be a C.M.E. church, which used to stand for Colored Methodist Episcopal. It became--the C became Christian, so for Christian Methodist Episcopal. And then in the '60s [1960s], it merged with some other denominations and it became United Methodist. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So we were always in church, to this day. Story_ID: 651005 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about church. Did, did, did you have any major role in church grow- growing up as a youth or, you know? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. I went--yeah, my major role was to make sure my butt was on that pew (laughter). I had to go to church. There was no doubt about it. And I enjoy church. I always did. We did the typical things, you know, in church; the youth groups and so forth. And when I turned eighteen years old, I kind of did my own thing. I didn't want to be a Methodist anymore because I thought Methodists were boring, and I wanted to be, you know, more invigorated by my religious experience, so I, you know, shopped around. I looked to being a Muslim. So I flirted with the Nation of Islam, you know, because I thought that was so cool so see all that precision and that whole thing there. And that wasn't for me at all, you know. Baptist, Apostolic. I looked at all of them, and I kind of came full circle, right back to Methodist. And so, it's, it's--I never left it, I just kind of explored other religions, I think, like a lot of young people will do. Story_ID: 651006 Speaker 1: Now, well, tell us about school now. Where did you start school? Did, did, did you go to the same grade school the whole time, or did you? Speaker 2: No. You know, with my dad [Charles Brewer, Jr.] having some of the issues that he had financially and, you know, with drinking, we moved a lot. So I went to a lot of schools. Speaker 1: So what was your first one? Speaker 2: My first one was School 26; John Hope School 26, which is at 16th Street here in Indianapolis [Indiana]. Speaker 1: John Hope. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Public school 26. And I went to that school until about the fifth grade. So I must have been eleven, twelve years old. Speaker 1: Now in those early years of school, did you have a favorite subject or a favorite teacher or did you even like school? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I always liked school. And my favorite subject was always writing, you know. And so I liked writing always. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, between the first and the fifth grade, did you write any--did you do any poems or any stories or anything like that? Speaker 2: Probably. But can I remember, no. I don't remember anything that's left an impression on me. Now when--at home when we were given things to do to keep us quiet or still, we would write stories--we, you know, at home, so, but not in school. Story_ID: 651007 Speaker 1: I didn't ask this question. This has just reccurred to me again. Did your father [Charles Brewer, Jr.] know the story of Mary Clark [Trotter's paternal great-great-great-grandmother, Mary Bateman Clark]? Speaker 2: No. He didn't know all of those details. Unh-uh. He knew--I mean, he knew there was something there--there was this feisty woman, and that's--he knew that. And he knew that there was some kind of lawsuit or legal action. He never really explained it. He never told us anything more than that. Speaker 1: Okay. So I'm not surprised--I mean a lot of stories, the relatives down the line have no idea-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that they're even related to the people that are (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. That was interesting always to me that he never-- Speaker 1: I think Harriet Tubman's relatives were saying that in an article last month that they didn't even know--her great-great-great-granddaughter didn't even know that she was related to her until somebody-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: --an aunt told her. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah, so (laughter). Speaker 2: That's interesting. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 651008 Speaker 1: So in school, now at John Hope School [John Hope School 26, Indianapolis, Indiana], did you have a favorite teacher? Speaker 2: We had a favorite--I had a favorite principal. His name was Starling James. And he was a father figure kind of a person. Speaker 1: That's an interesting name, Starling James. Speaker 2: Yep. Starling James. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, it's unusual for the principal to make that big of an impression on a student-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, at that level, you know. But what was he like? Speaker 2: He--well, he lived in the area, too. And he was a presence, so he was an authority figure. He--he was a person that I recall being positive for children's self-esteem, because he had positive things to say about the, you know, to the kids and about the children, you know, including me. So he said something to me one day, obviously that impressed me, so I kind of--that was it (laughter). I liked him (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did he say to you? Speaker 2: I can't remember what he said, but it was something that made me think, oh, he's a good guy (laughter). But, yeah, he--you know, and I don't remember too many of my teachers beyond that. I remember one teacher we had who was a substitute teacher. Her name was Mrs.--Miss, not Mrs.--Miss Spearman [ph.]. And she had multicolored hair. It was red, it was gray, had a little different colors. And, you know, when you're a child, you're seeing this hair like this, she-- Speaker 1: Was it chemically done or was it just her natural-- Speaker 2: I think she must have dyed her hair. Speaker 1: --hair or just a change in colors? Speaker 2: Yeah. I think it was all of that. Speaker 1: All of that. Speaker 2: She dyed--I think she must have dyed her hair and, you know, the gray comes in. And when you dye gray hair, you know, it does weird things sometimes. So I think that was part of it. But she was always a substitute. She was like a permanent substitute, so she was always around. And she was so little and short and tiny. She was like one of us. And she was sweet and lovely. I remember her. Story_ID: 651009 Speaker 1: So, now, did you do--I, I suppose, now, writing so much, you must have done a lot of reading? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. I, I, I had asthma when I was growing up. So I had to sit down a lot or sit still and go someplace as my family would tell me, "Go someplace and sit down." So I--so that left me a lot of time to read. And I probably got out of doing a lot of things. My siblings [Ethel Brewer McCane, Charlesine Brewer Ford and Oliver Brewer] had to do my work, because I had asthma. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that means I couldn't go outside or cut grass, because of, you know, of the pollen; couldn't work in the yard, the garden, because of the pollen. I didn't get to run around the neighborhood [in Indianapolis, Indiana] a lot and play like a lot of kids because of the asthma-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the outdoors air. So I would-- Speaker 1: So those days, they didn't give you a lot for it. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: They (unclear). There's nothing really--just try to keep you away from-- Speaker 2: From the things that would trigger the asthma attacks. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And which I which I had them all the time, so. And I remember some of the old remedies that they would give me and things they would do, like the asphidity balls. I don't know if you've heard of those. That's asphidity balls. This was a necklace that you wore that had some stinky stuff in it (laughter). I don't know where it came from. I'm going to do a story on that one day. But, and then sometimes they would give me whiskey, lemon and something else for coughing. And, you know, we were talking earlier about the people would come around door to door. Well, it just slipped my mind the name of this product. It was like Father John's, but it wasn't. And this--there was a man who would come around with these remedies, these syrups and so forth; well, my parents [Henrietta Ellington Brewer and Charles Brewer, Jr.] would buy this stuff from him, and they would give this to me for my asthma. So I had all kind of stuff in me, from whiskey to Father's John (laughter), to keep me from having asthma attacks. And you know, one day, my asthma was gone. Speaker 1: So has it returned since? Speaker 2: Well, you know what? I've had a couple of asthma attacks out of nowhere. This is probably going to be a asthma year. I can tell already because of the pollen, I think, too, but I don't, I'm not bothered with it anymore--not really, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I went on to run track and all that stuff, so I never had--I was never bothered with it through school. Story_ID: 651010 Speaker 1: What kind of reading materials coming into your house? Did you, did your parents [Henrietta Ellington Brewer and Charles Brewer, Jr.] subscribe to the Indianapolis Recorder, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) any paper? Speaker 2: Yeah. My--we always had the newspaper around. And my father's uncle, so it would have been my grandfather's brother, was a reporter at the Indianapolis Recorder. Speaker 1: So this is your father's-- Speaker 2: Uncle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was his father's brother. Speaker 1: So this was your great-- Speaker 2: Great uncle. Speaker 1: --uncle. Yeah. Speaker 2: He was a reporter. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: His name was Sam Brewer. Samuel Brewer. Speaker 1: All right. Was he named after this--well-- Speaker 2: His--his--Sam Clark [Trotter's paternal great-great-great-grandfather, Samuel Clark]. Speaker 1: Sam Clark. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So he was a reporter. That's a big deal. Speaker 2: Yeah. He was a reporter. And now, his uncle--so I'll go back even further than that, was Gurley Brewer. So it would have been his father's brother's son. Speaker 1: And Gurley, G-U-R- ? Speaker 2: Wait a minute. Yeah. G-U-R-L-E-Y. His name was Gurley. He was, he was born in the 18, I believe, '60s [1860s], '70s [1870s], 1870s. He purchased a newspaper and ran it (background noise). Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERUPTION) Speaker 2: So you're saying your uncle--this would be your great great uncle, Gurley Brewer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Let me get this right, here. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. It would be my grandfather's father's brother's son. So it would be my great-grandfather's brother's son. Gurley, was his name, Brewer. Speaker 2: Okay. You know the name of this paper? Speaker 1: I should know it. It's gone here from this head of mine. But it was early--it was an early African American weekly here in Indianapolis [Indiana] that he was the publisher of. He purchased the controlling interest of it. And so, he was in the newspaper business until he died. He died suddenly of a heart attack when he was in his early fifties. He was a lawyer. He was a graduate of Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio]. He was a politician. He was a delegate to the national convention of the Republican Party in 1903 or '04 [1904 Republican National Convention, Chicago, Illinois]; something like that. There's a lot to be done on him. He was--had he lived, he'd probably would have been a real figure in history here in Indiana. He spoke all over the states, so there's just a ton of newspaper clips about him. And he was known for his ability to give a rousing speech. And he was a newspaperman. As I mentioned, Sam, my grandfather's father-- Speaker 2: So that's his son, is Sam. So Gurley's son is Sam? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Oh. Okay. Speaker 1: Let's see. Sam is my grandfather's brother. My grandfather had-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --my grandfather had fifteen brothers and sisters (laughter). There were sixteen kids in his family. Speaker 2: Okay. So-- Speaker 1: Half the brothers were ministers, including one who was a district bishop in the A.M.E. church [African Methodist Episcopal], and so forth. My--their father, whose name was G.W. Brewer, and he was born and grew up in Vincennes, Indiana. He was a minister. G.W. Brewer had a sister and three brothers. One of his brothers had children who included Gurley. His father's name was Hubert Brewer [ph.]. He was also a minister, Hubert Brewer. That's Gurley's father. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. So you've got newspaper people in the family. Speaker 1: Yeah, there are. Yeah. They're definitely in the family. And my mom's side, one of her--let's see, how was this--Henry--her grandfather, Henry Martin, her mother's father, was a columnist for the Recorder. So I had newspaper people around me, you know, growing up. I knew--I could identify people in, in the media. Story_ID: 651011 Speaker 1: When you moved to another school, you--when you go to--well, I was asking you about the literature coming into the house, the newspapers and stuff coming in. Did, did you all get magazines and stuff, too? Speaker 2: No, we didn't. We did not. I can't remember receiving very, if any, very many magazines at all. And I can't remember even when we first started getting magazines like, Ebony and Jet. We did get them in the house eventually. But we did not have a lot of literature coming into the house. Speaker 1: What about TV and radio? Speaker 2: We definitely had--we're early TV viewers. My father [Charles Brewer, Jr.], being an electrician, worked on televisions, too. And so, we always had a TV around, you know, early when, you know, back during the days when tubes, you know, the TVs. So I remember always having the back of a TV off, and we'd look at the screen with the back off, because my father had been working on it, you know. But-- Speaker 1: Did he have you test the machines that they'll-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --test the tubes and that sort of-- Speaker 2: He probably did. I'm sure he did have those two test tube machines. So we did, we looked at a lot of TV, you know. But there wasn't that much to look at in those days. You know, 'Lawrence Welk' ['The Lawrence Welk Show'], (laughter) you know. Not a lot to look at, so. The TV, yeah, the- I mean, we looked at TV, but what was there to look at? Not a lot-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. Speaker 2: --for us, so. Story_ID: 651012 Speaker 1: So your next school in the sixth grade was what? Speaker 2: I went to public school 60 [William A. Bell School 60, Indianapolis, Indiana]. Speaker 1: Did it have a name, too? Speaker 2: I can't--no. If--it probably did, but I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause it's kind of blur after that. I went to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is it like a junior high school? Speaker 2: I was sixth grade. Yes. Fifth, sixth grade. Seventh. Middle school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went to 76--School 76 [Paul C. Stetson School 76, Indianapolis, Indiana]. That was another middle school. Speaker 1: So anything happen in the sixth, seventh and eighth grade that is significant in terms of your growth and development as a writer and-- Speaker 2: No. Just--I always made good grades in school and pretty effortless. I didn't have to do a lot of studying. I don't ever recall being a student who studied hard and a lot. Speaker 1: But were there any teachers at P.S. 60 that kind of standout (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Not that I can remember that were, that had any significant impact on me. No. Speaker 1: Did you--were you a member of the Camp Fire Girls [Camp Fire Girls of America; Camp Fire] or Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] or anything like that? Speaker 2: For a very short time, I was a Blue Bird. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a very short time. I can't remember much about that. But, yeah, for a very--one of my family members will--if was here, would be proud of me. "Yeah, you were. Don't you remember this and that," (laughter). Speaker 1: What about summer camp. Did you go to camps? Speaker 2: No. We didn't go to camp. Now we did go to church related camps. But not school related or organizational-related camps, so. Speaker 1: Okay. So it would be like church bible school or something like that? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, now what about--now, the next school you gave me was P.S.-- Speaker 2: 76. Speaker 1: 76. Okay. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Then I went to Shortridge Junior High [Shortridge Junior High School; Shortridge High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. All right. So you didn't go--I mean, so you only went to one grade in P.S. 60, is that it or whatever? Speaker 2: Sometimes I only went for one semester to some of these schools. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: You know, 'cause we moved around, and I moved around until--we went to a lot of schools. But when I say we, I mean my brother [Oliver Brewer] and I 'cause we were the last two at home. And by then, my father [Charles Brewer, Jr.] was coping with, you know, the alcoholism, and my mom [Henrietta Ellington Brewer] trying to work and make ends meet and-- Speaker 1: So did your older sisters go to college? Speaker 2: Yeah. They did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. They had left home by then. Speaker 1: Where did they go? Speaker 2: Well, my oldest sister, Ethel [Ethel Brewer McCane], went to Philander Smith, Little Rock, Arkansas [Philander Smith College], and where she was involved in the demonstrations and, you name it, there in Little Rock. Speaker 1: Now, is Philander Smith an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] school or Methodist? Speaker 2: It's a United Methodist. Speaker 1: Okay. I thought it was Methodist. Speaker 2: And my middle sister [Charlesine Brewer Ford] got married and left the state with her husband who was a Marine [U.S. Marine Corps]. So she moved to Kittery, Maine, and that's where she lived. And when they returned, she went to nursing school and became a nurse practitioner. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She just retired, as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: All right. So, how did you do at Shortridge junior high school [Shortridge High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]? Speaker 2: I did fine, you know. I--it was, again, it was school; sort of a blur, because, you know, I was there to go to class and come out of there and go home, go to work or do whatever I needed to do to help me to be supportive of the family. Speaker 1: So were you working by junior high school? Speaker 2: I went to work when I was fourteen years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I worked at Burger Chef. Before then, I was babysitting, that kind of thing, to help. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, are there any teachers that stand out at Shortridge? Speaker 2: Mrs. Johnson. Nancy Johnson was a teacher that I remember at Shortridge. She was an African American woman, English teacher, who corrected our English on a regular basis (laughter). So she stands out for me, so--to this day she does. Story_ID: 651013 Speaker 1: So was it uncomfortable being a new student a lot, you know in (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, 'cause, you know, when you're a new student you have to fight your way through a lot of stuff--not physically, literally fight your way through. But, yeah, I mean you were always the new person, and so I think it was--I look at it as a positive in a lot of ways, because I can anywhere and fit in, you know, and settle on in. That taught me how to do that well. So, yeah. But it was uncomfortable. What it did, though, most of all is it prevented me from having deeper relationships with people early, you know, because I didn't get a chance to know them well. We're here today, and we're gone tomorrow. So to this day, I know a whole lot of people, but do I know them well, you know, and I don't because we didn't get a chance to form that kind of depth in our relationship, because we would move, and off we'd go. So after Shortridge junior high [Shortridge High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], I went to 101 [H.L. Harshman School 101; H.L. Harshman Middle School, Indianapolis, Indiana], which was a junior high school. Speaker 1: Now these are all African American schools? Speaker 2: No. They're public schools. Speaker 1: I mean in terms of the population. Are they African American for the most part? Speaker 2: Shortridge was integrated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And 101 was integrated. Shortridge was integrated with probably more middle class--working class to middle class families; where 101 was integrated with more people who were from impoverished families. It was the Eastside of Indianapolis [Indiana]. Southeast side. And 101 was a feeder school to Tech High School [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], which was, like, one of the largest high schools in the state. And I remember when I went to high school at Tech, the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] came to our campus, and the Panthers [Black Panther Party] came to our ca- you know, our campus. So we had--we went to high school during a really turbulent time in the city. Story_ID: 651014 Speaker 1: So you started high school in, what, nineteen sixty--? Speaker 2: Eight [1968], '7 [1967], '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967]. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I would have--I came out in '71 [1971], so. Yep, '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: So 1967. So you were talking about the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] occurring when you were in high school. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: So why did the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] come to the high school? Speaker 2: They were recruiting. Now, the--you know, Tech High School [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] has a huge campus, and there were probably--to this day, there are probably eight buildings, separate buildings, each one could be a school itself, on campus, and--so there's a lot of outdoor area. Now, they weren't--they were just outside the school. They weren't on, literally on the campus, but they were outside the school attracting people to come to that particular gate, area of the school, because you think--it's hard to describe, but there's many ways to access the campus--in that campus. And on one side of the campus, which would be the southeast side of the campus, was the gate--access that was used by kids who lived in that neighborhood, which was a all-white, poor area. On the north side of the campus was the gate to gain access for kids who walked from segregated black communities in the area. We walked to school probably a couple miles a day. So that would be the gate that we would use. We'd come from the north to that campus. And so on that side, the black nationalist kind of groups would be there recruiting us, you know. There were--it's interesting because some of the people who were part of that became state legislators in Indianapolis [Indiana]; people like Bill Crawford, who is one of the longest serving legislators, and he's just recently retired. He was a Panther [Black Panther Party]. And Glenn Howard. There was a man by the name of Snookie Hendricks [Charles W. Hendricks]. These guys, they were all much older than us, of course. They were--they were Black Panthers, and they had a headquarters on Meridian Street at a bookstore. They, they recruited people, so. And they would do this countering the Klan recruiting efforts. So we were kind of caught in the middle. That--sometimes when we have reunions, we talk about those days because think, oh, no way. You're just exaggerating. No way. But it's true. Story_ID: 651015 Speaker 1: Was there a learning environment on campus [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]? You know, I mean, in the midst of all this political activity? Speaker 2: Yeah. There was a learning environment. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We, we--yeah, there was definitely a learning environment. I had a couple of teachers there who impressed me quite a bit and helped me. One was Bernice Jones, and one was LaVerne Washington [ph.]. And they were teachers who provided a lot of guidance to me and to other students. And, you know, one was black, one was white. Mrs. Jones was handicapped, and I would go to her house and help her. And the same thing with Mrs. Washington. I would do their windows or whatever to make some money. But during those times that we would be together, not only, you know, at their homes or on campus, you know, also, they would take us on field trips and , or, so, they would take us on field trips and places. But they would talk to us all the time and tell us, you know, "You see that? That's not normal," you know. They would guide us, and they would give us what we needed to get through that, so. Yeah, but it was a--it was an interesting high school time. It, for me, high school was a gateway--it was a gateway to adulthood, because that's what I was striving to reach adulthood, so I could do me and go on my own way and do my own thing, what I wanted to do with my life. Story_ID: 651016 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Henrietta Ellington Brewer] work when you were in high school [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]? Speaker 2: My mother did go to work, when I was about I guess, oh, fourteen, thirteen, fourteen years old. She worked part time doing what was called day work, which was housekeeping work. And we went with her often, my sisters [Ethel Brewer McCane and Charlesine Brewer Ford] and I, when I say we. And so, it really was good for us, too, because it showed us how other people lived from the very inside, you know; the good and the bad. We saw, you know, upscale lifestyles, because that's who could afford to have a housekeeper, and that's what my mother did. She went in and she cleaned their houses or did their ironing or whatever, and she took us with her. So in those settings, we got to see, you know, wonderful living, but we got to see some misery, too. I remember one family that she worked for had a couple that fought each other. And we never saw that in our own house. My mother and father [Charles Brewer, Jr.] did not fight like that, you know. They argued, but they didn't never punch each other. Speaker 1: So they actually got in a fight? Speaker 2: Oh, it was horrible. We would go in sometime, and the woman--the mother would have black eyes, the house would be a mess; like, you know, things were overturned. They had three daughters, and the three daughters would be, you know, in their rooms afraid, and we saw that; the aftermath. We didn't actually see the fight, but we saw the aftermath. And so, of course, I'm nosey and I'm going to look and ask, "What happened?" (Laughter) And mother would say, "Get over here. Get down here. Stop meddling," you know (laughter). "Come over here. Shut up." And I'm like, "I want to know what happened," (laughter). "She has a black eye. How did that happen?" And so we got to see that, too. So we're out, you know. It made me to understand that just because you had money didn't mean you had happiness; you also had some other things to contend with, and I saw that, so (shrugs shoulders). And even though we didn't have money, we didn't have that, you know, in our home, never, so. Story_ID: 651017 Speaker 1: All right now. I don't know if it's pre-high school or high school [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], but you said you founded your own paper as a youth, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was a kid, I, I tried to publish a paper (laughter). Speaker 1: How old were you when you did that? Speaker 2: I as a teenager, you know. I--it was a gossip paper. Speaker 1: Now, what, what gave you the idea for, well, for a gossip paper (laughter)? Speaker 2: What gave me the idea? Well, there used to be a column in the Indianapolis Recorder called Teen Talk, and Teen Talk was a gossip column for teenagers, and you had to really be connected to get mentioned in Teen Talk, so I formed my own paper called Teen Talk. And it was just a one sheet, front and back paper, you know, that I typed and ran off and passed out, and it was gossip. And it would be the same gossip, type gossip that was featured in Teen Talk in the Indianapolis Recorder. The gossip would include the name of a record; for example, Mary Wells song 'My Guy.' That would have been one of the songs, you know. "Eunice Brewer [HistoryMaker Eunice Trotter] is singing 'My Guy' to Jeffrey Trotter [ph.]," you know. And you would use the name of a record or song in this gossip column. And so it would be the latest information about who was wooing who. So I thought that was a good thing. It was popular. It made some enemies for me (laughter). People didn't like it. So they didn't want their business in the paper. So that was my first flirt with writing. But I did go to work with the Recorder after that, and I began ghost writing the actual Teen Talk. Speaker 1: How old were you--wait a minute. How old were you when you wrote--you distributed your paper? Speaker 2: A teenager. I was sixteen; fifteen, sixteen. Speaker 1: All right. And then-- Speaker 2: And that's how old I was when I started actually doing it for the Recorder. Speaker 1: Okay. Now how did it come to the attention of the Recorder or did you go there? Speaker 2: I went there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went there and showed them (laughter). They were on Indiana Avenue then, and I went there and I told them, "Look what I'm doing. I want to do it for you, I can do it." And I talked to Mr. Marcus Stewart [Marcus Stewart, Sr.], who was the publisher. He was the son of the founder [George P. Stewart]. And he let me do it. He said okay and gave me a chance, so. I didn't get paid anything. So he didn't have anything to lose. And so I started doing the Teen Talk column for the Recorder as a teenager. Speaker 1: Now, did you displace somebody that was already doing it? Speaker 2: No. Because they always had trouble keeping someone committed, you know, to doing it, because they weren't really paying a lot of money, if any, at all. I didn't get paid anything when I started doing it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But at the Recorder for that column, the content would be provided by submission. So people would drop off, you know, Teen Talk contributions from the various schools or organizations or neighborhoods, then I would bring that together however I wanted to and put it in the paper and get in trouble some more because sometimes the parents didn't like that. Eventually that column was discontinued by the Recorder. But it was very, very popular for a long time. Speaker 1: Was it discontinued during your, your control, or? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't. It wasn't during mine. It was, it was later on that it was discontinued. I did it for, I don't know, couple years, I guess. I was seventeen, I guess, when I stopped doing it--about seventeen years old. Story_ID: 651018 Speaker 1: Did you write any poetry or anything in those days? Speaker 2: No. Not really (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was the days when The Last Poets came out and all the (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. No. I wasn't into poetry. My sister was--my sister was, but I wasn't. I was into facts. I wanted, you know, hard facts. I tried to write a book, a story, but I wasn't into any poetry. I really didn't know I wanted to be a newspaperwoman. I know I liked doing it. I wanted to be a policewoman. That's what I wanted to be. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, why? Why did you want to be a policewoman? Speaker 2: Well, because I wanted to--I wanted to correct wrongs, I think. I wanted to have some power, maybe. I wanted to work with kids at that time. I wanted to get rid of criminals who were polluting our neighborhoods. That was my thing. Well, you know, again, I told you I grew up in an area, it was full of drug addicts and prostitutes, and, you know, these kind of people. Speaker 1: I know this was the era of what they called the blaxploitation films, but, I mean, a lot of films depicted heroes, you know, setting things right in the community, you know. Speaker 2: Maybe that's what helped influence me. I don't know. Speaker 1: Did you see a lot of those movies in those days? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I did. I saw a bunch of them. But I did. I wanted to be a policewoman, and I could not pursue that career track. Now, do you want to know why (laughter)? Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: Okay. The reason is because I got arrested, you know. Okay, "Why did you get arrested, Eunice [HistoryMaker Eunice Trotter]?" Speaker 1: Why did you get arrested? Speaker 2: For having a gun (laughter). So you talk about--now, let's think about where this was. This was in the '60s [1960s], late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], '71 [1971], '70 [1970]; something like that; '72 [1972]. I had a gun and I was caught with this gun. Speaker 1: Now this is after high school [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], right? Speaker 2: This was immediately after high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, just within, maybe you would say--yeah, it was immediately after high school. So I thought that having an arrest would--and it was talk--my record was expunged. There's nothing on there but, I thought that this would ruin me forever. I could never be a policewoman. So immediately I changed career tracks and focused on a passion that I had for writing; and that's how I ended up going into journalism. Story_ID: 651019 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now you were a, an athlete in high school, too? Did you run (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was. Speaker 1: You ran track, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what event did you run? Speaker 2: I did a hundred [100-meter dash]. And I did broad jump; tried to. Say a long jump, tried to. Did relays, so. Speaker 1: So did you win? Speaker 2: Yeah. I did. I went to the state for the dash, for the hundred, and I didn't win that, but competed in it. Speaker 1: That means that you were one of the fastest in the state. Speaker 2: Yeah. I competed, so. My son [Nolan Smith, Jr.] won (laughter). He went and he won, but those were some good times. Speaker 1: What was your fastest time? Speaker 2: I cannot remember. Somebody asked me that just recently. Told you, to hurry (gesture) (laughter). But I can't remember my time. And, you know, why don't I remember it, I don't know, but I can't. I can't remember what time I had. Speaker 1: Okay. This was Tech High School [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tech High School. Speaker 1: --and, okay. So did, did you continue to run in college? Speaker 2: Oh, no, 'cause, you know what, I didn't go to college traditionally. I didn't do the traditional college. Story_ID: 651020 Speaker 1: Let's, let's go back to the end of high school first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then we'll take you to college. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: So, in high school then, did you work on the school newspaper? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. I did, and the yearbook. That was at Tech [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]. I was active in high school, you know; in drama and choirs and that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Drama, choir-- Speaker 2: The track. Speaker 1: Track. Speaker 2: Yearbook. Speaker 1: You're working too, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I was working. Speaker 1: And you're still at Burger Chef? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were very busy. Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm working, and I'm helping my mother [Henrietta Ellington Brewer] too, you know, because she asked me to go with her still to some of these day work things. Yeah, I was really busy. What else did I do? I was singing. I was a part of a little singing group with a guy who wanted to have three backup singers, 'cause, you know, that was the time of Motown [Motown Records]. So everybody wanted to be Motown, you know, so. Speaker 1: Yeah, that three. Speaker 2: So you had to have three. So I was one of the three. And we ended up getting mad at him, so we broke off and became our own group. And we did little events at, like, Operation Breadbasket, and there used to be a club here called Pearl's Lounge [Indianapolis, Indiana]. It was a hotel, motel, and nightclub. So we sang there as teenagers. We had no business in there, but we were there anyway. There was another club here called the Twenty Grand [Twenty Grand Show Lounge, Indianapolis, Indiana]. We sang there. Speaker 1: What was the name of your group? Speaker 2: It was called the Soulettes. S-O-U-L-E-T-T-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It used to be Sam and the Soulettes [ph.], and we kicked Sam out. So then it became the Soulettes (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. The Soulettes. Now, did you sing the popular songs in the day, you know? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We sang popular songs of the day. Speaker 1: So, for example, what would you sing? Speaker 2: Oh, we sang Michael Jackson's 'Who's Loving You.' We had, one of our members, she's deceased now, Sylvia [ph.], would sing the Michael Jackson lead part of 'Who's Loving You.' And we sang, are, are rendering of 'Going in Circles,' you know. And just the songs that were popular that--during that time, we sang them. We sang 'I'll Take You There,' you know, and. We just had a good time. It kept us out of trouble and it got us in trouble, too (laughter). Kept us out of one form of trouble and it got us into another form of trouble. Story_ID: 651021 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to follow up on that, but I just want--now, on the verge of gra- when you're on the verge of graduating from high school [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and did you graduate with any special honors or anything or did you--? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was a honor student. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was an honor student. I graduated, got married immediately. Speaker 1: Immediately--okay. So, how did you meet your--well, you met him in high school, I guess, right? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Well, tell us how you met your husband [Trotter's ex-husband, Jeffrey Trotter (ph.)]. Speaker 2: Well, by then we had moved again. My mother [Henrietta Ellington Brewer] moved to an apartment in the 2500 block of College [Avenue]. And one day, a guy in a '57 [1957] Pontiac drove on top of the sidewalk to come and talk to me. That's how I met him (laughter). Speaker 1: He just saw you and then he just drove on-- Speaker 2: Yeah. He drove--he pulled on the curb on the sidewalk and that's how I met my husband. So we met and we dated, and then when I graduated from high school in May, we continued to date. We got married in October. So the year later I had a daughter [Nicole Holder]. Two months later, I was separated, living in Phoenix, Arizona, and I did divorce him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But between the time that I graduated high school and got married, I entered coursework at IUPUI [Indiana University - Purdue University Indianapolis], here in Indianapolis [Indiana] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 651022 Speaker 1: Now, this is also the time when you're caught with this gun, right? Right after-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --right after graduating, too. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So what was the gun--well, why did you have this gun? Speaker 2: Well, I always had a gun. I mean, I had a gun from the time I was probably fifteen, sixteen years old in high school [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]. And I tell people this. They think this is a real recent phenomenon. A lot of my peers had guns in school at that time. And they were for protection. We were walking to school. We were going through Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] country. We were dealing with street people who could hurt you, and this was what I thought I needed to protect myself. So, you know, I had a gun in school. Speaker 1: Did anybody know? Speaker 2: Um-mm. I mean my peers. Speaker 1: But you say a lot of them had guns, too? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's amazing. Speaker 2: All of us had guns. Speaker 1: I just never would have guessed, you know. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: I would have guessed the fellas would have guns. Speaker 2: No. Girls too. Speaker 1: Or some of them would. Not even all of the fellas, but some of the fellas. Girls carrying a gun. Speaker 2: Um-hm. We had a, in our neighborhood, we had a youth organization. It was called the Invaders [ph.]. And it was--you remember I was telling you about some of the politicians who were, Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] who became legislators? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Well, one of these people of that era was a guy by the name of Ben Bell. And he was able to get funding for youth organizations. Well, this youth organization had a lot of characteristics of an organized gang. And a lot of the people who were part of that youth organization were people from the neighborhood, guys and girls. And we had a uniform that was--that consisted of a blue jean jacket and pants, and on the back of the jacket was a huge circle with a black fist, and across that was the Invaders for the guys and the Invaderettes [ph.] for the females. Speaker 1: The Invaderettes (laughter). Speaker 2: Invaderettes (laughter). Now, the guys, who were the Invaders, were a lot of the bad guys in the neighborhood who had guns. And that's how I got my gun, from one of them. And, because they gave them to the girls for protection. I know it sounds--it sounds-- Speaker 1: So this would have been in 1969? Speaker 2: Eight [1968], '9 [1969], '70 [1970]. All in that era. Speaker 1: Now are you familiar with the Invaders in Memphis [Tennessee]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: That was the group--it was a group, and it's still kind of mysterious about who they really were. Speaker 2: Really. Speaker 1: In Memphis, when the garbage workers struck and marched, it was the Invaders that created that initial disturbance and created the march turned into a riot, a mini riot. And that embarrassed the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], and-- Speaker 2: Oh, really. Speaker 1: --that's the one that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to town to take control of, to make sure it wouldn't happen like that (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's interesting. I didn't know that history. Speaker 1: --because they would--yeah. So that's why he was in Memphis, because of the Invaders. Story_ID: 651023 Speaker 1: Well, in fact, when, when, when Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was at the park here in Indianapolis [Indiana], the evening that MLK [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, the day, and he gave the speech that supposedly stopped blacks in Indianapolis from having demonstrations or riots like those that broke out around the country. I was in that group of Invaders [ph.] and Invaderettes [ph.] there at the park and--hearing that speech. Speaker 2: So was that at Douglass Park [Indianapolis, Indiana]? Speaker 1: No. This was at King Park [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Park, Indianapolis, Indiana]. This was on 17th [Street] and Broadway [Street]. Speaker 2: It was called King Park then? Speaker 1: Um-hm. No. It wasn't called King Park then. It was called something--I can't remember what it was. It became King Park. But it's at 17th and Broadway, and I can't remember the name of the park there. But he was there for a political rally. So all the black politicians and the, you know, the party leadership were there at the park. Speaker 2: Yeah. The speech is, a famous one, it's one that they always play when they have a piece about Bobby Kennedy. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 2: I know a young fellow working on a book in Detroit [Michigan] about Bobby Kennedy's relationship with the black community that posted this speech online. Speaker 1: Oh, really? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, there's this documentary they're doing here too about this. So the issue is did he really stop anything from happening here in Indianapolis, was part of the issue, I should say, that was being explored. Did he have that kind of juice or clout to do that? And I don't see how he could have, because everybody wasn't at the park, you know. I think it kind of spoke to the kind of people who lived here in Indianapolis at that time and even today. Even though we had segregation and racism here, blacks in Indianapolis were fairly comfortable. We did not have huge impoverished areas like a lot of major cities. So that's been my general viewpoint of why there were not riots in Indianapolis. Like I told you, we had suburbs here where there were affluent black families living. They're not going to tear up the neighborhoods, you know. We didn't have that large retail commercial areas, you know, like in Detroit where there's this, you know, rows of businesses and all that kind of stuff that can become targets for rioting. So we didn't have that here. There was a flare up on the Westside that night where Bobby Kennedy was not located. He was on the Eastside, and that was quashed by other black people, because some of the young people who were trying to cause a disturbance were about to destroy property and businesses that other blacks owned, so that was snuffed out really pretty quickly, so. You know, did he stop the rioting, I don't-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I doubt--I would doubt it. Speaker 1: I don't think so. Speaker 2: But the speech, though, was well spoken (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The speech was (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --which proves that he-- Speaker 1: Yeah. His speech was--that was his speech. Speaker 2: People remember the speech. You know, less than a month later [sic.], he was killed. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Story_ID: 651024 Speaker 1: So, high school graduation, was there anything special about the graduation [from Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]? Speaker 2: No. I--my, my boyfriend [Trotter's ex-husband, Jeffrey Trotter (ph.)] who drove up on the curb (laughter), he was there. My mother [Henrietta Ellington Brewer] and father [Charles Brewer, Jr.] weren't there. My mother and father--my parents weren't the kind of parents who went to your events, and I tell my kids [Nicole Holder and Nolan Smith, Jr.] and my grandkids that because they expect that, you're going to be there for them for anything they do. But my parents didn't come to things that we did. And we didn't begrudge them over it. They just didn't come. They were busy, they were working, they were tired or whatever. So we didn't have that kind of parental visibility, although we knew we had their support. So, we graduated, we went out to a party and that was that. We went on with our lives after graduation. Story_ID: 651025 Speaker 1: So you said you, you got married right, right after high school [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and started taking classes at IUPUI? Speaker 2: Um-hm. That stands for Indiana University - Purdue University Indianap- at Indianapolis [Indiana University - Purdue University Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana], the joint IUPU campus. Speaker 1: And I think we passed it all the way over here. Speaker 2: Oh, good. Okay. You know where it is then. It wasn't nothing like that when I went. It was one or two buildings at the most. I think it was just one building. Speaker 1: Okay. So, and, the course of your marriage, in a few months, you had--you were saying you ended up in-- Speaker 2: Phoenix. Speaker 1: Phoenix, Arizona. Speaker 2: Yeah. After my daughter [Nicole Holder] was born, I left, because I had an abusive marriage. My husband [Trotter's ex-husband, Jeffrey Trotter (ph.)] and I were fighters. So we were, like, oil and water. Speaker 1: Okay. So you all separated in Phoenix? Speaker 2: No. We separated here in Indianapolis [Indiana]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I went to Phoenix. Really I escaped to Phoenix. And so I moved to Phoenix and that's where I lived for about a year, and I came back here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But while I was in Phoenix, I went to classes there at Phoenix College [Phoenix, Arizona] and came back here and continued going to school and working. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, did you go back to IUPUI? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. I did. Speaker 1: So what were your intentions at that point, I mean, to--were you focused on becoming a writer then, a journalist or--? Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm trying--let me think. I had started--I was working at the Recorder [Indianapolis Recorder] then when I came back, and, you know, writing stories, learning the business, sort of, from the inside and the ground up. Speaker 1: So that column you wrote at the Recorder sort of, it ensconced you in the office, I mean, in terms of they knew who you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --and you could come back? Speaker 2: Yeah. And I would come back, too. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: That's exactly what happened. He knew me and, you know, I was around, and when I wanted to write I could write for them and that's what I did. So they hired me as a reporter, and I wrote for them. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you have a role model as a reporter? Speaker 2: Yeah. There were people at the Recorder who very much I give credit to for helping me learn this business. One was Houston Rogers. Houston Rogers was a wonderful writer and a wonderful mentor. Also, William Chambers [William A. Chambers]. Mr. Chambers was this brilliant man who was a columnist and writer there, too. They helped me with my writing and gave me the opportunity to write as much as I wanted to, along with Marcus Stewart, Sr.-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who was the publisher of the paper. He would--I would listen to him, so he would give me long talks about the world and life in Indianapolis and black people, and on and on he'd go. He smoked. He chained smoked, and the Recorder was a junky mess; stacks of newspapers all around. And Mr. Stewart would have a cigarette hanging off the edge of a desk with all this paper all around (laughter). And it did catch on fire, and that was the reason they moved from the Indiana Avenue area to the Eastside of town. Speaker 1: So the place didn't burn completely up, did it? Speaker 2: It burned up. Speaker 1: Did it? Whew. Now, did, did he lose a lot of history when (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Lot of pictures, lot of stuff was lost in that. Story_ID: 651026 Speaker 1: What sort of stories did you write about, at--? Speaker 2: As a reporter? Speaker 1: Yeah, as a reporter-- Speaker 2: Just city (simultaneous)- --(simultaneous) in, in those days? Speaker 1: Well, I always had a interest in writing about crime and politics. So I would write stories about murders. And at that time, when there were murders, reporters could go into the scene of the murder. It was a matter of your relationship with the investigators. And so-- Speaker 2: So you would actually come on the crime scene (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yeah. At that time, that's what they would let you do. If there was murder in the house, you'd go in the house with the police and see the body and, you know, listen to the police interviewing witnesses. You could be right there, you know, with the investigators. Can't do it anymore. They'll send you a block away now. But then, you could walk in and you'd be there. Like I say, it would depend on your relationship. Speaker 2: Now, this is 19 what? What is this, nineteen seventy-- Speaker 1: This would be '73 [1973] to '4 [1974], or '5 [1975]; in that era. Speaker 2: And you graduated in '71 [1971], right? Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: From high school [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] by 1971? Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. So this is '73 [1973], '74 [1974]. So what kind--I mean, did it make--were you squeamish at all about being around, you know--I mean, a murder scene? I imagine it would be blood, bodies, and-- Speaker 1: No. Well, not really. I left a little out. I went to work at the Wishard Hospital [Wishard Memorial Hospital, Indianapolis, Indiana], too. I got a job there after I left the Burger Chef era, but I still worked at the Recorder, too. And I had my baby, my daughter [Nicole Holder], too. So I worked in emergency at Wishard, so I was kind of really exposed to that. Speaker 2: How do you spell that hospital? Wishard. Speaker 1: It's W-I-S-H-A-R-D. It was called general hospital [Marion County General Hospital] then, but it's Wishard. Now it's got a new name. It's called Eskenazi [Sidney and Lois Eskenazi Hospital], Ecka- something Hospital, but-- Speaker 2: But it was general hospital when you were there? Speaker 1: It was general hospital, then it became Wishard Hospital while I was there; Wishard Memorial. Wishard is the name of a person. Joe Wishard [sic. William N. Wishard], I believe, is the name. But, anyway, it's the city hospital. So that's the place where crime victims were typically taken or accident victims. It was a--it's a trauma hospital. Speaker 2: So you saw a lot of trauma and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, because I worked in emergency, so. So it was kind of a natural transition to be able to see the aftermath of crime, you know, or fatal accidents. So I would go out and I'd cover those. Speaker 2: Did--So I take it that you were covering the murders in African American communities, so, basically, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: For the paper [Indianapolis Recorder]? Not the whole community? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, was there, like a--can you generalize about the crime rate then? Was it high in Indianapolis [Indiana]? Speaker 1: Not like it is now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Nothing like it is now. There were murders, of course, but nothing like now. Now the--not just here in Indianapolis, but all over the country, the African American murder rate is just off the charts now. We've had just a slew of them just recently here. But, you know, it was really interesting for me to cover murders for the paper because it just kind of gave me just this inside perspective of what people do to each other and why they do it. Because it was always amazing to me the reasons these actions took place, why people would hurt each other. On the surface it would be over bacon. But then when you look a little deeper, you would find that there was a series of incidents that related to, you know, egos and self-esteem and that kind of thing, and that's why the murders happen. It wasn't necessarily over the bacon that this person got shot or stabbed. It was, because, you know, the person who did the shooting or stabbing, had been fed up with this person's opinions, you know, a tearing down of their ego and their self-esteem or attacking their values or feeling that they're under, under attack some kind of way by that person, so he wanted to shut him up. But, you know, I just always thought that was horrible. Story_ID: 651027 Speaker 1: Okay. So these--can you--once again, can, can you generalize about what these murders were about for the most part? Were they--today, I know we have a lot of drug related crimes because people owe money to the drug man or the--you know. So, well, what were they about in those days for the most part? Speaker 2: Well, there was probably some of that, too, you know. But, there could be, you know, a murder over being disrespected. You know, "You looked at me a certain way," or, "You said something to me," or, "You looked at my woman a certain way," or, "I saw you," you know, "looking at her," or, "I saw you looking at him." You know, just those kinds of things. And on the surface, you can go how crazy that they would kill one another or someone would even have any interest in hurting one another over something like that. But, when you start looking at the families and you look deeper into the victims and the perpetrators, you just see a whole host of issues leading up to that point. And, you see it's all predestined to happen sometimes, you know. And that was one of the things I enjoyed about doing murder coverage or the crime beat. Because you saw a man at his raw form. There was nothing pretty or window dressed about it. It was just raw emotion that you're seeing here. And then, you're looking at, in many cases, the whys; why did this happen, and what led to this. Speaker 1: As a reporter for the Indianapolis Recorder, were you able to delve into any depth of any of these stories at all in terms of the reason why people--? Speaker 2: You know, not the way that I did later, 'cause I was young and new. The questions were there, but I didn't know how to kind of peel back the layers of that onion to get to the core of it. And so I couldn't get to it. The questions, I could raise, but not as deeply as I needed to, to come up with some of the answers that I found later down the line. 'Cause, now, keep in mind, I was a young twenties, twenty-one-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --nineteen, eighteen even, during some of them. So I just didn't know what questions to ask. Speaker 1: And you weren't really writing features, you know, as such-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: --right? Just reporting? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Just reporting. Now, I did do some feature stories, but I was def- most--definitely interested, mainly though, in writing what we call blood and guts then. Story_ID: 651028 Speaker 1: So, is there any particular story that you remember that, that really stands out that you still remember now that? Speaker 2: Well, a lot of them. You know, you don't forget most of those. Most of those I remember, but I think one of the--I don't want to get ahead of you here, but I did go to work at the Indianapolis Star at a pretty young age. And that's the largest daily newspaper here in the state. Speaker 1: When did you--I mean, had you finished school yet, or did you--? Speaker 2: No, I hadn't. Speaker 1: Okay. So you-- Speaker 2: No. I was still going to school. Speaker 1: Okay. So how did that take place? Speaker 2: Well, a man by the name of Reginald Bishop, who used to also be a reporter at the Recorder [Indianapolis Recorder] encouraged me to apply at the Star. Speaker 1: So this is in nineteen seventy-- Speaker 2: This would have been--I went to work at the Star in 1976. So this would have been '75 [1975], '76 [1976]. In 1975 I had another baby [Nolan Smith, Jr.], but I was still in school going part time always. Kept--continue to go part time. That's why I said I went to school in a nontraditional way. Nineteen seventy-six [1976], I went to work at the Star, but I had a two year degree at that point. Speaker 1: So did they recruit you basically or what? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: Reginald Bishop told me to, you know, apply 'cause, you know, he said that I'd worked at the Recorder since I was a teenager. I now had a two year journalism degree, which IU [Indiana University Southeast, New Albany, Indiana] was offering for the first time, and that ought to be enough. He thought that I should apply, because after all, most people who are reporters don't have a degree at all. So you, at least, have a degree that's a two year degree. And I was very intimidated about applying because I didn't--just didn't think that I qualified, you know. And he encouraged me to go ahead and apply 'cause he had gotten hired at the News. Indianapolis News was the sister paper of the Indianapolis Star. And it was the evening paper. The Star was the bigger, more dominant daily a.m. And both papers were owned by the Pulliam family. They also owned the newspapers in Phoenix [Arizona]. So I did apply, and a man by the name of Larry Connor [Lawrence Connor], who was the city editor then, said he would give me a shot. And Lawrence, Larry "Bo" Connor hired me, and I started out writing obituaries, which was a big letdown. But I wrote so many obituaries, but I did that first for--to learn the style and to learn some of the newspaper's rules for the usage of punctuation and so forth; for example, in school, you're taught a series with commas continues right through the end. So apples comma oranges comma and bananas. Well, at the Star, the comma is the and so you don't use a comma. Those kinds of rules I learned at writing obituaries. And I learned how to use the punctuation, such as a semicolon. A lot of people don't know to this day how to use the semicolon in punctuation or the colon. So this was an opportunity to learn the proper use of punctuation and grammar. Now, grammar and I were fine, because I had a mother [Henrietta Ellington Brewer] who was definitely hard on us about grammar. But punctuation, I learned it through the Star. Story_ID: 651029 Speaker 1: So punctuation was the toughest writing tool, I guess, to, to master, I guess, in the sense that, that--I mean to, to be able to proceed, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, it wasn't tough. It was a drill, but it, it, it was a necessary drill. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. So I did obituaries. And then one day, Lawrence Connor asked me if I'd be interested in working the police beat. And so I said yes. And they put me on a nightshift covering the cops. So that is when I really got baptized in murder (laughter). So that's what I did. Speaker 1: So these were--well, how is it different from covering the--that same beat for the Recorder [Indianapolis Recorder]? Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't just black people, first of all. And second of all, the volume of it was much greater, of course, because you were talking not only murders, but you're talking about major accidents or explosions or anything police and fire were called to; house fires. So, death and mayhem was what we used to kid--you know, kiddingly call that beat. At the Recorder, I didn't cover every fire that was a major fire or every major accident. The Recorder was an African American weekly, and that's who we, you know, focused on in terms of information and content, so. It was much wider. Also, you know, we had offices at the police department, so it meant forming relationships with police officers, covering not just the blood and guts part of it, but also the politics of the police department, you know. So I got to see the political side of police. I didn't see that at the Recorder. Speaker 1: Now, what was the relationship between the Indianapolis police [Indianapolis Metropolitan Police Department] and the black community in those days? Speaker 2: Well, it fluctuated, but it could be tense. I remember there was a shooting of a police officer [Robert Schachte], and there was a door to door search for a suspect described as a man who may have been a homosexual drag person, and police were literally looking under women's dresses to see if they were male or female when they were doing this search for this man, later identified as Ricky Clark--Ricky Vaughn, Ricky Vaughn [Ricky Lee Vaughn], who was eventually convicted of shooting this policeman. So that kind of tells you--and this--that particular incident caused such a huge uproar in the city. But the relationships were tense at times, much like they are today. I don't see a lot of difference, then and now. I think the difference now is you have more black police officers. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Here, we've got a black police chief [Rick Hite]. Story_ID: 651030 Speaker 1: So you're writing like--you're covering like--now how many stories would you write, say, in a week? Speaker 2: For the Star [Indianapolis Star]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Oh, gosh. Every day I had at least one story. Every day. Maybe two or three. Yeah. And then we were responsible for doing something more substantive each week, which would mean a Sunday story, so to speak. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: We did, you know, feature stories are more in depth; enterprise story they would call it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, other than--who is the brother that brought you to the Star? Speaker 2: Reggie Bishop [Reginald Bishop]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Reggie was a reporter at the Recorder [Indianapolis Recorder], too. And he left, and he was hired at the News. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he became a columnist. Reggie doesn't get a lot of credit he deserves, and this is one of the reasons I like to hold Reggie up, because Reggie used to write a column called, In Black and White [ph.]. And he wrote this multiple times a week for several years. And his job was to cover issues of significance in the black community. And his was the main voice at the Indianapolis News as it relates to what's going on among blacks in the city. He's a lawyer now. He went to law school and came out of the media business. And he's successful. But, yeah, he--he's the person who got me--he encouraged me to come. Story_ID: 651031 Speaker 1: Were there any other Af- African Americans at the Star [Indianapolis Star] or the Star newspap- paper in those days? Speaker 2: There was a woman, Jean Lamb, who was a features writer when I went to work there at the Star. And-- Speaker 1: Was Reggie [Reginald Bishop] the first African American to work for the Star? Speaker 2: No, 'cause there--for the News [Indianapolis News]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: The News or those two papers. Speaker 2: No, he wasn't. There had been a black reporter--I was looking online the other day, back in the '40s [1940s] or '50s [1950s], who went to work at the News. But now, this is the interesting thing: neither paper had a black manager or editor until I became one at the Star, which was in the early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let's see. Now, were you a part of the formation of the National Association of Black Journalists? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was a part, not of the formation, but the early membership of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That group formed with, I think, fifteen or sixteen journalists, mostly on the East Coast. And when they became a national organization, I became a part of the early membership of the NABJ. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. And so did you find--so you found that to be a useful organization to talk about-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --the traditions of the-- Speaker 2: Oh, definitely. Yeah, it's changed, you know, over the years. It's gotten bigger and bigger and bigger, but when I first started going to NABJ meetings, boy, I tell you, we could all fit in a Comfort Inn [Choice Hotels International, Inc.] very easily (laughter). You know. It was--there were just so few of us around the country at that time. And it was a wonderful support system, because we learned through each other that we weren't imagining the kinds of things we were going through. They were real, you know, and we learned some strategies for dealing with those kinds of things that we went through. I remember being at a NABJ conference one day telling the story about an experience I had at the Star as an only, so to speak, journalist there. And I had an editor who was just--he was always just picky, picking on me. And so I wanted to go to dinner with him, or lunch, just to talk to him so I could stop having him on my back all the time over all of this stuff. So I said to him, I said, "I'd like to talk with you. I'll treat you to lunch, so I can work on some of the issues that you're having with me," you know, and I was very respectful. So he said to me, "I don't like greens and cornbread and pig feet." (Laughter) That's what he said. So my father [Charles Brewer, Jr.] came out (laughter) of me. So I said a bunch of bad words to him, and he just laughed. He was so entertained by me just saying this spew of bad words to him that we became friendly. And, you know, we were friends from--'til the day he died, which hasn't been that long ago. But he was wanting me to--I guess he was wanting me to curse him out (laughter), so I did. And he was fine. But, you know, it's a story that I tell, but it has--it had a lot of impact on me, because this went on for a long time. I'm like, why is he treating me like this, what is going on, what do I need to do. And, interestingly, I became his boss. And when I saw the quality of his work and his writing, his professionalism or lack of it, I just--it was just amazing to me that he was able to hold that position, to even be hired in that position with the lack of skills that he showed me. So it's--it just kind of showed me, and I always encourage younger professionals now, "Boy, don't be intimidated by folks thinking that they're better than you." Speaker 1: So, so it kind of demystified-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it did. Speaker 1: --who was in journalism. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Story_ID: 651032 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, at some point, now, you went back to school, right, to Martin University [Martin Center College; Martin University, Indianapolis, Indiana], is that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. You know, I've always been a student down through the years. I went back, and I, yeah, I had---I wanted to, I wanted to go to a black university [HBCU], and it was a new one. It was formed in a house here. Now it has a big campus (laughter). And so, Father Boniface Hardin. And he's a celebrity of sorts. He was the founder, he and a nun, Sister Jane Schilling [Jane Edward Schilling]. And I did get a degree there. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm at the--we had a conference at Martin back in the '80s [1980s] and I met the president. And he affected a look like Frederick Douglass. Speaker 2: That's right. That's Father Hardin. Speaker 1: Is that him? Speaker 2: That's him. Speaker 1: Father Boniface Hardin? Speaker 2: Yeah. He's deceased now, but that's him. You've got a good memory. Yep. That's him. Speaker 1: Well, you couldn't forget him. He was really a dignified man, but he had this look, that Frederick Douglass look. Speaker 2: He had that wild Afro (laughter). Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: White hair. But, yeah, he was my professor, and he mentored me quite a bit. Speaker 1: Okay. And that's something. Now, it's worth mention of this. This is a new black school. It wasn't an old black schools, historical black college; it was one--it's historical black, but it was just started up by the--after the assassination of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was after. Speaker 1: And named for him. Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: Yeah. Martin University. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. And it was also named for Martin Luther. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So--but, yeah. He--Father Hardin started it with Sister Jane's support in a house at 35th [Street] and College [Avenue]. And it was really an offshoot of a sickle cell project. 'Cause next door a--was headquarters for a sickle cell project that sought to help people struggle with that illness. And classes were started I ended up teaching classes for them. In fact, I'm going to be doing a presentation this week at Martin University. It's now a university. It was college then, so. But, yeah, but I got an English degree from them, and then I went back to school again. I got my master's [degree], an M.B.A. Speaker 1: Okay. So you got your B.S. in '81 [1981]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --I guess. All right. And you're still working with the, with the Star [Indianapolis Star], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Story_ID: 651033 Speaker 1: I'm not trying to go too fast here, but, but in 1987 you become the owner, editor, and publisher of the Recorder [Indianapolis Recorder]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --is that? So, how, how did that come about, and what were--how were you getting along at the Star [Indianapolis Star], and did that have anything to do with it or was it just an opportunity or what? Speaker 2: Well, in 1986, I had--well, actually in '85 [1985], I'd started a syndicate. My belief was that, media wanted content of interest to African Americans, but did not have the staffing to provide it. That was my belief. And I began to recruit writers around the country to be content providers, and I began marketing this work to newspapers, mainstream newspapers. Now, the work included cartoon strips, columns; that kind of work, some games, puzzles, that were Afrocentric, and I marketed this, but I found that the papers that we were subscribing to were not the mainstream papers. They was the black weeklies that wanted it and subscribed to it. So I had picked up quite a few subscriptions from weeklies. And we operated much like any syndicate, King Syndicate [King Features Syndicate, Inc.]. In fact, there was a syndicate that had a name real similar to ours, but had far more resources than we had. Ours was called Syndicated Writers and Artists [Syndicated Writers and Artists, Inc.]. And the big one was Syndicated Artists and Writers [ph.]. (Laughter). So. We provided the content. A lot of newspapers couldn't pay us on time, so we grew our company by including collections persons to help us get the money that the newspapers owed us. And the business grew, and I had to make a choice here. Do I continue working for the Star or do I, you know, strike out on my own. And so I did, I struck out on my own, and I found that once I left full time employment, more opportunities opened up for me, but it wasn't related to the syndicate. There were these opportunities were companies wanting PR [public relations] service; you know, "Can you do news releases?" So I formed a PR component of the business, and it--soon really, it became the overwhelming part of the business that kept us going. So we had clients like, Indiana Black Expo. We did the publicity, the PR for the Indiana Black Expo, Madam Walker [Madam C.J. Walker], Wilma Rudolph, she was a client, and on. I won't try to name everybody that worked with us. We started in my house, and we moved into an office building, and we moved into a bigger office space. And then I got a call from the Recorder. George Thompson [George J. Thompson] was the manager. By then, Mr. Stewart [Marcus Stewart, Sr.] had died, and he wanted to know if I would come and help him manage the newsroom, because they were having issues there. So we worked out an arrangement where I would set my business down inside of the Recorder. So part of the physical facility of the Recorder was devoted to my own business. And they gave us office space for that. So I had staffing for that, and then I set out to help manage the Recorder. And soon the Recorder became the dominant presence in my life, and I ended up closing the PR services syndicate down, and then interest was offered to me to continue there at the Recorder. And that's how I ended up at the Recorder. Story_ID: 651034 Speaker 1: So by this time like are you, are you making about the same as what you were--or more than you were making at the--? Speaker 2: Moneywise? Speaker 1: Yeah. At the Star [Indianapolis Star] and (unclear) you know? Speaker 2: No (laughter). Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No (laughter). No. The Star paid me well. So when I left the Star, I knew that I wasn't going to make the same money that I was making at, you know, there, so. Speaker 1: Are you saying--are you suggesting that it was important to you to have control over your own time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I think it was. That's the father [Charles Brewer, Jr.] in me (laughter)? Speaker 1: That's your father, yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. That's the father in me. Yeah, it was more important for me to have control over what I did in life, and that I did something that I felt good about. Not that I didn't feel good about my contributions at the Star, because I did make contributions at the Star. They allowed stories that were really important, you know, for people and for black people particularly. But I felt that the Recorder [Indianapolis Recorder], I could make more of an impact on an institution that was important to us as a people. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. And I have a note here that says that in another interview, you had said that when you were, I guess, in high school [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], you visualized that one day you would be able to do something important at the Recorder. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, because I had started working, you know, at the Recorder, because I was, you know, doing the Teen Talk column, helping, running over there constantly doing this and doing that. And I hope I did make an impact there. I think that I helped that paper survive. It was--it was having a lot of trouble surviving, because of the succession of the leadership. There was not any solid leadership plan in place to succeed. You know, Mr. Stewart [Marcus Stewart, Sr.], he had sons. One died early, and another was--did not have the interest in running the paper. And there was a grandson there who didn't have the interest or the education to run it. Mr. Thompson [George J. Thompson], who was godfather to me--in fact, when I got married the second time, he gave me away. My father was deceased by then. He was tired then, you know. He had a daughter who wasn't involved in the newspaper business. And there was nobody they could pass it on to, and that's how I got really involved with the ownership side of it. And he wanted to--he was tired, he wanted to leave--'cause you know, that's a rough business. You know, running a paper is rough. It's a cash business, so you've got a lot of issues dealing with just keeping an eye on the money, because you know you have--not so much today, but back then, your paper boxes were all cash. There was no debit card boxes and that kind of thing at that time. So who you had collecting that money was real critical to your survival as a business. Speaker 1: Distribution. Speaker 2: That whole piece, again, cash. Because when you collect it from the vendors, that was all cash business. Speaker 1: You see those--you know, I mean, ads selling ads and-- Speaker 2: All of that. That's--a lot of cash in that, too. So, my mom [Henrietta Ellington Brewer], she was really proud of me. She was very much, as always, a supporter. She would come to the office, and she would act as my receptionist in my area for the syndicate part of the business [Syndicated Writers and Artists, Inc.]; not for the bigger newspaper part. But she--I gave her jobs to do, and one of her jobs was to match invoice numbers with the ads in the paper. So if an ad was in the paper and it didn't have an invoice number, there was an issue somebody had to deal with, because that meant somebody got some money to put that ad in that paper. Speaker 1: And didn't, yeah. Speaker 2: So you got to marry those two. So that, she enjoyed that, and that was her job. Story_ID: 651035 Speaker 1: Yeah, the quote I have in here is from Jet magazine. They, they covered this in Jet magazine you taking over the, the paper (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Okay. Okay. I remember that. Speaker 1: Yeah. So this is black national news here, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Indianapolis Recorder. I saw--let's see. You were at the Recorder from what time to what time? Speaker 2: Well, when you say there-- Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987]? Speaker 2: As an owner? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You started ownership in '87 [1987]. Speaker 2: Yeah, '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987], '88 [1988]. I was there in that capacity. We didn't finish the paper part of it until '88 [1988]. But from '87 [1987] until '91 [1991], I believe, '91 [1991]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know that the years that they are using in the Recorder now are not accurate, and I told them that a hundred times. But in the Recorder now, if you look at the information about some editorial page and it'll show the publishers since the beginning of the publication. They have a span of years there that are not accurate. So, but it was '87 [1987] to '91 [1991]. Speaker 1: The paper was founded, what in 1897? Speaker 2: Ninety-five [1895]. Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1895]. And so here--so, okay. So what are the highlights of your involvement with the paper, with the Recorder? Speaker 2: Well, we got the circulation. That was one thing. The circulation was dropping hard and fast. We professionalized it in terms of the operations. Now, you say--what do you mean you professionalized it? That's an insult to the previous ownership (laughter). But when I say that, I mean we computerized it; we got rid of cold type; we structured the newsroom to operate like a newsroom should operate with beats and an editor and that kind of structure. We created sections, because there was just one paper, one section. We gave it multiple sections, so that we had a sports section, we had a feature section, we had a, you know, the traditional sections of a paper; cleaned up the place (laughter), 'cause, you know, I told you Mr. Stewart [Marcus Stewart, Sr.] had stacks of paper everywhere. We got rid of all that and did a lot of work on the physical piece. We got--we brought back some good things that used to work long time ago for the Recorder. And one of those things was a Recorder Midnight Show [Indianapolis Recorder Midnight Show]. And this midnight show started at midnight at the Walker [Madame Walker Theatre Center, Indianapolis, Indiana], and it went until the show ended. And it was a Christmas, and it was a fundraiser. And we brought that back, and we had a great time there. I've got footage for that too if you ever want to see some of that, because it's on some--I have old footage. I don't know what I'm going to do with this old stuff, but. Speaker 1: Now, who would perform in this midnight show? Speaker 2: It would be local talent. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the show would start at midnight and it ended in the morning, wee hours. Speaker 1: So would it start Christmas Eve? Speaker 2: No. It was before Christmas. Speaker 1: Before Christmas. Speaker 2: It was a fundraiser, actually, for our Christmas charities fund [Indianapolis Recorder Christmas Cheer Fund]. The Recorder has a charity--it used to have a charity fund so, and that fund would buy Christmas for families; needy, you know, families. So we brought that back. We also brought back an emphasis on education through a back to school picnic and parade. And we used that parade to provide resources to kids for their return to school. So we got donated to us supplies; notebook papers, backpacks, you know; school stuff. And so, hundreds of kids would come downtown, and they would come and they get the supplies or take part in the parade. And it was a time to tell kids, "Okay. It's time to get your head together. Get ready to go back to school," you know, and that's--and so it was a big deal for them. We had hotdogs and--remember the guys I told you about who were the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and now are state legislators (laughter), they, they were really very instrumental in helping with that, particularly Glenn Howard. And so he promoted it a lot, and it got a lot of publicity and just all over the city, and a lot of support. So we brought that back. Story_ID: 651036 Speaker 1: I think this also speaks to what the aim of the individuals in the Black Pan- Panthers [Black Panther Party] actually was in the--at the outset. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, because they're often called troublemakers and such, you know. They're really, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he [Glenn Howard] was a legislator by then. Speaker 1: Yeah. He was--so his--as his career matured, he's like, he's doing something for the community. Speaker 2: And that's what he was about, really, even as a Panther, because even with the whole Panther thing, there was a whole community service focus of that group then even--then, you know, when they were, like you said, when they were Panthers. So, we--you know, we provided employment for a lot of people in a legitimate, legal way to make money. One of the things we did is we really grew our distribution, (unclear), our circulation department so that people would come in, pick up papers, pay one amount for it, but charged a face amount for it and make money. So we had a big distribution system that they don't have today. And it allowed people to make money, you know, let them know, they, you know, if they had ten bucks [dollars], they could come and get double that amount by getting papers from the Recorder [Indianapolis Recorder] to go out and sell. And we did that and just put a lot of people to work. They even, still to this day, talk about making money. We had one older couple. They were responsible for probably, I think I remember, 17 percent of our circulation. They sold so many papers (laughter). And they did it door to door, on street corners; they'd go to all the nightclubs and places were with people. And they had a route. We also created a program called, the Journalism Awareness Workshop [sic. Journalism And Writing Seminars], JAWS. And this program, JAWS program, has trained many more journalists those years. People are practicing journalism right today. I don't know if they know about the history of how that was formed. It was formed, though, Journalism Awareness Workshop was formed, because I wanted a way to give kids a chance to get the kind of training that I got, and to have the kind of opportunity available that I had at the Recorder. And we had a reporter there. His name is Jim Nelson, who agreed to help me with that. And really took, he really embraced that program. And he started it and kicked it off. And it still exists today, so it's been twenty years now still going on. And, like I said, over that twenty years, we've trained a whole lot of journalists who are people in journalism now. Those are some of the major things that we did, you know, during my time there. Speaker 1: It wasn't that long. This is about four years, right? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: About about four years at a time, so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. Worked a lot. Worked real hard. Yep we did, we worked very hard. Story_ID: 651037 Speaker 1: Well what happened now--now, so, what happened in '91 [1991] that you would leave? Speaker 2: I was married--I had remarried then. And this speaks to the Bible or (unclear) (laughter). But my husband just hated me working in the newspaper, particularly at the Recorder [Indianapolis Recorder] because I worked so much, and, you know, I worked a lot of hours. And he pressured me a lot to get out of it or to get rid of it, because he thought that I was just working too much. But I hung in there. I brought my kids in, both of my kids [Nicole Holder and Nolan Smith, Jr.]. They had jobs too. My mom [Henrietta Ellington Brewer], everybody had to work. I started everybody. But he didn't want to work. He worked at a factory, and he looked at work as being nine to five [o'clock], and you go home and you forget it. So he never saw the value of hours and the labor. So he pressured me a lot. So I said, "Okay, I'm going to sell it. I'll get out of it." You know. And that's what I did. I got out of it. So Bill Mays [HistoryMaker William G. Mays] was on my board, I had created a board of directors when I went there, which is something the Recorder hadn't had. And I thought that I needed that board for a lot of reasons. But as it turned out, it was a good thing because it allowed me to get to know Bill Mays a little better. And Bill Mays operates a chemical company here [Mays Chemical Company, Indianapolis, Indiana]. He's a millionaire. He was interested in media. He, in fact, had me consult with him about another publication and its viability. So I did consult with him about that. So we had a relationship beforehand. And he wanted to buy the paper, so he did, and he got it for a steal, I would say. He got it for a steal, so. And he's been running it ever since. He had to put a lot of money in it because he did not have the expertise personally or the people with the expertise who would do it for fourteen thousand dollars a year, which is what I paid myself. So he had to pay for it. And a business like that, you can't afford to pay the kind the salaries that should be paid for the people. The people have to have the commitment beyond the salary or you're going to die on the vine, because you can't afford it. So he, for a long time, put a ton of money into the paper to have staffing there. I stayed for a while, but his idea of newspapers and mine were different. His was that it should be a good news place. Mine was that it should be a news place; the good, bad, and ugly. And so never shall the two meet, so. Speaker 1: Now, this is a philosophical argument. I first heard around this era, I know, a young lady started a paper in Chicago [Illinois], where she only wanted to print good news. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Nothing bad. Speaker 2: Well, that's not a newspaper. And that's what I would say. That's not a newspaper. If you like--if you have just good news, it's not a newspaper. Newspaper is news. It's any information. It's what is going on around you that's good, bad, and ugly, you know. No, it should not be all negative. No, it should not be all positive. It should be what it is. And so that's, that's where we, we went. We, we, we pulled and tugged over that. Story_ID: 651038 Speaker 1: So do you think--so, so you would, I guess, disagree with the philosophy, and there is a philosophy that people--and I've heard it expressed a number of times, that, that bad news, somehow, generates bad activity or something in a--? Speaker 2: I've heard that. But, it may; you know. The whole thing I think for a lot of the whole anti-bad news groups is what appearance it has about the people who are being reported in the bad news. But my position is, that doesn't make them go away. Just because you don't write about the murders don't mean they're not out there. Should it be the headline news every day? No, because it's not affecting everybody the same way. It should be in its place. But whenever there's a death, to me that's information that should be shared. And whether you make it a front page story or a page six story, whatever, that's not as important as the fact that it should be reported. So, you know, there's a whole position of bad news sells, too. My position was information is valuable, period, whether it's bad or whether it's good, you know. Lots of people bought the paper [Indianapolis Recorder] for Teen Talk, to hear somebody, you know, reported as being my guy (laughter), you know, so. News sells, whether it's good or bad or ugly. It's, it's information that should be provided. Story_ID: 651039 Speaker 1: How did you come--now, now, you, you eventually left, though, in, what, '92 [1992], or? Speaker 2: Nine- yeah. Left the Recorder [Indianapolis Recorder] you're saying? Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. I sold my interest in the end of '90 [1990] or early part of '91 [1991] and left. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had a no compete agreement with him [HistoryMaker William G. Mays] for five years. Speaker 1: So you wouldn't start another paper. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which was fine. And so, during that time, I kind of took off and became this gypsy, working all over the country, so. And that's how I ended up working, living all over, everywhere working. Speaker 1: Okay, now. This is a lot of movement here. Where did you go first? Speaker 2: California. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Went to work for Gannett [Gannett Company, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay. This is the Stockton Record [The Record], right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yep. Went to work for Gannett. Came this way, back this way, to be a little bit closer home again. And I hadn't--I wasn't in Lafayette [Indiana] six months and got a call from the New York Post, and they offered me a really nice job, and I went there and worked there for a while and went to Florida for Gannett again, 'cause Gannett had--was starting some zones and wanted me to start some zones for them, and I did. I went there and started some papers, actually, is what it was. Speaker 1: Now, what was the paper in Lafayette? Speaker 2: The Lafayette Journal and Courier. Speaker 1: Okay. And that was in what year? Speaker 2: Ninety-three [1993]. Speaker 1: Okay. Nineteen ninety-three [1993]. Speaker 2: Something like that I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is guessing too here, Larry [Larry Crowe]. I think it's like '93 [1993]. Speaker 1: That's--you know, it's good to guess, because I don't expect you to remember every date. But that's--a good guess is better than, you know, no date at all. Speaker 2: Okay. I didn't last long there. I just stayed there a bit. It wasn't a matter of lasting because I was there covering Purdue [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana], actually, and got a call out of the blue to come to work at the--this is an interesting story right here. And it kind of shows you how things happen in this business. You know, I was active in NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], and so I'd gone to an NABJ conference that year. And while there, there was a dance, a party. You know, a lot of these organizations have their whole social piece and partying is part of it, you know, dancing. So I was dancing with a group of people, you know, and one of them was an editor at the New York Post. And so we laughed and we danced and we chitchatted afterwards just a little while, you know. So, "What do you do," and, "What are you doing," and, "What do you want to do down the road?" So I told him what I did, and where I did it, and what I wanted to do down the road, which I told him was as little as possible (laughter). And he laughed and I laughed. He called me for a job in New York [New York] based on that. And so, I asked him, I said, "Do you want to see my resume or anything?" He said, "Well, Lisa [ph.]," who was a friend of mine who worked there, "says you're cool. If you're cool with her, you're cool with me. When can you start?" (Laughter) I never sent him a resume, didn't have any clips, none of that, you know. None of this stuff was online at that time, 'cause there was no online, so. Speaker 1: So now, were you still married during this period of time? Speaker 2: Well, you know, my husband who didn't want me working, no. We got divorced. But you know-- Speaker 1: I wondered if he didn't want you working all the time, I know he wouldn't want you to be out of town working, so. Speaker 2: No. We got divorced. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I tell him, you know, we're friends today, I say to him, I said, "Instead of selling my paper, I should have got rid of you then." (Laughter) But, you know, we're friends today. He regrets that too. He tells me. He's been sick. He, he had cancer. He's been sick, and he's saying--we talk and he says he regrets pressuring me to get out of that paper, but. Story_ID: 651040 Speaker 1: But anyway, I went to work for the Post. That was a great experience for me to do that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The New York Post. Now this is the tabloid newspaper in New York City [New York, New York], the-- Speaker 1: Yes, it is (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the most famous one, and-- Speaker 1: And I was working there the day the O.J. verdict came in and covering it. And I was at Times Square [New York, New York] looking up at the big screen when they had the verdict announced, and it was like the day the Earth stood still (laughter). Everybody just froze. I mean the traffic stopped. People were looking up, you know, at the screen, you know, at Times Square, and when they said, "Not guilty," oh, boy, it was something to see. It was just a stunned, you know, atmosphere. Everybody was just stunned, you know. And, you know, I ended up--I was working on that story, and it was just something. It was really a great experience. In fact the Post gave me opportunity to cover a lot of national stories. Speaker 2: So did you cover the O.J. story? Speaker 1: Yeah. I covered a lot of the O.J. story, yeah. When the verdict came in, I was not at the trial, covering the trial [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995]. I was covering the story. I was covering reaction to the trial and, you know, all along that whole thing. Speaker 2: Now, this is--this is just for those in the future who are watching this and don't know, O.J. Simpson was accused of killing his wife [Nicole Brown Simpson]-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --in a sensational murder where--- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --they, you know, there's--there was a lot of circumstantial evidence that showed that he could have done it, perhaps; but there was also manufactured evidence on the scene that, you know, raised tension-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --between the black community and the police. Speaker 1: Right. Well, that--well, you know, this being real specific; O.J.'s black, his wife is wife, you know; beautiful woman, California lifestyle, Beverly Hills [California]. I believe they lived near that area somewhere. And O.J. was, you know, a superstar at one point in terms of his sport, and he had been into some--tiffs with authorities, so I think, down before then, down through the years. And he was probably pretty pompous and arrogant, and he was accused of that murder. And there was this big chase, a slow speed chase with him in a vehicle on a California freeway that was televised the whole time, and he was exonerated of the murder. Speaker 2: After a long trial. Speaker 1: After a long trial. It was one of the first trials that was televised about, I think, on TV throughout the whole trial. We got to see just about every bit of that trial on television, so. Lot of, lot of people were glued to the TV the whole time, you know, watching that trial. Speaker 2: Was the reaction what you would have predicted, and how was the reaction--well, did black people react the same as white people? Speaker 1: Oh, no. You know, it was really interesting. You could see the racial divide right there. Because at Times Square, all the black people, and these--you know, in New York, black people were sort of a misnomer because black could mean many nationalities, but--and white could mean many nationalities as well. But, there, you could see it, the divide. The black people at Times Square started shouting and cheering. The white people looked like they had just seen a ghost. It was a stunned silence coming from the white community there, and this cheering and this celebration coming from the black community. And it was just really interesting. I mean the traffic had stopped to watch that verdict in Times Square, you know. People had stopped. Everybody was still, just looking at the screen. It was something. Story_ID: 651041 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, when I, I came in, we were looking at some old copies of the New York Post, and some of the, the stories that you wrote and--that made the front page. And, but, the, the headlines were always different from--they aren't, they aren't written by the columnists, right? I mean the reporters. Speaker 2: No. No. They're written by the headline writer. And, yeah. They're--a lot of thought and discussion takes place on some of those headlines for the wood, which is the cover page of a tabloid. They call it the wood. And so, the wood headline has a lot of input. And it's always catchy, and it always has double meanings, triple meanings, quadruple meanings, you know. And, you know. Speaker 1: What are some of the stories that you wrote that made the front page of the Post? Speaker 2: Oh, just a bunch of--I wrote a story about the drugstores in Brooklyn [New York] giving medication without prescriptions, and they called it 'RX for Disaster' [Eunice Trotter]. And I wrote a story about a hospital worker who was molesting corpses in the morgue, which is a horrible story. Speaker 1: What did they call that? Speaker 2: There was a name for that. They--I'm trying to think of what it--it was--I can't remember the exact headline for it now, but it was--I don't have that paper over there either,' I don't think. But it was--it was something crazy, 'Sleeping with the Dead [ph.], or something like that, you know, that they had written. There was a story that I wrote about group homes. It was a wood story. There was one about Princess Di's [Diana, Princess of Wales] visit and how one of the public relations people for the mayor didn't tell the mayor that she was even in town, and she took photographs with the princess and got fired, because these photographs ended up on our front page in the media period, and he didn't even know she was in town (laughter). Speaker 1: Who was the mayor, Mayor Koch [Ed Koch]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Uh-huh. So she got fired for that, and that was a wood. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, you were--I have a note here that you were a health reporter for the New York Post at some point? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was. That's how I ended up covering hospitals. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. The, you know--so, that's the corpse story that was a hospital story. Princess Di's visit, she was at one of the hospitals, the 'RX for Disaster,' the prescription stories, the health related story. Yeah. When you covered health for the Post, or when I did anyway, it wasn't the typical coveted board meeting and that kind of thing, you know. It was--interestingly, too, the health commissioner for New York was from Indiana, from Indianapolis; Woody Myers [Woodrow A. Myers, Jr.]. He was a black man here who moved there, and he ended up being the commissioner there, so. Speaker 1: His name is Woody, too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Woodchuck (laughter), Woodrow. Speaker 1: --and wood is the cover of the-- Speaker 2: And Woody is a cover of that--wood. Speaker 1: Wow. That's, that's interesting. Story_ID: 651042 Speaker 1: So, you were there from nine--from 1996 to '98 [1998], right-- Speaker 2: Yeah, roughly (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at the New York Post? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you have a favorite-- Speaker 2: Oh, wait a minute. The Post? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No. Let's see. I was at the Post from '93 [1993] or '4 [1994], like '96 [1996]; something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Ninety-three [1993] to '96 [1996]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Or '93 [1993]--'94 [1994] to '96 [1996]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause I went to a--I went to Florida around '95 [1995] or '96 [1996]; '95 [1995] or '96 [1996] I went to Florida, and they recruited me to come there. I used to brag that I've never looked for a job. I don't know if that's worth bragging over, but I would get a call to come to work someplace. So it was up to me to say, yes or no, and usually I said no, but sometimes I said yes, and that's how I went to these different newspapers. Speaker 1: So, I mean, were you ready to leave New York City [New York, New York] at that point? Speaker 2: I was ready at that point. I really loved New York. I lived in Crown Heights [Brooklyn, New York]. And I had a lot of experiences there that were wonderful. I met so many people, international people; had just a great time. But I saw a murder. I saw this boy get shot in the head and killed right under my window. And that really did something to me, and I just--I didn't go looking for a job, but it's just like God said, "Okay. It's time for you to get out of here, now." And then I got a call from Florida from Gannett [Gannett Company, Inc.] to come to work there at Florida Today, which was the forerunner of USA Today. But I went to work there after that. I really loved New York. It was very difficult for me in New York being from the Midwest where we never have trouble parking our cars, you know. And our cars are an extension of us. There, you know, they're not. And so, but I still had my car with me, and I drove it like I did here. So I was always in my car in New York. I lived in a walk up, very nice apartment; got a steal, but it was in Crown Heights right after the big, you know, ordeal, with Hasidic Jewish people, the Caribbean people over the death of the pedestrian [Gavin Cato] incident, you know, in the accident. I don't know if you remember that. Speaker 1: Right. Right. I remember that (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it was right after that. So it was a lot of tension over the neighborhood at that time, too. And so a lot of police presence there, too. It was a good--the best of times and the worst of times, you know, there in New York for me; and not just me, but for people, period, in that neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is interesting. This is at the birth of USA Today. You know, Florida Today was a predecessor of-- Speaker 2: Of USA Today. Speaker 1: USA Today. Speaker 2: In fact, the mock up of USA Today was created at the home of the publisher of Florida Today. He had staff that helped put that together. And USA Today, initially, had a lot of characteristics of Florida Today. You have the colorfulness of it and all that, so. But it wasn't a real big stretch when I went down there to look at taking that job, you know. Ocean, house with a swimming pool (laughter). Paying less money for my rent than I was in New York by far, you know; orange trees in my yard or Crown Heights, which one I took, yeah. So, I'm like, "Okay. I'll take that one I gue-," (laughter). So that's how I ended up going there. Story_ID: 651043 Speaker 1: All right. This is 1997 or so? Speaker 2: Yeah. My mom [Henrietta Ellington Brewer] died in '96 [1996], and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that, that really did something to me too when my mom died, because she was my buddy. She came down to Florida, she was everywhere I was, you know. And I stayed in Florida a couple more years and then got a call from Mike Ritter [ph.] to, you know, look at a job in Fort Wayne, Indiana, as an editor. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is--now, Fort Wayne is a city that has really grown-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, in (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it has. Speaker 1: --because I never, until I visited, I didn't realize it was that big. I mean, you know, it didn't-- Speaker 2: It has grown. Speaker 1: --at one time it was not. Speaker 2: That's true (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) (unclear), but it's really. Speaker 2: It really has. It's still growing. It's really in a big growing spurt right now. They're doing a lot of stuff downtown, and, you know, in terms of the convention business, they're trying to track--they've got this stadium they're building too downtown, and, you know, they have things there we don't have here. Just like the African history museum there [African, African American Historical Society Museum, Fort Wayne, Indiana]. They don't--we don't have one in Indianapolis [Indiana]. We have Attucks' [Crispus Attucks Museum], you know, history museum, but, and it tries to tap into some of the African American history here, but that particular museum is African history museum. But we don't have it here in Indianapolis. Story_ID: 651044 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about the--now, so you, you moved here to be closer to your (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. My son [Nolan Smith, Jr.] got--actually, my son became ill. He was in college, and he became ill. And he was trying to finish college. He couldn't do it on his own. He needed some support more from me. And I needed to be a little bit closer, because I was flying home every other week. It was just--it got to be just kind of crazy. So I went ahead and took the job in Fort Wayne [Indiana], 'cause that would give me an hour and a half, two hour drive if I needed to get here. So that's what I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I went to work there and became an associate editor there at Fort Wayne [The News-Sentinel]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And stayed there. It was comfortable there. I liked Fort Wayne, you know. They have a--it's an interesting culture there, did a lot of good stuff there; lot of nice package of stories. One of the memorable ones was about the Hmong community there. You know, Fort Wayne has one of the largest Hmong communities in the country. Speaker 1: Yeah, Hmong are-- Speaker 2: Burm- and Burmese. Hm? Speaker 1: They're Vietnamese, ethnic group (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Burmese. You know what, I said, Hmong, but that's wrong. It's Burmese. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Burma. People from Burma. I said Hmong. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's not Hmong. It's Burmese. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I think in California, that's where the Hmong community is (laughter). But, yeah, this--it's Burmese communities, and we did a lot of stuff with them because they were this mystery people there that no one really knew much about. Speaker 1: Now, when this happens, and I've been in a city where this happened, where a foreign group of people automatically just show up. You know, they just seem to just show up overnight. And they've got jobs and they're doing things. And you say wow. How did the Burmese get to Fort Wayne? How did they-- Speaker 2: The church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. They were refugees and the church brought them here. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So. And they're doing okay. So we wrote a lot about them. Speaker 1: Did they have to do with the--did their refugee status have anything to do with the political turmoil that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Aung San Suu Kyi was involved in? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So that would have been in, I'm trying to think of what--'99 [1999], 2000, 2001. Speaker 1: Right. I mean there's a movie made around that time called 'Beyond Rangoon,' about-- Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Aung San Suu Kyi, and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Yeah, they, they're interesting people. Story_ID: 651045 Speaker 1: And then I stayed there. I stayed until 2002. My, my editor--I was associate editor--my editor, the editor of the paper [The News-Sentinel] made a move to West Palm Beach, Florida, and wanted me to come with her to be an editor there with her. And she was at The Palm Beach Post. She went there to be an editor there. And I kind of labored over it. "Oh, god." I'm--just gotten back, you know, close to home, and so I said, "Okay. I'll try it." And I went there. And I got sick there (laughter). So I didn't stay there long, and I came back here. Interestingly, there was an opening at the Star [Indianapolis Star], and I came back and went back to work at the Star. Speaker 2: So this was around 2001? Speaker 1: Two [2002]. Speaker 2: Two [2002]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay, 2002. Speaker 1: And I stayed at the Star for nine years, up until a few years ago. Speaker 2: Now, what did you do at the Star? Speaker 1: I was an editor. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I went but came back as an editor. Speaker 2: Did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I got to do some projects-- Speaker 2: --anything special section of the paper or? Speaker 1: Business. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But now, by the--now, the newspaper business is changing quite a bit. It really--it's a different business there now. There was a lot of top down management, it had been for journalism, that reporters brought the stories ideas to the editors. Yes, there were assignments of various events and news issues that were made by the editors, but increasingly, and this is going on still today, it became more top down; the editors tell the reporters what to cover and how to cover it. And that became extremely distasteful to me. So there was a lot of resistance by old heads, like myself, still going on to this day. There is an evolution on in newsrooms right now over (gesture) who tells who what to do in the newsroom and how it happens. Story_ID: 651046 Speaker 1: Does that--what you're just saying is that was that really kind of rubs against the grain of traditional journalistic philosophy, right, in terms of--? Speaker 2: Well, it depends on, you know, who you talk to about it. I mean, you have the one school of thought that we've always, as editors, managed reporters. But it was not the same way. This is my position. Reporters were the people you trusted to go out to get the information and bring it back. Now, as an editor or manager, yes, we would send the reporter back out to get different perspectives of the information or have additional questions answered, but we're not going to say to the reporter, "Go out and find someone to have a certain position." We would say, "Go out and get the positions." But not tell them, "Okay. Now, I need you to go out and find somebody who is against this," you know. "And I want you to let them tell you the reasons why they're against it, but one of the reasons needs to be this or that." You know, to that extent. We never top managed reporters to that extent. And that's what happens now, and it's not good. Speaker 1: It is across the board? Is it something that's done at a conservative paper more so than at liberal ones or vice versa or? Speaker 2: It's probably done more at corporate newspapers. When there's corporate newspaper, then you might think, well, all the newspapers are corporately operated, which is true. Most of those papers were, are corporations. But they're not corporate chains. So, and that's what is going on in some of--in many of them. And there's not that many corporate chains either. But, just be direct here, Eunice [HistoryMaker Eunice Trotter]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In the Gannett [Gannett Company, Inc.] chain, for example, that owns a hundred newspapers around the country, there is a--there's a cookie cutter approach to how news is covered. And there's a cookie cutter approach to how news is presented. That's why at many of the papers, you're going to see--they're going to look pretty much alike. The websites are going to look pretty much alike. The content is going to be pretty much alike. If it weren't for a different city, you wouldn't know if you were in Indianapolis [Indiana] or if you were in Cincinnati [Ohio] or if you, you know, you were in Stockton [California] when Stockton had a Gannett paper [The Record], because pretty much corporate says, "This is how your newsroom will operate. This is how your paper will look, this is how your website will look." So even in our training, pretty much, we're going to be told to do news in our communities the same way. My position is, every community is different, and how you do news there might not be the same way we do it here, you know. The stories that are most important there might not be the stories that are most important here. So we might not need an environmental beat here, because environmental issues may not be as important here as they are there, you know. So just because you have an environmental beat, that doesn't mean we need one here. So, you know, those kinds of decisions that are made on a corporate level have a--can have a negative impact on the news coverage in the city. So, you know, there was--we fought a lot of those kinds of issues. And it was a good time for me to get out of the business, because at some point, you got to know when to fish, and you got to know when to cut bait (laughter). So I cut bait on that. And I'm still a content provider, which is fun now for me, now 'cause I'm still providing content to newspapers. But it's been interesting from this side of the divide seeing how some newspapers, I call them purists, operate as purists. And what they say is, "We're not going to take content from non-newspaper people. It has to be from newspaper people." "Oh, really. Then how are you getting all these non-newspaper columnists in your editorial section who have never worked for a paper?" It's just they're (unclear)--you can't speak with a forked tongue, you know. If you're going to take only content from people who are trained journalists, then okay. But you can't say you're not taking content from non-journalists and then take content from some non-journalists, period, you know. What--you can't do that, so. But, it's going to be interesting to see where all this ends up, because newspapers are struggling to survive now. They don't have the circulations that they had. People don't have the time that they had either to read their products. And I think what we're going to become increasingly is less informed people. We're going to look at TV news on the run. Story_ID: 651047 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On a phone or something? Speaker 2: We're going to get it on the phone, but it's only going to be little bites and nuggets, you know. And, and I always looked at newspapers as being a defender of democracy. We are supposed to be the watchdogs for the people. We're supposed to give people the information they need to make intelligent decisions about government and other matters. And if we don't have anyone providing that information quickly, we can see a dictatorial nation arise, because it will be only the few who will know what's going on. And you know, to a large extent, we don't know what's going on anyway. But we know what's going on less now than we ever have even though we have more information providers than we ever had. It's interesting. Sometimes I'll go out on the web and just look up a particular news issue to see what all has been said about that particular issue, particularly now in the healthcare field that I'm in, in terms of working for a nursing home management company [American Senior Communities]. It's the same news. It's repeated over and over and over and over again, all over the country. No one's really getting behind that news to see what else is going on there. And it's just kind of--it's really--it's scary because, you know, I can see that, you know, if we're not real careful, we could have our democracy threatened, you know. Story_ID: 651048 Speaker 1: So is there, is there a paper or papers that you admire today that you think are doing a good job or (unclear) doing a good job (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I mean I still--The Wall Street Journal, you know. And there's some issues there, too. But The New York Times I still like. They still do a good journalism I think. There's something--there's some small papers that are doing a good job. In Fort Wayne [Indiana], The News-Sentinel does a good job. They're still--you know, they've cut back on staff, but they are still scraping, you know, they're still trying to tell stories. The Indianapolis Star has fits and starts. They--sometimes they do good with certain news and sometimes not so good. We, for example, with government we don't do too good, covering government here at all. So who knows what's going on with government here, you know, which is scary. But, yeah, there are papers doing good. You know, they're trying. They're still trying to be good newspapers. Speaker 1: Are there certain reporters or news writers that you admire the most? Speaker 2: You know, I admire investigative reporters all over the country, because they are trying to do what we are charged with doing. But we don't have very many of them anymore. You know, we don't have very many of them who are gonna--to dig in the records and talk to the people. I don't know if we would have had a Watergate exposed in 2013, because I don't know who's doing that kind of work anymore, you know. And this--but a lot of the people with the drive to do that kind of work aren't choosing this business because of what's going on with the economy in this business. You know, there's layoffs and cutbacks. I know in the last few years I was at the Indianapolis Star, we had probably three furloughs, where you're off work with no pay, can't use your vacation time. That's crazy, you know. And they're making money. But they want to be able to make more money, and that's the corporate newspaper factor. It was when the Pulliam family owned the paper, yes, they were making money then, but they didn't have, you know, stockholders to be responsible to. And now that's, that's the driving force here--that they have to perform. And they're going to do it by any means necessary, so. Story_ID: 651049 Speaker 1: Now, do you, do you read the online black news sources, like TheGrio, and like, black.com [ph.] and that sort of (unclear)? Speaker 2: Sometimes. Sometimes I do, yeah. And those, those, those are--they're good. I mean, they help me, because you don't see a lot of that on TV or--where else you're going to find that information, you know. Where else? I had an idea for a multicultural portal to collate news from various sources, but to offer it by nationality, culture, race; for example, I went to St. Louis [Missouri] just last weekend and I wanted to see what--what was going on in the black community in St. Louis. Why can't--there's no way to find that out without reading a variety of sources of information. So I wanted to bring it all together. And same thing, say, if someone wants to know what's going on in the German community here, how do you bring that together so that you know what's going on in that particular community or the Asian community, and, you know, its various components, you know. We have a Vietnamese community here. We have a Korean community here. What's going on in those communities? So I haven't really pursued that, but somebody might do that one day, because as we become more and more multiethnic, there's going to be more and more demand for that, you know, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what about AlterNet and The Huffington Post. Is that something that you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, those were good. They're not local though. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: That's not telling me what's going on here. Speaker 1: Right. Right. They sure don't. Speaker 2: Unh-uh, so. And they're doing stuff on a national level. But, again, what's going on right here. I don't know. Story_ID: 651050 Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems to be even in the radio. The trend is to have a syn- one syndicated person in some other city broadcasting all over the country. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And for the morning shows-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and the--you know, drive time show. Speaker 2: That's--and that's not good for your local community, because you don't know--I mean, there's no accountability here. We have one guy who's on radio here who, you know, blurts off about something or someone that he doesn't think is doing the right thing, but he's very biased, and I just would like to have the facts, you know, about something of issue. And I know a lot of people would. They want the facts. They don't necessarily want the editorializer, you know. I don't need you to tell me how to think about this. I--just tell me what this is, whatever this is, you know, not how to think about it, so. And that's what he does, so. I look at even the Recorder [Indianapolis Recorder]. We used to get quite a bit of, you know, news about what was going on in the black community through that medium. But it tends to be featuring magazine-ing now, you know. "The AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] are bringing their national conference here." You know, and all about the AKA. Everything you want to know about AKAs, you know. Or there's this one thing, you now, "Amos [ph.] versus," this other guy, Mohammed [ph.], whatever his name, "who's going the biggest, who's the best," you know, that kind of stuff. Who cares about that? That has nothing to do with my neighborhood, my taxes, my public officials, you know, my money, you know, the church; nothing. Speaker 1: I know in California--in Oakland a few years ago, a young man [Chauncey Bailey] who was doing an investigative report on a Muslim bakery [Your Black Muslim Bakery], and I can't think of his name now, but he's ensconced in journalism now, was actually shot and killed, and, there, you know, there's a--I think, still investigation as to shot him, but he was coming too close to something-- Speaker 2: See. That's something. Speaker 1: --and in a small paper that wasn't really making--he wasn't making a lot of money. Maybe he was doing that kind of local reporting. I've heard of other local black reporters talk about, you know, some of the danger that you could get into reporting on issues that affect the black community. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So the powers that be or so. Speaker 2: Powerful (laughter). Powerful. They want to keep that power. You know, and crooked, a lot of them. Crooked. And they want to continue to have, you know, benefit, so. You know, that's why I said we don't know what's going on in our communities now, 'cause nobody's writing about it. Story_ID: 651051 Speaker 1: Now here we are now. You left the Star [Indianapolis Star] in 2011, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, since that time, you, you've been busy doing a lot of things even though you were going to try to relax, right? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). I'm selling properties and I'm trying to just open up a hotdog stand on the beach. Speaker 1: Now, you wrote a book in, well, the book was published called, 'The Secret Lives of Seniors' [ph.]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Speaker 2: Yeah. That's a--that was a project that I did for American Senior Communities. And the--this was based on our knowledge of who were in the communities managed by this company. And there were a lot of significant people in these communities who had become elderly, and people just didn't know anything about them. And so I wrote stories about twenty-five or thirty of them. And they included TV celebrities, military heroes; as a matter of fact, one of the engineers in the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] project, one small step for man, one large step for mankind project; people who had been married seventy years, you know; people who were actors and actresses. It was just a variety of people. These were the stories about people who had achieved significance in their lives and perhaps their stories would have been lost if we hadn't published their stories. So it--there were things (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For instance, can you give us a small--I mean, a little snippet of what--of a person? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. I mean, there's one, Bob Carter. Bob Carter was known throughout Indiana as Sammy Terry. And Sammy Terry was the host of a featured called 'Nightmare Theater.' Sammy Terry also swears he's the person who coined the phrase finger licking good for Kentucky Fried Chicken [KFC Corporation]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Harland Sanders is from Indiana or that's what I heard. He's not even from Kentucky. He's from Indiana. Speaker 2: Well, he's--well, Bob Carter says that he's the one who coined that phrase, and that's how KFC had that phrase. And it was during a radio interview and he was doing it, and when he says, "Oh, this chicken is finger licking good," he used to be a radio talk show host. So he's one of the people in the book. Speaker 1: Now, he's not an African American, is he? Speaker 2: No, he's not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, it's--the book is really, it's just--it's not all African Americans. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's just a mixture of people in the book. Rosie the Riveter. You know, during the World War II [WWII] when the men were called to war, the women were left, and many women took on the roles men had in the factories, when before the war, you know, they could never have been hired to do those jobs. Well, because there was a demand for labor, they were able to get those jobs. So the stories about Rosie the Riveters and how they, you know, kept the wheel turning in these factories, many of which were producing materials needed for the war. And, you know, riveters were people who placed rivets in devices, and these women, you know, used these various pieces of machinery to do riveting, and not only the riveting, but other work, too. We had a--we have a popular restaurant up in the north part of the state that had this big, huge chicken on the roof. And it was like this landmark in that particular community. And this is corny, but it's one of the stories. And this big chicken, you know, was this landmark that so many people became familiar with. So I wrote a story about the people who bought that chicken and put it on that roof and ran that restaurant. And both of them were in the nursing home. They're both deceased now. As a matter of fact, most of the people in the book are dead now. Speaker 1: Okay. What town was this in that had the big chicken? Speaker 2: This was in, I believe, it was Auburn [Indiana]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Don't hold me to that city. But I think it's Auburn. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I shouldn't-- Speaker 1: So these are interesting human interest stories (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. These were just regular people stories. Speaker 1: --that, you know. Speaker 2: These are human interest stories. I want to do one on this rock and roll guy who's in Evansville [Indiana]. And his name is Chuck Wiley [Charles Wiley]. He has just a lot of music out on the Internet now still popular. He was in the Elvis Presley era, the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Chuck Wiley, huh? Speaker 2: Chuck Wiley. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 651052 Speaker 1: I did a story about Glenn Howard. You know, Glenn was the person I told you. He was Black Panther [Black Panther Party]. He ended up helping me in the picnic. Well, he developed Alzheimer's disease, which is a devastating disease. And I wrote a story about him and his background and his life, which I was really glad to do it because no media did it. And he really had a significant role in this community and the history of this city. And so I was able to write about him and his contribution and get that published before he died, so. So he was in there ['The Secret Lives of Seniors' (ph.)]. Just, you know, just stories about people. Speaker 2: These kinds of--how do you think these--do these stories make the community stronger you think? Speaker 1: Well, yeah. I mean, if particularly, though, this isn't a book. These kind of stories should be in newspapers, too. I mean, these are the stories that we need to tell all the time, not just in a book that a company [American Senior Communities] is producing. And I think if these stories were out there in the mainstream media, they would make a difference. Now, do they make a difference in this book, I don't--you know. They make a difference to the people who read it. But, you now, who's gonna read it? You know, I don't know. Right now, it's people who know that the book exists and that they want to get the book because their family member's in it or their friend is in it. But, but these are stories that should have been in newspapers all along. Story_ID: 651053 Speaker 1: So, let me go back again to the, your ancestor, Mary Bateman Clark. Now, you have something called the Mary Bateman Clark Enterprises [sic.]? Speaker 2: Project. Speaker 1: Project? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, project. It's not enterprises? Speaker 2: It's Mary Bateman Clark Project. Speaker 1: Okay. And when did you start the Mary Bateman Clark Project? Speaker 2: Well, that started--let me think here. Because we started informally, you know. The project, actually, was a research project, and that's the reason it was called a project. And it had became a project to get a marker placed in Vincennes, Indiana, honoring Mary Bateman Clark. And it started in 2003, '4 [2004]. We've been at it for about ten years. And when I say we, I mean myself and my sister [Ethel Brewer McCane] and people who have been supporting us to get this done. So the research first, and then after the research, the marker, which we now have placed--we are continuing the project with the documentary ['Mary Bateman Clark: A Woman of Colour and Courage']. We want to get a headstone placed in the cemetery where she's buried, and we want to get this book published as part of the project. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. This started in 2003 and there's still some goals that haven't been met? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, how did you--you might have told me in an early part. I don't think--I don't remember it though. How did you decide to pick this story up in the first place, 'cause, and you were telling me before as it relates to what your ancestors did, but I didn't--I don't think asked you about how you, you know, decided to focus on this. Speaker 2: Well, actually, it started as a genealogy project. I, you know, wanted to know more about my father's [Charles Brewer, Jr.] side of the family, because, like I said, he left Vincennes and he never went back. And he told us some things about it, but I knew that his father [Charles Brewer, Sr.] was born there, I knew his father's father was born there, and I thought, okay, this would be a great line to trace, so. It started as a genealogy project. And I guess I could have focused on a lot of different ancestors from that line, because each one--not each one, but many, I should say, have made some contributions to Indiana. And so, actually--initially, I started with Sam Clark [Trotter's paternal great-great-great-grandfather, Samuel Clark], her husband, 'cause he is the patriarch. And he's the one who was at the Battle of Tippecanoe. I found secondary support for that; newspaper clips when he died, which was in eighteen sixty something, saying that he was in the Battle of Tippecanoe with [President] William Henry Harrison. And he was a hostler, horse handler for William Henry Harrison. And so that's where I really wanted to go. But then, as I found out about his wife, and then as I went to the Recorder, which happened prior to 2003, so actually, the research story, long time ago before then. There was this trunk at the Recorder, and in this trunk, and I told you that at the Recorder is stacks of paper everywhere, junk and clutter; well, there was a big shed in the back of this building with a trunk in there, and inside that trunk was just such a treasure trove of stuff. And one of the things there was the history of the A.M.E. church [African Methodist Episcopal] of Vincennes, Indiana; the history of Bethel A.M.E. Church of Vincennes, Indiana. And this history was written by the founder of the Indianapolis Recorder before he founded the Recorder. So the Recorder was founded in 1895. The history was written prior to 1895, and it was, I think, 1891, something like that, it was written. And it was a history of Bethel A.M.E. Church that read--that include every pastor, every board trustees, all the information about when Paul Quinn [William Paul Quinn] came to visit. This whole wonderful history about that church. And in that same history book were bios of the founders, and the very first one was about Sam and Mary Clark. And so when I saw that, I thought, oh, boy. This is really coming together for me. So I began to continue on that trail, and it just really took me all through Vincennes and through--I can't count what library clippings, you know, files. If--I'm going to give you one of those videos to take and you can just--you can gleam whatever you want from that. But I just, yeah. I just--It just opened the door to a lot of information about both of them. So I really--I could have gone Mary Clark, I could have gone Sam; but Mary's court case [Mary Clark, a woman of color v. G.W. Johnston] is what made--which is what made me really glom on to her, because this--and that's not in history books. There was nothing online. There's nothing in libraries that I saw about her, you know, and this case. This was an important case, and why wasn't there some information about that. That was my question. It was the why. It was a journalistic question, you know. Why isn't this story out there somewhere. Why have we been taught that Indiana was a free state when it wasn't, you know. And why is that lie continuing to be perpetuated even today, you know, in history books. So that's why I started with that. I wanted to, to correct that history, 'cause it's--we've been, we've been told a big lie. Story_ID: 651054 Speaker 1: Well, there's another connection. I, I don't know if you're aware of this, but you know that A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] news--I guess it's a news magazine or a newsletter. It's called The Christian Recorder. Speaker 2: Yes. You know they've got that online now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So when I'm--there's a whole ton of stuff in there that I'm kind--'cause my family was so involved in A.M.E. church, they're all in it, so. It's another lifetime of research (laughter). Speaker 1: I'm sure the name Recorder has directly bounced off of The Christian Recorder, the Indianapolis Recorder. Speaker 2: Probably, because, you know, that Indianapolis Recorder started out as church news. That was the purpose of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was-- Speaker 1: And that's exactly the connection there. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: We don't even have to go any further. We know. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm. So, it became a paper, so. Story_ID: 651055 Speaker 1: So this is, these are the questions we ask at the end. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the first one is, when you think about everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could? Or change? Speaker 2: Well, I probably would have held onto the Recorder [Indianapolis Recorder] longer. That's one thing I would have done, because I'd like to see that paper doing so much more than what it's doing. I'm really glad that the current ownership has it and has kept it viable, and it looks good; but I'd like to see some content changes there. So I would have done that. I probably would have had more movement around the country, career wise; early versus late, 'cause early in my career I was pretty stable, you know, I didn't move around, I didn't look--go to other papers; waited to be an old chick to kind of do that kind of stuff, so. I would have done that a little bit differently. Other than that, there's not a thing I think I would have done differently. Story_ID: 651056 Speaker 1: Likewise, again if you look back, what today would you consider as your journalistic legacy? Speaker 2: Well, probably being a first at the Indianapolis Star, opening the door for other females and journalists of color to be managers. That was--that's the legacy part there. And I think the Star is kind of embarrassed of that because it happened so late. You know, it was the '80s [1980s], '1 [1981], '2 [1982], '3 [1983], before they hired black editors? Come on now. So, and they don't like to say that. They don't like that known. But it's a fact. And people don't realize it, but the kind of influence a black journalist has inside these newsrooms is huge. They just have no idea how huge, because so much would not be covered or so much would be covered quite a bit differently if they weren't there. So I'm, I like to think that I've had some impact there in how things were covered in our communities. Story_ID: 651057 Speaker 1: Now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, I hope that we return to some of our old values. It used to be that we definitely acted as a village. We looked out for each other. We looked out for our children. We are now afraid of our own children, let alone someone else's children. We have allowed society, today's culture, to dictate to us how we're going to keep our families together or not keep them together. It's pretty sad when, you know, we have to ask permission to--from our kids, to do things or to not do things with them, you know, like our children are running things, you know. See what I'm saying? They have gotten to a point where--. Well, here's an example: we have a program at my church, and when kids get out of school, they should do their homework. That's the old school thought. Well, the mother says to the little girl, "Do you want to do your homework now? You know you're not going to have time when you get home." So the little girl says, "No. I don't want to do my homework now. I want to go play in the gym." "Well, you're not going to be able to do your homework later." "I want to play in the gym." "Okay." (Laughter) Come on now. What? Now what is that, you know? So, do you want to do your homework now? It's, "Do your homework now." It's parent your children, you know. So, I'm--that's a big hope. And here in Indianapolis [Indiana] now, we're just--we're having so many murders of young people; nineteen, twenty, twenty-one, twenty-two years old. And this anger and this hate didn't just come up overnight, you know. They're being raised in some homes now that are creating these monsters. It's going to get worse if we don't do something, you know, about it, so. Yeah, ju- I'd like to see us return to some of our old values, you know, before we arrived. Story_ID: 651058 Speaker 1: Well tell us about--now, you have, you have two children? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, tell us about your children and your family today. Speaker 2: Well, my, my, my daughter [Nicole Holder] is a manager for CPS. She has her master's [degree]. She has an M.B.A. She is competing now for a directorship. She's trying to be a director for the state. She loves her-- Speaker 1: And CPS is? Speaker 2: It's child protective services. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she has five kids. She's married. She's been married for twenty-three or four years. So, one mama, one daddy. So, they're happy. My son [Nolan Smith, Jr.] is in school now. He's doing good. He's single. He's happy. He just moved into another apartment. It's a nice apartment, so he's really happy. He's really happier 'cause I came and helped him unpack his kitchen (laughter). That's not going to happen a lot. I'm single. I'm selling this--my home, and I'm wanting to move downtown with the hip set, so. No, I'm teasing, but I do. I want to move into a condo and get out of this house. I've been here for a while, and you know, I'm real happy doing what I do for American Senior Communities. It's a good, older lady job, I call it. My sisters [Ethel Brewer McCane and Charlesine Brewer Ford] are retired, so we're all moving toward that rocking chair moment, which I doubt we'll ever all be in the rocking chair ever. But, you know, it's a good time in life. I'm real busy in my church. I--you know, I work with organizations. I try not to join anything anymore. I used to be in so much stuff, but I try not to be in stuff, you know, and I protect my time more than I used to ten years or five years ago, you know. I say no more. And not just, "No." I say, "I can't do it, but--." I try to shove people someplace else, to someone else who's now out there trying to do some of the same things that I used to try to do. And so it's a good time in life. I'm good. Story_ID: 651059 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to raise before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Like what? My eyes are red, bloodshot (laughter). Like what? I'm thinking. What do I do for a hobby? Speaker 1: Oh, what do you do for a hobby? Speaker 2: Oh, glad you asked (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I bowl. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, you'll notice behind me over my shoulder here, there are numerous trophies (laughter) and plaques from my bowling. And I bowl with the National Traveling League [National Traveling Bowling League], which is a black organization and it's sanctioned by The National Bowling Association, which has a huge history here in Indianapolis [Indiana] and around the country, TNBA, The National Bowling Association. Speaker 1: NBA, the other-- Speaker 2: TNBA. Speaker 1: TNBA. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, TNBA. Speaker 1: Okay. They put the T in it. Speaker 2: TNBA, and that sanctions the National Traveling League. And the TNBA was formed back in the '30s [1930s], I guess, because black people couldn't bowl in white leagues. Speaker 1: Well, I imagine there's something called the American Bowling Association. Speaker 2: Um-hm. You know it [sic. American Bowling Congress]. Speaker 1: National always says that N (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black. Speaker 1: Yeah. (Unclear). Speaker 2: Black. That's why I became a national, and it was the ABC. And they couldn't--and so there were people here in Indianapolis and other parts of the country who came together to form the bowling association. And they have thousands of members now. And while, you know, blacks can join the USBC [United States Bowling Congress] now, which is the combined bowling associations, the National Bowling Association continues to exist. And, in fact, is having a national convention in Louisville [Kentucky] in May. And so, during these conventions, there is the bowling that goes on, of course. That's a part of it. But also there's a lot of networking that goes on. And it's really interesting, the people, but you have a lot of major people who are bowlers, you know, and they do this as a way to socialize, but also to network. So it's more than bowling, you know. It's the networking too that really comes into play. So that's what I do. And I'll probably do that until I'm a really old little lady, 'cause there're people in their seventies and eighties still bowling. Just get a lighter and lighter ball. And, but you know, I'll continue doing that until I can't throw any more balls; and then I'll just sit down and look into the ocean after that. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, that's a plan. Speaker 2: It's a plan. Speaker 1: A life plan. Story_ID: 651060 Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but it's a little, little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I would like to be remembered as that Brewer girl who took chance, who worked hard, who made a difference, who loved people, who made a contribution to journalism, but also to history. It goes without saying, the contribution to my family and the community, but mostly to history, because without us knowing some of that history that is still lost to us now, we can't go forward. We can't form our own legacies without having that information on which to form them. With Mary Bateman Clark, who knew about her? You know. Who knew about Mary Bateman Clark and what she did and what she went against to do it, you know. And I'm hoping that, in telling the story about others, I'll have my own legacy formed, "Who knew about [HistoryMaker] Eunice Trotter," without, you know, knowing about a Mary Clark. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you very much for sharing with us. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Thank you. Story_ID: 651061 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead and tell us about that picture. Speaker 2: Okay. The top photo was taken in the mid-1980s of me and the lieutenant governor at that time, Lieutenant Governor John Mutz. And it was taken in front of the Indianapolis Recorder building, which was located at 29th [Street] and Tacoma [Avenue]. And the bottom picture is of me with one of the labor union leaders during an event during which I received an award. Speaker 1: I ran for state senate [Indiana Senate] and this part of the campaign literature from that contest. Speaker 2: There was my headquarters when I ran for state senate, and it was a hub of activity. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me and my mom [Henrietta Ellington Brewer] that appeared on the front section of the newspaper. It was about my taking over as publisher at the Indianapolis Recorder, and my mom was right there with me to be supportive. Speaker 2: I wrote a letter to the editor when I sold the Recorder just to clarify the status of the Recorder when it was sold, which it was sound at the time that it was sold. Speaker 1: The top picture is of me and [HistoryMaker] A'Lelia Bundles, who's the great-granddaughter [sic. great-great-granddaughter] of Madam C.J. Walker, and I. We were at an awards program. And the bottom is a visit with then governor of Ohio during a film tour that I went on. Speaker 2: This was during a political event that included Ms. Fulani [Lenora Fulani], who ran as the Communist Party candidate for president. Speaker 1: These are some of the many press badges and passes that I had over the years. These show a couple from the New York Post, and I believe that was an Indianapolis working press badge. Speaker 2: This--well, that's memories. This is a picture of some of the sales staff at the Indianapolis Recorder when I was there as publisher of the Recorder. Speaker 1: Can you name them? Speaker 2: Oh, goodness. I can name--no. I can't name every--I can name most of the people there. Beverly Watkins, Cherise Scruggins [ph.], Bob Moore [Robert Moore]. I can't remember that young lady's name, but Bill Ferguson, who's deceased now. Speaker 1: This was at an event with Aja Hilliard [ph.], and myself here in Indianapolis [Indiana]. Speaker 2: The top picture is of me and some fellow actresses that performed in a play called 'The Trip' [ph.]. And the bottom picture is of, from left to right, Bill Mays [HistoryMaker William G. Mays], who is the person to whom I sold the Recorder. I'm in the middle and third from the right. And then on the end, far right, is Tom Binford [Thomas W. Binford], who was very supportive of me in my acquisition of the Indianapolis Recorder. Speaker 1: That's a much younger [HistoryMaker] Eunice Trotter at the Indianapolis Star. Speaker 2: That's a picture of most of the black publishers who were female in the United States. And you can see there's just a handful of us at that time. That was in the late '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: These are pictures of me at my office at the Indianapolis Recorder, and then some of the staff of the Indianapolis Recorder, including my mentor I mentioned earlier, Houston Rogers, who's on the left; and the man in the middle is George Thompson [George J. Thompson], who sold me his interest in the Recorder, and who was a mentor and godfather. Speaker 2: In 1987, there was a gathering of national political black women that met here in Indianapolis, and that's that group that you're looking at. They included a variety of women, including [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis; and the woman at the bottom was a lady who carried all of our luggage when we were on the trip to Japan. Women do a lot of that in Japan from the airport, interestingly. Speaker 1: This is the Indianapolis Association of Black Journalists in 1984. I was president of that group. That included some trailblazer journalists that you see pictured there. Speaker 2: I left the Indianapolis Star in 1987 the first time to start my own business, and this was a going away party. They gave me a briefcase. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): A picture of Mayor Hudnut [William H. Hudnut III]. Speaker 2: The Indianapolis Recorder had a booth at Indiana Black Expo, and this was me and Mr. Thompson at the Recorder booth being greeted by then Indianapolis mayor Hudnut. Yeah. Speaker 1: That's my mom and dad [Charles Brewer, Jr.] at Club DeLisa. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): In Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh. Speaker 1: They, I tell you, they had a good time for a long time. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter). Speaker 1: Before we came along. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Ten years before you came along. Speaker 1: That's them. And this dapper young man in most of those pictures is my dad. And as a young boy, he and his sister are pictured there as well. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is that the (unclear) one? Speaker 1: Yeah. That's my dad and his sister, Dorothy Hill [ph.]. Speaker 2: The young lady at the top left is my grandmother, Bertha Anderson [Trotter's paternal grandmother, Bertha Brewer]. She was from Princeton, Indiana. That's her to the right, as well, and other relatives in the other pictures. Speaker 1: Well (laughter), the little chocolate baby is me. That's the only baby picture I have. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Top right? Speaker 1: Right. That's my brother on the left holding my leg up. That's me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): She was a little girl being held up by her brother. Speaker 1: Yeah. My aunt used to bring these costumes. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What's your brother's name? Speaker 1: His name is Oliver Brewer. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And he's a year younger than me, so. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is this you in there? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's me. That's me at School 26 [John Hope School 26, Indianapolis, Indiana] with my-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) now, this is high school [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]? Speaker 1: Yes. That is high school. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's a high school picture of me. Looking pretty scary. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's with the dance (unclear) Harlem record. Speaker 1: (Laughter) You see why I didn't go into dance. I look like a awkward--. My aunt would bring this crap to this town--to the town. She's from Chicago. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Here we are. This is one of her headlines here. Speaker 1: Yeah, those are a variety of headlines that I've had. Yep. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Well, thank you. Speaker 1: All right..