 Story_ID: 639416 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Assisting is Neculai Burghelea. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Robin Wilson, R-O-B-I-N, W-I-L-S-O-N. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: I do not have a middle name. Speaker 1: Any nicknames? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I won't tell you (laughter), but--no, it's funny--my, I think my parents [JoAnn Scott Wilson and Rubin Wilson] always said that my last name would be my middle name when I got married, so they didn't give me a middle name. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Austin, Texas, September 26, 1969. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am the CEO of Robin Wilson Home [New York, New York]. I'm an ecofriendly interior designer for both residential and commercial projects and I've been doing this since 2000. Story_ID: 639417 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth. There are five lightweight questions we ask as--kind of a warm up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They are very lightweight. The first--and they only require short answers. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is calamari. Speaker 1: Okay. Calamari. Speaker 2: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 1: My favorite is guess blue. Speaker 2: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 1: My favorite time of year is fall. Speaker 2: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 1: I love Australia. Speaker 2: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 1: Yes. My favorite phrase or saying is what would you attempt to do if you knew you could not fail? Speaker 2: Okay. What would you attempt to do if you knew you could not fail? Story_ID: 639418 Speaker 1: I'm gonna start with asking you about your ancestors. And how far back can your family trace its history on either--Well, let's start with your mother's [JoAnn Scott Wilson] side of the family. How far back on your mother's side? Speaker 2: I can--my family can trace back to great-great-grandfather. And before that, we really don't know. Speaker 1: This is down on your mother's side? Speaker 2: That's on my mother's side. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Okay. Tell us something--what do you know about him? Speaker 2: My great-great-grandfather was a white man, his name was Richard Hill [ph.]. His nickname was Dick Hill, and he was a famous Texas lawyer. In fact, his--the white side of his family had a novel [sic.] written about them, called a 'Murder in Texas.' I believe his son [sic.] committed some severe crimes. But from the black side of the family he had a relationship with my great-great-grandmother. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: He did take care of his son. My grandfather--my great-grandfather, and that's how we began to own real estate in Texas. From what I understand at that time, African Americans could not actually buy property in Texas. And, so my great-great-grandfather funded his son and would be the lawyer of record whenever property was purchased. Speaker 1: So there's a way to get around these laws. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: If you can have the means. So, well, tell us a little bit more--now when was the--when did he live? What was his-- Speaker 2: My great-great-grandfather, I don't know too much about him. I just know oral history. But I think he probably died in the '40s [1940s] or '50s [1950s]. My grand- my great-grandfather--I actually got to know him. He died when he was ninety-nine years old. And he died when I was probably eight or nine years old. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So he would be the son of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He would be the son of Richard Hill. Speaker 1: Hill, okay. Speaker 2: That's right, his name was Robert Scott. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is your grand- your-- Speaker 2: My great-- Speaker 1: Great-grandfather. Speaker 2: --grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Robert Scott (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he was a very fair skinned man who had freckles and blue, blue-ish gray eyes, and he was wonderful, he loved jazz music, and had a Victrola, I do remember seeing the Victrola in his room, and he smoked a pipe, and occasionally I'll walk down the street and I'll smell that specific tobacco smell, and it takes me right back to being a little girl in his arms. Story_ID: 639419 Speaker 1: So did he [Wilson's maternal great-grandfather, Robert Scott] basically manage property or what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: He, he had a general store. He--in fact, this is the other part he had--what do you call it?--he had a general store, he had real estate and he did what I would call pick up work, meaning--probably little bit of bootlegging, probably, you know, some farmhand work, you know, but not, you know, he was more an entrepreneur. And, so I sort of think I got that from him. I do remember he and--so, now his son, my grandfather [Robert Scott, Sr.], my mother's father they continued the entrepreneurial tradition. And I remember on Fridays they would collect the rent, and we were little kids and we learn to count with stacks of money because back then people got paid in cash in an envelope. And, so they would get the rent before people went out to bars or restaurants to spend the money. So I remember counting money, large stacks of money, and then on Saturday morning we would take it to the bank and I'd get a lollipop, and that was my reward, along with a half dollar. My great-grandfather used to call them big nickels, and that's something that I really enjoyed. He'd say, "Do you want, do want a quarter? Do you want a big nickel?" I want a big nickel, you know, and that's, so that's just a fond memory I have. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is your-great-grandfather's your-- Speaker 2: Mother's-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --grandfather. Speaker 1: Grandfather. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. And he was probably, he was six feet--so my great-grandfather, Robert Scott was, he was probably 6'2", 6'3". He was the, he was the same height as my dad [Rubin Wilson] I know, and he had a sense of humor. He had obviously seen a lot of the world and dressed every single day in a button down shirt with a collar, and had a hat, and a jacket if necessary, but trouser pants--and when he went to work, he would dress for work. But every day he got up and dressed very nicely. Not, you know, no jeans or anything like that, so-- Speaker 1: Was he a veteran? Speaker 2: I don't know. You know, that's a question I've never asked but, I don't know. Who knows. Speaker 1: What year was he born? Speaker 2: He died (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was he like World War I [WWI] generation? Speaker 2: He would've been World War I generation because I was nine, so it would've been 1978, '79 [1979]-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --when he passed away. So that means he was, he was eighteen something I guess--I don't know, he was, he was old, let's just say that but late 1800s (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Yeah he would've been in that era. Speaker 2: World War I. Speaker 1: He, he'd been a young man. Speaker 2: At World War I. No, what I do understand and this is something that is sort of interesting within family--my mother's [JoAnn Scott Wilson] side of the family, they were what you would call country rich. They weren't rich by city standards, but they were the respected African American family who the rules did not apply in their small town. They didn't have to do the colored only water fountain, for example. They could walk in the front door of restaurants because it was the Scott family. And, so there was a certain level of respect in their small town, which was Angleton, Texas about sixty miles southeast of Houston [Texas]. Speaker 1: That's Angleton with the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A-N-G-L-E-T-O-N. It's the county seat of Brazoria County [Texas]. So you've heard of, you've heard of Washington on the Brazos [Texas]. All of the places where the Texas wars were fought, that's the heart of where my great-grandfather was so-- Speaker 1: These are the names that come up when you watch 'Lonesome Dove.' Speaker 2: Exactly, well that's (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Wild West (unclear)-- Speaker 2: That's where it was. And so one thing that is very interesting is--again part of the family lore is so many of--I think the influence of my great-great-grandfather [Richard Hill (ph.)] prevented any them usually from having to be in the war, any of the wars. I believe because, I don't believe my great-great-grandfather was in the war. I know my grandfather was not in the war, and all of my uncles were not in wars. So I think there was some family influence because that was like Vietnam [Vietnam War], that was all these--I think they got deferments or something that was typically accorded to a more welloff family. Story_ID: 639420 Speaker 1: So did the white side of the Richard Hill [ph.] family sustain a relationship with, with your people (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My [maternal] great-grandfather [Robert Scott]--while he was alive, yes. But, I don't, I think that there was a point when it was the family was on its own. Because you don't, you know, at a certain point either the mother doesn't know or the kids don't really care. And I do remember the, I do remember talking to my great-grandfather, and his entire focus on was on education, on self-empowerment, on being focused on a goal and not just being aimless. So he was very, very influential during the time that he lived. He was not--his dreams were not small, and so for me as a young girl, my dreams have never been small, and I got that from sitting with my great-grandfather, and hearing that I could do anything. Now we all know that that was a different time. But my great-grandfather when he wanted to could actually pass. And that means that he could go into downtown Houston [Texas] as a white man and conduct his business and then he would come back down to the country and be with his family. Speaker 1: Now did he go to school, I mean, or college? Did he go to college? Speaker 2: He went to eighth grade, eighth or ninth grade. I think I understand that he didn't go to a dentist until he was thirty years old. Up until that point he had chewed sugarcane to keep from getting cavities, and he died at ninety-nine, he never had a cavity, I've never had a cavity. So it's fascinating the genetics with that, but yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. You don't even chew, chew sugar cane-- Speaker 2: No, I chew a lot of bubble gum though (laughter). Story_ID: 639421 Speaker 1: Now did you know your grandparents on your mother's side? Speaker 2: I definitely did, in fact, my granny just passed away last May, May 2009, and she--I believe told us that she was ninety-two. But, when she passed away we learned she was really ninety-eight, so we thought that was really funny. But my granny was someone who really--and my grandfather were someone who very much cared about again education, about--in their case it's funny--so let's go back, my great-grandfather [Robert Scott] probably did--as I said a little bit of bootlegging, at little bit of who knows what so as a result his son became hyperreligious. So my grandfather became a minister (laughter), he continued to run the general store. He also managed the real estate. But I often use the analogy he was trying to condone for the sins. Probably my grandfather who also by the way (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was his name? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Oh, Robert Scott [Robert Scott, Sr.] again. Speaker 1: Robert Scott. Speaker 2: But, you know, what's interesting I also left out my great-grandfather. I think he also had an interest in the local bar and saloon. So interestingly enough that's probably why he got his money before the guys went to the bar, 'cause he knew how much money they were gonna spend at the bar. So it's, you know, it's small town economics. But, you know, my--one analogy I use is so many families by the fourth generation, you return to the first generation. So the first generation might be the entrepreneur, the second generation is the caretaker of it, the third generation sort of--they live off the fruits of that and often squander it, and then the fourth generation if you had any influence from any of the older generations, you often return back to the, to the roots. So I'm the entrepreneur hearkening back to my great-great-grandfather [Richard Hill (ph.)], so-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So did you all attend the same church I guess with your grandfather (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no. So my great-grandfather--my grandfather--excuse me, my grandfather became a minister and--in the Church of God which is a very strict protestant type religion. And my granny also was the--I guess, you call it a lay minister if it's a woman. She was very involved as the minister's wife. So growing up we would spend our summers down in Angleton [Texas] where I call the mosquitos as big as, you know, birds. They'd fly in and hit you on the arm. But my mom [JoAnn Scott Wilson] and dad [Rubin Wilson] lived in Austin [Texas], so that was about two and half hours away from Angleton. I would go spend my summers down there in the country. Speaker 1: Oh, what was your grandmother's name again (unclear)? Speaker 2: Willie Mae-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Willie Mae Scott [Willie Mae McNeil Scott]. And my grandfather's name was Robert Scott. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is all maternal grandparents (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, yeah. Story_ID: 639422 Speaker 1: What did your mother [JoAnn Scott Wilson] tell you about growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. Speaker 1: Did she grow up in Angleton [Texas] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She grew up in Angleton too. My mother is the third of six children, she as a middle daughter--so it was really interesting, it was girl, boy, girl, boy, girl, boy throughout the--actually no, I'm sorry she's the fourth of six children, so there's my Aunt Alice [Alice Scott Jonas], there's Uncle Robert [Robert Scott, Jr.], there is my Aunt Mary Ann [Mary Scott Leland], my mom, her brother John [John Scott], and then General [General Scott], now (laughter) General--the in- interesting time there were men in the South who were called Mister and General, and they would name their children all these titles so that -- Speaker 1: Lawyer, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly (laughter). Speaker 1: There's a famous song now 'Pants on the Ground' by General Larry [Larry Platt]. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Exactly. Speaker 1: Somebody from Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Exactly. So my mom said it was, it was a somewhat strict upbringing because they were the minister's children. They were expected to be the best in school and athletic as well, and so they all went to college. They all were athletic, my mom ran track, and she was also in the rodeo. She did the barrel racing, and her older brothers did basketball, and track as well. But mom--I didn't believe her until one day we went to a farm and she got on a horse and it was like a bicycle for her. She just took off and I was, I was cracking up 'cause it was, she was very comfortable on the animal. But, you know, so very much a free, a free environment. I think that's what I gathered from her growing up because she literally in a small town like that everyone knows your family. You know, I call it the gossip radar if they did anything wrong a phone call came, and they were told on if they did something bad. That's number one, and number two it was a safe town. By that I mean it was the county seat. They were considered a respectable family. Story_ID: 639423 Speaker 1: Now there's backstory to all of this when I say a safe town. If they use their family name it was safe. There are stories of children that went missing during that time. The Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] was very heavy in that part of Texas. My grandmother--my granny Willie Mae [Willie Mae McNeil Scott], her mother was abducted by the Klan, and when my granny was maybe twelve years old. She hid my granny and her sisters under the bed, and they came in and took my granny's mother away until the end of her life she wanted to find out what happened to her mother. Speaker 2: So she never found out what happened (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She never found out what happened to her mother. Speaker 2: Is there a story about what precipitated that I mean, you know, that we can figure out-- Speaker 1: Something in the town [Angleton, Texas], something in the town-- Speaker 2: But, we all know it was very racist-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --and violent but, you know-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --was there some kind of incident? Speaker 1: She never really talked about it. But she said literally they came in, they were burning parts of the town. The--you know, they didn't burn that house thankfully 'cause the kids were hidden under the bed, but they took her, and-- Speaker 2: So they were attacking the black community. Speaker 1: They were attacking the black community-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in that part of Texas. And so my granny's mother was never found, and 'til the end of the days she would get tears in her eyes and wonder what happened to her mother. Speaker 2: This is the one who lived to be ninety-eight then? Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: So her mother--you're talking about--this is the late 1800s, 19--? Speaker 1: No, my granny--would've been like in the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s], '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: When this happened? Speaker 1: When this happened, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: And so she never found out what happened to her mother. And, so, you know, there is that pain, and so to be married to my grandfather [Robert Scott, Sr.] who, whose father [Robert Scott] was half-white, you know, who could pass, was a safe place for her. Because if anything ever went wrong, she could call Scott. She called him Scott, she could call him, and it would get taken care of. Who knows why, but my, my mother's side of the family was never in a, in a bad position. Because of that affiliation with Richard Hill [ph.]. Story_ID: 639424 Speaker 1: So they were, they were in a better position, but the--but bad things still happened (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bad things still happened around them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, you would hear--there's an, there's so much that they kept from me and my brother [Russel Wilson] because I think my parents [JoAnn Scott Wilson and Rubin Wilson]--I call them the hippie '60s [1960s] generation. They didn't want us to grow up with anger or with hatred or with just frustration about the past. They wanted us to look toward the future. So they didn't tell us a lot of things, and there were a lot of family whispers and you would hear about something would happen to that family down the street. But they never wanted us to have that, that anger about it. Now I'm learning more as I'm older and I can sort of process it in an evenhanded way. But there were parents who I think they kept things from their children just because they didn't want us to know that your skin color could cause an issue. We were in Texas, you know, it's not the most open community in the world. Speaker 1: Just for the record what was the name of your [maternal] grandmother's mother that was abducted. Do you know her name? Speaker 2: I don't know her name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, I'll look at the funeral program. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'll try to find that for you. But I know that she--I will say this, I think my granny [Willie Mae McNeil Scott] was actually the product of a rape. Because she is very--she was--is--it's so recent that she passed away, but she was very fair skin, she had blue, blueish gray eyes just like my [maternal] grandfather [Robert Scott, Sr.]. She had Indian [Native American] type hair and by that I mean literally you could wash it and dry the car and it still looked pretty, you know, if I do that my hair does a gigantic, you know, Afro poof, you know, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I like Afros, you know. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: But, still, I know what you're saying-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the standards that people have (unclear). Speaker 2: In that time, yeah, in that time it was, you know, you had good hair, or you had bad hair and, and so that was something that was very interesting to me. She also, I think--my grandfather--it's interesting, my great-grandfather [Robert Scott] got married three times. The first time to a white woman [Annie Edmond Scott] and then they had children. And the children came out a little brown and he got divorced merrily. The second, the second was to an Indian woman [Leola Eldridge Scott] and the third was to a very dark skin African American woman [Bennie Carter Scott]. And so when I go to family reunions, there's the whole gamete of skin tones and colors and whatever, so I never grew up with barriers toward just--it was like people are people, you know, this person down the street with blonde hair and blue eyes could be my cousin and that's what I grew up with. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is not different from a lot of families, but it's interesting that your family notes--takes note of the fact--or can point to a white ancestor who was, who had a relationship. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And there's also white ancestors that are suspected. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Because of the color of-- Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Speaker 1: --had no relationship Speaker 2: Had no relationship, that's right. And that's the saddest part I think of certain history, you can't trace, but you can see and then you hear the oral history or the--what someone says we aren't gonna talk about that, especially older folks, they just don't wanna talk about it. And, and you're like no, I really wanna know, I really wanna know just for preservation. Story_ID: 639425 Speaker 1: What's your mother's name? Speaker 2: JoAnn [JoAnn Scott Wilson]. Speaker 1: JoAnn. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And how do you spell that? Speaker 2: J-O capital-A-N-N. Speaker 1: And what's her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She would kill me if I told you, but I'll whisper it to you. It's December 16th, 1947 (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. In-- Speaker 2: In Angleton, Texas. Speaker 1: She was born in Angleton? Speaker 2: Um-hm. That's right. Speaker 1: And you said she went to high school there, she was an athlete. Speaker 2: She went to Angleton High School [Angleton, Texas]. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: And then she went to the big city, Austin, Texas and went to Huston-Tillotson College [Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas] which is one of the historically black colleges [HBCUs]. At that time the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] was not very--which is my alma mater. The University of Texas did not really accept that many African American students unless they were athletes. And so my mother went to Huston-Tillotson. And in 1969 she got what many women at that time did, she got an, a Mrs. degree. She didn't graduate, but she got married [to Rubin Wilson] and had me so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: A Mrs. degree. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, now are there any favorite stories that are passed down from her, you know, about growing up that-- Speaker 2: My mom told me a story about going to Austin. And I remember because of her family having this, I would say hands off in that small town. She didn't know really--or she knew, but it was not relevant to her, the white and the colored water fountains. So when she went to Austin, she took her little tour of the state capitol [Texas State Capitol, Austin, Texas] and saw the white water fountain and the colored water fountain and she was like, I don't want colored water and drank from the white water fountain and one of the guards stopped her and she was like, but what do you mean. And she just literally, she had an awareness (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She didn't know. Speaker 2: --but she had never been stopped from doing that. And so she was a small town girl, who all of a sudden got a dose of reality in her freshman year of college. Story_ID: 639426 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So was Angleton [Texas] primarily a black town? Speaker 2: It was, it was mixed, it was the richest--you know, there's oil workers in that area. It was the richest of the small towns in the Braz- Brazoria County [Texas] area. So you had white wealthy land owners and oil field workers and--when I say workers, I mean like people who owned like oil fields. And then you had ranchers and you had the black working class or poverty class that were actually sharecroppers in the town. And in fact, when I was growing up I remember taking all my hand me down clothing to Angleton and we would put it in the church and then the next--later in the summer, later in the year I would see kids with my clothing. So there were very, very poor people who had earthen floors in their home and they were sharecroppers and there were multigenerational sharecroppers so very, very sad. When I followed some of those same children I grew up with, they didn't have the same opportunities that other children did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Very sad. Story_ID: 639427 Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side. Can you tell us about your father side of the family? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Well, my father's side of the family I really can't trace that far. We can only trace to my grandfather [Armon Wilson, Sr.], but even then I don't know the information. In fact, I must--now that I'm doing this interview I'm gonna ask my dad a little more. But my dad is from a family of--there were thirteen children. Speaker 1: And what's your father's name? Speaker 2: Oh Rubin, R-U-B-I-N Wilson [Rubin Wilson]. That's his actual--Rubin is actually his middle name and his first name is Willy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he goes by Rubin. He is the youngest of all of these children. I think he had a younger brother who actually died in--as an infant. He had a very high fever, and the nearest hospital was a white hospital and they couldn't get to the black hospital fast enough and he died en route. Speaker 1: Where was this--were did your father--? Speaker 2: My father was born in a small town that was a railroad depot that died out, and it's a black town. It was a black town called Littig, L-I-T-T-I-G, Texas, which is right outside of Bastrop [Texas] or Austin [Texas] in this, in the outskirts of the town and-- Speaker 1: Is there, is there a story about the--that town, I mean the name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's similar to Rosewood [Texas], yep, yep. So you've heard of this, yep and, so that's where all the blacks live now. The interesting thing is if you think about my mother's [JoAnn Scott Wilson] side of the family, it's more of a professional class, educated or at least aspirational to be educated. My father's side of the family was very working class. His father actually helped put the railroads down. Not working on the railroad train but, putting the railroad ties down across the State of Texas. So a working man, and, but Littig was--I actually--my dad--when I was a little girl drove, he drove us to this little town. He did a little turn off and what was left of their property was just a little water spout. And dad said this town used to be a bustling town, railroad depot, and then they rerouted the train away and the whole town died afterwards. Speaker 1: So it is now what they call a ghost town I guess. Speaker 2: It's somewhat--I mean--I think there, there are some development there with, you know, maybe fishing and spa and golf. But it's not owned by black folks like it once was. His, his stories are more harrowing and very sad, and very--dad doesn't ever really want to revisit that and his older brothers and sisters don't either. His family, so-- Speaker 1: Now he really isn't that old. He, he's like well, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My dad is seventy. He'll be seventy this year. Speaker 1: All right. So he was born more like-- Speaker 2: So he was born on June 1st, 1940. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he's the youngest, so his eldest brother was a guy named Doris [Doris Wilson]. Doris was actually very smart. He was the product of a rape, though. His--my grandmother [Pauline Ross Wilson] was very fair skinned again similar to my mother's mother [Willie Mae McNeil Scott], and how would I describe it, she was very elegant, classy even, you know, held herself with a regalness that, you know, but she was a housekeeper. But she still was, you know, did quilting and canning of perserves and almost I use--she was the ecofriendly guru to my life, right now if you think about it, she reused everything from aluminum foil to, you know, having a backyard garden. And I think that what I remember most about her is she was a very giving person, a very loving person. The--I'm bouncing around but I will simply say her first son was a product of a rape. She was raped by a black man, so her son turned our very dark skinned, and then all of the subsequent children after she married my grandfather are very brown skinned. So Uncle Doris--if you think about the timeframe when my dad was a little boy, Uncle Doris was in World War I [WWI]. So my father was a little boy and his older brother was in World War I. So there was this, there was this huge divide almost within the family. Because there's all these children and they're all different ages, and in fact--because by then my grandfather was a bit older, we called him grandpapa, what you actually saw was the eldest son caring for the family with his check. Story_ID: 639428 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wanna tell you something that I forgot earlier about my father's--my mother's side, my maternal side. I don't know how many brothers there were, but there were only three I knew about of my great-grandfather's [Robert Scott] brothers. There was, there was actually, excuse me, of my grandfather's brothers. There was Joe [ph.], my Uncle Joe and there was a guy named John. Now from what I understand John was the first black police chief or sergeant in Chicago [Illinois]. And so if you read about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is he the John what-- Speaker 1: John Scott. Speaker 2: John Scott. Speaker 1: John T. Scott and so if you read about the Chicago race riots in 1913 [sic.]. I believe he was one of the first people on the scene that tried to calm down the black crowd. So he was the first--this would've been my great-grandfather's brother I believe or my grandfather's brother. Speaker 2: Your great-grandfather's brother? Speaker 1: No my grandfather's brother, I'm sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Grandfather, okay. Speaker 1: My grandfather's-- Speaker 2: So this is your great uncle? Speaker 1: This is one of my great uncles. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he was present during the race riots that were in Chicago. Speaker 2: Nineteen nineteen [1919]? Speaker 1: Nineteen nineteen [1919] or somewhere in there. Speaker 2: Yeah, 1919. Speaker 1: So that was a--so you'll see if you read the histories, John T. Scott and he was the first black, and that was my, that was my great uncle and I don't know anything about the Chicago side of the family but I do know that my grandfather [Robert Scott, Sr.] kept a clipping in his little bag of important things for the longest time, a yellowed newspaper clipping about his brother's appointment to that role. Speaker 2: It was a very active African American Police League in Chicago [Afro-American Patrolmen's League; African American Police League]. Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness. Speaker 2: They keep some records and they preserve the history (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I would love to meet that side of the family. It's just--I mean, it's amazing to me that our family has this group of achievers and my Uncle Joe was a minister, so again I think they were trying to do the right thing no ma--I don't know what my great-grandfather did but-- Speaker 2: Was he a Chicagoan too-- Speaker 1: No he was in-- Speaker 2: --Joe Scott? Speaker 1: Joe was in Austin [Texas]. He worked at Huston-Tillotson [Huston-Tillotson College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas], which is how my mother [JoAnn Scott Wilson] ended up at Huston-Tillotson. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So you've got, you've got the-- Speaker 2: So was he teaching at Huston-Tillotson? Speaker 1: He was teaching in the divinity program and he was also a security guard there and a minister. So Uncle Joe--this would've been my great uncle and then John, who I never met, you know my grandfather's brother who was the first black police. I don't know if he was a caption or chief or sergeant, but some high ranking position and you actually see his name in history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I remembered the yellowed newspaper clipping about his appointment that my grandfather kept in his special folder of things, so I remembered seeing that. Speaker 2: Yeah, so Huston-Tillotson is HB-- Speaker 1: HB (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How do you say it, HB-- Speaker 1: HCBU [sic.]. Speaker 2: HCBU, yeah. Speaker 1: Historically black--no, HBCU (laughter). Speaker 2: HBCU, right. Speaker 1: Historically black college and university, that's right. Speaker 2: In Austin? Speaker 1: In Austin. Speaker 2: All right. Okay. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: And, so-- Speaker 1: So that's where my mom went to-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --college. Story_ID: 639429 Speaker 1: We were talking about mom [JoAnn Scott Wilson] and dad and, so you got thirteen (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On your father's side (unclear)? Speaker 1: On my father's side you got thirteen children, you got World War I [WWI], ending with, you know, 1940, what, Depression [Great Depression] time frame with more children. And literally my dad's youngest brother died on the way to the hospital. So my dad probably didn't remember this brother. But he always remembered the tears his mother [Pauline Ross Wilson] had. So my-- Speaker 2: This is Doris [Doris Wilson]? Speaker 1: No. This is--so Doris is the oldest, my dad Rubin [Rubin Wilson] is the youngest, there was one baby right after that, and I don't know his name but he died as a young child. Because he couldn't, they couldn't make it to the black hospital fast enough. And this is around the time Littig [Texas] I guess is sort of blowing up. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: And I don't know all the details. But they left, and my Uncle Doris with his [U.S.] Army check funded the purchase of a house in Austin [Texas] that was a two or three bedroom house that our family still owns, and they rent it out now. But but he--with his check--because by now you think about it, my grandmother's too old to be a housekeeper, my grandfather [Armon Wilson, Sr.] is too old to basically be a railroad worker, and they're retired but there's no retirement money. So with that eldest child, he actually cared and kept the family standards up, along with the other brothers. By the way, there were twelve boys and one girl. So my Aunt Bobbie [Bobbie Wilson], B-O-B-B-I-E is the only girl. And so of the, of the boys there are--there's my Uncle John [John Wilson], my dad, Corinthus [Corinthus Wilson] sort of like church, there are three--and maybe four. There might be--I think it's three or four that are still alive and my Aunt Bobbie, and everyone else is deceased of all those children. Now I understand that during a really bad times in Texas, so this is now part of the migration that you see of families spreading out. So you see one uncle [John T. Scott] going to Chicago [Illinois], on my mother's side. But on my father's side, they saw California as their golden land. So all of the brothers in that middle tier all went to California and to San Francisco [California] or to Los Angeles [California] and built their lives there. From what I understand my dad says that they--some of them got into illicit activities out there, and a couple were murdered and probably the drug trade, you know, music, jazz, who knows. But it was never, never--I guess when they went out there, there was a--they knew he was murdered, but nobody would talk. And so it was a, it--the police just sort of closed the case 'cause it was, you know, it was black people, and they didn't really care to pursue it. And because they were in that illicit world, nobody talked. So that was--let's say a couple of the brothers, and then the other couple became longshoremen. So again work- working with their hands, unloading ships out in the Oakland [California] area. And then I think a couple were in the [U.S.] military. Military for a lot of them was their way for freedom. I don't know that many of them graduated from high school, or if they did it was by the--as they say--my dad would say by the skin of their teeth. Because they were focused on trying to work and care for the family. My dad, his brother Corinthus and my Uncle Doris, the very first were very well educated, and my Aunt Bobbie had--she actually went to college. But they were a working class family, they were not ri- rich it was--they had to have a garden in the back just in case there were lean times. They had to do preserves, they didn't really eat out. Eating out was a special occasion. Their social activity was church, and sitting on the front porch and watching the cars go by. It was, you know, that-- Speaker 2: Did they wave at the cars? Speaker 1: Yeah, my dad is totally into cars, like literally I shouldn't know this stuff, but I know about catalytic converters, I know about carburetors, and, you know, dad had a Cutlass SS Super Sport [Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme] or whatever it was, I mean just like, you know, it's like he was so into cars. Because I think that was their other activity, you could admire a car even if you didn't own one, and so they're--they were very much a working class family. Story_ID: 639430 Speaker 1: And their aspirations were not necessarily about college. That was a big thing. My Aunt Bobbie [Wilson's paternal aunt, Bobbie Wilson] went to college, but she went to college so she could get away from home and to get married (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--did she go to Huston-Tillotson [Huston-Tillotson College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas] or did--? Speaker 1: No, she went to a school in San Antonio [Texas] and I don't know the name of the college but, she did what girls do back then you get married, you move to wherever he's from, I think he was a military person in San Antonio, and then you, then, you know, she got divorced. So that was pretty profound back in those days, and then she got married to another man who I know as my uncle, and he passed away many years ago. But yeah, it was very--like--my--if you think about the professions on my mother's [JoAnn Scott Wilson] side, you have lawyer, pharmacist, entrepreneur, insurance, professor, and I'm trying to think what the last one is--oh, a chemist at the oil plant. On my dad's [Rubin Wilson] side, you have longshoreman, bus driver which was what my dad was. My dad happened to be the, I believe the first or second African American city bus driver in Austin [Texas]. And the first or second interstate bus driver, so like Greyhound [The Greyhound Corporation; Greyhound Lines, Inc.]. And he was the first or second in the State of Texas. Speaker 2: That was a big deal. Speaker 1: That was a big deal. Speaker 2: 'Cause these are the days of the Freedom Rides. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: That sort of thing. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: He probably got that-- Speaker 1: That's right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) kind of position, yeah. Speaker 1: And dad always said that it was great when he became a highway bus driver because he had bathroom at the back of the bus. He didn't have to do what people had to do back in the day when you were traveling long distances. And he always, he talked about the respect people had when the bus driver would come into town because the bus driver would bring commerce--bring buyers to the general store. They stopped at the general store, they stopped--and people would then end up, you know, eating at the local restaurant. And so the bus driver was always like respected in those small towns, where otherwise he might not even be able to walk in the front door. But, you know, he brought news from the outside, so-- Speaker 2: Right, right and as you said previously they had been white. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Basically all white (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All white. Speaker 2: --and black folks had to probably get on the back of the bus (unclear). Speaker 1: In the back of the bus, that's right and dad-- Speaker 2: And be the driver. Speaker 1: And be the driver. He's in charge, you know, and dad also said in their union, so it's Teamster union [International Brotherhood of Teamsters], so when you joined the union you got pension, you got, you got the benefits, you got all these things and so it was a good job, you know. Story_ID: 639431 Speaker 1: My uncle--one of my uncles is a mechanic. So going back to dad [Rubin Wilson], the professions on my dad's side of the family, the mechan- the car mechanic. You have the guys who did the illegal things. You have my Uncle Doris [Doris Wilson] who, the first in the family, he was a decorated war veteran, World War I [WWI] veteran. He came back, he got the highest score on the postal service exam and, or, you know, I guess it's the GSA [General Services Administration] exam and they would only allow him to be a janitor and he fell into a depression and so then they let him be a mail sorter or something like that and back then, you know, he could've worked in an office, he could've, you know, and so he got very disenfranchised with--he's a war veteran, he gets to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So he's a decorated vet, veteran. Well, this is-- Speaker 1: Decorated veteran. Speaker 2: You--well, once again--I hate to ask you again, but you say World War I? Speaker 1: World War I. Speaker 2: Not two. Speaker 1: Not two. World War-- Speaker 2: World War I? Speaker 1: World War--oh, I'm sorry, [paternal] grandfather [Armon Wilson, Sr.] World War I, Uncle Doris, World War II [WWII]. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, all right. I-- Speaker 1: Please forgive me. Speaker 2: --get it. Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Please forgive me. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I got those dates wrong, World War II. And so my Uncle Doris is a decorated World War II veteran. Speaker 2: Yeah. Now what did he--is there a story behind his service? Speaker 1: I think he was in the [U.S.] Navy from what I understand or the [U.S.] Army, one of the two but it had something to do with front line infantry and, you know, he saved lives. He had all the little stars that people get. Decorated veteran and he got back and they were like you can be a janitor and he got the top score of whatever test he took and that was something that was always talked about always, you know, in fact, in our town there was Doris Miller Auditorium [Austin, Texas] which I believe he was a famous, famous Navy-- Speaker 2: Wait a minute. Speaker 1: --you know-- Speaker 2: This is--okay. Speaker 1: Yeah and so, I remember-- Speaker 2: Dorie, Dorie Miller [Doris Miller] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dorie Miller. That's right and so I think-- Speaker 2: That's your, that's your-- Speaker 1: No, no, no. Speaker 2: No. That's a, that's--okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's someone else. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I just remember we would drive by that auditorium. Speaker 2: You got Dorie Wilson. Speaker 1: Yeah, Dorie-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 1: Doris Wilson, that's right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And literally we'd drive by that auditorium, every single time he would grumble and he would be like, "There should be an auditorium named after me. I was a veteran, I saved lives." Speaker 2: Did he get the Congressional Medal of Honor too, or--? Speaker 1: No, no. He didn't, yeah. Speaker 2: So he received like a-- Speaker 1: He received a star--what do you call it the-- Speaker 2: The Bronze Battle Star? Speaker 1: --Purple Hearts-- Speaker 2: Purple Heart, okay. Speaker 1: --or whatever. I don't know--for saving lives. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I don't know all the designations. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But he did receive all of rewards and that was always his sadness, that it was not his time, that he had to have menial labor jobs. Instead of advancing the family or moving to the next level. And he always had aspirations to be bigger and better. But he couldn't because it was the wrong time. And he didn't have a college education. He was a dark skinned man. You know, it was all these things that as he would say conspired against him and, so he died not so happy. And-- Speaker 2: So civilian life was a letdown compared to the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Very big letdown, very big letdown. Speaker 2: --life he experienced in the war. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 639432 Speaker 1: So, you know, you have, you have dad's side of the family, though, and no matter what someone would say about what your professions are--they're wonderful warm people. They care about everyone. The path wasn't there if that makes sense, so fast forward to he meets my mother [JoAnn Scott Wilson]. How does my dad [Rubin Wilson] meet my mother, you know. Speaker 2: Now, see, he didn't meet her in school, he wasn't going to state college (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He didn't go to college. Speaker 2: So, she-- Speaker 1: He went to twelfth grade. Speaker 2: --she was there running and-- Speaker 1: She was running for the bus (laughter). Speaker 2: From the-- Speaker 1: She was running for the bus. And my dad was like who is this cute girl, and so he started taking his lunch break--she was always running late. So he started taking his lunch break right there so that she wouldn't have to run for the bus, and so he would take an extra five minutes, and my mother would come running out. The bus would be sitting there, and she'd always think it was luck that she caught the bus. And my dad was just waiting for her to get on the bus so she could go to her little, her little job (laughter). And one day he got the courage, and asked her out, or they laughed or something, and mom and dad became an item. And it's funny because my dad had a car. My dad had a good job. But he wasn't in college, so her family was like he's not good enough. His family was like she's too uppity, so it was like those clash of the titans, they fall in love, they get married and of all the aunts and uncles, they're the only ones that have stayed married. It's very--of my, on my mom's side, on my dad's, people stayed married. But it's very funny how they fell in love. They--I mean my, my mom's family had to initially provide some of the seed money for their first house. My dad's family bought them a washing machine--a dryer 'cause my uncle worked at Western Auto [Western Auto Supply Company], and he got a discount on washers and dryers, you know, my other aunt worked at Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] so they got, you know, the crib and all the other things that they needed for the house because, you know, these people are, are melded together by family, not by profession, and that's what I really learned is, you know, you have, you have, people who say today to me--they're like, "Oh, when that bus driver--," and I'm like, "My dad was a bus driver," you know, "Well, oh, you know, this person's a lawyer, and they're so great," and I'm like, "Well, you know, my aunt was lawyer, but she's sometimes not so great, you know," or whatever, you know, she--it, it's, you know, and I shouldn't--let's cut and let's repeat that 'cause I don't want my family to hear that. So, you know, what I learned was my family is melded together by family, and helping each other out, and you could have the mechanic, the lawyer, the bus driver, the pharmacist, they're all melded by family. It's not the profession, and are you a good person or not. So that's something that I grew up with and yet as you, as you know when you have a family that's so big and disparate, you go to family reunions, and some are doing very well, and some are not doing so well. And that's been a very hard dichotomy to contend with at times. Speaker 2: Yeah, every family I think has a-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --a business or reflect on the character of the individuals. Speaker 1: It's their-- Speaker 2: Not necessarily, but sometimes-- Speaker 1: It's their opportunity, it's their, it's their schools. I mean I have cousins who are five years older than me. If you think about it I was born in 1969 in Austin, Texas. I believe schools were desegregated in Austin officially in '69 [1969] or '70 [1970]. So I was part of that first little group of kids who went to desegregated schools. Which means my opportunities were greater than the kids who were five or ten years older than me. So I have a cousin who was born in 1959. She went to all black elementary schools, maybe didn't have the same education foundation that I did and struggled a little bit in high school. I was part of the, you know, the--I don't know--my parents drove me to a school. And, you know, the senators' kids went there and, you know, the doctors' kids went there, and we all grew up being friends. And my opportunities were greater because those kids were like, "Oh, we have to take the SATs next week." I'm like, "What's an SAT?" But maybe at the other school or in the other environment, no one ever talked about that. Until it was too late. Speaker 2: Or even took 'em. Speaker 1: Right or even took them-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: --until it was too late. So I sort of got on that college prep course schedule and expectations and priorities early. Story_ID: 639433 Speaker 1: Can you describe your parents' personalities-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --and tell us who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, gosh, my parents are--my dad [Rubin Wilson] is really funny. My mom [JoAnn Scott Wilson] is serious but yet, yet optimistic about anything. She believes that if you put your mind to it you can become a doctor the next day. So very optimistic. My dad is more practical and clear about the world and so I take after both of them in a unique way. I look like my mom you'll see from the pictures. My dad, I take after him with my height, I think that, I think that what I get from both of my parents is a certain vulnerability and that sounds strange but no matter how much I succeed in my life, the vulnerability comes from I know my dad's stories. My dad will tell me a story of being seven years old on a bus and he didn't move to the back of the bus fast enough and an old man called him the N word and, you know, hit his brother over the head with a cane and my uncle still has a cut on his forehead from that. So I heard those stories from my dad's side of the family. From my mom's side of the family, I basically heard flout the rules, just be yourself, you're not colored, you're not, you're not--you aren't--you are just Robin [HistoryMaker Robin Wilson], you know, be Robin. And if you are--as my mother would once say, she said, "If you were blind and you didn't know what color you were, what color would you be?" You're not a color, you're a person. You're a personality and be your personality. So this optimism almost the hippie '60s [1960s] Austin [Texas] cool of, you know, be yourself is what I grew up with. The one, the one thing that I do know, is my dad believed in hard work, believes in hard work. The one thing my mom believes is education. And so it's really funny there would be times when I would be, I would be working hard in school or something like that, but to my dad because he's a man who works with his hands and he was like, "You're studying with music on, you're not supposed to study with music on." And so he's very traditional in that way. My mother, on the other hand, was like, "Do whatever it takes to make an A." Very, very different philosophies. My dad said that, you know, his parents [Pauline Ross Wilson and Armon Wilson, Sr.] worked all the time and never went to school activities. My mom, her family went to school activities. My mom would come to every school activity we had. My dad sometimes didn't even if it meant something to us because he was on the road. He had a strange bus schedule. He drove at night sometimes and slept during the day. So we would have dinner together and then he would go out, go to work and come in at four or five [o'clock] in the morning after driving Austin to Houston [Texas] every day. Story_ID: 639434 Speaker 1: But you're saying even that he felt that he should be wor- working-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --rather, you know, than-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. He would bring home the bacon. Speaker 1: What they did. Speaker 2: He was that old school, bring home the bacon. I don't need to be there because I made sure you could participate. It's that very different, different mindset. You know, my dad [Rubin Wilson] in being a bus driver I heard so many amazing stories. He was, he was a bus driver at the time LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was president, or just after being president. And, so dad drove the charters with LBJ and got to meet people like that, and the Dallas Cowboys were a big deal. And dad drove the Dallas Cowboy charters and the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] charters. When the football team was amazing with like Earl Campbell and, you know, so you had this--dad would meet the dignitaries (laughter) when they did movie shoots in the middle of nowhere, he would be on the charter and meet the movie stars and so in his own little way, he was an ambassador for Austin [Texas] and for the black community. My parents, my parents speak very clearly and that's something that's very interesting. If we used words like ain't we got in trouble. If we used terminology that was not, that was not of the--what I would call an educated vernacular. My parents would say, "I'm sorry we're paying for you to go to private school. We are paying for you to have all the privilege," in my dad's case, "that we didn't have." Because my dad actually picked cotton for his school clothes. My dad said he started picking cotton at five or six years old and he carried these bags of cotton and that's how they paid for his school clothes. And he had a pair of shoes for Sunday and a little outfit for Sunday and everything else was one or two outfits, one pair of shoes, if it wore out, you put cardboard in the soles. So dad grew up very poor and very aware of poverty. My mother [JoAnn Scott Wilson], on the other hand, was like, "We're paying for you to go to school so you can go to college. So I didn't finish my degree [from Huston-Tillotson College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas]. I'm going to one day, but you're gonna go to college and that's your plan and that's it." And, so it's very, very much geared toward, you know, being--how do I say? Taking, taking education not as a--it's--it was a given. It wasn't I'm thinking about it. It was this is what you're going to do and so that is interesting to me when I think about my parents. I, you know, they're--in their own way they didn't know how to get me there. They didn't know how to get my, me and my brother [Russel Wilson] there, but they just knew if we went to the right schools and were surrounded by the right kids then we would take on their value system of education as a means and an end, not just a means. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that sounds interesting. There are a lot of parents who think that if they--their kids go to college, their lives are 'gonna be totally different. They don't understand that you have to have an end goal too. Just getting them into college means they could drop out the first year. They could party really hard and lose their scholarship or whatever, but to us, it was a means and an end. Story_ID: 639435 Speaker 1: So you're in an interesting situation growing up, where you got your [maternal] grandfather [Robert Scott, Sr.] is an entrepreneur and he's a big par- part of growing up. Your father's [Rubin Wilson] experience as a bus driver. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did, did, did your mother [JoAnn Scott Wilson] primarily work as a housewife or did she have jobs outside of the home. Speaker 2: My mom was a housewife until I was four or five years old and then she got a job in the insurance industry with State Farm which had a big headquarters in Austin [Texas]. And then ultimately worked for the State Board of Insurance [Texas Department of Insurance] which was a regulatory body for the insurance industry. Having that state job allowed her probably the best freedom because, you know, you had comp time, and you had holidays for all the state holidays, and Austin was a state capital so you had all those holidays. And it was only a mile from my elementary school. So in a funny way she would pick us up--we had a after school program. But she could--if anything happened at school, she could be there within like five minutes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just walking or, you know, catching a cab or something. So I don't wanna say she was a housewife. But because of her work schedule, she got-- Speaker 1: She had more freedom. Speaker 2: She had more freedom. And she could actually, she could actually be at our school, be involved in the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], you know, if you ever thought about doing something bad, it was like all over 'cause she'd be there in thirty-five seconds. Story_ID: 639436 Speaker 1: Just one more que- question about your dad [Rubin Wilson]. Is there a story about how he became the, the--one of those early bus drivers? Did, did he talk about it, was there a struggle involved in that? Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting. He had a mentor, and I call him my uncle. It's my Uncle Frank, Frank Rucker who was the city bus driver, and Frank was a pretty fair skinned black man from like Louisiana or something and when dad started at the bus company, the city bus company. After working as mail clerk--by the way, my dad has had jobs since he was five years old, picking cotton, pumping gas, delivering mail for the State. Working at the Hoffbrau steakhouse in Austin, Texas. Mixing salads. Whatever he could do to earn his own money so that he was not a burden to his parents [Pauline Ross Wilson and Armon Wilson, Sr.]. So when he got the job as a city bus driver Frank I believe trained him, and then when Frank got the job at the bus company for the--it was called Kerrville Bus Company. The owner I believe was John Mahaffey, you remember the golfer in the '70s [1970s]? John Mahaffey, Jr. They seem like an open minded family and they were willing to buck the trend. And I don't know that there were protests or something like that. But I think there were, but they hired Frank and then they said, "Who's another good guy?" And Frank said my dad. And then all of sudden you have this wonderful confluence of events where dad got the job, and it was almost like a waiting out process. Where drivers had to do charters first, and that means you are--three days you might not work straight. But then you got a call and it's like you're gonna work ten days straight 'cause you're driving the Cowboys [Dallas Cowboys] and you're driving the UT [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] football team and then you're driving LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], and then you have this off time, and so a lot of people would quit because they didn't have the steady income. Dad stuck it out, new baby (laughter), you know. Story_ID: 639437 Speaker 1: I do know one story about my parents [JoAnn Scott Wilson and Rubin Wilson], and their struggle because he didn't wanna accept money from my grandfather [Robert Scott, Sr.], my mother's father. So they had no money. I am a allergic child. I'm in the, you know, I'm--they have one car. And mom is at home, and I'm sick. And there's no way for her to drive me to the hospital. So she calls a neighbor, I get to the hospital, and now you've got a hospital bill. And I don't know if his insurance had kicked in at the time, that's one, and two you have this moment where you have, you know, he's scared, and he's on the road, and we don't have cell phones, and you don't have a pay--you know, who're you gonna call if she's not home? They don't have answering machines. So he's trying to reach my mom, and he can't reach my mom. And he's on a charter and this is gonna pay for the mortgage, and he can't come back home and it's just all this--and he said it was sheer panic, and for the first time he realized he was responsible for this little baby and my mom and like that was a real bonding moment for him. The second thing that happened one time was he'd gone without work for a while. And then he's starting to have a regular run, but now--because I'm so allergic to things they had to have this stuff called ProSobee [Enfamil ProSobee] which is a soy based baby formula, and it's very expensive. It's like ten bucks [dollars] a can or something, even today, and so, you know, instead of like the baby jars of, you know, or regular milk or whatever, they're paying a ton of money for these ProSobee things. And they'd buy 'em by the case 'cause I was a fat baby, and so they said--dad ran out of money, and he's like--but he had because he worked for the bus company, and because his brother was working for Western Auto [Western Auto Supply Company], he had an Exxon gas company [Exxon Corporation; Exxon Mobil Corporation] card, so he drives into an Exxon station, he's like--says to the drive- to the owner he said, "You know, I've gotta get food for my baby, and I don't have any money. I have this Exxon card, and I need you help me." And he said, "Well, who are you," you know, and he said, "I work for Kerrville Bus Company," and he's on his charter whatever, and the guy says--and he's trying to be quiet because he probably got passengers out and about, and the guy said, "You work for John Mahaffey [John Mahaffey, Jr.]? Well, I tell you what we'll do, you'll buy four tires from me, and you'll sell 'em right back to me, and I'll give you the money." And dad to--I mean I remember being a little girl and always wondered why we would go to this Exxon station. And as I grew up, this family was always like, "What are you doing? We're so proud of you," and then I learned the story one day. Speaker 2: Okay, that's a wonderful story. Story_ID: 639438 Speaker 1: From what I've read you were hyper-allergenic as a--or you were, you were allergic (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pan-- Speaker 1: Pan-allergic. Speaker 2: They call it pan-allergic, yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was--who knows why I, you know my dad [Rubin Wilson] had hay fever. My mom [JoAnn Scott Wilson] had other allergies and I think they all came into me and became a dominant force. But I literally, I was in the hospital for a great amount of my early months of life. I was allergic to milk. I was allergic to almost anything, dust, pollen, as they say, wheezing and sneezing outside wheezing and sneezing inside. And when you're a baby and all you're doing is screaming and, you know, crying, nobody knows. As I got older I--it was dairy. Now people think I'm saying I'm lactose intolerant. No, it's--I was literally allergic. If you gave me a piece of cheese, I would have an anaphylactic reaction. If you gave me a glass of milk I would puff up, couldn't breathe, you know, like literally having to go to the hospital and ice cream, same thing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: It was, it was a very bland diet. Speaker 1: That cuts out a lot of things in people-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --people are used to consuming. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: Then you're allergic to wheat too right (unclear)? Speaker 2: I was, I was not really allergic to wheat but I couldn't have a lot of bread, who knows why. So it was all these things that--So I had a diet--by the way, a wonderful doctor who wasn't the type that said, "Pump her full of medicine." He was like, "Let's eliminate everything from the diet. Let's start with oatmeal. Okay, once she get--we know she can have oatmeal. Now we'll try green beans. Okay, now she can have greens beans, we'll try the next thing," and so literally we learned or my parents, my mother and dad learned through multiple test and, you know, I would have, let's say a hamburger and if it was too greasy, I would have a reaction, it's just all sorts of things and who knows, and often you grow out of these things. Today kids stay away from them. Back then it was give you a little a little bit, build your tolerance up. Give you a little bit, build your tolerance up. Story_ID: 639439 Speaker 1: The story I will tell about that was--I'm--went to private school from zero to like seven, six or seven. Speaker 2: Now what, what, what school was this (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was St. Martin's Lutheran [St. Martin's Lutheran School, Austin, Texas]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --church school and, and then I went to, I started second grade at Pease Elementary, P-E-A-S-E, Elementary School in Austin [Pease Elementary School, Austin, Texas], which is the oldest public school in Austin. And St. Martin's--it was the first time I think they'd admitted kids of color into the school. And the amazing thing is there was one little boy, who I guess his parents were not the most open minded people and he called me and my brother [Russel Wilson] and the other two or three black kids the N word and he got expelled. And in another time that might have been ignored but they didn't accept that. And then we went to elementary school at a public school, which was, as I said the senators' kids went there and doctors and whatever and I-- Speaker 2: What senator? I have to ask? Speaker 1: Oh, I have no idea, you know, Denton [ph.], I mean. Speaker 2: Denton? Speaker 1: And then Jake Pickle's [J.J. Pickle] granddaughter went to my high school and--I mean my high school is Austin High School [Stephen F. Austin High School, Austin, Texas]. So George Bush's daughters [Jenna Bush Hager and Barbara Bush] went to Austin High later, many years later. So there's all sort of, you know, it was a very, it was a school where people who were on the move or people whose parents were doing well all went to the same elementary, junior high and high school and, so, you know, and you didn't know what people's parents did. You just knew you went to a birthday party and somebody had a bigger house than your house or something like that. Story_ID: 639440 Speaker 1: One story I will tell is I was in second or maybe third grade at--this is right after leaving a private school [St. Martin's Lutheran School, Austin, Texas] where they understood your dietary restrictions. Now I'm going to public school [Pease Elementary School, Austin, Texas] and this particular, particular principal, Mrs. Williams [ph.] who I believe is deceased. I will talk very freely about her--was not the nicest woman in the whole wide world and she--one day served grilled cheese sandwiches for the lunch hour and I was like, "I'm allergic. Can I have a peanut butter and jelly sandwich?" She's like, "You're just a spoiled rotten kid. No." And I said, I said, "Well, I'm allergic," and she's like, "Clean your plate" (laughter) so I ate my tater tots and I'm trying to drag out my tater tots she comes by my area and says, "Clean your plate," and I said, "But I'm allergic to cheese and we have grilled cheese and I can't--." She's like, "I'm gonna call your mother [JoAnn Scott Wilson]." I was like, "You should call my mother." She was like, "But I'm gonna call her 'cause you're disobeying me." And I'm like--I've been brought up where you obey adults. So I was like, "You need to call my mother because I'm gonna get sick right after I eat this." So I take my big ol' bite of grilled cheese sandwich within five minutes, anaphylactic reaction. I'm turning blue. I'm rushed to the hospital and, you know, she retired at the end of that year. But I mean it was like--today you'd have sued her (laughter) and the school district and everybody but back then the apology was accepted and that was it. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But from that point forward, people understood it wasn't a joke. It wasn't I was being picky. It was I was really allergic to stuff but yeah, that's my day (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, how did it make you feel? So the teacher, I mean the-- Speaker 1: Principal. Speaker 2: Yeah, the principal was calling you spoiled? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And, so then--but how did you--did you feel special because of--you-- Speaker 1: No. (Laughter) All the other kids would eat ice cream and I would eat Jell-O, you know, it was like, you know, I got my tonsils out 'cause the doctor thought maybe that was the cause of it. So I'm in the hospital with all the other kids in the ward are eating ice cream and I'm like, "Jell-O? Y'all get to eat ice cream," so you know, you're crying you know--I remember, I remember going to kids' birthday parties and ice cream and cake and I can't have ice cream. And, so it was like this thing where you just wanted what you couldn't have. I should also put--qualify this. I was born with--I don't know how you describe it. My legs were turned in, my feet and my legs were turned in and I had to wear orthopedic shoes and braces and so on top of the allergies I'm like, I look handicapped and yet I guess I am, but my parents never said I was. So I still ran and I played and I did whatever you do. But at night, this is back when I saw metal braces and my parents didn't wanna have my legs broken which a lot of kids do and then they break their legs every couple of years and they have a growth spurt. So my parents were like, "No, no, no let's try to see what we can do with the, with the metal braces and the orthopedic shoes." So I wore those things at night and they put a bar in between the legs and so you'd sleep on your back with your, you know, your feet focused and your legs perfectly straight. And, so I was not privileged. I was very, very pained. And you would go to school and boys and girls would make fun of you or try to trip you 'cause you're like a turtle, you can't really get up too easily. So I was like, "Mom, I can't wear these braces to school anymore, I just can't, you know," so she stopped--she said like, "You may not wear the braces, but you can wear, you have to wear these shoes." And these shoes looked like (laughter) they have, they look like--well, today it's probably fashionably cool, but they look like bowling shoes. That's the best way to describe it, with a cement arch in them and they're like very hard leather so your feet stay perfectly straight, and everybody else is wearing Nike sneakers and you're wearing these bowling looking shoes and you're running in them and yeah, so it was painful. Let's just put it mildly (laughter) and, you know, I mean, yeah. And I was also tall. I've been this height--I'm five [feet] eight and a half [inches], little over five eight and a half, since I was ten years old. So imagine you're as tall as your teachers. You're skinny like Olive Oyl. You have orthopedic shoes (laughter) and you are allergic to everything, not fun at elementary school. Story_ID: 639441 Speaker 1: Despite these problems-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --what were you interested in? Did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my gosh. I, you know, I loved art. I wanted to be an artist, I-- Speaker 1: I was thinking that, that when you--okay. Speaker 2: Yep, I wanted to be an artist and, so then this is where your practical parents [JoAnn Scott Wilson and Rubin Wilson] come in. Because remember there's no artists in their family. Even if they are, they hide the fact that their artists. But I wanted to be an artist. My brother--so I was, I was good with the word. I wanted to be a journalist, an artist. My brother was like--Russel [Russel Wilson] was his name. We were fourteen months apart. So he was born in, I was born in '69 [1969]. He was born in '71 [1971]. And, so he was like the engineer math type and, so you can just imagine like--he's the, he's the right brain, I'm the left brain or whichever one it is. And, so we were just two peas in a pod and mind you--he didn't have orthopedic shoes (laughter) he could eat all the ice cream he wanted (laughter) and, you know, so it was a, was a very interesting childhood. My parents never told us we were black. That's the interesting thing looking back and I asked my mom when I was in--after college [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas]. I said, "Why didn't you tell us we were black? Why did we have to learn from other kids?" She was like, "Because who you are is Robin [HistoryMaker Robin Wilson] end of subject. Who you are is Robin. No matter what color you are. There's a person inside of you, a soul, a spirit inside of you that's Robin and it's not a color." And she said, "If I develop that person or that soul, then no matter what happened in your life there's the core being, you know who you are." And I was like, "Whoa." But back then it was like, you know, I'd go to high school [Stephen F. Austin High School, Austin, Texas] and via that moment where the black kids sit at one scho- one table and the white kids sit at one table. And I was like, "But these are my friends." The white kids are my friends so, you know, busing now in junior high [O. Henry Junior High School; O. Henry Middle School, Austin, Texas] and high school and you're like. Well, I can't sit at the black table because I don't know y'all, you know, so then you'd called a sellout or an Oreo or whatever horrible terms kids think of because you are just with your friends and you speak colloquially and they want you to be down and you're not down because your parents are protecting you from the down mentality, and when I say down mentality, you know, some people would then say you're bourgeois, or bougie or whatever and it's like, you know what? Do you know what bourgeois means? It means aspirational. It means that you have goals to be better than what your ancestors were. It means that you have goals to expand your mind. It means you are, you are like the renaissance man. You want to explore and you want to find interesting things. To be down typically meant don't get an A. Don't show how smart you are, be cool. And my parents were all about, as my dad would say, "I picked cotton. You don't have to pick cotton." My mother would say, "I didn't go to the colored water fountain, you're never going to have to. So I need you, Robin, to not say ain't because ain't isn't cool in this house, no matter what your friends are doing." So there was a very pivotal moment in, you know, junior high, high school, where it's like pick a side. And I just decided to be the popular girl. I decided to be the editor of the school newspaper (laughter), you know. Run for student body president, so you knew everybody, so then people wouldn't say you're picking a side, you were just friendly with everybody. And I often just skipped lunch 'cause they were often serving grilled cheese sandwiches or things, and I would go to the library and study and just try to be the every girl to everybody kind of thing. And that was, that was my survival mechanism, instead of fitting into a clique or a crowd. Years later, you talk to those same people who gave you a really hard time, and you see where their lives have gone, and they're like, "I should've been more like you." And so that's a very interesting dichotomy that I think a lot of kids face where they're asked if you're a person of color sometimes to pick a side, and the side they should pick is what their goals are. The side they should pick is what their dreams are, and if they have the strength or the support at their family, they should continue on their path, 'cause it's their path. It's not the crowd's path. Story_ID: 639442 Speaker 1: To what extent did popular culture affect you? Now you-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --you were a little kid in the late '70s [1970s] I guess the mid-'70s [1970s] to early '80s [1980s] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So '76 [1976] I'm graduating from-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --elementary school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh no, first grade [at St. Martin's Lutheran School, Austin, Texas] I'm sorry. Speaker 1: First grade, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976] I'm graduating from first grade. So you have Elvis [Elvis Presley] passing away, you know. Why do I know that? Elvis in '77 'cause my father's father [Armon Wilson, Sr.] died the same year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, so that's, you know, it's sort of, you attribute events to what happened, what do you remember. Speaker 1: Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] the president. Speaker 2: Jimmy Carter was president. Speaker 1: In terms of the civil rights all that is like now in documentaries. Speaker 2: It's old. Speaker 1: I mean a lot of--though there's still problems. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And the big struggles, you see 'em from a different-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --perspective. Speaker 2: Right, so you're a little kid and the desegregation battles--people throwing rocks and eggs at buses, you're not part of it 'cause your parents drove you to a school that didn't have any busing. My elementary school that I went to didn't have any busing. Everyone had to be driven to school, so only a certain group of people could go to that school, and my parents [JoAnn Scott Wilson and Rubin Wilson] applied for a transfer 'cause our neighborhood school wasn't very good. And she was like, "You're not going to that school." Now I have cousins who went to that school, and their lives have taken that direction because they didn't get the best basic education (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you lived in the, in the black community? Speaker 2: We did, we did. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: We did. Speaker 1: It wasn't a special community? Speaker 2: Nope, it was a--we had probably--the house was probably two thousand square feet, three bedroom, just a little rectangular house with a yard, and very simple lifestyle. You rode your bike up and down the street and went to the park and the Little League games. And, so my first entrepreneurial experience was selling snow cones and hot dogs to the Little League games. But was I allowed to hang out on the street at, you know, the rule was the street lights come on, you better be in the house. Was there in any fear in our community? No, you know, Friday nights, people might drive by with loud radios in their car, so you're seeing a little bit of the disco era. Probably--although I didn't know you're seeing a lot of the first divorces starting to happen. You're seeing the career woman, you know, who is earning a certain amount of money. 'Cause I do remember--this is something that's interesting my dad being more blue collar than my mom. He saw---he would say sometimes, "If a woman earns more than a man, they're gonna get a divorce 'cause a woman doesn't need man anymore." So in a way--I think it's interesting 'cause my dad probably held back my mom in her growth and development. Now it was okay if she was at the state because, you know, they didn't make a lot of money at the state, and yet she had a professional job [with the State Board of Insurance; Texas Department of Insurance]. She did, she had a ceiling if you think about it. And like mom wanted to do like a jazzercise or exercise class at a health club. My dad would drive her there and wait and then, you know, we'd be in the car eating like, you know, French fries or something, and we would wait 'til mom's class was done 'cause she didn't, he didn't want her to, you know, how do you say fraternize with men wearing shorts, you know, it was that kind of very protective--and I look now and I'm like, "That was a little controlling." My mom's like, "Yeah it was, but it was a different time, you know, but he let me go to the class," and I'm like, "Mom, you could've done anything you wanted to do." She's like "No." She's like, "If you think about it, in order to get a Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] credit card, you had to have your husband or your dad sign for a Sears credit card." I was like, "Oh." You know, so it's just--the world was changing very quickly. The war was done so you got all these veterans who are now back, and one of my friend's fathers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Vietnam War? Speaker 2: Vietnam War, and once of my friend's fathers I remember they got divorced because he would have night terrors, and like, you know, and so she'd wake up in the morning like being beaten 'cause he's like, you know, he's having a night terror and doesn't realize what he's doing and whatever psychological issues of things he saw. And so that's when you first start seeing divorces happening, and you have kids who are like, "My parents are getting divorced," and you're like, "What's that," you know, so that was a strange era (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was religion a-- Story_ID: 639443 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was religion a big part of growing up (unclear)? Speaker 2: It's interesting. My dad [Rubin Wilson] is not particularly religious. My mom [JoAnn Scott Wilson] was, she forced us to go (laughter), I didn't say this. If my mom ever sees this, she forced us to go to church (laughter) on Sunday. But when we went to my [maternal] grandparents' [Willie Mae McNeil Scott and Robert Scott, Sr.] house who were the ministers. It was Sunday church--oh, Sunday school first, Sunday church. Sunday evening church. Tuesday choir practice. Wednesday prayer meeting. Thursday get the church cleaned. Friday lock in for the teenagers so they wouldn't get into trouble, so they could watch movies at the church. Saturday the--whatever prep and mowing the yard and getting the prayer books all set up properly for Sunday church. So dad's side of the family was Baptist. It was like you sin, go to church (laughter). My [maternal] great-grandfather [Robert Scott], I remember was a slight influence on my life 'til I was maybe eight or nine, and he used to say, "Church is a hospital for sinners, sometimes you need to go," (laughter), "and a lot of times you don't 'cause the sinners are up in there and they'll teach you bad tricks." I was like, "You are so scandalous," he go, but I'm a little kid, and I'm like, I'm listening to him, and then, you know, because you're so involved in the church, you're actually knowing that John Doe, is having an affair with this person, and Jane Doe is, you know, has a baby out of wedlock. But the church says you're not supposed to do that, and so you're just like seeing all these contradictions and hypocrisy, and so it makes you very aware at an early age that church is not the answer, it's who you are inside, and that's how my dad was, that was his philosophy. He's like, you know, we'll go for the christenings. We'll go to the baptisms. We'll do the Easter and Christmas and whatever, you know, Mother's Day church and things like that. But we aren't going to church every Sunday. And my mom would take us. And by I think twelve or thirteen, I was given a choice and I would choose sometimes to go and sometimes not to go. And I am Christian. However, I would say today I'm more spiritual than I am a churchgoing person. I know the Bible backward and forwards. We used to have Bible races--again I probably did enough church in my formative years that most adults haven't even been to church that much. But I mean I can quote scripture I, you know, I pray. But I do a lot of it silently, and it's just, you know, it's part of my fabric. But it's not, it's not on display, you know, I see some people who really do bad things and they're wearing their big church hat on Sunday, and I'm like (makes sound), you know, and, you know, dating four or five guys at one time, and, you know I'm like (makes sound), you know. So there's a, it's a way you conduct your life, that's the way I think I live-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as a person. Story_ID: 639444 Speaker 1: Now you were at Pease School [Pease Elementary School, Austin, Texas]? Speaker 2: Pease Elementary. Speaker 1: Elementary school. Did you have a favorite teacher there? Speaker 2: I did. Her name was Mrs. Goebbel, G-O-E-B-B-E-L, and Sherry Goebbel [ph.], and I remember--oh, my gosh, she was German, I guess that's a German name. She was blonde haired, blue eyed. She--her husband was a mechanic. Now this is funny, because my dad's [Rubin Wilson] so into cars (laughter) he knew the husband (laughter) and so--'cause he got his car repaired and so--at the Buick dealership, and I remember Mrs. Goebbel drove a Buick and my dad was like, "Oh this is great, oh, your husband works here." So we went to the Buick dealership so we could meet her husband, so her husband could work on dad's car, you know, it's like that kind of, you know, small town Austin [Texas]. And she was just really kind. She knew I wanted to be an artist and actually entered one of my drawings into a competition. I actually did what I call free hand sketching at the time of architectural things, and so it may have been a church or something of that nature, and I saw this church in a picture. I drove by it with my parents, and then I found that picture in a book. And I was like, "I want to sketch. I want to do this drawing." And so I did it, and it was very intricate detail, and I won the art competition, and they actually ended up putting the picture on the walls at the school. And I was like, "Oh, my gosh," you know, and then there's a calendar contest, and so I did one of the months, and it was--I think I did an Indian [Native American] with a headdress and everything and made that, you know, that picture made it into the calendar and, so I was like, "I'm pretty good, I know what I'm doing, this is great," and then reality intrudes and, you know, your parents say, "You're not gonna be an artist, you're gonna do business or something different so--." But, you know, one thing though I'll tell you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they actually told you that (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. You can't make money being a journalist, you can't make money being an artist, you've gotta make some money so it's like okay, you know. Story_ID: 639445 Speaker 1: The other thing I will tell you that's really funny about my life is at that same time--I don't know if you remember Apple Macintosh when they finally came out with a IIc. They had a commercial that said, "Even an eight year old can do it." I was part of that eight year old test group, so 1978, '79 [1979] I was part of the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], beta test program that was run at Pease [Pease Elementary School, Austin, Texas], and they brought in this box. The Apple IIc, the prototypes, and I think they had twenty or so of these (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is that prototypes of the little PC [personal computer], the one, the little (unclear) that sits like-- Speaker 1: It looked, yeah. Little bitty, little bitty screen and they put--I think there were two or three of them in the room, and we don't know what it is, and they don't have any instructions, and we're little kids, and they have this double window. What do you call it a, you know, where you can see through the window, but people can't see you. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Twoway, twoway mirror, and so we're sitting there playing, and they're like, "Figure out how to use this box. Next week you'll get some instructions." We're like, "That's what we have to do for an hour?" So we're in this gifted and talented program. So you have no grades, it's like whatever you wanna do, so that's why the arts coming out. And, so now you have this computer thing. But we don't know what a computer is, they're just like, "We'll call it Apple," you know, or whatever. So we're like okay. So finally one day, you know, we're--like three kids are to a team, and we figure out how to turn the thing on. It's a little switch at the back, and we're like, "Okay," it's got a keyboard and you're like, "It's not a typewriter, but what do you do," you know, so it's like--and we figured it out. By the end of the year we were programming, we were doing little dumb programs. But I mean--so the next week you got some instructions. It gave you clues about how you could do more and then the next week you got more instructions, and so we were just building on our knowledge base. Then so I would say I'm part of the first set of kids that actually grew up with computers, so I'm not a second generation computer kid. I'm--it's part of my DNA. Speaker 2: So how old were you at Pease when you did--about eight you say? Speaker 1: Eight or nine, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I was in second or third grade--I was in third grade and they put me in a fourth or fifth grade gifted and talented program. And it's wild--one of the kids from my--from that program is actually a gifted computer programmer. I think went to work at Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation], and he's one of those Microsoft millionaires 'cause it's part of what we do. It's a logic map. We understand the if then statements 'cause back then it was if X equals Y then, and you had to almost program in BASIC [Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code] and then COBOL [Common Business Oriented Language] and, you know, Fortran [Formula Translation], and then later you had the easy interfaces that we see today. But we understood how to program back then so-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, and I was the only black kid in the program, which was really funny because there would be--they would ask me certain ethnic questions I had no clue, I'm like, "I don't know," you know, what do black people think about this? I'm like, "I don't know," you know, and I'd call my other friend. So it was very much still Austin [Texas] or still the world was that time like they thought that you as an individual understood how the whole world worked with your community, and you're like I don't know, you know, 'cause I wasn't poor, you know, we were middle class, maybe lower to middle class, you know, but we weren't poor. We weren't there in the free lunch program, we weren't, you know it was like the very different mindset, and I think there was still some bias with teachers who still assume that the reason you were there was you were on a scholarship or you were on the free lunch program, and I was like, "I don't have free lunch," you know. So it was very interesting, and yet the kids who were in the free lunch program, unfortunately back then they did tracking, so they had three classes, they had the smart kids, the average kids, and the dumb kids and they literally had kids in that type of a track back then (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 639446 Speaker 1: So you went to Austin High School [Stephen F. Austin High School, Austin, Texas]? Speaker 2: Yes, I went to O. Henry Junior High [O. Henry Junior High School; O. Henry Middle School, Austin, Texas]. Speaker 1: O. Henry. Speaker 2: O. Henry first, and O. Henry now you learn who (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is O. Henry's from--? Speaker 2: O. Henry's from Austin [Texas]. So all of a sudden you learn this famous writer, and you're at his school, and you learn that he's like Mark Twain of, you know, folktales. Speaker 1: He's really, yeah. Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: Everybody had to read 'The Ransom of Red Chief' [O. Henry]-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --growing up. Speaker 2: Exactly, and you're like I'm at--oh, I wanna be a writer, I really wanna be a writer now, you know, and of course your parents [JoAnn Scott Wilson and Rubin Wilson] are like, "You can be editor of the school newspaper that's your hobby," you know, so my grandfather [Robert Scott, Sr.]--this is now going back to mom's side of the family. He said, "Robin [HistoryMaker Robin Wilson], do you wanna be editor of the school newspaper?" I was like, "Yeah," he said, "But," he said, "well, how you gonna put it out," and I'm like, "I don't know," and there were, you know, typewriters at school the old manuals where you had to do the carriage return which so many people don't even think about today. But that was really hard. You type it, you know, and he's like, "Well, I think I might have a present for you," so my grandfather bought me--or from his office or something, this gigantic electric typewriter (laughter) that was probably from the '50s [1950s]. Big gray military looking thing and it was like you push the return button, and it, you know, did everything. Speaker 1: It's electric (unclear)? Speaker 2: So it was, it was something, it was, it was insane, and it had a little engine, it, you know, it made a lot of noise, and so I typed the school newspaper on this, and then they would run it off in the school office. Story_ID: 639447 Speaker 1: Tell me this--this is something we always ask, and so I must ask. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Goodness, when I was at my [maternal] grandparents' [Willie Mae McNeil Scott and Robert Scott, Sr.] home, it was the cows and the horses and the muck that you had to clean up from the stalls. Thankfully, I was allergic to the hair on the animals. It was one good thing I was privileged not to have to be around the horses because I would break out and, so but my brother [Russel Wilson] had to muck the stalls. But I remember that pungent smell when you're fertilizing the fields. That was done at my grandparents' house. I also remember the ocean. Because we were near the ocean. It's, you know, Angleton's [Angleton Texas] sort of between Galveston [Texas], and so it's right on the coast, and so we would drive out to the ocean and just have that clean ocean air and the waves and the salt water and things like sea wa- I guess, taffy, you know, is something I remember. Then in Austin [Texas], what I remember most is flowers, there were--so much--the city--they call it the pollen capital of the world. You would have flowers everywhere the state capitol [Texas State Capitol, Austin, Texas] had these beautiful grounds you could walk on with ponds, and we always went to museums. We went to free stuff as kids, you know, my parents [JoAnn Scott Wilson and Rubin Wilson] would take us to the museum or, you know, really to just give us a chance to explore the world. But now the funniest part which we talked about earlier. What do I remember? The smell--my dad using bleach on the white wall tires (laughter) because he had to keep his car clean, you know, so the car was always immaculate, going to the car wash, and keeping the white walls clean, and dad on his, you know, and we got to help dry the bumpers, so that's what I remember the most about helping our dad and, you know, cutting the grass every week, and just the simple things in life, and not knowing there was more to life than that. It was the simple things. Story_ID: 639448 Speaker 1: So the activities in high school--you, you were editor of the school paper and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Junior high [O. Henry Junior High School; O. Henry Middle School, Austin, Texas]? Speaker 1: You were popular. Speaker 2: Junior high. Speaker 1: Junior high? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, in junior high I was editor-- Speaker 1: You chose to be a popular girl. Speaker 2: I chose to be a popular girl and I say that because there's a difference between being a popular girl and a mean girl. And there were some mean girls at our school gotta tell ya. I knew that the black kids weren't going to accept me. I knew that I probably would not go on a date (laughter) because there were not too many black guys at my school, except the athletes and they wanted the easy girls, and my upbringing was so very strict that was, that was not part of the equation. So I felt that just being friendly was the right way to do it. And so in high school, I actually ran for student body president in my junior year, and I won, and the--we did half year terms 'cause they really wanted to make sure you got your grades, kept your grades up. And the other guy who won--so I was the fall president, which means I was the football when, you know, as you know Texas football is a big deal. So at every game we would do the exchange with the other school and pep squad and pep rally and, you know, all the things that are about school spirit. The spring president was Scott McClellan so if you remember the White House press secretary, so I grew up with Scott McClellan and-- Speaker 1: Scott McClellan, he's the one that eventually-- Speaker 2: He wrote a book. Speaker 1: --told the truth about the-- Speaker 2: He told the truth. Speaker 1: --Bush [President George Walker Bush] administration, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, and Scott and his family are amazing. His mother [Carole Keeton Strayhorn] started off as Democratic mayor of Austin [Texas], and then she ultimately became a Republican. But I think the thing to know about Texas is, you know, a conservative Democrat is a liberal Republican, and because Texas is like forty-ninth as far as, you know, right to work. If you don't have an issue then you have a right to work. And we're not gonna give you benefits, you know, you can work the field, you can, you know, so it's about work and work ethic. And as a state--so anyway I grew up with Scott McClellan, and just admired him so very much, and his family was always very, very kind to my family. Speaker 1: Also at Austin High School [Stephen F. Austin High School, Austin, Texas], I mean I know that a couple other people became famous. Speaker 2: Yeah, there's Ben Crenshaw who went to Austin High. There's Don Baylor, the baseball player, African American baseball player, there is J.J. Pickle who is a, you know, congressman. I can think of so many people. Speaker 1: I think in terms of who came out with you there were a couple-- Speaker 2: Oh, who came out with me? Speaker 1: Yeah, I think-- Speaker 2: There's Scott McClellan. My classmates that I know have done very well--there's Scott McClellan, there's Jennifer Bourianoff who was a famous--I think she plays the violin, and she's in, you know, plays or what do you call it? Orchestra performances all over the world. There is--goodness--there are people who are couple of years older than me who-- Speaker 1: What about Owen Wilson and Renee Zellweger? Did they come with you? Speaker 2: No, they were in Houston [Texas]. They were outside of-- Speaker 1: In Houston? Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were outside of--so I think Renee went to Sealy High School [sic. Katy High School, Katy, Texas], and Owen Wilson is from Dallas [Texas]. Speaker 1: Oh, they went to the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas]? Speaker 2: They went to University of Texas with me yeah, yeah so. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, all right not high school. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I think Matthew McConaughey went to college with me, we didn't know each other, but we knew--had a lot of friends in common so, you know, such a big state. You meet so many different people and, so Austin because it's the melting plot- pot, it's the cultural center of the state. Speaker 1: So in Austin High school did you have a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I will say Ian Moore, who is--he's a musician. He played in the style of Stevie Ray Vaughan. Ian went to school with me. A couple of years older would've been the Sessum brothers, Chris Sessum [ph.] and Charlie Sessum [ph.]. They were part of the Stevie Ray Vaughan cool, you know, music scene and, you know, there's a lot of people who culturally are well known in the music scene who went to high school with me. Speaker 1: Okay. So you said Don Baylor. He was older than you (unclear)? Speaker 2: He was older than me. But his son [Donald Baylor, Jr.] was at my high school at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: His son--it's so funny--Don is I think six feet tall, and his son was really short at the time, and just a cute little kid, and, you know, kept to himself because he was different, you know, his father's famous. He was dropped off at school in a Rolls-Royce, you know, and he's a black kid, and the black kids didn't like him 'cause he spoke properly so it's always this--there's always been that--I call it almost code switching, that many people in my generation are able to do or try to do, and that means if you're with a certain black crowd you're down. If you can do that and with others you are yourself, and I've always just been myself. So the funny thing this is digression but, I was doing a speaking course, and someone said, "Oh, if you're ever on a commercial need to be, you need to have a black vernacular, why don't we try to make you do that Robin [HistoryMaker Robin Wilson]." So I tried--the class was on the floor falling out laughing. They're like, "Okay no, we will keep you on, you know, just being Robin," and it was funny because I couldn't code switch. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: Now my brother [Russel Wilson] could though. Because that was a survival mechanism for him as a boy. Speaker 1: Yeah, he would be subject to probably be beat up or something. Speaker 2: Beat up, yeah, so he could, he could do that, and it would crack me up, 'cause I'm like, "What," you know, "you sound like a rapper," and he's like, "Yeah." But then he'd turn into my brother again, you know, so it's very funny. He could do both. Story_ID: 639449 Speaker 1: Now did you start modeling in high school [Stephen F. Austin High School, Austin, Texas]? Speaker 2: (Laughter) That is funny, yes, I did. I again, I've been this height since I was ten, and I was at the store, and by this time I've sort of outgrown some of my allergies so I'm eating things I'm not supposed to. But just to build the tolerance, and I'm getting ice cream, so now I'm in high school, I can have a little bit of ice cream. My mom [JoAnn Scott Wilson]--I couldn't drive yet, I was fifteen I believe, fourteen or fifteen--actually no, I must've been younger. No, I was twelve or thirteen, and my mom's in the car as, you know, moms wear their house coats, hair's in a curler. They send their kids inside to go get the whatever, produce or ice cream, and they're like, "Don't bring anybody out here, 'cause, you know, I'm wearing my house coat." Well, I'm getting this ice cream and this woman says, "Are you a model?" And I'm on the ice cream aisle, in this store, and I turn around to see who she's talking too, and she's talking to me. That was the first time in my life someone ever said, "You're pretty," you know, 'cause I was raised to be the smart girl not the pretty girl and, so I was like, "Me?" She goes, "Yeah, you, how old are you?" And I was like twelve or thirteen, whatever age I was. She was like, "Are you a model?" I'm like, "No," (laughter), "me?" She's like, "Well, you're very pretty and you should be. You're very thin and, you know, well, where's your mom?" And I'm like, "She's out in the car" (laughter) remember my mother's got her house coat, her curlers, she's like--so I come walking out with this white woman. My mother's like, "Oh, my god. Robin [HistoryMaker Robin Wilson] stole something," you know, this is the security patrol or something, so my mother's like, "Oh, what did you do?" And this woman's like, "I'm Debbie Branda. I work with the Boulevard agency [BLVD Company, Inc., Austin, Texas]. It's a affiliate with Elite [Elite Model Management] out of Dallas [Texas] and I'd like to give you my card and I'd like to talk to you about your daughter modeling." My mother's like (laughter), "No," you know, and she said, "Maybe you'll come see a show, you know I, you know, I live in the neighborhood, my daughters go to such and such high school." So now my mom's comfortable, it's not, you know, something strange and she said, "Why don't you come to a show?" So the very first show I went to was Olivia Newton-John owned a store called Koala Blue and she had a show at the Arboretum, which is a mall right in northwest Austin [Texas] near where we lived and, so I go to the show, and there's all these tall girls like me, and they're all walking ramrod straight and I'm like, "(Gasp) I wanna do this" (laughter) because at the end of the show we got to go backstage and whatever and they said, "How much money do you think these girls make?" And I'm like, "I don't know fifty dollars," like, you know, to me that's a lot of money. They're like, "No, they just made like five hundred to a thousand dollars," and I'm like for eighteen minutes, you know, walking up and down the run way, and I'm like, "(Gasp) Mom, I could do four of these and I could have a Hyundai" (laughter) 'cause a Hyundai was four thousand dollars at the time, and my mom's like, "Oh, dear god," you know, I'm like I could have a car, I could buy my own car. So, now you see where my head is, I'm like in Texas you have to drive. So I'm already thinking what can I, how can I earn my money so I can do this. So my mom's like, "I'll think about it," you know, what that means when your mother's says that? It's like the car just got buried but she forgot the woman gave me her card (laughter) so the next year on my birthday my mother said, "What would you like for your birthday?" And I was like, "I'd like to call the agent, I have her card." And my mother's like, "You kept that card?" And I was like, "Uh-huh," so it's my birthday so I got to do what I wanted. So we called the lady, and we went to a meeting and basic- she was a real agent, a real agent doesn't charge you anything they take a percentage of what you earn. So their job is to get you work. So I had to do a class to learn how to walk in heels. My mother let me do this surprisingly, and years later she's like, "I still don't know why I let you do this, it was your birthday, so I did." So I learned how to walk. I had one pair of heels and they would do your makeup. You didn't have to worry about that. And what else? A week later I was booked for Dillard's, which is a regional shopping center. And they wanted to make sure I got my stage fright out because they did a mall show which means your friends are probably in the audience and you have to be able to get out there and do it, and then about a year later I was doing Chanel with Saks Fifth Avenue and Neiman Marcus and so being, you know, driven by my parents to Houston [Texas] or to San Antonio [Texas] or Dallas to do a show. And that's when I--I mean again, it was a means to end. It wasn't going to be my career. But I could eat a pizza and still get in the clothes, you know, so that shows you how thin I was and I made a lot of money and, and that allowed me for college to have spending money, and, and freedom to travel a little bit on my own. Story_ID: 639450 Speaker 1: So what else about high school [Stephen F. Austin High School, Austin, Texas] do we need to know before we graduate you now-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --into college? Speaker 2: In high school I never had a date because a) my parents [JoAnn Scott Wilson and Rubin Wilson], they were like, "Dating? You'll be forty-five before you date," but more importantly it was, it was protection to make sure that I didn't go down a certain path. One of my cousins got pregnant at thirteen and I was on lock down from that point forward. And she was younger than me, and it was like that's it. No, you're not going out. You can go out in groups. We're picking you up, you know, that's it. And, so by fifteen I had enough credits to graduate from high school and so I didn't because I wanted to have the whole senior year experience. I went to a half day program with the Lower Colorado River Authority, where I was an intern and making money. And the power in that is that's when you begin to see my involvement in environmentalism and I learned about, you know, power plants and pollution and coal fired plants and water conservation. And my first boss hired me, Jerry Lawson. And he is a guy that created the Energy Star program at the EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency]. And Jerry made me take a drug test. I was like, "I've never done drugs." He was like, "I know, I hope," and he was like, "Take the test." So, of course I take the test, I pass. And he's like, "I just wanna make sure that the kid that I pick from your high school really has goals and is gonna perform well because I picked one kid and that's you, and I want you to be a star." And, so we are still in touch occasionally and he gave me direction and guidance. And Connie Lucas [ph.] who is his assistant had me Xeroxing and doing schedules and call sheets and all those other things and I learned how to be a professional in an office. Remember I always wanted to be an artist though. So I'm doing my little creative spin on things 'cause now we're working on computers. They don't know how to use computers so very well. So I'm like, "Oh, I can do the cover," you know, so I would do the cover of their reports or, you know, put some art work in or stuff like that. But it would, it allowed me to really gain a sense that I was going to have earn my own money and this is, you know, this was one way to do it. So I worked at that job all the way through college so-- Speaker 1: Oh that's something yeah. So, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It wasn't just one summer. Speaker 2: It started off as a, as a half year, a half day program in my senior year and it became an internship that was formalized when I got accepted to the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas]. Story_ID: 639451 Speaker 1: I was a National Merit [National Merit Scholarship Corporation] semifinalist, so you get that by doing the PSAT classes or a test and I became, I was in the 98th percentile of test takers and so I got a National Merit scholarship or semifinalist scholarship. So that paid for college and I had a five year ride, meaning I could go, I could go five years and figure out what I wanted to do or get an extra year if I wanted to do a graduate program on top of that. And UT [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], this is the funny part, UT at the time because of oil money supplementing the, you know, the cost of school. If you were an in state resident, it was six hundred dollars a semester with a full load. And, so I had money left over to buy my books or to do whatever I wanted to do and I modeled. And, so I was living large in college and I lived at home the first two years 'cause I started school when I was sixteen, college. And oh, I almost had no dates in college too because my dad [Rubin Wilson], remember was the bus driver for the athletic team. So he called the coach and said, "My daughter is off limits." So I became the athletes' best friend and none of them would date me. And they're like, "We'll get kicked off the team." So it was just like, it was (laughter) it was, it was not pretty. But I did date a guy and so of course he wasn't on, he was, he had been an athlete, but he is now an engineer and he was older and my dad was just like (sigh) you know, so yeah. I will tell you this. I dated interracially and I still do because that's the environment you grow up in. And my dad was very negative about me dating white men and that changed. But it's funny they raised me to be open minded. And, then guess who's coming home to dinner and you think about 'The Bernie Mac Show.' That was my dad I mean, just horrible to guys--I mean it was just--I watched that movie, I was like, "Dad, that's you," and my dad's like, "I wasn't that bad." I'm like, "You were worse," you know (laughter) so that's, you know, and I was like you shouldn't have raised me to care about people if that's what you want me to be. Then I've turned into a racist 'cause I'm not and I care about people. And if it's a good guy, it's a good guy and that's it. And, so, you know, and [maternal] great-granddaddy [Robert Scott] was half white and his daddy [Richard Hill (ph.)] was white. So, you know, what are saying? So it was like this challenge between my dad and I because he knew the story of his mother [Willie Mae McNeil Scott] being raped. He knew the story of, you know, other women as he would say, who had been raped and he was very afraid for me that something bad could happen and nobody would do anything about it. So that was a big clash in college with my dad and I. And my mom [JoAnn Scott Wilson] was like, he's nice, he's cute, you know, so it was like this very interesting dichotomy with us-- Story_ID: 639452 Speaker 1: By the way, I will throw this out. At UT [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] I took my first African American history class and the professor was African. So he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So who was it? Speaker 1: Oh, I can't remember his name. But it was profound because he would talk about everything from, you know, when slaves were sold by Africans to America. So it wasn't oh, there were these slave traders. It was like, he was like, "I apologize to all of you African Americans in this room. Our African people sold you to slave traders." You know, so it was like a very--so all this insight and then he said, "Robin [HistoryMaker Robin Wilson], you know, your name is Wilson. Have you ever wondered why there's Johnson and Wilson? That's Will's son, that's John's son, and that's how slaves--many of their ancestors like me, we have these names that end S-O-N." And so I was like "Oh," you know, and so all of a sudden there's like this insight and, you know, it makes, it starts to make since that you sense that you see so many Johnsons or Williamson or, you know, in African American names, that it--Will was probably some slave owner and this was Will's son. So all of his slaves probably had the last name Wilson. And so it's like, "Oh," you know, so insight. Story_ID: 639453 Speaker 1: Now you, you majored in history-- Speaker 2: I was-- Speaker 1: --from what I see here, history and economics [at the University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas]. Speaker 2: Right, I wanted to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you choose those two? Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't choose, my parents [JoAnn Scott Wilson and Rubin Wilson] choose for me. I actually wanted to go to the design school. I enrolled in the design school and the journalism school, and my mother saw my little schedule, you know, the history of design, the sketching class and the journalism program, and she's like, "Nope." And she went with me the next day, remember I'm sixteen, (laughter) to the dean and said, "She enrolled in the wrong program, we need her in the liberal arts school." History and so ultimately I did economics just because I double majored, you know, but-- Speaker 1: So you were sixteen when you started-- Speaker 2: College. Speaker 1: --college, okay. All right. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I mean, I was hurt 'cause I wanted to be again an artist. And her thing was no you cannot because you won't make any money. That's the way our parents were. I think that what's really funny though is with everything that I'm doing in my company now [Robin Wilson Home, New York, New York]--I do ecofriendly design. So I'm doing design, I'm on television, so I'm doing my journalism. I write articles, I'm doing everything I wanted to do. But I will give mom and dad the credit, by having the business background I'm able to run my business. I'm not just talent who shows up at the game. And I think that's, that is the benefit. Many people however, they're unhappy, they don't have the opportunities like I've had and they just do what they're told, and then they, you know, become an accountant, and then twenty years later they, they hate what they're doing. They have that midlife crisis. But they don't know why. I came back to what I've always wanted to do. Story_ID: 639454 Speaker 1: Did I tell you the story about my [maternal] great-granddaddy [Robert Scott] and my granddaddy [Robert Scott, Sr.] one time painting houses when I seven years old? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Oh, well, they said, you know, "What color should we paint these houses?" And I'm six or seven and they say, "What color should we paint them?" I'm like, "Easter egg colors," and they painted the yellows and the lavenders and the blues and the pinks and that to me was when I realized I wanted to be a designer or I wanted to do something with houses. So I actually have this ability, this special ability. I can walk into a room and I can say, "What can it be" because I was always around spaces. Speaker 2: They owned shotgun houses. Speaker 1: Shotgun houses. Speaker 2: Shotgun houses. Speaker 1: You've heard of shotgun shacks? Speaker 2: Sure. There's shotgun houses. There's a famous painting by a Texas artist named John Biggers [John T. Biggers], called shotgun houses ['Shotguns'] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you know about John Biggers? Oh, my gosh. Speaker 2: Standing out in front of the shotgun house, yeah. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, and I mean literally, a shotgun house means it has a front door and a back door in one line. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You can open those doors and shoot a fire, a shotgun from one end to the back and one side is the living area, one side is the dining--what you call--one side is the kitchen living and the other side is the resident part where you live. And, so it's just a little old shack. Basically studio apartments with a driveway in front and that's where oil field workers would live and pay rent to my granddaddy and yeah, so anyway that's all lesson aside. Speaker 2: Okay, so you were inspired by the painting of these shotgun houses to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I had power, I'm seven years old I--you know, I have power. And, you know, people would drive by the block and like, "Oh, dear god," but, you know, what no one ever missed the turn. They were like--the--you know, the rainbow houses, they, you know, whatever they just knew that where all the colorful houses were, that's where, you know, that's where they had to turn so--before it was all white, if you think about it, all white with black trim so, yeah, so. Speaker 2: So it made those houses special on some level. Story_ID: 639455 Speaker 1: Were there any special professors at University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] that, or programs that you participated in that shaped what you were gonna do (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was, there was, and I--you know, I--I'm feeling awful that I cannot remember his name. He was a famous history professor. He was very good friends with, oh, goodness, he just passed away couple of years ago. Speaker 1: Jo- [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin. Speaker 2: John Hope Franklin. In fact, John Hope Franklin spoke at my college graduation. This particular professor. Oh, and I'll think of his name after we're done with this, but he was someone who inspired me to actually write my thesis in history and American history 1865, Civil War to 1965, civil rights. And that's what my thesis was on, and-- Speaker 1: This isn't Blackett is it? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: R.J.M. Blackett. He, I know he went down there at one point (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Yeah, yeah, I can't think of his name but I'll think of this gentleman's name and you--he was very influential because he was much about what can you do to change the world when you have come, when you've grown up at a time that is not buffeted by the Civil Rights Movement. 'Cause our generation we missed it. We're part of the next generation, so-- Speaker 1: Did he write any-- Speaker 2: George, George Wright [George C. Wright], George Wright. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the professor. African American. Good friends with a Dr. John Hope Franklin. And he was, he was hilarious. He was tough as nails and he taught us to think. He taught us to think about where we are going, not where we are. So that was one. And then I had an economics professor. I was trying to finish college early so I went to summer programs and actually I ended up being a four and half year student because I added the economics piece on. But I remember a summer program where all of a sudden the global economy started making sense, supply and demand and that's when, that's when I said I'll do economics too. Story_ID: 639456 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that and the ecol- the job in the summers, I guess with the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The internship with the-- Speaker 2: LCRA [Lower Colorado River Authority], yep, but you know the other thing is one summer I asked for a sabbatical from LCRA because I was given an offer by a consulting firm in San Francisco [California], Barracat and Chamber [ph.]. That was the summer of 1990 and I went to San Francisco--as Mark Twain said, "It's the coldest winter I've ever had in my life." It was so cold and I lived in San Francisco on Nob Hill at Pine [Street] and Powell [Street] in a building called the Nob Hill Chateau, and my apartment was about 250 square feet with a Murphy bed that pulled out of the wall. And so when I walked in to see this space and I was pen- spending a thousand dollars a month on for the summer. I was like, "Where is the bedroom?" And the guy, the landlord just pulled the bed out of the wall and I was like, "Oh" (laughter). So that was my re- my brutal reality check of--the--reason I remember by the way, it was the summer of '90 [1990], is that was the year Nelson Mandela came to the United States on his tour and he actually came to Oakland [California] and Gorbachev [Mikhail Gorbachev] also came to San Francisco that summer. So I'm like in this hot bed of all these global leaders and you've got Nelson Mandela telling his story of, you know, I was a prisoner and yet I'm a positive person. You've got Gorbachev saying, "I tore down that wall and I'm here to tell you that the world has changed in a positive way." So for me it was just like this fascinating moment in history and I wouldn't have seen all those people had I been in Texas. So my global view got bigger all of a sudden. And that one summer influenced me to say, "Texas is not where I'm gonna live my life." I will visit but this, you know, I now realized the world's a lot bigger than Austin, Texas and the other thing-- Speaker 1: I don't know the pres- the president now is Texas guy. George H.W. Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] right? Speaker 2: He was, George Bush yeah, moved back. But, you know, maybe I'll retire there. But I, you know, I needed to build my career. I couldn't do it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's right. He's Kennebunkport, Maine-- Speaker 2: Kennebunkport and Midland [Texas], I believe Midland, yeah. But, you know, I knew, I knew that there was--I don't wanna say late into racism, but there's still a ceiling on your dreams in Texas. Should I be a teacher? Should I be a state government worker? Should I--you know, it was--Robin's [HistoryMaker Robin Wilson] different, (laughter) you know. And what I was just doing is--I'm a young woman. I'm gonna explore. I'm gonna do a consulting firm. I'm gonna work in the Electric Power Research Institute [Palo Alto, California]. I'm gonna design some programmatic things for, you know, for energy research. Sure, I might be the only one in this field, but I'm having fun doing the logic maps for computer programming and cycling which cycling means peak summer load. You're trying to figure out how do you--instead of building a new power plant how do you conserve energy so you don't have to build a new power plant so at the hottest day of the summer or the coldest day of winter? How do you conserve so you don't have brown outs or power outages and you're running computers models to do that. So I graduate and I get offers from California companies and Boston [Massachusetts] companies and a Houston [Texas] company. The Houston company says--basically they make me requalify myself. Are you good enough? And meanwhile I have friends who hadn't even worked a day in their life who are getting the job and they weren't doing the same questions to them that they did to me. So I was like, "Nope, I'm not working in Houston." I don't think I'll go very far. San Francisco is one choice and then Boston was the other because I was dating a guy who went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I actually moved to Boston and I ended up working for Mercer Management Consulting [Oliver Wyman], which was in Lexington, Massachusetts and it was great (simultaneous). Story_ID: 639457 Speaker 1: Before we leave the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] and all that, I wanted to ask you about Barbara Jordan. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I think you have a Mickey Leland story too. Speaker 2: I do have a Mickey Leland story. Barbara Jordan first up--my--well, there's two parts of Barbara Jordan. The houses my grandfather owned, my [maternal] great-grandfather [Robert Scott] bought and owned, were in the Fifth Ward in Houston [Texas] which is where Barbara Jordan grew up. So my family knew her family from as they say jump step. And we knew the Mickey Leland family from jump step because he was also from the Fifth Ward. And ultimately Mickey's brother Gaston [William Leland] married my Aunt Mary Ann [Mary Scott Leland]. They divorced sometime in the '70s [1970s]. But Barbara Jordan was an influence to my mother [JoAnn Scott Wilson] when my mother was in college [Huston-Tillotson College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas] and was just one of the most eloquent spokespeople in the world. And she was not defined by her color, she was not defined by anything except being the smartest girl in the room, if that makes sense. She was well spoken, she was a kind person. Mickey was the same way. I remember, I remember looking at the wedding pictures many years later. You have Mickey in this red Afro wearing a blue turquoise tuxedo with ruffle shirt, and the wedding party just look like, you know, right out of the '70s [1970s] and we've got that family picture. The women are wearing floral dresses, and now to know that the, with the tragedy of the plane crash, the airport--he has-- an airport's [sic.] named after him. So it's just, you know, it's one of those things where you grow up, and you don't know--again mom's side of the family--you don't know anything other than you got this congressman who everybody is so respectful to, but you're just a little kid, and you're like, "Oh, I get a lollipop," you know, you're just, you don't understand the privilege you just (simultaneous)-- Story_ID: 639458 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did it--well, dawn on you that--was she a big, make a big impression on, on black girls in those days (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Barbara Jordan, Barbara Jordan did--it was her voice. I, you know, two of the most powerful voices of black women that I know are [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou and Barbara Jordan. And I had the privilege of spending Thanksgiving with Maya Angelou a couple years ago. And I just remember sitting at her, at her feet, and she said something to me that was so profound and the voice it was like, it was like gospel. You just, you have to listen you understand where it's coming from and, but Barbara Jordan paved the way for so many people. Because she didn't let anything hold her back, she was just like, "Yeah I'm doing this, and I'm gonna win. And I'm gonna get supporters because I am saying the right message and," you know, you--Ann Richards was the same kind of person. When she ran for governor and, you know, that was one of the first campaigns I got involved in. And I remember finding the humor in some of the things she said. But women of that era said very pointed things with humor. They weren't, they never forgot that they were ladies. They never forgot that they were women and they were just--this is my opinion. I'm gonna say it with a barbed edge, but you know what I'm saying. And that's what--those are some of the role models I had. Very strong, powerful women that you have growing up and you're like, "They did it, I can do anything." And that's what so powerful about Texas. You have these role models of people who--they buck the trends, and they did what they wanted to do. Speaker 1: Yeah, what an interesting mix of people in those days Ann Richards, first woman governor of Texas. Speaker 2: First woman governor--well, actually, you know, she's not. There's a-- Speaker 1: She isn't? Speaker 2: No. There's a, you know, and I don't know if this is a joke, but there was a Governor Hogg [Jim Hogg], H-O-G-G who--I don't know if it was the 1800s but I know my Texas history, and he had a daughter named--I think--well, the joke is that he had two daughters, one was named Ima and Ura. Ima Hogg and Ura Hogg. I think it was Ima Hogg who--when he passed away she became the governor in his place. Speaker 1: Really her name was Ima? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. It was--yeah--it was the daughter or the wife [Sallie Stinson Hogg] and, so there was a woman governor. But I think she took over her husband's seat. I think--Ann Richards was the first elected, and again think of about Ann Richards growing up in Texas and hearing that there was a woman before her. I mean that gave her some type of--yeah, I can do that too. And I think that's what's exciting about, about the state also 'cause you have these--you don't have some of the defined rules that you might've had. You do, however, have the bias when I was growing up toward this is a woman's job and this is a guy's job. You don't hear that in the northeast, you don't hear that as much as you did at one point. Story_ID: 639459 Speaker 1: And Texas at this point has really become an influential state in terms of politics in the country on the conservative end and a liberal end. Speaker 2: That's right, well, Austin [Texas] is a little blue dot in a red state. And at one point Texas was a blue state, and it's changed. But what people forget is that it was somewhat a conservative state to begin with. And as you see people ceasing to have the gray, you know, there's a position--I'm a Democrat or I'm a, I'm a Republican. At one point you could say, I'm a conservative Democrat, which meant you were a liberal Republican. You're more independent. Now it's sort of, you take a position. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You're either or. But Texas--Texans I think have a quality that's about--I call it the wildcatter mentality. You could have a billionaire driving beside you who owns an oil field and he's driving a pickup. And six months later his oil wells go bust, and he's--he doesn't have, you know, a shoe. He, he's, you know, you heard about former Governor Connally [John Connally]. You know, at one point I think he went bankrupt. So there was a--Texas is very much about can do, you know, people lose money, people win money, but who are you? Does your handshake mean something? And that's what I grew up with, is that core belief that your word means something, and if it, you know, just like being an entrepreneur today, you know, I have employees. There are days as an entrepreneur you pay your people and you don't pay yourself, you know, it's--that's your word, you know, you gotta job, you gotta check (simultaneous). Story_ID: 639460 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Speaking of this--now we take you to Mercer [Mercer Management Consulting; Oliver Wyman]. Speaker 2: Mercer consulting. Speaker 1: In Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what happened there? Speaker 2: Well, I interviewed for Mercer in August, September and it was cold then. And I was like, "Oh, this is cold? I can handle this." I forgot it was only September. I accepted the job. I moved there in late December after Christmas. And got there and it was a blizzard and it's the coldest I've ever been in my life. I worked in their energy group, and worked with Fortune 100 clients. Learned a lot, learned that I didn't wanna be a consultant (laughter). Because literally you would work 'til one, two o'clock in the morning. Sometimes go to client sites Monday through Thursday, and then Friday, Saturday, Sunday you were at the office detailing your reports, and doing your laundry so you could get back on the road. So I really learned--but I will say this I got out of school and my first job, real job I got $42,500. That's a lot of money in 1991. And even today, and so I was living large, you know, I was like, "Whoa, I'm making a lot of money." And I remember my parents [JoAnn Scott Wilson and Rubin Wilson] having resistance to my moving. 'Cause my mom's like, "But you should have a job here in Texas. You could get a state job." I'm like, "Mom, they'll pay me $22,000. I'm getting $42,500 and I'm moving." And so I moved and worked really hard, and then tragedy struck in 1993. My brother, my brother died in a motorcycle accident, and it was one of those moments where everything comes to a screeching halt. There's before Russel [Russel Wilson] and after Russel. And your best friend is gone, and you have a, you have a mortality moment. And a lot of people don't get that 'til later, but from that moment forward I have been committed to doing what I want to do in my career and in my life. Because you don't have tomorrow promised and that is what I got from that. A lot of people say, "Oh, one day or when I retire I'm gonna travel." I'm like, "If you have an extra twenty dollars, you can get on the train. You can go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] from New York City [New York, New York] on the train, it's eleven dollars, you know, on the local, not on the express. Do what you wanna do during your lifetime, 'cause you don't know if you're gonna have tomorrow." So my brother was twenty-two when he died. I was twenty-three and I was fortunate that the boss that I worked for, his name is Jim Down [ph.]. He was the president of Williams College Alumni Association. Jim's brother, I think had passed away in a motorcycle accident. And Jim had met my brother. The one visit he made to Boston to visit to me from the [U.S.] Army. He had a weekend off and he came to visit me. And Jim--after the funeral said, "Robin [HistoryMaker Robin Wilson], what do you wanna do?" And I said, "I don't wanna be a consultant anymore, honestly." He's like, "Okay." He's like, "What do you wanna do?" I was like, "I don't know." He's said, "Well, for the next three months while you're grieving I want you to get out of bed every day, and just get dressed and come say hi to me. I'm gonna give you a project, hope you finish it. But if you don't in the three months I want you to figure out what you wanna do." So about two months in, you know, I would sometimes come in and I would say, "Good morning," and cry, and he'd be like, "Go home." But it was to get me out of bed every day and I'm very grateful to that man, because I think that there's a point that you can go when you're grieving that is very dark. And when you gotta get up (laughter) to say, "Hello" to someone. Even if it's the one hour drive, some form of normalcy starts to return to your life. And my parents are in Texas and they're grieving, and so it was like the lights went out in our family. If that makes sense. Story_ID: 639461 Speaker 1: So fast forward by two months in I said, "I wanna help people. I wanna do something that's, you know, where, you know, I'm--." I was part of the project where AT&T [AT&T Inc.]--we--they did--if you remember the headlines on Time magazine where ninety-two thousand people or sixty-two thousand people laid off. Well, we were the people that ran the numbers. We ran the computer models but computer models don't count people they just say, "Here's what your cost savings can be." Well, the result was a lot of people got laid off, lives were ruined. Speaker 2: Is that when AT&T mer- merged (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's when they did the big layoffs. Speaker 2: All the Bells were broken. Speaker 1: That's right and we were part of that project. And I was like, "Whoa--this--I can't do this," you know. So he's like, "Well, if you wanna help people--." He's like, "You could do not-for-profit," but he was like, "you can't." And I was like, "What do you mean?" He's like, "Your taste is too expensive, you can't. Do that later in your life." And he said, "Why don't you become a head hunter." And I was like, "A head hunter?" And he was like, "Yeah, the pers- you know, you will help executives redefine who they are. You'll help them get great jobs and you'll get paid, and you'll have fun doing it." Story_ID: 639462 Speaker 1: We were talking about Mercer [Mercer Management Consulting; Oliver Wyman] and then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my brother's-- Speaker 1: So you were, you were going through your--what was your brother--I didn't ask you--what was your brother doing before he passed? Speaker 2: My brother-- Speaker 1: What were his aspirations? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, my brother. His name was Russel Allen Wilson [Russel Wilson]. He was born February 22nd in 1971. He was at Texas A&M [Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas], before he joined the [U.S.] Army, mechanical engineering major, and he was brainy kid. He actually went to the science academy when he was in high school which was a different school from mine [Stephen F. Austin High School, Austin, Texas]. He wanted to be an engineer, building bridges, something with his, you know, how do you say, his imagination coming to life. And he joined the Army during the first Gulf War. When all the guys at A&M joined and because he was college educated guy, he was gonna be able to go in as an officer. And it--that's very funny. His skillset, I think, was so strong that they didn't station him thankfully in Afghanistan, but they put him on the DMZ [demilitarized zone] in Korea. And he protected the embassy and did whatever. And so I remember he would, he would send Coca-Cola cans that were like a strange size. And he could get a suit made in a weekend, and all these hilarious stories about his existence over there. And he had a motorcycle and got a new one when he came back. And I remember sending him a thousand dollars toward that bike. And then he died, and then I got the canceled check back a couple weeks later. So that was very, very painful. But Russel would've been probably an amazing engineer and scholar who would've helped with animal conservation movements. He loved animals and probably would've gone on safaris every couple of years, you know, and so he was just, he was my yin and yang, you know, it was yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneneous) I just thought I'd ask and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 639463 Speaker 1: Let's pick up again if we can with the head hunters. Speaker 2: Yeah, head hunters. Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So I became--so my boss [Jim Down (ph.)] said, "You should become an executive recruiter." I said, "Okay, tell me a little bit about it." And he said, "Well, you change people's lives. You help them visualize where they can be, not where they are today." And I found something exciting about that. I'll use the term puppet master. Your client is not the candidate, your clients is the company, and your client as the company could be American Express [American Express Company], and they say, "We want a new CEO. Who are the ten people in the world who can do it?" So you're doing research, you're finding out who, you're finding out who's available, you're finding out what conflicts they might have, their education background, news articles that written about them. So you're doing consulting work, voluminous chunks of information, and pulling it down to a very narrow succinct report about why they're right for the job. And I learned how to be a head hunter working first for a small boutique that did college, university--college and university presidents and not for profit. Then I was a loan executive to the Boston Organizing Committee [Boston Local Organizing Committee] which is the Olympic bid committee. And Boston [Massachusetts] didn't win, but I le- learned how politics works. I met Senator Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy]. I met Senator Kerry [John Kerry] and all these other great people, and really learned how politics works to make something real or not. And through that I met Nader Darehshori who was the president at that time of Houghton Mifflin publishing company [Houghton Mifflin Company; Houghton Mifflin Harcourt]. So remember, everything my parents [JoAnn Scott Wilson and Rubin Wilson] didn't want me to do, I'm headed right back to it although I'm on the business side. So I became the national corporate recruiter for Houghton Mifflin and found great talent for them. I did that for one year, and then was recruited out to work for a huge consulting firm, executive search firm called Heidrick and Struggles [Heidrick and Struggles International Inc.]. And that's where my life really changed and--so some people say, "Oh, you've had all these (unclear) careers," and I really say, "Well, I was a kid. I was a model. I worked at an energy consulting area. I then did executive search, and I became an entrepreneur." All of those building blocks though gave me the tools. So as kid I have allergies and asthma. As a model I learned how to conduct myself on camera in front of a stage, how to handle being somewhat public in my life. In the executive search world, I learned, excuse me, in the consulting world, I learned how to take voluminous chunks of information and to narrow it down to succinct summaries of what the issues are and what you need to know how to run a business so it's successful. As an executive recruiter I learned how to hire great people, how to work as they say on my business, not in my business. And to know what type of person will help you grow your business. And then finally, Heidrick and Struggles the firm I worked for, they went public in 1999. I worked there about four years, first in the Boston office and then got transferred to New York City [New York, New York]. And by the way, my brother [Russel Wilson] when he died left me a portion of his [U.S.] Army military benefit. And I used that money to buy my first piece of property in Cambridge, Massachusetts. And that created a certain sense of financial freedom. Plus my salary doubled when I became an executive recruiter. So instead of making forty something, I was making eighty something thousand and this is like I'm twenty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This your-- Speaker 2: I'm twenty-four years old, twenty-five years old. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the point I was--yeah. Speaker 2: I was the vice president. And, so I go from being an associate at a search, at a consulting firm to being a vice president at a search firm to then becoming the national corporate recruiter of a publically traded company, to then joining the top search firm in the world, Heidrick and Struggles. And I worked first in New York, excuse me, in Boston and then got transferred to New York to work for the managing partner of the financial service practice. Which if you think that's the boom, boom years of IPOs [initial public offering] and all the Wall Street firms hiring and firing, and people moving. So we would do about twelve searches a year, salary range was let's say eight to twelve million, eight to fifteen million [dollars], and the firm got one third of their first year salary. So we did pretty well. And I'm like I moved here I was twenty-seven years old and I was making over six figures. Story_ID: 639464 Speaker 1: During these years did you feel disadvantaged in any way because you're not a white male who's been in this business for a long time and all that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and knows all the people-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --already knows them? Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say yes if I had identified as a black person. Right, I don't know anything and they're not teaching me. I am Robin [HistoryMaker Robin Wilson], my job is to learn and I had a good mentor. And my mentor--I'll give you an example, I went to a meeting once and I happened to be the only black person in the room. And by the way, I was the first black person in the firm [Heidrick and Struggles International Inc.] in the Boston [Massachusetts] office who was not a secretary, and I was the first in the New York [New York] office who was a professional as well. And what people don't understand in the search world is that's how you become the CEO is a search firm identifies you as a hot talent. And then you make that short list and then they consider putting you on their roster of people to start watching for. A lot of people think it's just the golf course, it's not. It's the people who say, "This is a talented person who should be on that short for CEO or for board of directors search." So I know I have a chance to make change, I have a chance to say, "Do you know about this guy? Do you know about this woman?" Because they didn't even know who certain people were, I won't say any names, who are very prominent in the African American community. But they weren't even on the radar in the search firm. So I started adding those names to the, to the roster. And I felt like I was really making change, and I would talk to people and say, "You know, I need you to improve your resume. I need you to do this." And some people in our community were like, "Whatever." And others did listen and they are in commensurate positions because of that. So it's really--that was an exciting time. Story_ID: 639465 Speaker 1: But they went public in '99 [1999] and I got a windfall. And it was a choice of do I wanna keep the money with the firm [Heidrick and Struggles International Inc.] and keep gaining shares? Or do I wanna take the money and do what I wanna do? And I literally said I can do search every day, some elements I like. But being on the phone smiling and dialing for the right candidate wasn't fulfilling to me. I like real estate. I would read the real estate pages like it was a sports section for a guy. It was like "What's the price? Oh, what are the comparables?" You know. And I ended up getting enrolled at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] while I was still working there at night, and I started getting my master's in real estate finance from NYU at night. And when they went public, I was like, "Give me my money." And I got a lot--like six figures and I bought an apartment. This--So, the next year 9/11 [September 11, 2001] happened or two years later 9/11 happened. I had this money saved now. I bought apartments, flipped them, bought another apartment and started building a nest egg and at the same time was doing project management on the side. So I managed my own project when we did renovations at places. When you think about New York [New York], there are so many old places here. And when you have a buyer who can walk in and its turnkey. That's unusual in New York. Typically you have to renovate. Hasn't been touched since 1970 or 1950. And I was doing these places where I would make it perfect so you could just walk in and buy it. And so I made a lot of money. Speaker 2: What make it perfect? You--what do you mean? Speaker 1: It might mean refinishing the floors. Taking those old appliances out that are energy inefficient. Putting in energy efficient appliances. Sometimes old claw foot tubs that are just, you know, sides or the paint's peeling. Putting in another new tub or refinishing that old tub. Taking out the old Flush-o-matics toilets and putting in a new toilet. And making it pretty, you know, so that the lights. There might not be any lights in the living room. So putting in recess lights or, you know, putting in phone lines that aren't--they're hidden behind the baseboards. So you have like--a modern house you have the switch. You have the thing but you don't have wires running everywhere. The wires are in the wall. And just making it aesthetically pretty. But if you walk into many old apartments, you'll see the wires running along the baseboard or along the molding and you've painted over it fifty thousand times. It just doesn't look pretty anymore. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So that's what I do. Speaker 2: I know lots of people in cities all over the country, Detroit [Michigan], San Francisco [California] and Chicago [Illinois] are--start rehabbing Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --buildings around--in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 639466 Speaker 1: Now a lot of older places were made new places that used to house multiple families at one point (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 1: In the Depression [Great Depression] or whatever and now-- Speaker 2: They're, they're pretty. They're, they're floor through apartments or, you know. So I did that and made good money. And then people started saying, "Can you do that for me, you know?" I've traveled. I'm a businessperson. "Can you just handle my renovation?" So I was like "Sure." So I would get 15 percent of their construction cost and in New York City [New York, New York] that can be pretty high. And I took my company from zero to $1.2 million in eighteen months. And I was the employee and I was totally burned out at that time. I was like, "I can't do this anymore. I'm running from one end of the city to the other." And sometimes you're arguing with contractors. And you have to remind them if you finish it the way the client wants it, you get paid (laughter) so let's do it the right way. And by the way I've got another project lined up for you but you just have to finish this. Then, so you became the busy homeowner's best friend. And what people, people have trouble typically with contractors 'cause they forget the contractor is looking for their next job. But I became the Walmart for all these homeowners because I'd be like, "I've got Mr. Contractor. Finish this job, I've got the next job for you. You don't have to walk off the last two weeks of the job to try to find your next job. I got your job for you. Here's where you gonna be in two weeks, but finish this job." So all of a sudden my clients are getting great service. The plumbers are showing up on time. The electricians are showing up on time. And instead of someone sleeping on a couch for six months, they've got six weeks. They've got three months. They, you know, and their projects are getting finished. And so all of a sudden you've got the economy of scale. And my business just started growing like crazy. So at some point I was like, "I can't do this, I need a break." So I decided, I created a bucket list right after my brother [Russel Wilson] died, I started looking at that bucket list. I was like, "Here we go." And I went to Australia. I snorkeled the Great Barrier Reef. I went to Venice [Italy] and rowed gondola across the Grand Canal. I did all those things that people want to do and say they're gonna do one day. And, you know, shopping, losing my mind in Paris [France] and just saying I want to shop. Now what I regret is I didn't buy some property before the euro came in because It- Italy and Paris were quite affordable at the time. But we learn, but, you know, those are things that--I just, I lived life and I had some fun and then, you know, I dated someone who was a lot of fun and just, you know, just--it was great. And then, and then I remember I dated another guy in 2005 and probably--I don't wanna say it was a mistake, but I moved. I went to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and to anyone who's from D.C. They love their city. But as a Texan, I felt like I was going back to the South. I felt like there were limits and ceilings because everyone is sort of a government employee and they, you know, I was trying to rescale or replicate my business down there. And in New York because of the financial service world people were like, "I don't have a budget just get it done." In D.C. they're like, "Can you do the whole project for twenty thousand dollars?" I'm like, "You want me to redo your whole house for twenty thousand dollars? That includes my fee and the contractor's fee and all the--," No. So fifteen months later I'm back in New York (laughter) you know, and that was 2006, April. And I literally rebranded the company to Robin Wilson Home [New York, New York]. Before that it was called DSG Consulting [ph.], which ten minutes after I say that you're gonna forget what it was. And someone in a magazine said, "Change the company name. "Make it--put your name in it and you'll be wedded to it and you will--," you know, I was like, "I'm gonna fail." And she's like, "No, no, no. Your name's in it. You don't wanna fail. You're gonna work twice as hard." Story_ID: 639467 Speaker 1: To summarize the beginning of this is that you basically got involved in real estate and started rehabbing places and, and you have learned on the job. Speaker 2: Learned on the job, learned on the job. Speaker 1: This kind of stuff you learn by doing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and you have to remember I watched my [maternal] grandparents [Willie Mae McNeil Scott and Robert Scott, Sr.]. I watched my granddaddy and my, you know, how did he paint? He would--a tenant would move out. The place would look horrible sometimes. Fingerprints everywhere, you know. Dirt everywhere. He'd have the dumpster there the day they moved out. Clean it out. Next day you're painting, pranting--planting new grass, flowers. Outside done. Inside done. New tenant a week later. How do you do that? You do that with practice. And it's a schedule of how do you do certain things. And, so I watched it being done. Now back then, I just watched. I didn't do it 'cause I wasn't allowed to--that's not girls' work. But the funny thing in New York City [New York, New York], if you think about it. You got a lot of guys, contractors who speak contractor speak and they don't understand when their clients don't understand. And their clients say, "Well, I want that thingamajiggy over there to be six inches," and they're talking about a window apron. Well, now I can translate what that lady just said to the contractor and the clients get what they want. The contractor gets the instructions that he wants. Everybody is happy and people aren't enemies by the end of the project. So I provided a service and, you know, I made a lot of money. Got burned out, but I came back and rebranded the company in 2006. That was four years ago. I realized the only way to grow my business was to scale it. Meaning you have to have a project manager. You have to have someone in your office who does design work so that you can say this is my concept. They sit there on, there on the CAD [computer aided design] computer, CAD design and they do it for you and then you approve. So it's almost like Frank Lloyd Wright would do. You know, desks of assistants. Back then they had to draw by hand. Today I only need two or three different people because they can do it on their computer. I can approve it. They can make a simple change. You don't have to redraw all the plans like you did back in the olden days. And, so and then you need a project manager to help you make sure things are ordered properly for your clients. So the business, however, moved from just project management to actually clients hiring me to do design work. So Robin Wilson Home [New York, New York] is, Robin Wilson Home is design, interior design for residential and commercial. It's an online retail store called the Nest Store. It is licensing, so one could say I'm like a mini, mini Martha [Martha Stewart], mini Ralph [Ralph Rucci] I hope in my day I will do that. But licensing my name to different products and I happen to be the first woman to license my name to kitchen cabinetry. A company out of Wisconsin found me because I brought so much business to them. And now we're talking about a multiyear, multimillion dollar licensing deal that it's unheard of. And, you know, it's exciting because we are providing ecofriendly kitchen cabinets that don't have formaldehyde. They have low VOC [volatile organic compounds] paints and stains, so someone can walk into the house and there's no chemical smell. And that's a healthy thing for people's kitchens (simultaneous). Story_ID: 639468 Speaker 1: Now how did ecology meet rehab? I know we-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --we often hear of problems with all the rehab work during the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s] of, of you know, people encountering asbestos and when you do a build out the ventilation system changes and people--some office, somebody suffocating, and somebody got too much in another one and all these kind of problems doesn't seem like people are not thinking about it. Speaker 2: Right well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Black mold. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, well the the biggest challenge that builders had in the '80s [1980s] was basic supply and demand. Going back to economics, a lot of people had babies. A lot of people were not doing what I call the village growing up. They didn't stay in the village they grew up in. There was a lot of transitions. Like I move from Texas to Boston [Massachusetts]. There are people from Boston to California. So people were spreading out and instead of buying a single family home, there were apartments going up. Condo going up and people shoddy sometimes in their construction. Here in New York [New York], though, you have these old pre-war apartments and you have some new apartments. And people in their pre-war buildings, nothing had been done sometimes. You would have a kitchen with the same kitchen cabinets that were put in 1950 and they were pink or green. And the same tile in the bathroom, the pink or green. And you're just like "Oh, my gosh, this is a 'Jetsons' ['The Jetsons'] commercial," you know, this is like, and so now someone has sold the apartment or wants to sell the apartment. They're wondering why it stays on the market. They hire me, we get fixed up to the modern aspect. Put white subway tile three [inches] by six [inches] on a brick pattern or, you know, it could be simple things, just paint that--the apartment not in pinks and yellows and greens, and we would just do that. The wide plank floors, put them down if it's a parquet. Some people don't like parquet. If it's a cheap parquet, take it out, put in wide plank floors and just simple things and hide the wire behind the baseboard and create the little phone jack in the wall or the cable jack in the wall, instead of just wires just running everywhere. And the other thing that people don't think about is back then you had one thing to plug in, maybe two. So then you're running electric extension cords everywhere. Well, we would put an outlet on every wall. Those are simple things, but guess what, it ups your sales price. So I became like this go to person for even real estate people, they'd be like just get it fixed so we can sell it. Story_ID: 639469 Speaker 1: Fast forward, we rebrand the company, and now it's Robin Wilson Home [New York, New York]. We got these four divisions: design, the Nest Store where they can buy products like towels, and sheets and candles, table top items. Then you have the licensing, and then finally, I call it the TV channel, but YouTube is invented. So now we have a YouTube channel where all the TV that I appear on becomes real. Now how do you get to TV from how you rebranded your company and you're just doing construction? Well, Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] people called, I thought it was joke. I did not return the phone call. This wonderful man, Adam Glassman, who is her creative director, calls and says, "I'd like to interview you, this is Oprah's people," whatever. I'm like, "Whatever," don't return the phone call. The next day I get a phone call, we're on a deadline please call. I'm like, "This is real," so I call him back, we do an interview. They do a profile and the next thing you know, my business really starts to take off. So I really owe a lot to the Hearst magazine family of companies [Hearst Communications, New York, New York]. The executive who suggested I change the name worked at Hearst. The profile on Oprah was done from that the newspapers started calling. Other magazines started calling, and it just took off. And, now here we are with a company that I have investors. Story_ID: 639470 Speaker 1: But again 2006, I came back to New York [New York] and we are literally at a place where we're gonna have our break even year in the fifth year. And then I can start to pay those investors back and let them start seeing a return on their investment. I won the Make Mine a Million Dollar Business award from American Express [American Express Company] and the Count Me In organization [Count Me In for Women's Economic Independence], which is a women's empowerment organization. They gave me business coaching, and they said, "Work on your business, not in your business. Hire people to work in your business, you stay here as helicopter, and you helicopter down when you need to, and you helicopter up when you need to. But don't do the accounting, hire somebody to do the accounting. Go down when you need to verify all of the accounting stuff, but don't, don't work in your business. Learn to be the ambassador, build your brand, make it scalable, and scalable means you're bringing in enough business to hire people to do what they need to do." Two thousand nine [2009], last year was one of the toughest years for many, many businesses. I laid off two people. However, we have now efficiencies in the office to let me know. I might need one other person very soon, but I don't need five or six people because we have computer aided design tools, and because I'm actually more--how would I say, on the brand building and the licensing side, which over time will actually earn more money than design. Because design is, I'm giving you my attention. When I'm doing licensing, I'm touching a million people with a product that's at a store or at a local dealer. In fact, the kitchens are sold at over five hundred dealers. And in about sixty days a towel line is gonna premiere at Bed Bath and Beyond [Bed Bath and Beyond Inc.]. So--which is one of the major retail stores (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is it--so-- Story_ID: 639471 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So these products--I read somewhere you got four criteria for ecofriendly-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --living. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Sustainability--what are the four things? Speaker 2: Yes, there are four criteria for ecofriendly design sustainable, recyclable, reusable and non-toxic. So sustainable could be bamboo flooring. It could be that you reuse the wood planks in your house in another room, you don't throw them out. Recyclable blue jeans right now can be recycled in insulation. Instead of throwing your blue jeans out, send them to the recycle center. They actually turn it into insulation for your space. And of course, have the recycle bins in your house. But on a basic level reusable is the vintage furniture that you have in your house that you might wanna throw away. But what if you just repainted it or sanded it down and re-stained it. And then non-toxic is don't use anything that off-gases. Meaning those man made chemicals that we all love the new car smell, but it really just means it's an amalgam of chemicals that you're smelling. And you wanna get that out of your house. Because today building envelopes are so very tight that literally that means that you could be poisoning yourself. If you think even about Hurricane Katrina those poor children in those trailers that they had to recall because of formaldehyde. They were just breathing in chemicals and, so my goal is to help people know ecofriendly is beautiful aesthetically. But being ecofriendly is for your ecosystem. It's where you live, it's what touches your skin, it's what you eat and what you're breathing. Story_ID: 639472 Speaker 1: I know I've heard stories about plywood, fumes coming up from plywood. Speaker 2: Formaldehyde. Speaker 1: We got the Chinese drywall crisis-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --now. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Do we now know more about these substances now or are they worse than they use to be or? Speaker 2: We do know more and the tragic thing is we don't know enough. Chinese drywall--I wrote about it on The Huffington Post two years ago, and people laughed me out of the room. Now they're recalling the whole mess of Chinese drywall. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yep, because in stripping them and putting in U.S. gypsum board. Now, Chinese drywall was probably made and cured with some type of sulfuric compound just began to just--I don't know--in its, in its--yeah, it smells like eggs, rotten eggs in your house, and all of the electric materials would begin to blacken. So that means you, if you plugged in something, your refrigerator cord was blue originally, it became black. And all the electrical wiring in the walls became black, so it just, it was bad. And think about what that could be doing to you. So if your home is your ecosystem, your building envelope is tight meaning that there's insulation today. And many years ago they didn't have a lot of insulation. You wanted to let your house breath, you didn't have, you didn't use your AC [air conditioning] very much. So you wanted to open the windows and let the heat come in and out and, you know, today it's sealed. Almost hermetically sealed, so what you bring in, it's toxic. Hypothetically, simple things you can do. Take off your shoes when you walk in your front door. Leave the pesticides and the dirt outside. Change your vinyl shower curtain into a nylon shower curtain'cause that--think about it when you open the shower curtain a nyl- a vinyl shower curtain it's like chemicals. But if you open nylon, there's no chemical smell. And those simple things are things that we're trying to teach people because the incidents of asthma in the African American community is insane. It's one in seven children. Why? It wasn't like that. I was the rare bird who had asthma and allergies. Now you're seeing asthma and allergies and autism at an extreme level. And it has to have something to do with your environment. Whether it's you're breathing, it gets to--into, you know, the membrane of your child or they're eating lead paint and it's hurting them, you know, it--we don't know what it is, but I think we need to recognize that there's a trend that didn't exist many, many years ago. And we've even had calls from clients who have undergone cancer treatments and they wanna come into a non-toxic space. And, so they bring us in and they're like, "Take everything away," and you're like, "All right. Well, this couch, you were a smoker for forty-five years we're taking this couch out 'cause there's nothing we can do to salvage it. We're gonna get a fresh couch in so it's not off-gassing. We're gonna," you know, "we're gonna make sure that your kitchen cabinets don't have formaldehyde base glues. We're gonna take the wall to wall shag carpet out because it's got a vinyl backing which means it's off-gassing for it's entire lifetime. We're gonna get a wool back carpet, and we're gonna put hardwood floors in and all these things that really allows someone to come into their space and it's clean." Speaker 1: And most people think Pine-Sol cleaner is clean. Pine-Sol's ammonia. That means it deadens all your smell endings, and it doesn't mean it's clean. It just means it deadens the smell endings on your nose. Speaker 2: I always thought about products like Febreze and other odor, you know, that they're--do they really eliminate anything or do they just mask? Speaker 1: They mask it so you don't smell it anymore for a moment. But it's not clean, you know, and that's what people--they--they're like, "Oh, my house smells clean because it smells like flowers, 'cause it smells like a pine forest." No. That's not clean--it's--clean is when you smell almost nothing. When it's antiseptic, you know, and the other things are scents that your body is breathing. Speaker 2: What about things like incense? I know lots of people who are very, considered themselves very spiritual and they burn lots of incense. Speaker 1: Well, again let's say if you have a candle that's emitting smoke, you're breathing smoke. If you have a candle like soy candle that doesn't have much smoke because soy doesn't emit smoke, which candle's better? Incense, all it is, is smoke, so--and some of the waxes are petroleum based, 'cause that's, you know, it's not a natural (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Beeswax. Speaker 1: Beeswax, if it's beeswax, that's great. But if it's a petroleum based incense and you don't know often, then guess what that means? That you're putting a gasoline type or petroleum fumes into your house. And your house is sealed so over time that is what you're smelling. That's what you're putting into your environment. Speaker 2: These new carpet smells, new appliance smells, new TV smells. Speaker 1: It's all off-gassing, all off-gassing, and so, you know, nobody's perfect. So when you get new things in your house, open the windows for a while let it, let the smell go away, and then and only then can you say, "My house is, you know, clean." Make sure you're using energy efficient appliances. Story_ID: 639473 Speaker 1: So, now how does this harken back to [HistoryMaker] Robin Wilson the little girl? Allergies, asthma, my parents [JoAnn Scott Wilson and Rubin Wilson] had to pull out that '70s [1970s] shag carpet, put in hardwood floors and tile because I was allergic to the carpet. Now allergic--most people say, "What do you mean?" Well, I would walk in, I would start wheezing and sneezing. Now you can pump your child at seven, six, seven full of steroids so you don't wheeze and sneeze, but you gotta go to the root of the problem. So the root of the problem was they took the carpet out and I was like (makes sound). So there's something with our environment that we're not recognizing. And one thing--I just did a lecture the other day and I said to the parents in the audience and all of them winced. I said, "So you're ecofriendly? When was the last time you changed your pillow?" And every parent was like, "Ooh." I said, "Do you know dust mites live on us?" That's how skin turns over and people will have a pillow that weighs ten ounces when they buy it. Two years later it weighs sixteen ounces. Why 'cause the dust mites, their carcasses which you cannot see are in that pillow. So if your child has asthma, they could be wheezing and sneezing 'cause they're sleeping on a dirty old pillow. It's the equivalent--if you don't wash your pillows, it's the equivalent of wearing pajamas for the same two years. And they were like, "Ooh." So those are simple things, simple things that we try to teach people to make their ecosystem healthy. And we're trying to make a difference in people's lives. And so when I--there's this green movement--(laughter) notice I've never said green. The green movement came along after I founded my company [Robin Wilson Home, New York, New York]. We're really part of the wellness movement which was part of the late '90s [1990s]. And when people heard wellness it was about your health and your lifestyle. The green movement came along in 2003, 2004. Sure, you know, would say, "Robin you're green." I'm like, "No I'm not," (laughter) you know, no. I'm ecofriendly because green sometimes tells you what you're not doing right. What you can't do. What you should be doing. It's very preachy. Ecofriendly is what are you doing? What can you do? It's not telling you that you're bad if you aren't doing certain things. It's saying try to do what you can, and that to me is really important because you need to affirm people's participation in keeping their environment safe for their family. Story_ID: 639474 Speaker 1: Now you completed a big project. There's a picture of it on the wall here. Speaker 2: Yes. Oh, my gosh. Speaker 1: Tell us about this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was recommended by Laura Turner Seydel, Ted Turner's daughter to do a project for Robert F. Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy, Jr.]. To do his ecofriendly renovation as a designer. He and his family had a flood in their home. They were in Hyannis Port [Massachusetts] and literally black mold covered the entire house from the month of July and August, perfect petri dish moment. When they got back in September, there were still six inches of water standing in their basement with black mold all the way up to the second level. I wrote a book, my very first book. It's called 'Kennedy Green House: Designing an Eco-Healthy Home from the Foundation to the Furniture' [Robin Wilson] and this book tells the tale of the entire house renovation. The sick children. The toxic home situation where the kids would go away and then they would come back home. They would go away and they were sick but they would get healthy when they went away and then they'd come back and they're wheezing and sneezing again. And that affects many people today. This was a house that--we had an opportunity to create a living laboratory. The best ecofriendly products that exist on the market, from solar tubes which are passive lighting devices that's actually in every closet instead of having that power surge in the morning where everybody turns on the light in the closet. They have natural light coming in and they can get dressed in natural light or they can turn on a light if they want to but they get natural light. We use low flow shower heads and toilets, in some cases dual flush toilets. We use low VOC [volatile organic compounds] paints through Benjamin Moore [Benjamin Moore and Company, Inc.], wide plank engineered floors through Mohawk [Mohawk Industries, Inc.], and these are floors that take like three millimeters of wood and the rest is a non urea--non added urea formaldehyde plywood. And so you have this great beautiful floor but it's not toxic. And we did all these, you know, the kitch- my kitchen line is in the house and, so you can just imagine all these great companies some of which are family owned. They don't have big budgets. We put their products in the house. People see the book, at the very end you have a resource guide and now people hopefully with supply and demand will start to patronize those companies and cost will start to come down so it's affordable for everyone. This project--I don't wanna say it changed my life but it certainly taught me a lot about people. It taught me a lot about the products and it taught me a lot about working with celebrity clients. And the positive I will say is this one statement. His father, Robert F. Kennedy, Sr. [Robert F. Kennedy] said before he passed away, before he was assassinated, that in forty years there would be a Negro president and there is [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. And his son hired me to be tastemaker for his home and so that tells me times have changed no matter what we wanna say. Things are different, there are families and people who will help you along the way, push you to the next plateau in your life and they could've selected anyone in the world to do this project. Ted Turner's daughter could've recommended anyone in the city [New York, New York] to do this project, but they recommended me and that tells me that that is a powerful moment in my life and in the life of some many other people who might say, "Well, you know, you know, when are you ever gonna get projects like that?" I'm like, "No, you just have to be ready when a project like that comes along, to drop everything and do your work," and the book speaks to that and you'll enjoy reading the book, 'Kennedy Green House.' And my first book, and by the way, I will say this about the book, it was quite humorous how cheap I was. I was like I'm not paying a ghost writer five thousand dollars to write this book. I'm gonna write this book. I learned very quickly that they're worth every penny because I would work day all and then have to come home and write and then re-write and re-edit. And so I wrote the whole book--sometimes on my Blackberry--I went through two Blackberries during this time. And I learned very quickly that a ghost writer would've been a great tool for this project. But eighteen edits later I can say doing this book brought me back to the journalism and it is something I like to do, so I can't wait to get started on the next book and, and just to--whatever it may be, whatever topic we cover, it's a lot a fun to write. Story_ID: 639475 Speaker 1: So I feel like, I feel like the summary of my story is I have parents [JoAnn Scott Wilson and Rubin Wilson] who taught me to be Robin [HistoryMaker Robin Wilson] before being a color. I have [maternal] great-grandparents who through birth or otherwise. I go to family reunions and I've got that rainbow coalition at the family reunion and I've got an entrepreneurial bent that I believe was born from my great-grandfather [Robert Scott] on my mother's side who was involved with real estate and taught me that you can make a difference at an early age. And taught me also to be demystified about money. If you can imagine collecting rents and you just have money spread all over. It's like Monopoly money. So what end up happening is you learn to count. You learn how to band everything up. You had the big old adding machine. So money has value. A lot of kids get money one day and they lose their minds because they've never been around it. They don't understand you have to work for it. You have to, you have to save it. You don't need to show people what you have and there's a whole culture right now of people who are so consumer driven that they wanna show people that they've got money and in effect they really don't. If I have one dollar that I make every day, but I have no debt, I'm richer than the person that has ten thousand dollars in credit card debt and they make $50 million. So I say to myself everyday there's a certain level of practicality that I grew up with that I'm very thankful for. It's about knowing what you know and not being afraid to say, "I don't know." And have somebody on your team or around you who does know the answer. It means literally as I said earlier what would you attempt to do if you knew you could not fail? You know, this maybe my last career, it may not be. Next month somebody could say, "I want you to go to Abu Dhabi [United Arab Emirates] and be a spa owner and run hotels and sell your company," and okay that might be what I end up doing next. But I do know this everything I do I give 110 percent to. And I believe that my word is, is priceless. Story_ID: 639476 Speaker 1: We always ask this question and you may have answered it in some ways but, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My hope and concern for the African American community is threefold. The first is I hope young people stop using terminology like you're bougie or you're down or you're cool. Meaning that if you are an achiever that that's a bad thing. I hope people take step back and they remember that their grandparents, their parents all worked very hard to get out of the cotton fields, or whatever they did to give them a chance to have the opportunities they have today and pay homage to your ancestors. Number two, I hope every African American has chance to go to Africa at some point. I went to Africa, and I went to Africa and I went to Goree Island [Dakar, Senegal] and stood in the room where slaves were sold. And had that moment of goose pimples, you know, as big as my arm, just popping up and saying, "Oh, my gosh, I have the blood of a survivor in me. I have the blood of a warrior in me. Someone who made that passage and someone who survived and understood what the rules were." And the rules were survive pass your, pass your genes on. Those were the rules, it was not about I'm better than you. It was pass the genes on and give somebody hope to live in the future. And my third point is again I said this, what would you attempt to do if you knew you could not fail? If kids knew a little bit about their history, they would know things like Paul R. Williams was a famous black architect who built Frank Sinatra's house, who built the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion [Los Angeles, California]. There was an African American who built the Philadelphia Museum of Art [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. There's the golf tee, there's the guy [Daniel Hale Williams] out of Houston [sic.] who helped pioneer open heart surgery. There are so many people in our history today that we aren't passing on the oral history, the oral tradition, and if we did kids would not say, "Oh, well, I can't do it." They'd be like, "He did it, my grandfather did it." Speaker 1: If I can get the name right isn't it John Chase [HistoryMaker John S. Chase] in Houston [Texas]? Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, and we just need to know our history. Not that we were all downtrodden. Yeah, somebody started off as a slave, but somebody paid enough money or they got a scholarship to go to an architecture school. And Paul R. Williams I'll use him as a very good example, he worked for Frank Sinatra, Dolores Del Rio, all these famous Hollywood stars back in the day. And during that time he was not allowed to sit next to his clients. So he learned to draw upside down, so he--Frank Sinatra said, "I need this to be in a different area," he would do whatever he did, upside down. So that he could say, "Is this what you'd like, sir?" Now tell me--that's like Ginger Rogers she dances backwards for Fred Astaire, she did everything he did. So my view is we need to know who the leaders are of our past, our current world doesn't have the singular leader. And I think that's something that we often have heard, there's a single leader, there is not. You're a leader in your own world, you have history to draw upon. You have a leader in the entertainment world maybe, you have a leader in the political world, you have a leader in the design world. But we are not your leader, and that's what I think in the past that may have held us back at little bit. Because if you look at other communities it's--there's not a single leader. If you look at the Jewish community, for example, they don't say this person represents all of us, they don't do that. There's a business leader, there's a religious leader, you know, and it, what it does is it makes sure that different viewpoints are heard. And it doesn't make it a homogenous, one group of black people. I know too many people who have different stories, and so I guess the summary is achievement oriented, dream oriented, and know your past, and respect it and revere it, and know that you can do all those things and better. We have so many more open doors today. Story_ID: 639477 Speaker 1: Two last questions-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that are very similar-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: First one is when you look back at everything you've done at this point and you're still young. You're forty. Speaker 2: I'm forty don't tell everybody, though (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Don't--all right, all right. Speaker 2: Well, everybody knows now (laughter). Speaker 1: That seems young to me. But what would you consider today to be your legacy if you had to define it? Speaker 2: If I were to die tomorrow I would say--the first things is I helped people always, I was loyal to people around me. And I believed in the impossible, I believed in the impossible dream. And that means life is always fun. Tomorrow I could tell you I'm gonna have a deal with a spa products company within a year, and I'll set that as my goal, and if I say that I will have that deal in a year. So I believed in the impossible dream, I believed, I believed that everything is possible if you focus on it. And, you know, one other thing I will say I haven't had as much focus on my personal life as I should have, so I'm not married, I don't have kids, you know, the joke with me--my friends say, "No pets, no plants, no kids." So I hope that changes, but as one of my friends said to me recently, sometimes you can't have it all. Sometimes-[HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou when I sat with her at Thanksgiving she said, "You don't have a job, you have a career, and your career will help millions of people, so keep pursuing it." And the guy I was dating at the time, she's like, "And he's not the one." And, so (laughter) so when you hear that from Maya and you're like, "Okay." And shortly thereafter, you know, I'm here in New York [New York] doing my thing. And it's very funny a couple of days ago someone called and said, "That guy called and wants to say hi to you." I'm unh-uh, yeah, keep it over there, you know, my real point to you is to say at forty years old which is typical midpoint for people's lives, I've done of my bucket list, which I did at twenty-three, I've made 100 things I wanted to do before I died. I've got about thirty-eight left, so if I only have thirty-eight things left and I do one a year and that's my lifetime hooray. We all need to have a bucket list about what we wanna do. 'Cause it's the silly things, it's riding in a hot air balloon, it's riding in a Ferrari at a racetrack, it's I don't know--it's reading a book in a whole weekend, and turning off your phone. It's those things that you say, "I always wanna do one day," and just doing them. Speaker 1: Last question is similar to legacy but a little different but briefly how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, if I were to die tomorrow I would want people to say "She--," oh, god it's like--it makes you think, "She explored, she explored, she grew, she learned.".