 JD: This is Jennifer Donnally. I am a graduate student at the University of North Carolina. Today I am interviewing Elaine Barney, who was the director of Women's Health Counseling Services at the Orange County Women's Center. It is Thursday, May 31, 2007. Elaine, this is our second interview. We discussed earlier in the interviews, much of your life story. My curiosity is when did you first hear the term feminist? EB: As far as I can remember, it was when we were living in Pennsylvania. It was at a time where the book Our Body, Ourselves was just being seen and talked about all over the place. I was a member of and [a] coordinator of the NOW [National Organization for Women] group in Bucks County [Pennsylvania]. That's what we talked about. It was feminism. It was just a wonderful [interruption]- - oops. JD: Yeah, they're fine. EB: Oh, okay. JD: [Laughter] so wonderful- - EB: Sorry. JD: Our sound's good. [Laughter] 2 EB: People knew the Bucks County Chapter, which is very, very active, and certainly the ERA [Equal Rights Amendment] was still not passed. I began getting more information about women's health issues, and then I went to the conference that I told you about in Philadelphia. I think that's when it- -the name of a feminist -- really became something I was hearing a lot. JD: What did you take it to mean back then? EB: [pause] JD: It's extremely hard the define it. [Laughter] EB: I think because it was so closely tied with my understanding of the women's health movement, it was concurrent with, "Okay, so this is what a feminist is". The stereotypes were all out there: "Feminists hate men, they wear big heavy boots and they clomp around in [them]". The image and the stereotype of a feminist was so negative. And yet when we moved to Pennsylvania, and my daughter was very, very young, it was like, "No, this doesn't all make sense". Part of what happened at the time was that the NOW group in Bucks County decided to have a little series about what is a feminist. We would meet at our monthly meetings to talk about the history of feminism and dispel all of the stereotypes. It was a real eye opener for me in terms of the women who had been involved. I knew something about some of them, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, et cetera, but to find out how women had been treated before then. I could identify with some of that from my family of origin. When you learn about it in a way that dispels all the myths,[it] makes you even more aware of the amount of oppression that women had experienced for centuries. Once I found out about that, there was no going back. Then I was very pleased and proud to use the term feminist. I think it helped to have women who were 3 also going through the same kind of process of identifying themselves and defining their sense of feminism. There was a lot of support between us. That's about the earliest that I can remember. JD: So when you first remember the term feminist, did you immediately selfidentify with it or was it a process? EB: I think [I] self-identif[ied]. [Laughter] Having a nursing background and having experienced, as I may have mentioned the last time, what it was like to be a nursing student. [You had] to stand up and offer the doctor your seat and he -- I never knew [any] she's [who] would take it -- and being in the OR [Operating Room] where the surgeon was just very, very authoritarian. It certainly gave me an enhanced appreciation of the power of women and what women could do as a group. Particularly, the more I read reviews of and the more I heard about the Boston Women's Health Book Collective [and] Our Bodies, Ourselves. It was like, "Oh, yeah, this is what I need. I need to read this and find out more about that because people weren't talking about that in my nursing program." It just all began to fit together and then meeting these wonderful women, many of them not conforming to the stereotype. For the most part, they were heterosexual [and] married with young children. JD: White? EB: White, yes. Bucks County, yes. [Laughter] Yet, there was also concern expressed about [diversity] when I went to the meeting in Philadelphia. That was a mixed group of African-American women. I don't recall many Hispanic women at the conference. Certainly the consciousness of the women who wrote the book and who were part of the Boston Women's Health Book Collective were just amazing. It wasn't 4 just race, but class, and disabled people and their rights, and gender issues and transgender issues. My head was spinning. It was just learning so much and yet all of it made sense to me. JD: And we're speaking of a national health conference held in Philadelphia in the summer of 1974? EB: Yes. JD: It might not have been the summer. Is what you are talking about where you really hit all these issues for the first time? EB: Right. JD: We talked about that in the earlier interview. EB: Yes. JD: Let me see if I can go into a little bit more on this conference in Philadelphia. You allluded that you came back and wrote an article or a story about the conference. Was that for the NOW chapter or for a local newspaper? EB: It was for NOW. I just needed to write about it because it changed my life in a very dramatic way. It confirmed a number of things that I may have been thinking, but I couldn't articulate it in terms of race, gender, class, and my nursing experience. [I] listen[ed] to the women at that conference talk about how they had been treated by physicians and by their husbands. There was this big idea of battered women coming up. I had to write about it. I don't think it started out as, "Okay, I'm going to write this for NOW." It was I needed to write about it, period. The more I thought about it, I thought maybe this is something the NOW group would be interested in. I think some of the people there then read it and said "yes." ( ) send it in to [a] woman whom I'd met, who 5 was kind of the coordinator in that area of Philadelphia. I think she was associated with NOW at that time. She was very excited and thought that the article was something that she would like to put in the news for the larger chapter. JD: Okay. You felt compelled. Everything clicked at this conference. EB: Um, hum. JD: Because it was a woman's health conference, and it seems like much of your ideas about feminism suddenly clicked due to your career as a nurse, why do you think that the women's health became such a galvanizing issue, or the force behind the women's liberation movement of the early 1970s? EB: Well, I think part of it is what we've just been talking about. That there was so many connections that spoke to women. I think the connections were related, on the one hand, to the whole idea of women have the right to know more about their bodies and had the right to make any kind of women's choices. Certainly, the choice of deciding what they wanted to do if they were pregnant was a hot thing because the Supreme Court didn't pass anything until 1973. People were still debating that. But I think for women, it spoke to women's lives. I know for some people it sounds an overused phrase, but the whole idea of one's own autonomy and empowerment and sisterhood. At this conference, people were getting up and talking about their abortion experience, or what it was like to be gay. [When they began talking about choices,] the choices that had been denied them and the shame and humiliation that they experienced from their family members and their husbands [in terms of the abortion,] it just spoke to a deeper core of meaning for so many of us. People could identify with them. Women could- -there were a few men there, but [I] was 6 just surround[ed] by all these women. Women doctors sa[id] what it was like for them when they were going through their own training. Eeverything seemed to resonate with everybody in that large, large conference. It resonated with me. It was on a different scale. I wasn't practicing as a nurse at that point, but it all made sense. Then, of course, it made me come home to my family too. What's going on with my family; the patriarchy. It just reinforced my budding feminism and drive -- how women were treated as patients, how they were denied the right to make choices, how so many of us didn't know very much about our bodies. I knew a little more because of the training, but abortion was never mentioned during my years at the Cornell Nursing School. How did I get by with all this? And it's supposed to be such a great program. It was to many, but no one ever mentioned abortions. What is that? What does that mean? I think I wasn't alone in that questioning and finding a sense of being able to relate to women I'd never seen before, [by] listening to their stories and being tearful at the humiliation at times that women were subjected to because they were trying to find their own path, and trying to make decisions that they weren't allowed to make. JD: Who did not allow them to make [those decisions]? Who's responsible for the problems? Was there any discussion of who was responsib[le] or even if it's a who, or if it's a what that caused all these problems? EB: Well, then you get to the larger political picture of, and history of women's rights from Elizabeth Cady Stanton on and the suffragettes. That's where I found myself relating to the series that NOW people had- -it was actually one person who was very, very interested in finding out more about [the] women's rights movement. We would talk about the state legislature and all the people who didn't want to pass the Equal Rights 7 Amendment. Abortion was not legal at that time. Then of course, there're flashes of anger towards the whole male-dominated political system that would prevent women from having their rights. And then you move forward in to this period saying we still didn't have any rights. They didn't have the right to make choices in terms of reproductive rights. Why is it that men were still allowed to beat their wives? It just opens up all of these avenues. I think that it was a time when I and others were questioning all the societal values: woman's places in the home, women shouldn't be working unless you have to provide support, the option of being someone who can choose to be married or not, choose to become pregnant or not, choose to work outside the home or not. Everything was being challenged. It was a very exciting time. But, it was fraught with a lot of anger at times too. I think when people began realizing they had the right to voice their concerns and their choices, there was a big backlash. "You must hate men." Dumbest thing I ever heard. [Laughter] It just opened up all these new ways of thinking about being a woman and the choices that we did or didn't have and what it was like for the generations of women before us who never had those opportunities. It was amazing. It just blasted my hope [and] awareness. I'm very grateful for that. JD: So you came home and wrote. I know you also said you couldn't wait to get home to talk to your husband about everything that you learned. You wrote the article. What other activities come out of this conference in Philadelphia in 74? EB: For me? JD: Yes. EB: [pause] Well, I think it was [pause] just a renewed interest in the whole feminist movement and the women's health movement. I'd like to say that I then bought 8 a copy of Our Bodies, Ourselves and sat down and read the whole thing cover to cover. [Laughter] No, I didn't do that. I did get the book. I wanted my own copy of it, and [I] would read from that. It was wonderful. So part of that was just a renewed involvement in the women's health movement. I gave a couple of mini courses at the Y in Bucks County on women's choice and little film clips or movies about women's issues. [The films] were all over the place, so I said, "Well, okay. I'll get some of these reels or film clips," and the woman who was running the Y said, "Oh, yeah, that sounds like a great idea. Why don't we do that?" So we put out a little flier, put one up in the Y, and a fair number of women came. They were all housewives, in quotes. They all came and brought their children. It was again, that sense of community and almost without speaking about it, people shared a lot of experiences. So we would then at times stop and [ask], "Have any of you ever experienced this particular concern or issue?" or "Do you want to talk about what it was like growing up female in your family or household?" Then it was just more and more consciousness raising on that level. I think I ran it twice. It was kind of like carrying forth the mission. [Laughter] The only one who didn't like it very much was my father. [Laughter] I was interviewed by a woman who had been part of this workshop, and she just quoted some things that I had said. She took the quotes from Our Bodies, Ourselves, so I was really pleased about that. It was kind of like, "Look Dad". I sent off a copy. Well, about four days [to] five days later, I get a call from my sister, Barbara, who said that my father had read this article and he was just beside himself. Whatever the article said about families and men and experiences growing up as a child, that was all taken from Our Bodies, Ourselves. My father missed that part and thought that I was being quoted as, "This is what happened to me when I 9 was younger in my family." I was like "No. That's not at all what that was." So then I had to call him and he was still angry and felt humiliated because I had presented him as a bad father. [Laughter] That's not quite what I thought, but he didn't like the term feminist or feminism. He just saw it as something that denigrated family and he didn't understand it, but [thought] it must be that you don't like men. I was like, "Oh, no." I was trying to explain to him, but it was a difficult telephone conversation. JD: I can imagine. EB: Yeah. So I sent him another copy and highlighted where it said that this was ( ). So, that was part of it. [Laughter] And then I went to more conferences offered by NOW. As a result of this brief article that I had written, the woman I met who was a health educator in Philadelphia called me and asked me if I wanted to be on the committee for Women's Health Issues in Pennsylvania. That enabled me to go to some other conferences and meet a lot of women who were from other states. I think I then took over one of the elections for one of the organizations. I don't think it's in existence any more, [and] I may not be able to recall the name. It was like a women's health something that would offer information to women who would call and needed some resources. [They] also kept their eye on the whole legislative and political end of what's going on with women and what are the concerns they have. It just took me in a different direction, but it was good. It made sense to me and it still does. JD: Well, just to make something more concrete, because we were talking so much about what it means to learn about your body for the first time. Is there a story that you can talk about or something that you remember particularly that [was] your ah-ha moment when you were reading through Our Bodies, Ourselves for the first time? Or 10 something that you were completely blown away with that you learned, so that we understand how much women didn't know and how much this meant to find out information. EB: Yeah. Yeah. I think- - JD: I know that's digging into the memory. EB: Yeah. [Laughter] JD: Or even stories when you taught people and they suddenly had questions and were surprised to find out or- - EB: Well, one of the things that we did, it was an incredible night, at the Orange County Women's Health Center, yeah- - we weren't in the Women's Center at that point at all. So we were just at switchboard in the crisis place. JD: At the Health Counseling Service? EB: Yes, thank you. [Laughter] JD: In North Carolina ( )? EB: Yeah. JD: Okay. EB: We may have to re-do this part over again, because I feel like I'm coming off like [Laughter]- -It's the sugar. As part of the Women's Health Counseling Service we did have some people come in and talk to us. There was a very active group in Durham. One of the things that they were doing was teaching the medical students. JD: Women's Health Teaching Group in Durham. EB: Yes. JD: Okay. 11 EB: How to relate to women: number one to treat them with respect and to provide, what's the word I want?- -how to provide medical exams. JD: Pelvic exams? EB: Pelvic exams. They were brave women to go out there and do that. At one of our monthly meetings at the Women's Health Counseling Service, we invited them in and they brought the little table thing you could lie back on and flashlights and sheets and all that. Whoever wanted to look at their cervix would be able to see it because I had a magnifying glass. Well, it was just an incredible night. People were like "I didn't know that's what I looked like". [Laughter] No one had really done it on their own because they were uncertain what- -where's the cervix, am I going to injure myself if I insert something? They brought speculums and you were able to see it and guided us all. We all took turns with that, and to hear the women: "Oh, that's really interesting," and "Oh, it looks nice", just because there had never been any opportunities to do that. I was one of them. I had had Jeremy by then, so I thought, "Oh, yeah, I know, I'm a nurse". But it's one thing to experience it through reading, but another to see your cervix and to realize that this small area- -that then I had two children and how in the world did they ever make it? [Laughter] People were just- -it was so freeing for all of us. We were laughing and talking about it and just really very, very interesting. So they- -[Laughter] I became so carried away with it I wanted my daughter to know about all this. So [Laughter] the next day I asked her if she wanted to see Mommy's cervix. She didn't know what that was. I said I wanted to show you where you came out, because it wasn't just out of my belly. And she said, "Okay, sure". So I hopped up and I held it so that she could see it and she was like, "Oh, hum." She didn't- -it wasn't this earth-shattering thing, but it was 12 just very freeing. I thought okay, at least I'm not hiding anything from her and she's not going to have trauma or anything from it. We were all- -it was like, "Oh, yeah." Again, this community of women, because we all had different experiences and we all came from different backgrounds. There were very few, I think two African-American women by then, one of them was a nurse educator. But it just united us all no matter what our backgrounds were. It was just very freeing. Yeah. JD: We've talked much before about this sense of community. It seems that it was immediate when you started talking about women's health because of shared experiences around conceptions of child-birth, reproduction, sexuality. How did you gain that community and how did you keep that community going, because there's obviously diversity amongst that community? EB: There were some rough times, [Laughter] very rough times. I think there is an example of that at the Women's Health Counseling Service. We had a pretty good group. There were a couple of individuals who felt that I was being too much the leader, and therefore it should be less hierarchical. I thought, "Hum, okay." But the way in which it was done by this particular person, as I recall, was to be more attacking of me. So it wasn't all ice cream and great times. Majority of the times, yes, but I think there were people, too, who wanted to be in that roll, and felt they could either do a better job or wanted to do it differently. So we had meetings where we had to process all that; long meetings. Eventually, we came to an uneasy truce with it all. JD: ( ) like a collective verses a structured organization? 13 EB: Yeah. There was some of that, but it was very short-lived. I think I had another thought on that that was- -I'll just stop there with that, but if it comes back to me I'll say it them. JD: Did you develop friendships with any of the volunteers? EB: Yeah. One of the volunteers soon after when I had stepped down as the director. I wasn't in it for a long time, but I was spending a lot of time at the little office that we had. It just got to be too much after a while. So I stepped down and I think the burn-out was just getting to me. I mentioned to my friend that I was stepping down and she was a great volunteer and hadn't been at the meeting or something, and she said, "I'm applying to the school social work," and she said, "Why don't you?" And I said, "Oh, well that sounds- -yeah." She said, "I think you'd be a good administrator" blah, blah, blah. I told her a day later, "Well, you're going- -you want to be a therapist and you just think I'm going to be a good office person." She goes, "No, I never said that, but you didn't say you were interested." So we worked that out. I finally owned up that yes, I'd really like to do the therapy part, and so we each applied. I wrote a letter of recommendation for her and she wrote one for me, and we both got in it. [Laughter] So that was- -and she's someone now I don't see as often, but she went on to get her doctorate. Other people I still see in the community whom I know. It was nice, but I think I learned too that Chapel Hill is a community that is always on the move and so a number of people would then finish at Carolina and then they'd move somewhere else. Yet the person I was talking to about earlier who's the director of the birthing center, I see her from time to time. And if her son is there, she goes, "See, she's the woman who said that I was pregnant with you". The birthing center is just doing well, and is just a 14 wonderful place. She's a great woman. So yeah, there were friendships that were certainly developed that worked out well. And the pot-lucks really helped with that because everybody was just bringing in things and we'd all sit and eat and talk about things and then we'd go out if people wanted to just get a beer at the Mexican restaurant next door. So yeah, it was a good time. JD: So I'm going to backtrack. There's this wonderful slogan that's called "The Personal is Political". So much of what you've described of women's health movements in terms of moving a woman to act stems from this, because so much of women's health is personal affairs. How do you move out of the personal affairs and make them political? Or how did that evolve? Especially in the one-on-one counseling services, and actually amongst your volunteers, amongst this community, how did that actually look at on a day-to-day basis, if that makes sense? EB: Well, certainly we had- -I think part of it was educating. We'd get brochures from the woman at the health department who was the health educator, with the workshops that we offered. The people were all pretty political, and some of them weren't activist, but others were. So we'd have information about if there was a march for the ERA or for abortion rights, and we'd have flyers up in the rooms. So it was very clear what our leanings were in terms of the Women's Health Counseling Service. As well as being very clear that we were not there to make choices on behalf- -for the woman. That this was really her time to talk about whatever she wanted to do. Did she want to give us a name? If not, okay. We wouldn't turn them away at all if they couldn't- -have the dollar for the pregnancy test. It was okay. We had a little kitty. After a while you look all around you and everything's political because it is personal 15 and it's also part of being a woman and it just keeps growing and mushrooming. So workshops were important. JD: What sort of things did you cover in the workshops? What topics were well received in the community? EB: Well, one of them was an eight-week series that we put on initially in Chapel Hill. Then because it was so popular, other people were asking about this workshop coming to Hillsboro. It was an eight-week series on choices and childbirth. We all had an interest in that and many of us were mothers or were pregnant. But it was also because not only was it important to have that series to show that there are many different choices that people can make about whether or not they want to have children or not, if they are pregnant, what they want to do with that decision that they would be making. It was also because we felt that it was important to emphasize that because of the women's health movement and feminist movement that it- -I'm trying, I'm struggling for the words to say it, -- but it was important to show the public that women who are feminist, who are interested in some of these political issues that effect women's lives and men's lives, that we were pro-choice. That meant not only about abortions, but children. That we weren't all running around just having abortions and hating kids, which were some outlandish stereotypes at times. Again, trying to empower women with choices and also showing that you have the right to make decisions. If you decide not to have children, okay. If you decide to, wonderful. So having the nurse- -someone like the woman who is still the director now of the birthing center to work with me and some of the other people there who were doing home births. That was another whole part of what the women's movement was about, if you decide to, then learn about your body and parenting and 16 parenting skills. It just worked out really, really well. We were delighted when we offered this that men were there who were also interested in that. It wasn't just the woman deciding to have a child and the guy's out of the picture. It could be part of the bonding of the couple or the family. It was really well received. That was one kind of workshop that we would offer. We'd have training workshops for the volunteers and we would talk about women's health issues, and STD's [sexually transmitted diseases] and slip in all the women's rights. Actually, we didn't have to slip it in, because the women who came and were interested, they were kind of already there and were wanting to find out more about women's health issues, political issues, and abortion rights, and all the health issues too for birth control and the dangers of using some of the birth control pills, and all these other things. There was just so much. We just kept doing it. If people- - and we had a survey sheet after the training. What did we miss? What do you want to see more of? We would incorporate that in the next training session. Out of that came other things such as developing a women's health library. Some of us donated books. I was leafing through the Our Bodies, Ourselves book and hadn't noticed it initially, but then saw they would give us the books at cost if we were able to get enough. I forget how much it would have been, but it was very, very cheap. I think it might have been either free or a dollar per book. JD: Wow. EB: We could just- -that was something where, yeah, we'll take twenty of them. They just flew out. JD: Wow. 17 EB: So we advertised all of that to make it available. If they didn't have a dollar or two then okay, we have a little amount of funds. Yeah, here take that. I had the original one which was just the little paper- -it wasn't even paperback, but just paper. [Laughter] A little tiny paperback thing, but this was really amazing. We did that for a few years. People would just come for that and ask more about the Women's Center and ask more about the Women's Health Counseling Service. Sometimes I- -it's almost interchangeably in terms of the Women's Center and I'd have to stop and think, "Did we do that at the Women's Center? Yeah, I think we did." But, I know at Women's Health Counseling definitely we did. So that got the word out too. JD: How did you go about trying to change practices at doctor's offices and things of that sort? Much of what you're identifying is a medical profession that's made up mostly of male physicians that were not the most friendly to the reforms being suggested. So what were your tactics to try to help women as consumers of health? EB: Well, one of the things that we did was to develop, when I was at Women's Health Counseling Service, we developed a form. We saw a woman at the Health Service and she was going for a GYN [gynecologist]exam, or she came in and the pregnancy test was positive. After talking with her, and the woman was very clear about I know what I want to do, et cetera, then we would talk about that too, and show her the book. As she left, we would ask her a favor, "Would you please fill this survey out when you see your health provider and bring it back or send it to us?" What we accumulated then, over time, was a rather hefty client survey of the physicians and nurses, if they went to a nurse. Would you recommend this person to one of your friends or family members? What did you like or what didn't you like? What was the fee? We let the providers know that we 18 had this. First, they were really threatened. I think the more advanced, [laughter] more sensitive people realized that also it became a good way for them to pick up new clients, because it was opened to anybody. You could just sit and read it. They didn't have to write their name on it at all. It was wonderful because again, it was women kind of taking responsibility for their impressions, their information, and accepting responsibility towards others. This is what I went through, or this person was wonderful. He was very sensitive. This nurse was just very short, didn't feel like explaining to me. We felt like we were sort of helping the providers to become more sensitized to the needs of women as clients. Very consumer based survey, but it really was quite positive and we would ask them, "Would you recommend this to someone else who comes to the Women's Center?" It was always, "Yes." I really felt like, "Okay. I'm in control here;" they were able to really just make use of that. JD: Okay. Here's an interesting one for you. [Laughter] You love me prefacing with those. What life experiences have changed how you view feminism or the women's health movement? Those are two separate questions. So let's do the women's health movement first. So what of your life experiences or memories changed how you viewed the women's health movement or reinforced? I'll give you that. EB: To this day I am very, very grateful to the Boston [Women's'] Health Book Collective. [The] women who published that- -I think I mentioned last time -- they were in town and I called them to see if they could come to one of our meetings. They did, and they did a little fundraiser right then and there. We publicized that they were going to be here and I think we raised twenty-five dollars, which was a lot. [Laughter] But [they were] warm and wonderful and funny and so knowledgeable and so concerned. They're a 19 role model in terms of [the] women's health movement. I think that- -oh, dear. I forgot what your question was. [Laughter] I was getting lost in the- - JD: It's a little bit hard. What life experiences changed how you viewed women's health? EB: Okay. My own life experiences after I became a feminist or prior to? JD: Let's do after you became a feminist. You can do any of the above as well. [Laughter] EB: Okay. JD: We're going back out to the general questions. EB: Yeah. Well, I think I've already talked about my nursing experience and seeing the sense of entitlement of doctors. They were unfortunately all men. Some of that was reinforced in the training as I had mentioned. I think, too, that one of the things that I'm laughing about and I'll be embarrassed to say, but when I had Jeremy, I had to go back for a postpartum visit and there weren't any female gynecologists at that time in our area. But, I was all, "Okay. I'm going to be aware of everything that this person is saying." He came well recommended by someone, so I went in and for the postpartum visit, [thinking] I'm not going to take any guff from him." Right? [Laughter] Does that sound defensive? Oh, yeah, probably was. So he came in and he introduced himself, shook hands, and I thought, "Okay, that's nice." Then he talked a bit about how the baby was growing, and that was okay. Called me Mrs. Barney. Okay, another point. That's good. Then he said, "Well, before you change into the gown and get the nurse in, I wanted to ask you if"- -no, that wasn't it, before that. So he wasn't talking to me at that time, so it was before I changed. It was chit-chat. Then he looked at me and he said, "Do 20 you have a vulva?" I said, "Of course I have a vulva. All women have vulvas." I was really getting kind of angry and annoyed. What kind of question is that? And he very seriously replied, "I was asking you if you own a Volvo." [Laughter] Because I had keys, but I didn't have a Volvo, but it was something, and he pointed to the key on it and I just about lost it. I was embarrassed, but all I could do was maintain it. I was "Oh, I see, but no, I don't have a Volvo." But when I tell it now even, I just want to crack up [laughter] because I was so full of myself with it and so embarrassed. This poor guy didn't even have a chance. I was all set. I was going to take him on if he said anything sexist and my god, of course. But that's one example of kind of making assumptions that I learned about to my embarrassment, my everlasting embarrassment. [Laughter] Other experiences I think just come from family of origin. I think we've talked about how my father was very strict. I think he would not brook any kind of quote "answering back", end quote. He never said he believed it, but he practiced it; corporal punishment. That's- -he couldn't articulate things but he could strike out. Being in a family where I was the youngest, and also that there was four daughters and then one son certainly made me aware of how the scales were tipped in terms of male/female. I think I mentioned this last time, too, my father referred to him as "the son" when he would talk to other people. Never heard "the daughter" [laughter], but I think again, when we were talking about the feminist movement, the preference for male children. When my daughter was born, I called my father from the hospital to say that we'd had a little girl and Bill and I were very happy. And he said, "Well, that's okay. You can try again." It wasn't quite what I had hoped to hear, but he couldn't understand that. I didn't say anything to him, because to him, that was as natural as the climate in which he was 21 raised. So that's something. Or when I said I was going to college, he just said, "Well, if you go to college, you're never going to get married." I said, "Why [not]?" "Well"- - basically he sort of talked about if you're in college you're not going to meet men or men will not want to marry you because you've been in college. That was just who he was. I think he meant well at times, but sometimes it didn't come out in the most supportive way. I think my mother was someone who was not able to stand up on behalf of her children. It was very difficult for her to do. She had been raised in a family where her father was an alcoholic and was abusive towards her, physically abusive. I think her way to deal with that and cope with that was once in a while she would say something to my father like "Oh, Frankie", but wasn't able to intervene on my behalf or on behalf of my siblings. She just wasn't able to do that. I think that at times it was upsetting. On the other hand, I did learn to- -I couldn't stand up to my father, but I stared him down when he would hit me. He didn't like that at all, but that was the last time that he did anything. It was the last time that he would slap me because I think I was able to just challenge him without challenging him. So I think that those kinds of attitudes and perceptions certainly enabled me to, on some level, give voice to my own sense of independence inside, and to acknowledge to my father that I was a feminist. It was- -by then he wouldn't do anything to me at that point. And it wasn't that we had an advocarial relationship per say, it's that difficult intertwining of love and at times fear as a child, but also as you get older you can cope with it in a different way. That taught me I can survive, but I also want some choices. Does that answer your question? Yep. He died when he was ninety. I think if he was sitting here, he'd probably say "What was all the fuss about?" He was raised in a way that promoted that as well. You see that 22 intergenerational passing on of things that are wonderful and also some that just are not wonderful and they are hurtful and painful. So I think that's a part of it for me. JD: Speaking of generations, this is probably maybe more of a lighter question. What ways has your daughter impacted how you view feminism? Strengthened it? EB: Definitely. I think that one other thing I'd like to add to it when there's time is that Bill was also a part of my- - JD: Yes. EB: my budding feminism. JD: [Laughter] Yes. Sorry. EB: We've had many, many interesting discussions, whether it was around parental responsibilities- - JD: And Bill is your husband? EB: Yes. Assumptions that both of us were making. It wasn't just Bill and it wasn't just me. It was both of us just struggling to work out something that's equitable and that both of us could agree on. It was- -some interesting things would come up. "Yeah, you're right" or "I hadn't thought of that" from either one of us. We'll be celebrating our fortieth anniversary next week. JD: Congratulations. EB: Yeah, thank you. JD: So that's where the Russia trip comes in as well. EB: Yeah, I think so. [Laughter] JD: Congratulations. 23 EB: Yeah, it's been an interesting journey [laughter] and it's been wonderful in many respects, but I think when you're struggling with defining roles whereas before then I hadn't- -I would chafe if there were something or else going on, but I couldn't articulate about, but when I came back from [laughter]- - JD: The Philadelphia conference? EB: Yeah, from the conference and then the NOW group, I think there had to be just discussions about what was going on and how I felt and how Bill felt. He was able to kind of roll with it all. But as I said, at times interpretations of what I was thinking or saying or he was thinking or saying needed to be kind of [laughter] explored a bit more. But he's- -yeah. But to get back to, I'm sorry. You were asking about the- - JD: Your daughter- - EB: My daughter, yes. JD: because the first interview you had some wonderful stories about your daughter . . . EB: Yeah, yeah. JD: So I just wanted to re-touch on that a little bit more. EB: Well, Sina1 is her own woman. I think we have a pretty good relationship. I think it's one where we're now both struggling. She's not my young child and she's independent and has a mind [of] her own. And sometimes I don't agree with some of her [laughter]- - JD: Choices. EB: Choices, or I think she is still a feminist, but she doesn't like terms like that. She doesn't want to be defined in that regard. She and I will look at some political issues 1 Sina is short for Kristina, her daughter's full name. 24 and we don't always agree. I think probably I'm more radical than she is at this point, and yet when we're talking at times, then I'm not certain that that's true. She can be more radical than I. Just very interesting kind of social concerns and issues that come up or that don't come up that I wish would. So I think we're still working out because she's living in the same town and has wonderful friends and a good work place. We connect on a lot of those things, but there is some where we just don't talk about them. Although, thank God, she is not a Republican [laughter] or a conservative person. But I think that she, maybe because of my activism, she's not as likely to voice some of that. And yet she went with me and drove with me up to [Washington] D.C. in January to protest [President] Bush's war. She and I agreed on it and came back with bumper stickers or something. Well, I came back with a bumper sticker, I guess, and she came back with one of the signs she saw there. But I think if I would say, "Do you want to [do] this or this, or protest?" She's at the stage of, "Been there, done that," and she probably is more open to talking about some of these issues with her friends. But it's a generational gap, too. At other times, we just have to say "I don't agree" or she'll say, "Mom, I can't go. I don't- -no." I just say, "Okay". That's usual par for the course I think for mothers and daughters. I think she's an, and this is not to belittle it, but I think she's struggling with how can she relate to her parents and particularly her mother when we live in the same town. But so far, knock on wood, it's been okay. JD: We've covered almost everything now throughout this interview. I have a couple of wrap-up questions. What are the biggest changes that resulted from your efforts and other activist efforts on behalf of women's health that you see when you reflect back? 25 EB: [pause] Well, I think one of the things that I still feel angry and sad about is the failure in this state to pass the ERA. I still don't understand why people, and I was going to say men, but it's women too, who are so threatened by the idea that women should have the same rights as men. Our whole family, all of us, Bill and Sina and Jeremy, we all marched into the state legislature that time when Jimmy Green was Speaker of the House. We went on the march to Washington [D.C.]. I went with friends and I think Sina went also. Bill babysat Jeremy, who was younger. We went to that big march dressed all [in] white. It was amazing, amazing to see all the people marching on behalf of that. And yet it still hasn't passed. So we come back and we're marching in Raleigh. We're all out there and lots of people are coming out and of course the newspapers downplayed, a tiny little bit in the back. I went to the Legislature meeting because they were going to vote on it. Jimmy Green was the Speaker of the House. It was the most maddening and disappointing, shear [pause]- -I don't- -humorous, I guess, something. I can't describe it really. We filed in and Jimmy Green was there with his gavel and people who were supporting the ERA and had petitioned for it- -it was just packed. It didn't come up, and it didn't come up, and then people who were in the Legislature were saying "Mr. Green" and he would just bang the gavel and say, "Next". And any time someone tried to bring up ERA, he would bang the gavel. No one was allowed to speak to that issue at all. Then a vote was taken and the vote was to defeat the ERA movement, but there was no discussion. There were no arguments. He threatened to- -if anyone tried to speak, not only would he bang the gavel, as I recall, I think he threatened to have them led out of the room. You talk about disempowerment. Everyone was just furious and he [laughter]- -I'm surprised the head of the gavel didn't fly off, 26 because he was just banging and banging with a vengeance. It later came out, I think the next day, that there had been a secret meeting where the men in (and I don't know how many of the men, but enough to have it go that way) agreed, and it was called a gentleman's agreement, that they would not allow the issue of ERA to come up on the floor. Green was certainly part of that because he was the Speaker of the House. So the whole thing was cut and dry. There was no reason to have gone there. I'm still furious about it because it was just such a denial of legislative process and of the rights of citizens to petition, to seek clarity, to have a vote. It was appalling. That's been a big disappointment that we still haven't passed it. It hasn't passed- -it's passed in some states, but not in terms of the whole country. Oh, it just angers me. I still see him, his banging. That part hasn't been ( ). I think my concern is that the whole idea of reproductive rights is sliding backwards and with some of the choices for the Supreme Court that Bush has made, I think it's really going to threaten the whole idea of reproductive rights, in particularly the abortion rights. People say, "No, it's not going to happen, they'll never do that," and yet I think he's stacked the courts with this whole demon-ization of the late-term abortion. It's become just crazy in terms of how they define it, the funds that have been cut off for years, for foreign aide, with all the funding, people having abortion policies in there. They don't get the funding for it. I'm not putting it absolutely correctly, but I think in terms of cutting off all those funds for people in other countries who also need that kind of help. I don't know where we're going with it, but I don't want to see what so many women and men have fought for in terms of equality for women and for reproductive rights to disappear. It's very, very worrisome. With so many conservative, I guess 27 conservative evangelical types that are out there and proselytizing about these issues that I don't agree with at all. It's just very, very scary. That's about as much as I can say. Is that what you- -did I leave something out that you wanted me to respond to? JD: No. I guess is there anything else you'd like to add before we close? Anything else you need from the- - EB: No. JD: notes or anything? EB: Let me just check here for a minute. I think you were asking about what else we do. We did go to the School of Public Health. I was invited to talk there about women's health issues. And certainly went to, I think some outreach programs for students. Not necessarily the public schools, but just to- -yeah, I think that's about all. I just came across this one thing that you may or may not want to include, but for the advisory, it was a committee on the status of women. That was in the fall of [19]79, in Philadelphia, but as you say, you were able to find it. You are a good researcher. I think that's it. It's been a wonderful experience and opportunity for me to sort of re-live some of this and to talk about it. I hope I did it accurately. [Laughter] I'm not so sure of some of the dates, but these are certainly my impressions and memories of it. It certainly was a very formative part of my growth and understanding of myself as a woman. Hopefully I've given that sense too, to our children. I think so. I hope I have. But I still get frustrated about the political process. [Laughter] I'll never stop with that. If there are mistakes in this, I take responsibility for it, because it is nothing you're doing. It is interesting how some things come back with an immediacy. I'm very clear on that. And others are sort of pulling it out from the back. I think that I've tried to be as open and 28 genuine in terms of what I am saying even though some of the facts may not be exactly as they happened. I appreciate the opportunity. JD: Well thank you for your time, reflections and memories. EB: Yes. [Laughter] I think you did really well. You asked some very good questions and your style is one that enables or enabled me to talk and make a mistake and still keep going with the thought. I am so glad you called me that one time. JD: Well thank you. We'll end now...