 Jennifer Donnally: This is the interview with Elaine Barney, March 1, 2007, in her home. My first question is, where were you born and where do you come from? Where did you grow up? Elaine Barney: I was born in the Bronx, and grew up there. It was considered the South Bronx, a really nice place, mostly German and Irish people in the area. My parents had lived in this little apartment with five children for a number of years. JD: Did you have any formative experiences growing up that began your interests in women's issues, in particular women's health? EB: In a number of ways. I'm sure more will come to me as we talk, but as I mentioned, we grew up in a neighborhood that was German and Irish. My mother had German roots and my father had German ones. He was quite an autocrat. [My brother], the person in my family who was greatly, greatly adored because he was the only male child, certainly had an impact on me. But my father was just a very stern person, quick to anger, and his word was law. Looking back, I remember wondering what he would think of hearing about all I did being a feminist. Obviously, I had to rebel against all this stuff. JD: Because my project's interested in your involvement in the Triangle area, when did you move to Chapel Hill and what did that entail when you first came here from the North? It must have been -- Elaine Barney 2 EB: You mean like culture shock? [laughs] JD: Culture shock, and just give a time frame of when you came down here, so we know where you were in relation to the historiography. EB: We moved down here in August, I say August because it was so hot and humid you couldn't breathe. You'd open the door and [breathing sound] there was no air. That was in 1970. I'll have to check, it was either 1970 or 1975. We were very excited, because Bill had been teaching at Trenton State, and we had come down in the summer of [19]68 so that he could do doctoral research at UNC. We had to go from there to Alabama, and then we wound up in Mississippi. We're just going south and south, and it got hotter and more humid, but we fell in love with Chapel Hill, &#8216;cause it was just, it seemed so different from what we had expected. I think George Wallace was running for President, and it was just awful and wonderful. There were so many things going on. But to come to Chapel Hill, where they had the Southern Historical Collection, and I was reading all these documents from the Civil War, and then seeing the beautiful homes and trees - that was great. It was like "Oh, wouldn't this be wonderful if Bill could get a job there?" It certainly did happen that way. So we moved down, and I think it was [19]75, because Jeremy was born in [19]73, and he was about two when we came down here. It was a very different world. I think part of it was the humidity, but Jesse Helms was in full cry at that point. We were trying to find a nice place to live. We were fortunate a year later to find one where we could both walk to work, since we both worked at the University by then. But what I recall also, and it was really odd -- my daughter was very precocious for her age, and so she thought nothing of telling the teachers and her classmates that she Elaine Barney 3 was a feminist and that her mother was a feminist. So some of the kids, I remember, ganged up on her. They didn't hit her or do anything like that, but they said they were going to beat her up and rape her after school. When I marched in to the principal's office and also to have a meeting with my daughter's teacher, it was just "Oh, oh, that's, you know." It was treated very dismissively, like "Oh, kids will be kids." It was the same attitude I had with the same principal when I said I did not want them to use any [corporal] punishment on my children. Right away the principal, who was an ex-Marine, said, "Under state law, it's perfectly legitimate for us to do this." And I thought, "Oh, my God, why in the world did we ever live down here?" [laughs] That was an initial impression that clearly stayed with me for a while until I got to know other people and began volunteering at a 24-hour hotline place, and saw that there were other people who had other thoughts and views about corporal punishment and feminism, so I could relax a bit. JD: For my clarification: how old was your daughter when this happened? EB: She was in second or third grade. She was all full of it at that point. I would take her along with us on some marches and things. I think, too, she had -- I think she still has it, I found it upstairs a few weeks ago -- a lunchbox, and it had Elizabeth Cady Stanton on it. We named our first dog "Elizabeth Cady Stanton," so she was called "Cady." She had all these feminist things that she painted on her lunchbox. JD: At that young age? EB: I think actually that part of it may have happened more, maybe fourth grade. So that was kind of [an] interesting situation. Elaine Barney 4 JD: So you said that when you came down here you began to be acquainted with a community through this hotline. What did the hotline do? Who was in charge of it? How was it run? EB: Well, it was a community-based agency, non-profit agency. It had been formed and was run by people from the Mental Health Center. From that they spun off into other kinds of programs. Certainly there were people there would had degrees in counseling. I might have realized that so many people would go through Help Line, it was called initially, because the training was so great, and they wanted to find out what it would be like for them to be a counselor or social worker. So, they were flooded with all these people who really were like-minded in terms of what I was wanting to do at some point. They had open minds, and didn't agree with Jesse Helms. This Help Line would do hot lines on the phone. You'd have to sign up for a shift after you got some training. There'd be some staff who had a degree in counseling, and they could be backup in case there was a serious situation that was developing, someone was suicidal or had been raped. For me, it was a very good way to be introduced to the community, because I found out about all these agencies, like the Rape Crisis Center, and also what we didn't have at that point, which was something for battered women. That just wasn't there. It was a good introduction into that whole world of people who shared the same political views regarding women's health issues. I think also it just made me realize [why] I'd left nursing. Looking back, it was because I was not the happiest when I had to take orders from the doctors. As I mentioned to you earlier, when I was at the New York Hospital School of Nursing, the class that I was in was the last class where we were taught by the instructors that when a Elaine Barney 5 doctor came in to the room we had to stand up and offer him -- there were no hers -- our seat. They would take it. Looking back at that, I thought -- I mean, it was just the way of life there. But, it also had to do with the kind of people who were going in to medicine then. I also did not make a very good O.R. [operating room] nurse because I was lefthanded, and so the surgeon screamed at me because I couldn't slap it into his hand, because I was going the other direction. I could not do this maneuver with him. I decided that nursing wasn't really for me, so I left that and actually became a visiting nurse for a while in New York City, so I could visit people in their apartments and provide some care there. Then I was a visiting nurse for a Catholic school and noticed that the doctors, who came in were just signing off on records but not doing anything else, earned a lot more than the nurses who were more qualified. So it all led up to building up different pictures, in terms of what I hadn't been exposed to in the Bronx, and hadn't been exposed to until we moved down here. [There] were other people who were skilled and empathic and really were doing very positive things. I also think that, relative to my daughter's little feminist role, she was very proud of that. She could identify with her mother and other friends, and at that time the Boston [Women&#8217;s] Health Book Collective had put out this little tiny, it wasn't even bound, book, called -- I can't remember, it'll come to me. They had not only put out this book on "Our Bodies, Ourselves...." -- somehow I got involved in that. I know, because I wrote an article. I joined NOW [National Organization of Women] when I was still in Pennsylvania, and I was invited with some friends to go down to Philadelphia because Judy Recegan [??] and some of the other women from the Health Book Collective were going to have a conference on women's health issues. Sina went with me [for] three days Elaine Barney 6 down there, attending different workshops, and listening to experiences, the horrifying experiences of women, and how they were treated by people in the medical profession, the way in which people would treat women who for various reasons had decided to end their pregnancy, and what happened to them when their friends found out, or their family found out. It was just a real eye-opener for me. On one level I knew that that existed, and the way [discrimination] towards women was certainly something I grew up with. But when I listened to the women, all of us were so moved by what they were telling us and trusting us to listen to in a very open way. I came back from that and wanted to write a column just on my impressions of what I had heard. From there was asked by someone in Pennsylvania -- it was based in Philadelphia -- if I wanted to be part of this women's health issues team. I stayed on there for a while,and then from there -- I forget the whole thing, but there was some other task force in terms of getting other people on the board, and these were topnotch people. It was based in Pennsylvania but it was really what became the Women's Health Collective, and they were focusing a lot on Women's Health issues. JD: So how long were you in Pennsylvania? EB: Not all that long. Probably - let's see, we moved in [19]75 -- probably about four years. JD: Is it right before moving down to Carolina then? EB: Mmm-hmmm. JD: Okay. So that's [19]71 to [19]75? EB: It just gave me a whole other world to enter. I think I probably was pretty polemical at times, but when you find out that what I experienced in my family, as being Elaine Barney 7 the youngest. And certainly there was disappointment that there was only one son, and he was called "The Son." He was the only one for whom my mother and father saved money to send to college, whereas we had to earn our own. It was freeing to be with other women, and meet men who also supported the women's movement, and were outspoken, and saw the need for these changes. About two years after that, one of my sisters told me that my mother had had an abortion. She was Roman Catholic, and it must have been before the Depression, or around the time of the Depression. I think my father was working in the Post Office. He could have quite a temper at times and didn't like to take orders, so he was losing jobs right and left. My mother took over as the custodian of the brownstone building where there were five or six families living. She was the person who was swabbing down the stairs and going out there to have some kind of income, because by then the children that they had at that time -- there were three children -- they had to do that. When she found out she was pregnant -- I think my father was aware of it. No one in the family will talk about it now except my one sister. She just went to a neighborhood woman by herself. It was the worst scenario of knitting needles and having an abortion like that, and coming home. She, being Catholic, I don't think ever forgave herself for that. She rarely, if ever, would take Holy Communion, because she thought she had done something really wrong. That had a very decided impact on me. Here was this really good woman who was doing the best she could, had these three young children then, and yet didn't feel she had the right to communion. Elaine Barney 8 JD: How much, during the beginning of this women's health initiative at the conference in Philadelphia, was discussions of abortion and access to abortions part of this general push for helping women gain better health services? EB: I think it was a very important piece for that, because it was focusing on all aspects of women's health care, including the right to have an abortion if the woman decided. It wasn't termed in terms of it was the only option, but certainly for someone it was the only option to them. So how to develop greater access to resources, so that if the women did decide that this was what she wanted or needed at that point, that it was her choice. I firmly believe in that. You can't mandate that kind of choices that women should or shouldn't have. But, I feel it was very much part of the issue, because it also looked at talking about being pro-choice and a woman's right to decide. It was certainly going against the patriarchy of the male doctors who felt that they would need the husband's permission. It was very much about how can women feel empowered to make the decision that they need to make, or want to make. But it also included other things, like better access to birth control. It still does amaze me even now, that we can put people up on the moon, and yet we don't have safe, effective forms of birth control that don't cost an arm and a leg and don't have side effects. That was also very much a part of it. It was just a very full and packed agenda, and it was swamped. People standing in the aisles in this large, large meeting area. I couldn't wait to drive back home to tell Bill all about it, and go back the next day. I went there because it really changed how I viewed myself, as well as how I viewed the need for women's health care. It was an amazing conference. They must have gotten grants, because they were able to get people from the west coast to fly in and make Elaine Barney 9 presentations, and they had films. Films on sexuality. It was quite an eye-opening experience for me. JD: At the time were you still a nurse, or had you left nursing, or were you a visiting nurse at that point? EB: Let's see. [laughs] JD: I'm sorry. It's just you're obviously, you're switching in terms of your motivations at this point. This conference has a major impact on how you're choosing your career path. What career were you more geared towards after the conference, that's really the question. EB: After that, I really felt that I didn't know what I wanted to be other than I did not want to be a nurse. I admired, and I still do admire, nurses, who can make such a difference to people. But even now the patients get treated as clients. The whole thing about language, too. But after that I just really wanted to be an activist. That was really important for me. JD: Looking at another relationship: how does the women's health initiative play into the women's movement, in the early 1970s into the 1980s, as you see it? They seem critically linked, and I'm curious as to why you believe that is so. EB: I guess because for me on a personal level, yes I knew about nursing and about giving injections and medications, but I think that looking back, the education I received -- it was the five year nursing program, we were to be the leaders, but teaching us to stand up and give our seat to the doctor is not one of my favorite things. It never was. They were considered a topnotch school of nursing. Yet, they weren't teaching things that were really important in the lives of women. Birth control wasn't mentioned. Elaine Barney 10 Abortion or the right of a woman to make that decision, I don't recall that ever being brought up. How to make beds? Yeah, the square corners, which I still use. But it wasn't as relevant to me in the way that perhaps before I graduated in [19]67 it was. But then my eyes just got opened. I just ate up everything that was in the book Our Bodies, Ourselves, learned so much about that for myself but also about things we didn't talk about: sexually transmitted diseases, childbirth options, nurse-midwives. My heroines at that point, I never went to Kentucky or any of these places where they had the woman who would -- they were public health nurses, but they could and would do everything. They would deliver the babies, they would educate the families and try to educate the women if their husbands weren't around more about birth control, or about other options in terms of health care and birth control. Those were the people who were really true nurses in my primitive belief system at that point. And yet I couldn't see myself doing that at that point either. I think this came along and fit really well for me. It also meant I became more involved in NOW. I felt that that politically was the way to go. They were able to be very outspoken and political. I went to protest marches, and I felt "Yes. This is what needs to happen." I became, I forgot the terminology used then, but they'd divide us into different areas of the state, so I'd go to conferences there, and that's where Ellie Smeal first became known to a lot of people. We always wanted to share the power, so there were two of us who would become the coordinators for the chapter in this particular area of Pennsylvania, and when Bill came down to be interviewed he asked, and I don't remember who it was, if they had a NOW chapter here. He came back and they said "They do, they have a NOW chapter." So Jenny Ryan who was married at the time to Elaine Barney 11 Frank Ryan, who's since retired, she just heard all about the NOW group prior to my coming but was able to take me under my wing. We did go to the NOW meetings and would go out for some beer afterwards. It was a great way for me to again, get to know another part of the community. They were meeting in a Presbyterian Church building. There were just little pockets in and around Chapel Hill. So I was very happy, very pleased. "Okay, I've found my niche. Don't know what I want to be yet, but I know where I want to be." So that worked out really well. I think I might not have been as happy if we had moved to Fayetteville, say, or a more remote area. So it worked out really well. JD: I'm interested in you finding a niche, this community of activists in particular, women activists, because it's my understanding all these communities converge in 1979 to form a women's center in Chapel Hill, and then the Rape Crisis center, and the hotline in the women's health counseling, converge. Can you remember how this started happening, that everybody kind of got together and how this idea of "We need a women's center" comes into the picture? EB: Well, it actually didn't become a women's center until, I'll have to get it out, it's probably in the books, I don't remember right now. They were separate entities. I JD: I think it's 1983 where they all come under the Orange County Women's Center as the umbrella [organization at] the Henderson House. EB: It was before then. We both might want to check in the history book. But when I was at the women's health counseling service -- and I mentioned to you it was this underground -- I became a volunteer and then I became the first director of the Women's Health Counseling Service. We applied for and were able to get some funding, Elaine Barney 12 so that I was actually hired to work. I had income, it was like "Ooh, this is nice!" after years of doing volunteer work. From that, then, I think the Rape Crisis Center had been formed earlier than that. Someone you might want to speak to about that would be -- JD: Miriam Slifkin? EB: Yes, thank you. Miriam Slifkin. The donor who I think has now gone public, in fact I know she has, her name was Swanna Cameron. She called Miriam and said she'd got money from her family -- it was Coca-Cola stock -- but no one had the 501c3 except Women's Health Counseling Service. Miriam said, "Why not talk to all three of us?" So we did. We talked about each of the agencies, what we represented, and she agreed to do this. Since Women's Health Counseling had the 501c3 we applied for it as a non-profit agency, got that together. Then we met for about a year ago in one of the places, I think it was the Coalition for Battered Women at that point. It was Durham-based but we were also trying to establish part of that in Chapel Hill. It was like auditioning for someone. We didn't know what to expect from Swanna, what questions she would ask or anything, but I think Miriam Slifkin set the tone and [it] really worked out well. She understood that there were different pieces to providing the services for women in Orange County. Then we were able to get the funding for it and then quickly established bylaws and all those god-awful rules and regulations. I forget who really did the major part of that. We were trying to seek funding for all three, and of course the County Commissioners were saying "Why should we spend money funding three different agencies when can we just combine you all and it won't cost as much to the county?" Well, we applied anyways, and had to explain to them about it. Initially I think we were Elaine Barney 13 turned down, but then they allowed us to have one person supervise the funding. Initially I think it was going to be Nancy Parks. After a while when we got all the rules and the formal documents together, the money came to our agencies. It was just a matter of establishing "Okay, where can we rent [that&#8217;s] relatively inexpensive for the three agencies?" and it went from there. JD: I would love for you to return to the development of the Orange County Women's Center in a moment. I'd like to go back though to clarify of the Women's Health Counseling Service that you said you became the first director of, because I don't know much about that history and it was very much eliminated in the history of the Women's Center that I've been reading. So when did this idea of the Health Services come in to being? How did you play into developing that program? Did it come out of the hotline? EB: Well, when I became a volunteer at the hotline there was -- I think it may have been called Women's Health Counseling then, but it was a volunteer organization with a volunteer coordinator. We had meetings and we would all sit and just talk about the aspects of the situations that women were faced with, in terms of their health care, in terms of even having information, so that they could become better consumers of health care. The help line was pretty open to having us install a telephone line so that we could have private, confidential, phone calls, rather than sitting in front of other volunteers. It just didn't feel right, to me or to the other women. So they provided for the first year or two, a little room upstairs in this tiny little house and said that we could use that space. There was a phone installed up there. The women would come on shifts, probably one or two people could be there, so that if a woman came in for an Elaine Barney 14 appointment then she wasn't just being met by one person. If there was a crisis situation then we didn't want that particular volunteer to feel like she was just out on a limb by herself. So we were going to have at least two women there on a shift. But, then it became more widely known and sometimes we had a number of people who were waiting. We thought it would be nice if we had our own funding so that we could have brochures, [and] so we could have more information that we could get xeroxed. And again, help line was very helpful and we were able to use their xeroxing machine until it became a little too much for them because we were having more women coming in with their partners to talk about pregnancy, birth control, or STDs. It just began rolling, and I think that's when we went to the County Commissioner. We would go to the Commissioners' meetings and hang out with them, getting to know them, because they were the people who had the power. We got to know them, and I think they began to realize we weren't just flying at loose ends with it, that we were trying to be very responsive to the needs of women, and responsible, in terms of what we could offer. And documenting easily developed forms so we could also have that to review at meetings, "How can we do this better?" or "I'm stumped, maybe there's someone else in the community we could tap into," and found some other women and brought them in for training by the original woman named Faye -- I can't remember her last name. Then when I became, not the director because we didn't have any funding, but the organizer, we began having monthly meetings and then it was once every two weeks or so to talk about some of the situations that came up. From there I began doing training. That's where actually in a way my nursing education fit in, because some of that was very Elaine Barney 15 relevant to the training. I have to back up, because I said they didn't just talk about birth control. It's true, they didn't. But Our Bodies, Ourselves was difficult for them. But a nurse was able to put the two together. The teaching part of that was very satisfying for me. I felt like I was putting my nursing to use, but in a different way. JD: When you became director -- I'm assuming this happened very quickly, because it was [19]75 when you arrived here, and within five years you went in together to the funding to form the Women's Center. I'm curious to know, you talked about this group of activists -- you all do know each other as members of NOW, there's overlapping in terms of membership in those communities -- what sorts of discussions did you guys have in that one year where you're ironing out the bylaws, and those formal documents? EB: Thank you, bylaws, yeah! [laughs] JD: I'm sure that you were very idealistic starting out. It probably took a year or two to turn those ideals into reality. What discussions did you guys have envisioning? Because the fun part is envisioning what you would want the women's center to become. What were some of the concerns, some of the dreams? EB: And maybe some of the issues. JD: Yeah. EB: Because some people have really strong opinions. I think we all did, to some degree: "This is the way I want it to be." Of course, I was representing Women's Health, but then there were also other people who had a stake, rightfully so, and I supported that too. You know, the Rape Crisis center needs to have more staffing, and the Coalition for Battered Women. The concern was that by clumping us [break in tape] Elaine Barney 16 JD: We were talking about the compromises and issues that are brought when creating and envisioning what the Women's Center would become between the Coalition for Battered Women, the Rape Crisis Center, as well as the Women's Health Initiative. Can you expand on that more? EB: Yeah. When you say the Women's Health Collective, we weren't known as that at all. JD: How were you guys known? EB: I don't know! [laughs] JD: I think a lot of the time too people have questions and they're like "That's the person you go to, when you have that question," but they don't have any idea. You're the expert on certain questions people ask. EB: I think initially it was the three agencies trying to get funding for our agencies. And yet, at the same time, there was concern for each of them about well, are the county commissioners going to say "Oh, we'll just fund you all in one fell swoop and then you can fight among yourselves about it." Or at times we were trying not to get into these power trips of "Oh, this is the most important person, agency. I want my agency to do that." We spent a lot of time talking about that. We'd be sitting on the floor in this little place that had been rented by the Coalition for Battered Women, and trying to make sure that the agencies felt respected by the other agencies and that the funding would also go to all three, to each of them. I think we were left almost without a choice because the county commissioner said, "Well, here it is." They wanted to appoint this one person who would decide all of these financial decisions. That united the three of the agencies, saying "Well, actually, I think that we need to remain separate." The majority of the county Elaine Barney 17 commissioners were men, and sometimes they couldn't grasp the fact that a Rape Crisis Center would be very different from a Women's Health Counseling Service, which would be very different from the Coalition for Battered Women. It was like, "But you're all women and you're all talking about it, so why not just put it all together?" and it's like, &#8220;Doesn't work that way.&#8221; Because everyone each had a piece of it, we knew what we wanted in each of the agencies. How to ensure that the general public understood that was going to take some doing. That's where we spent a lot of time. And understanding that yeah, Women's Health Counseling Service doesn't have the same financial needs that perhaps the Rape Crisis Center, or the Coalition for Battered Women, would have. But it also had certain needs that weren't being met, but we needed the money for them. For example, this woman Faye I think was befriended by a pharmacist. No, it wasn't a pharmacist. Was befriended by someone who worked for a place where they could get pregnancy tests. He would give us a test kit so we could do that at cost. It was like $50 for this test. So we would serve 50 women, and we would get $50 so that when he came again, we could give him the next $50, and that was what we needed. And we were able to ask them if they could to donate $1, so we could do the pregnancy tests. And so that's how we were working with that. It depended on the kindness of the staff people, the person who in charge of the hotline, to help us do the Xeroxing, that we didn't have to pay for. As it got more and more popular, and we had training manuals, then we had to do some other kinds of fundraising for our agency. But I think each person had their own unique set of responsibilities and priorities and needs, because they were serving different populations. Elaine Barney 18 JD: This is coming out of Herstory, because Elizabeth Grew quotes from your statements that you said that the Women's Health Center was kind of the odd man out in public view, or not as celebrated in the public view because you were providing services and counseling pregnant women, or discussing abortion. How did that impact negotiations and your interaction with the public? EB: Well, let me just go back. There was no issue that I recall between the three, once we worked out, "Okay, the funding is not going to be equal because the needs aren't equal and blah blah blah." What we were able to all agree on was the need for those three agencies, because those were the primary needs as we saw them. The people coming in for help clarified that even more. It was through making sure, for example, that when we were trying to get money from the county, and the person who was the man in charge of the Health Department was very threatened, because basically what he said to one of the people working there was we would be applying for their money. And so the Health Department was going to lose all their funds to these people who were in favor of abortion. So I would have to talk to some of the Commissioners, and/or write a letter rebutting that, that so-and-so said this, but that's not what we're doing. We're not about to take money away, we're hoping that the county commissioners will find additional funds for this needed service, the way there are for the needed services of the Health Department. But it was just amazing when I first heard that -- he said what??!! But that's just how it is with the funding part of it. Also, we became more aware of the need to join -- there was some other group, and initially it seemed like they were predominately men, who were the director of the mental health agency, the county health agency, and I'm trying to think of some others. Elaine Barney 19 There were all these other agencies that were all - surprise, surprise! they were primarily male for all the directors. Ours was different, and I don't think they knew what we did or how we thought, other than we were feminists. And someone said, "You know, you're not going to conquer them, but you can join them," and I thought, "Ooh, yeah." So we could, because we were a county agency for all three of us, and I think all of us were represented there, because we each could talk about our specific agency and the reason we were coming there, or the need of battered women or women who had been sexually assaulted. And they got to see us as individuals. I think it made a real difference, because we applied for and were able to get some money from United Way. It took a while for them to kind of get it, to understand it. But once they saw us as individuals and could hear us talk about our programs, and we did get accepted by United Way, then that helped, too. It was just a process that none of us knew what we were getting into when we started. JD: This is interesting, what you bring up. You brought two things up that I'd like to question you on. The first thing is the issue of male dominated organizations that -- in a way, althought you did not intend to -- it was perceived that you were competing with them. This also brings up the question of issues of authority, because everyone was attempting to help women, but the question was did that give you guys greater authority, in that you were women representing women, or was that even a concept at the time, because many of these were organizations led by men, who were trying to benefit and help women, and how did that play into the race to get funding? EB: Oh, yeah, because it could be really, really tough. I don't know if you've ever been part of an agency where you had to apply for the funding. I mean, they just wanted Elaine Barney 20 so much information, and then you got grilled -- and with just cause. If they're putting the money out there, they want to know what support do you have, and what are the numbers, and how many people do you see, and breakdowns, and do you have policies and procedures and documents? It took a lot of time. We had our own board, and the other two women's agencies had their individual boards as well. But I think that when we came to the Human Services something, and we found out we could join, I called Bill Baxter, who was the director at the Mental Health Center. And he gave us after -- there was something else that we can talk about maybe another time that happened, where Women's Health Counseling Service felt the need to go to the Mental Health Center -- and ask them if we could be housed there for a year until we had enough time to get another place for us. The politics of funding and politics of some of the people there [were] becoming increasingly threatened by Women's Health Counseling Service and maybe also with funding. We weren't as welcome. JD: Cause they're the Women's Center? EB: It might have been, I don't know. This was at Helpline. JD: Okay. Okay. EB: We had good reason for objecting to some of their policies, I guess, in terms of the -- yeah. I'd like to talk with you about that later. But I think that being able to go to the United Way and be represented as a United Way agency was very, very helpful. Then, when we needed additional space, because we had to move from the hotline, then Bill Baxter stepped forward because he knew us, he knew me and some of the other people from the agencies. It was like, "Okay, yeah, we'll let you stay in this spot for one year until you see if you can increase the funding for a Elaine Barney 21 rental space." So we were able to do that. But I think if he hadn't known us it might have been difficult to say, "Oh, well, I don't know you women, and I don't know what you do, but here, you can use the place." Joining that Human Services group was very germane to gaining more acceptance and being able to educate them at times. Because they would go around and say "What do you have to report?" and we could say what we were seeing was more women were coming because they had enough access to birth control, or transportation. They heard some of that and took that back with them as well. JD: Did the Women's Health Counseling Services, did they move into the house on Rosemary Street or did they stay housed in the Mental Health Services? EB: It might not even have been a full year. In fact, it was still the Coalition for Battered Women and Connie Renz that -- she'll have the person's name, Archie something from the Botanical Gardens. He owned a house that was near the corner of the fire department, as you're going down the avenue there. He was renting this one place, and it was a barn. It was big, it was drafty. We brought in a heater. We pooled some of what each agency had to offer there and [turned it into] an office, so each one of us would work there. We didn't stay all that long at the Mental Health Center. But again, being able to have access to a phone, have an access to copy machines that really helped us a whole lot. Then I think we got more funding. We hadn't been there that long when Miriam Slifkin was able to talk about the three different agencies to Swann Accounting, and even though we didn't have a lot of money, we were the only ones with the 501c3. So I thought, "Cool! We have something to offer all three agencies here." So we rented that, Elaine Barney 22 and actually I haven't been over recently, but until a couple of months ago it was still there. JD: The Rosemary house? EB: Yeah. A little beauty parlor there. The first time I went, I almost started crying. The very first purchase of our funds was a file cabinet that was red, and I thought "Wooh!" And then we brought in my daughter's furniture that she had, so that when new moms were there then the children also had a place that was child sized. We brought in toys. It really worked out well. It wasn't competitive in the way all of us initially were concerned about. JD: In the Herstory, it also mentions that the house on Rosemary was an ideal place because you were looking for a place which to rent which would give you access to minority communities as well as easy access to the campus. EB: Absolutely. JD: This is bringing the question up of diversity, and how is that handled in interacting with a community that is diverse? How did you guys handle that, and what were the assumptions coming in the community -- your assumptions as well as the community's assumptions? EB: I think that that was always a struggle, in terms of recruiting people who were of different races, and seeing the need for that. We would see a number of women who were African-American. I don't think there was a large population of Asian people at that time. We'd see a few. I was recruiting like crazy, and I did -- I recruited one of the health educators from the Health Department, as a volunteer. She was African-American, and I was just very up front with her. I said "We need someone like you, because right now the Elaine Barney 23 volunteers we have are white, and we really feel that that's going to work against the women coming in and training people if they come in and they're African American and only see a white woman." Her name was Donna. She went through the training and was able to really spread the word, throughout the Health Department number one, that no, we weren't out to take their money, but also just to let people know. She would bring brochures, and they would be placed in the Health Department. We tried to also have some information that looked like people could be either African-American and/or white or a mix. Trying to get that was a really important part, I think for all of us. I know that Rape Crisis Center needed and wanted to have African-American people who could be counselors, and the same with the Coalition for Battered Women. For Women's Health, it was mixed. We certainly were able to get some people who were African-Americans but I don't think we were ever grounded enough to continue that base before the people decided -- and these were people who -- I'm trying to think. We weren't at that house very long, and part of it had to do with some of the women who didn't feel that it matched their views of what a Womens' Center should look like or be. We all had donated furniture, we had all kinds, but there were some people who really felt uncomfortable. I would be there at night and I didn't have any concerns. No one ever came banging on the doors, or doing anything, but I think some of the board members, as we became more of a Women's Center -- the makeup of the board changed. I think that then reflected in the views of some of them that they didn't feel comfortable there. The furniture was donated stuff and that didn't fit the image, I think, for some of them. Elaine Barney 24 About a year later -- and by then I had resigned from Women's Health Counseling Service. [laughs] I'm laughing about it because I had a volunteer whose name was Gail McCarthy. I trained a lot of volunteers, and some of them did trainings after I left. But, I was just getting kind of burned out. Gail came to me and asked me to fill out a form. She was applying to the School of Social Work. She said, "Why don't you do that too?" And I thought, "Well, she didn't mention anything about whether I could be a social worker. You just mentioned the administrative part." She said, "No, no, I had in mind social worker, psychiatric social worker." We wound up writing one another's recommendation letters, and we both got in! Apparently they didn't know what to do with us. We both got in and that's why I was laughing about it. At that point I resigned, because I'd be going to the School of Social Work. Soon after I resigned, then other people were on -- you're always trying to recruit other people to be on the board. Next thing I knew, they had rented a place that I thought was pretty upscale, and felt pretty white. It didn't appeal to me. I was used to the furniture that we all would donate, and bring in, and just sit on the floor, big pillows, and suddenly there was this very posh-looking... JD: You had an influx of money then. EB: I think so. I think so, yeah. So it changed the flavor of it at that point. It didn't stay there all that long either. That was then kind of the backdrop for the next phase of that, I think, which was after they moved into that place, which was across the street from -- JD: The Courtyard? Elaine Barney 25 EB: Yes, thank you. It just seemed a bit posh. And all of us were like "We're glad that the board is doing this and that they're taking serious concerns," and then we [makes upset noises.] It was nice to just leave there after a meeting and just go out with some of the other volunteers and have beer, but now this wasn't viewed as classy enough or something. So it changed part of the tone. But it attracted donors. One of the major funders, or the major funders, certainly, were the people who then got this house. JD: This is the Henderson house? EB: Yes, it is. It still is. I think that it's a beautiful house, but it raised issues too of funding and upkeep. I know that for some of the people in the neighborhood then, they didn't want an agency on their block. Then other people, like Ida and Bill Friday invested in that. I think that probably went a long way towards the funding. But it was again just a different tone. Not a bad one, but different from what some of us -- we had never anticipated we would be housed in this beautiful place. But it was hard, because at one point, and I believe that might be in Herstory, it talks about a meeting that was held at the President's house. A number of the people who were there were very affluent, and I think very outspoken, about what should be done. When I went there I remember feeling like, "Ooh, gosh!" because they were well intentioned, but it was , "What have you been doing with the stocks, and why didn't you invest it in this or that?" And I remember saying, "Because we didn't know anything about investing." We were depending on people who would have that knowledge. It was a blaming tone and it didn't feel good, because we had been doing our damnedest to Elaine Barney 26 really work with the population, not investing in funds, because we didn't know anything about it. Somehow it was damned if we do, damned if we don't. Again, it was a different flavor, and I think it is still a lovely house. The people there are sincere and well-intentioned and want it to continue, which is good, but there's constant fund-raising going on. The Women's Center, their yearly show, arts and crafts, that involves so much time on the part of those of -- when I was working at the Women's Center as director of the clinical programs, it just took so much time and effort. So it's kind of a trade-off. JD: So for clarification: you resigned from director of the Women's Health Counseling. Did you continue your involvement with the Women's Center through your work in social welfare and the School of Social Welfare? When did you fully, or have you fully withdrawn your services from the Women's Center? EB: Well, when I resigned it was at the time when we were in the Courtyard, and I didn't really know most of the people. I was pretty burned out by then. I joyfully went off to the School of Social Work, and then decided I wanted to be a psychotherapist, a clinical social worker, and really, really enjoyed that. Did my internship up at Duke, in the outpatient department. Learned a lot from Bill Mayer, who is highly regarded by a lot of people. He taught me a lot. Got to go to on rounds, I picked it up like candy. I was the second-year student at CAPS at Duke, so I learned a whole lot there as well. Then I worked down at Asheboro. I would drive down there every day. I had to be there at eight in the morning. JD: Oh, goodness. Elaine Barney 27 EB: Yeah. But learned a whole lot, because it's a very different milieu than the Women's Center, at that point in the Courtyard. But just going down and working with people who were just [?? unclear] and to learn from more country folk. That was great. The commute was long, and one of my friends said "Well you ought to go down with Mike Lipson" -- Dr. Lipson, a psychiatrist. I said, "I don't know him." "Oh, you know, I'll introduce you," and she did. So he did the driving. He was the director down at it, he was going once or twice a week. They needed someone who could be on board and be a psychiatrist and check on medications. He just happened to mention to me that there was going to be a position coming up and if I were interested, I could apply. So I was like, "Yes!" I worked there for about eight years, eight or nine years. So that's my trail. I never knew what was around the corner. It was just time. I couldn't articulate at times why it was. It wasn't I got fed up with anything, but it was just time. The same with leaving Mental House counseling and going to a Women's Center, with a director of clinical programs. I learned a lot. It felt again like I could offer something there, because I knew of so many therapists. I could tap into that and ask them if they wanted to run a workshop, or run a group, and establish some standards for who's the best qualified in terms of their experience. So it all fit in really well, until I got laid off. Funding just didn't come through. So it's been interesting, just hearing myself talk. I'm sure we have left out [a lot], or should have left out, but this has been useful for me to just be able to talk about it, have a better sense of it. Who knows, maybe in the middle of the night the name will come to me! [laughs] An interesting and enjoyable experience. Elaine Barney 28 JD: Well, is there anything you would like to add at this point in time, that you can think of? EB: I don't think so. JD: Well, thank you very much for agreeing to be interviewed today. EB: You're welcome. Thanks for asking me. JD: It was a pleasure...