 Mary Frederickson: All right, so you were born in Missouri in ... . Brownie Lee Jones: In 1897. M.F.: Where were you born in Missouri? Jones: Near Joplin at a place called Sarcocksie Prairie. At least, that's on my passport. M.F.: What were your parents doing in Missouri? Jones: Well, my father, when I was born, was on his father's farm, one of his father's farms. He was also a surveyor. Then we moved to Oklahoma when I was very young, about four or five, something like that. M.F.: Had they been in Missouri for a long time? Jones: Yes, both my mother's and father's families had been there for many years. In fact, my mother's father had come into this country from Ireland and when he got here the Civil War was on and they were rebels, so he joined the rebels, the wrong side. (laughter) My grandfather, who was born in Tennessee and grew to the age of fifteen in Tennessee, when the Civil War started, he and his father came north to fight against the rebels. M.F.: So, you had grandfathers on either side. Jore s: Yes, and they never spoke. They never spoke to page 2 - Jones each other until my brother went to World War I. M.F.: They were in the same area and their children married and they would never speak? Jones: Yes. M.F.: Do you remember very much about either of them? Jones: I remember both of them very well. M.F.: Were they near you when you were small? Jones: Well, I stayed with my mother's father and mother when I was very, very small, from the time I suppose that I was two until we moved to Oklahoma, because my mother was quite ill. She was a very frail person. I stayed with them until we moved to Oklahoma. Then I would go badk every summer and visit them. My mother died when I was about nine or ten, I've forgotten, and we moved in with my other grandparents, my father's mother and father. M.F.: You came back to Missouri then? Jones: No, we moved into Oklahoma with them. M.F.: When you were smaller and around both of your grandparents, what did you get from their stories of the Civil War and being on either side? Jones: I did not even know anything about the fact that they were on either side until, as I said, my brother went to page 3 - Jones war and then someone told us that the two grandfathers met and had a discussion about it. But that was the first time. My grandmother was southern, the grandmother who was the mother of my father. She was southern and he had been on the northern side during the war. Never once did I hear the Civil War mentioned in our family, because if it had been there would have been bloodshed, I'm sure. (laughter) M.F.: How did those grandparents meet? Jones: Well, I hae some of their letters, they are precious letters. He met her when he was stationed somewhere near where her home was in Missouri. He was writing to invite her to come to a dance and she finally decided she would and that's the end of that story, but for a long time, my grandfather tried to find where he really wanted to be. He didn't want to stay in Missouri , so he went into Arkansas. She wouldn't follow him there, no sir, she wasn't going to live in that uncouth state. So then he moved into Indian territory and I suppose that they built and we moved down there . . .oh, I must have been five or six when they built and then we moved down established because my grandfather had/a mercantile store, a cotton gin, a bank and a grocery store. pag e 4 - Jone s M.F.: All in Oklahoma? Jones: Yes, in a little town in Oklahoma. M.F. : How did they make the decision to go to Oklahoma, do you know? Jones: Oh, he just wanted to always strike out, you see, and see new areas. He was very ambitious, shall I say. But he died very poor because he got involved in too many things he owned too much land and just died very poor. M.F.: Well, do you remember the move from Missouri to Oklahoma? Jones: Not at all. I haven't the faintest memory. I know that we did not go immediately. I know that they were established there. Then we moved and we had a house that in today's terms would probably be a block away. My grandfather's house was on one of the town's squares and it had a big yard, barns and horses and what-not. M.F.: What do you remember your father telling you about his life when he was small? Jones: Not very much, because my father died when I was young, too. I was about fifteen when he died and I don't remember very much of his telling me about his life. He was an invalid for many years before he died. page 5 - Jones M.F.: Did he go to college? Jones: Yes. He went to Drury College in Springfield, Missouri. M.F.: What did he study? Jones: I haven't the faintest idea. I know that he used to read himself to sleep in Latin or Greek, but I don't . . .none of it rubbed off on me. (laughter) M.F.: So, he went to college and came back to his father's farm and worked there? Jones: He always worked with his father. M.F.: So, he worked on the farm and when they went to Oklahoma he worked in the bank and store? Jones: That's right. M.F.: Was he ever interested in politics? Jones: Yes, very much. I remember going to the station to see Teddy Roosevelt. I don't remember when that was, but I remember going. M.F.: Was he a Republican? Jones: No, he was a Democrat but he voted Republican in that election and my mother was furious with him. I can remember that because she was a dyed-in-the-wool Democrat. M.F.: Did he ever run for office himself? page 6 - Jones Jones: Yes, he ran for office once and he was defeated. I think it was when he was very young, for county surveyor or something like that, back in Missouri before they ever went to Oklahoma. M.F.: What was the name of the town that they settled in Oklahoma? Jones: Wagoner. M.F.: When they were there Wagoner was pretty small, wasn't it? Were they sort of the pillars of the town or ... . Jones: It's always been very small. (laughter) In fact, it's smaller now than it was then. Once it claimed to be three or four thousand, but I'm sure that it's smaller now. M.F.: Were your father and grandfather both sort of active in running Wagoner. Jones: My grandfather wasn't, no. He was active only business; in his/ he would go down in the morning and in the afternoon he would meet an old friend of his and they would go into the old friend's hotel room and play cards all afternoon. Then he would come home and look at his garden. They always had a contest going on who could produce the first melons and who could produce the first asparagus. He wasn't interested, really, in running the town. My grandmother was not a very pag e 7 - Jone s polite and rice lady. She was a lady but not very nice. (laughter) M.F.: Harsh? Jones: Oh, very harsh. M.F.: How old were you when your father died? Jones: I was fifteen. M.F.: Did you ever live with your grandparents after your mother died? Jones: Oh yes, we lived with them after my mother died and then when my father died I lived with them then until my last year in high school. I must have been seventeen I guess, because I didn't start school until I was eight. My last year in high school, I only needed two credits and a man that my grandfather had enjoyed a lot when he was superintendent of schools in Wagoner was then the president of what was called the Oklahoma College for Women. They had an academy as well as a college. So, he said that it was silly to stay there for two credits, why not go down there and see if I was going to like college. So,I did. That's how I happened to get to the Oklahoma College for Women. M.F.: I wanted to ask you a couple of things about your mother's life. Did she sort of come from the same sort of page 8 - Jones circumstances as your father? Were her parents farmers in Missouri also? J0nes: Well,my grandfather was never a farmer. When I say farmer, I don't mean that he ever worked on a farm in his life. He just owned farms. (laughter) M.F.: He ran farms. Jones: No, he didn't even run them, he had somebody else running them, you know. He had a bank in Neosho, I know that. Then he sold that out and moved into Arkansas and then from Arkansas, I guess, into the Indian territory. My mother's father, I don't really know what he did. I know that he owned, and this was very much a disgrace to my father's mother, he owned a big livery stable in the* town, but he didn't run it. But I do know that he broke dozens of horses for people always. He just loved to break a horse. That was one of his preoccupations, but they were both older people when I began to be interested in what they had done. M.F.: What did your mother do? Did she go to college? Jones: My mother and father went to college and from college because their parents didn't wish them to get married. They both went to college but I don't know the name of the college my mother attended. M.F.: Where your mother went? *Neosho, Mo. page 9 - Jones Jones: Where they both went. I can't remember and I can't remember the name of the town. It was a Missouri college, I know that. M.F.: Drury College? You said .... Jones: No, that's where my father went to college He went to college there before he came back to Neosho and met my mother. I don't know ... . . .1 remember seeing a newspaper article about their being married and about what devils they had been in college. They rode their horses up the steps to the president's office and tied their horses to the president's door. (laughter) Oh, I don't know, you know, just crazy things that you hear about. M.F.: What do you remember about your mother or hearing about her? Did you have brothers and sisters? Jones: I had a brother. M.F.: Was she active in politics herself, did she campaign for suffrage? Jones: No. I don't think that she knew the word. I don't think she did. I doubt it. No, she was very gay, she loved parties and she and my father were good dances and they went to all the dances everywhere. That's all I remember. page 10 - Jones M.F. : What do you think that she would have thought about what you went on to do? Do have any feeling for that? Jones: I wouldn't have any idea. I know my father would have been interested because I can remember him saying to me once, "Now there are three women that I certainly hope you will get to know in your lifetime." One of them was Jane Addams, who I did know and I slept in her bed for six at Hull House weeks in Chicago/when I led a student in industry project. One was Elizabeth Chrisaman , who was the head of the Women's Trade Union League and the other was Mary Anderson who went on to be head of the Women'sL abor Bureal /Dept. of Labor/. M.F.: How did he know about these women? Jones: Well, he read constantly. He was really a very well read man. M.F.: Do you think that had something to do with your going in that direction? Jones: No, I don't think so. They were just interesting women, women who were interesting to him. That's all. No, I don't think so. M.F.: Did your family have people working for them in the town of Wagoner or before that in Missouri, in the house? page 11 - Jones Jones: Oh, you mean servants? M.F.: Yes. Jones: We all grew up with the same mammy, if you want to know the truth. It's a very bad word, you know, now. When I was little she lived with us, Lucretia. She had been my father's nurse and she died when I wasin college. M.F.: Were you incredibly close to her? Jones: Oh, yes. We thought there was nobody else. She was a dear person. M.F.: Did you maintain contact with her during the time you were in college and until she died? Jones: Oh, yes. M.F.: Who were your companions as a child? Your brother? Or did Lucretia have children or did you .... Jones: We used to play with Lucretia's children. She used to bring them with her many days when she came. She lived in the house much of the time but part of the time she would go home aid she would bring them back. I can remember my mother, one day she was very ill and she called me into her bedroom and she said, "I want you to play in the backyard." I said, "Why?" She said, "The neighbors page 12 - Jones don't like it when you play in the front yard with Lucretia's children." I can remember that decidedly, you see. But we always lived until I went to college in very segregated communities, you know. Thoroughly segregated. M.F.: Do you remember anything about the way that your parents treated servants as being different from the way that other townspeople did? Jones: I don't know. I think that in general, everybody that I knew loved the people that worked for them. Of course, it was a benevolent kind of thing. It wasn't a genuine equal proposition, but I don't remember anyone ever being unkind at all to anybody. I can remember one time when my father when we were in Oklahoma my father said to me, "I dislike so much the fact that when I'm walking down the street and a Negro is coming toward me, he steps off the sidewalk for me to go by." I can remember him having said that. There are just different little things like that that you remember, but they are all so far, far back and that's what you remember best, you know. M.F.: Did Lucretia and her family move with you to Oklahoma? Jones: Lucretia came with us and then she would go page 13 - Jones back home often When she got older, she couldn't stay long, you know, but she would cone down for awhile and we had two or three other people who took her place, but they were younger Negro women. There was a succession of them and I just don't even remember. M.F.: Your mother died so early. I was sort of wondering if you modeled your behavior after her or after your father? Jones: I don't think I modeled my behavior after anyone. (laughter) M.F.: Who was the adult you were closest to? Jones: My grandfather, really. M.F.: Your father's father? Jones: Yes. I just worshipped him. He was a great guy. M.F.: Why did you like him so much? Jones: Well, he was very thoughtful. He knew that we were unhappy without having our mother and he just tried so hard to do things for us. He got a tent and put it up out in his yard so that we could play and be completely out of the house, out of my grandmother's eye, because she was very strict. He had a farm and he built us a lake and put a rowboat on it so that we could learn to row. Always on Sunday afternoons, I would go to one of his farms with him. I just loved him and I page 14 - Jones loved the country. I was meant to be a country gal, I think. M.F.: But you were never that close to your grandmother, then? Jones: No. M.F.: Was the church an important part of your life when you were growing up? Jones: It was a very controversial part of my life. My mother played the piano for the Episcopal Church and so, she kept the Episcopal Church going in Wagoner until she died and after she died, nobody kept the church up. My grandmother insisted that I go to the Methodist church and I would come home from Sunday School and Church and my father would say, "Now what did you learn today?" I would tell him and he would say, "Well now, you know that is all a very lovely story, but you don't have to believe it if you don't want to." He was really an agnostic and completely unchurchy. (laughter) M.F.: But your grandmother was a very religious woman? Jones: Yes, I think so. M.F.: She took it seriously? Jones: Oh yes, she took it very seriously. And my grandfather was really the pillar of the church because he made it possible for them page 15 - Jones to build the church. M.F.: That was the Methodist Church? Jones: Yes. I think that it was because of her that he did it. I don't think that he was really engrossed in religion. M.F.: Well to you personally, did ifc mean a lot to you when you were small? Jones: It didn't mean anything to me, really. M.F.: Do you have any feeling, other than your father saying that he wanted you to meet Jane Addams, Elizabeth which Christman, Mary Anderson, of the forces/were in your family that pushed you into .... Jones: I don't think that my family pushed me into before anything. I went to work just/ my grandfather died, I went to school, of course, he had me go to school. I went down to the Academy of the Oklahoma College for Women and that summer I came home and I was determined that I was going to work. I went to normal school and got myself a job and taught school. My grandfather was very interested. He said that no woman in the family had ever worked and he wanted to be sure before he left that I could take care of myself. I can remember/him saying that. Then, the next" year, pag e 16 - Jones he died. Before he died,he said, "Now, you will go back and finish college." He had property in Kansas City at that time and I had gone up to Kansas City and I was working for Hall Brothers Engraving Company and they were determined that they were going tomake an engraver out of me at that time. He said, "Now look, you are going back to college," and I said "Yes, I will." He went home from Kansas City and was never conscious from the time he got home until he died. So, I really took that seriously, when he said that I had to go back. So, I went back and worked my way through the next three years. M.F.: This was still at the Oklahoma College for Women? Jones: Yes. M.F.: What was that school like? Jones: Well, it was small. It is now called of Oklahoma University of Science and Arts/ but at that time, it was a woman's college. We were around three hundred students. As I said, the president was a man who had been very fond of my grandfather and he helped me. M.F.: What did you study while you were there? Jones: Well, almost everything I studied was in English or drama. Of course, you know that you have to have some required things and I sweat blood over some science and page 17 - Jones languages . . .I had five years of Latin, I know. Four in high school and one in college. M.F.: What had your experiences been like in the schools that you attended before you went to the Academy? Jones: Well, we had wonderful teachers in Wagoner. We had three teachers who were Rhodes Scholars. Now, that was really a phenomenal thing to have had happen to a child because they were marvelous people. One of them was Clyde Eagleton, I think that to this day he is part of Columbia University. One was a man by the name of Alexander, he was terrifically nice, and the other person, I've forgotten the name, but there were three and they were just fascinating people and meant a tremendous amount to the students. M.F.: Is that when you found your interest in English and drama, under those people? Jones: No, I suppose that I've always been interested in English, but my grandfather read constantly. He never went away from home that he didn't bring a book back. We all read. M.F.: Were there any teachers at the Oklahoma College for Women who especially influenced you? Jones: Well, one who influenced me terrifically has just whom died and she was a woman with/I had most of my English. She was a terrific person. page 18 - Jones M.F.: What was her name? Jones: Her name was Carolyn Laird. She lived out here until she died . . .she died around the tenth of February. She had written to me at Christmastime and I knew she was ill and I wrote back immediately and said that I was going down to San Diego to have a week with an old college friend and that another of my college friends was coming and we were all coming over to see her. She was looking forward to our coming friends because she wrote to my Indian/ and said that she was so glad that she was going to see us all and then before my friend had her program down there, she was gone and we had the program, of course, over at the Casa. (The Casa de Manana, La Jolla). M.F.: What was the program? Jones: It was an Indian program. Teata is an Indian who has given programs all over the world. I feel . . .1 don't know it for sure, but I think thatprobably Miss Laird had been instrumental in having her brought there. She comes out to California every year and has a regular circuit out here. M.F.: Her name is Teata. Jones: Yes. She was Dr. Clyde Fisher's wife, who was at the Natural History Museum in N. Y. . . .very wel] known person in the field of natural science. page 19 - Jones M.F.: What was the atmosphere like at the Oklahoma College for Women? What were they training women to do? Jones: I would guess that most of the girls who were coming out of that school were going into teaching. M.F.: Well, after normal school, were you planning to..... Jones: I knew that I didn't want to teach, (laughter) shorthand and typing My last year in college I took/ . .which of course was not done for credit, it was just because I wanted to do something else. Then I went to Denver right after graduation and I, too, was striking out in a new place. I got a job in Denver as a stenographer for an automobile firm. Then I worked in a bank and then the YWCA asked me to come and start an industrial department for them. M.F.: In Denver? Jones: Yes. M.F.: Did you ever have any contact with the YWCA before that? Jores: Well, I had in college. I knew a number of people in college. They would come in and out, college secretaries. page 20 - Jones M.F.: Were you active in that organization on campus? Jones: Oh, semi. M.F.: Was it more religious or was it more oriented to social problems? Jones: Oh, it was net very religious, no. It was pretty much social problems. M.F.: When you were in college, did the women get into debating social issues a lot? Jones: Oh yes. And of course, remember that was during the war and so we were really very much involved in war work and what was going on. M.F.: Were you opposed to the war? Jones: Well, we weren't opposed to the war, we just wanted to bring our brothers and our friends home, that was all. M.F.: Oh, I see. Jones: Well, I think the it never is very clcs e to you, unless you have somebody in it. And at that time, I don't think that we had any feeling against World War I, or even World War II to tell the truth, but I certainly am opposed to wars since. M.F.: What about suffrage or women's rights? Was that an issue when you were in college? page 21 - Jones Jones: Well no, we could vote, after 1919. M.F.: But on the campus, the women weren't? Jones: No, the teachers talked about it and we listened, you know. We were interested and we did know what they were issue for us. voting for, but it wasn't an/ I studied a lot of sociology in college, too, under a very wonderful woman. Dr. Anna Lewis, who went on to the University of Oklahoma. M.F.: Were you interested at all at that time in settlement work or the Women's Trade Union League or ... . Jones: Oh, yes. Jacob Riis and all those people, you know. I just read everything that they wrote. (laughter) M.F.: Did you think about doing that sort of work? Jones: I didn't think about doing that myself, no. I was just terribly interested in it. M.F.: Did you do any writing while you were in college? Jone s: No. M.F.: Who were the authors that you read? A page 22 - Jones liones: Oh my, who were they? I couldn't tell you to save my life. I know that I've read all my life. M.F.: What about any of the expatriates? Hemingway or Fitzgerald? Jones: Oh yes, we read Hemingway and Fitzgerald and of course, that was later, really, that I was involved much in reading about them, not while I was in college. I really wouldn't know . . .all I know is that I spent most of my time reading plays. I read plays and I read plays and I read plays. (laughter) M.F.: Was the church at all a part of your life at college? Jones: Oh, I had a Sunday School class for awhile, little boys. I don't think I taught them anything, but we went on picnics every Saturday. (laughter) M.F.: Were you at all politically active in college? Jones: No. M.F.: Did you have any sense of where *you were going or what you were planning to do? Jones: Not the faintest. I had my eyes open and I was going to look for something interesting, that was all. M.F: Were you at all interested in race relations at that time? page 23 - Jones Jones: Well, I don't think that we ever thought in terms of race relations. I know that I never .was anti-any race. I never have been. M.F.: But the YWCA in Oklahoma was not oriented to any kind of interracial work? Jones: Well, we didn't have any in the school, you know. M.F.: Well, what about Indians? Jones: Oh, they were just part of us. I went to high school and in my class, there were only two of us that weren't Indians. M.F.: So, you were the minority. Jones: It wasn't in the whole class, but in the agricultural section. I took a gardening class with the boys because I wouldn't take home economics. I was the one girl in that class and all the boys were Indian except one, so there were two of us that weren't Indians. M.F.: Why wouldn't you take home economics? Jones: Oh, I didn't like it. M.F.: The whole time that you were Oklahoma growing up and in college, was there any feeling about . . .well, what was page 24 - Jones feeling regarding the integration of Indians into white society? Jones: Well, we lived in the Indian territory, you see. After all, it was their territory and our good friends were all Indians. For instance, the farm that we used to visit quite often, that Grandpa owned, he had a Buffalo White Killer and his wife, Maggie, and I would go out and spend a week with them. He would take me out while he was looking over the farm and I would stay a week and he would come pick me up and bring me home. M.F.: So, unlike the relationship that you had with the servant in your family, Lucretia, which you said was one that in the treatment of your parents and grandparents was a paternalistic, benevolent thing, your relationship with Indians was not that way? Jones: No, I think it was straightforward. He was the manager of the farm and that was it. I do remember how the Indians used to come into the store and how they always they wanted to be sure the Captain was going to be there. Everybody calM Grandpa"the Captain." He had been a captain in the Civil pace 25 - Jones War and somehow, that had stuck. They always wanted to see the Captain and they were always very good friends. I know that he helped two or three Indian boys go through school. I know that for a fact but no one in the family knew it but me. M.F.: Why didn't they know it? Jones: Well, they wouldn't have been interested if they had known and he never talked about it. I just knew that there was a school for Indian boys and he was keeping two or three boys up there. It wasn't discussed, it wasn't a big thing at the time. M.F.: So, it was really a relationship of equality, then? Jones: Well, I suppose that it was as near equality that you can have if you have more money than somebody else has. I don't know. They were in relationship to people who worked for him. I know my brother when he came back from the war was very close buddies with many of the Indian people that he knew. M.F.: What about at college, were there Indian women at the school? Jones: Oh yes, Teata came from that school. She was there when I got there, graduated the yar before I did. M.F.: Well, you were working in Denver and the YWCA contacted you about setting up the Industrial Department and you page 26 - Jones did that in Denver? Jones: Yes. M.F.: Who first contacted you? How did the YWCA find you? Jones: Well, I had belonged to the Business Girls Club at the YWCA, the local YWCA. M.F.: In Denver? Jones: In Denver. It was a group of staid, middle-aged women and I used to play around with the secretary of the business girls department and she said to me one day, "They are trying to get me to start an Industrial Department and I just cannot take on more work. I am going to see if they will hire you to do it." So, they did and in no time flat, we had a good sized industrial department. It was pure fluke, I didn't know anything about it. They taught me all I knew about it. M.F.: How large was this department that you set up? Jones: Well, I know that we had around 400 girls in it. M.F.: Where did they come from, which industries in Denver? Jones: Well, Denver had an enormous overall factory and we had some small plants. Not big factories, but small page 27 - Jone s plants. We had a big meat-packing plant. The person who had really been pushing for an Industrial Department was a woman whose husband owned the meat-packing plant. She said, "Nobody does anything for those girls. Why don't we start some work with them?" So, she got the board to say that they would do it, you see. We never did get many meat-packing girls in, but we got some. Even so, it was her influence that really got the board to start an Industrial Department. M.F.: What was the goal of what you were trying to do with them? Were you trying to get them to join unions? Or were you trying to get them a little culture or ... . Jones: Well, we had an incipient labor college in Denver at the Methodist Church. Even before I went to work for the YWCA I had been regularly going down to the labor college and going to the labor forum. M.F.: How did you happen to get interested in that? Jones: Well, because there were interesting speakers that they brought. They brought Anna Louise Strong and people like that. I was interested. M.F.: Why was it incipient? Jones: Well, the labor movement did not really embrace very many women at that time in Denver. It was nearly all men in the labor movement but there were page 28- Jones women tailors, women garment workers,and some people out in some of these small plants. They were not too well unionized. Well, when we started the Industrial Department, I guess that it was about the first or second year, William Sweet ran for governor and he was a liberal man and the labor group wanted to endorse him. We had no channel. So, they started a labor paper and several of us used to read copy for the paper and do what we could to support the paper and we were all supporting the labor college, of course. The University of Denver . . .a nice , conservative, I think Methodist university, I'm not sure . . . M.F.: But a private college, isn't it? Jones: Yes, a private college had a very fine man by the name of Colston Warne , whose name is familiar to everybody and he taught economics at the labor college. So, Frank Palmer, who was editor of the Labor Advocate, brought a bunch of boys that he was interested in and I got a bunch of my girls interested and we would all meet for supper and then go to the labor college together and Colston and Frank would steer the whole group through what we were going to haee for the evening and I'll never forget those lessons that we at had/the labor college in banking. It was just simply thrilling. It was so exciting, so revolutionary to me, who knew nothing page 29 - Jones about what happened to money, but that was how I really began. I couldn't have been in a better climate to learn about the labor movement than I was in that Denver YWCA. M.F.: This would have been around when? Jones: I finished college in 1920 and then worked, as I said, in an automobile company and the man that I worked for was killed in a fatal automobile accident. Then I went into this bank to do bond consolidation filing and I didn't know a bond from a chicken. (laughter) But at any rate, it was in January of 1923 when I really went to work in the Denver YWCA. You see, I had been in the labor college and working on the labor paper before I went to work in the YWCA. Then we started our Monday night suppers at the YWCA with this girl and boy group and going on to the labor college. M.F.: Were you trying to put pressure on the labor movement to integrate more women into the ranks? Jones: No. You didn't need to pressure the labor movement page 30 - Jones in Colorado at that moment. They were trying to get anybody they could get in the ranks. They were glad to work with the women. There were, I would guess, about probably three or four hundred women actually working in good sized plants. I think the overall plant must have had two hundred workers and then the other smaller plants . . .we had a candy factory, too. Bower's Candy. That was a big concern. I would guess that we must have had maybe a thousand women workers. M.F.: In Denver? Jones: Yes. M.F.: And you had four hundred in the Industrial group? Jones: Well, it was around four hundred. Now, some of those women who came in the industrial group were doing household employment. We brought those right into the same group, but there weren't many of them. As long as there was an Industrial Department in the YWCA, household employees were a part of it. M.F.: How old were most of these women? Jones: Well, I would say ... I must have been about twenty-five , something like that and they were all about my page 31 - Jones age or maybe a couple of years younger. We were all not too mature yet. M.F.: What were the conditions that they were working under? You know, in 1923 in the South, I've read lots and lots about the horrible conditions, especially in textiles but in garments, too. Was it the same sort of thing there? Jones: Well, you see, these garment workers were in a union. They were in United Garment Workers at that time . . . They really had a union and it was a good union. I've forgotten what their wages were, if I ever knew. I'm sure that I must have known, but I know that it was a good deal more than most of the women in town made, and certainly more than the clerks in stores made. By the time I left Denver, even the clerks were organizing and that, you know, was pretty far back. I left Denver in 1926. '26 or '27. And went to Flint, Michigan where the women were not organized. That's when they began organizing unions in the automobile industry. M.F: I'd like to go back to Denver for just a minute more. What were the issues that you were dealing with in the Industrial Department? Was equal pay an issue, for example? Jones: No. Not equal pay, but minimum wages were an page 32 - Jones Colorado issue and then, remember, / had had the Ludlow strike. That was really one of the prime things that had everybody in the labor movement excited. That happened three or four years, I guess, before I reached Denver. (End of Side A of tape 1) M.F.: Were most of these women married, or were they living with their families or by themselves? Jones: Many of them were married. I know of no girls who lived alone. M.F.: Could they have supported themselves on what they made? Jones: I would guess that they might have been able to. I would guess so, because it didn't cost so much to live in those days, you know. They couldn't have had an apartment, they could have had a room. M.F.: Did you work with them, talking about participation in the union? Jones: Oh, we sent them to labor college, that was when Bryn Mawr was open and we were recruiting students for Bryn Mawr and .... M.F.: What was the effect on students from going to Bryn Mawr, do you remember anything about that? page 33 - Jones Jones: Yes. We had about three students in the years that I was in Denver that went to Bryn Mawr. M.F.: How did you pick people to go? Jones: Oh, we would have a number of people who would apply and then we had a committee that raised the money to sent them and the committee would make the ultimate choice. M.F.: But what were they looking for? Jones: They were looking for women who had some kind of leadership and could demonstrate it, you know. M.F.: Do you remember if the women who were picked to go were very different from the other women? I mean, were they unusual women? Jones: Well . . .two, I remember, were unusual in that . . .one of them is now in a nursing home. She was a very unusual person and very dramatic, a very fine leader, a Jewish girl, GoIdfieId. Then I think that one of the twins went. We had twins in the Industrial Department, the most beautiful girls that I ever looked at in my whole life, and one of them went. They were always leaders, those two ijjirls. They could really get people stirred up. I think that we must have had another person, but I can't remember who it was. M.F.: Do you remember when they came back . . .did they get a lot out of the experience? page 34 - Jones Jones: Yes, they were trade union people, all three of the girls. There was a fourth person and I'm not sure about it, I think that person went after I left, but I'm not sure. They were very active in the labor movement, they wrote for the labor paper, they spoke at conventions, they were quite active girls. M.F.: What was the relationship between the women in the Industrial Department who were in irions and those who weren't? Were you working with people on two different levels? Jones: No, there were no conflicts and as many people went to labor college that weren't' in trade unions ad those who were, really. M.F.: Was there any attempt to organize the domestic workers? Jones: Not that I know of. M.F.: How did the board of the Y in Denver react to the Industrial Department? Jones: Oh, they were very interested in it always. I know that I wanted to leave the year before and they said, "No, you just can't. We are building our new building and we are the going to build a whole section that/trade unions have dedicated to the Industrial Department and you've just got to stay." So, I did. page l&amp;gt;4 - Jones Jonest Yes, they were trade union people, all three of the girls. There was a fourth person and I'm not sure about it, I think that person went after I left, but I'm not sure. They were very active in the labor movement, they wrote for the labor paper, they spoke at conventions, they were quite active girls. M.F.t What was the relationship between the women in the Industrial Department who were in uions and those who weren't? Were you working with people on two different levels? Jonest No, there were no conflicts and as many people went to labor college that weren't in trade unions ad those who \mzrn, really. M.F.i Was there any attempt to organize the domestic workers? Jones: Not that I know of. M.F.i How did the board of the Y in Denver react to the Industrial Department? Jonesi Oh, they were very interested in it always. I know that I wanted to leave the year before and they said, "No, you just can't. We are building our new building and we are going to build a whole section that,trade unions have dedicated to the Industrial Department and you've just got to stay." So, I did. page 35 - Jones M.F.: Why were they so open to this whole idea of an Industrial Department? Jones: I don't know why they were. I suppose jut because they were nice people. (laughter) M.F.: I mean, again, I'm sort of comparing it in my mind to the situation in the South. Jones: Well, you see, women in the West were not as tied as women in the South were. M.F.: Tied? Jones: Tied to tradition, tied to patterns. You see, the South is older than the rest of the country and there is more tradition, more patterns of behavior and everything. M.F.: Was unionization, not just for women, but unionization period, sort of a more accepted pattern for workers in the West? Jones: Oh, much more so. You see, we didn't have these people coming down from New England setting up factories to avoid unions and fighting them. That had happened there. And (1913-14) of course,*Ludlow,/remember, was a very dramatic thing for Colorado to have experienced. Then we had Judge Ben Lindsey, who is one of the world's great liberals. M.F.: Do you think that for the middle-class or upper-class women who were on a board of the Y . . . . Jones: Well, we had an industrial worker on the board, and *The Ludlow Massacre (1913-14)"open shop" page 36 - Jones the business girls had a business girl on the board . . . M.F.: But I mean, was the board more likely to be controlled by these other women, such as the woman whose husband owned the meat-packing plant? Jones: Well, all I remember is that I know that three of the best friends I've ever had were members of the board. They were just wonderful people. M.F.: But they had reacted to Ludlow? That's what I'm trying to get at. Jones: Oh, yes. Oh, indeed they did. M.F.: They were horrified by the whole thing. Maybe their work in this was sort of a way of mitigating that feeling. Jones: Well, I don't think that they thought of it in terms of mitigating their feeling. I think that they would have done it anyway. M.F.: But they did have this .... Jones: They had this bad reaction to Ludlow. I know in 1924 that a very, very stupid thing happened. Somebody put up a coal exhibit in a window downtown and one of these lumps of coal in there was obviously a human skull that had turned and blackened like coal. Oh, the town just raised cain about page 37 - Jones that. I'll never forget seeing it for the first time and it didn't stay there long. It wasn't really a human skull, but it just looked like one, you see. Then you see, that's Josephine Roche, you remember her name? M.F.: Josephine Roche? I don't know her. Jones: Well, she was active in government many years later. Josephine Roche started the Rocky Mountain Fuel and Iron Company . . .1 think . . .well, anyway, it had a different name from the Ludlow group. So, we conducted all kinds of campaigns to increase her sale of coal and boycotting the other company. I remember a very active campaign. M.F: Were these carried on by people like Ben Lindsay? Jones: All kinds of people in the town, yes. Denver was a very liberal spot at that point. M.F.: Was Denver unusual for Colorado, the most industrialized place aid .... Jones: Well, it' s abovt the only industrialized place at that time in Colorado. M.F.: Were the industrialists at Ludlow out of character with the rest of ... . Jones: Well, they were eastern, you know. Weren't they Rockefellers? Yes. They were eastern and it was all page 38 - Jones in their manager's hands. The Rockefellers never came near it, you know. It was just a horrible company town. M.F.: So even the industrialists in Denver would have .... Jones: Well, there were no big industrialists in Denver then. Now, of course there are. Everything in Texas has moved into Denver now, practically, and there are loads of big industrialists, oil men there. But at that time, Denver was . . .oh, I don't know what the population was, but it was just a small-sized city, really. And it was a city of colleges, too, you know. Boulder was near and the University of Denver. I didn't last in Flint very long. M.F.: Why did you decide to leave Denver and go to Flint? Jones: Oh, I still had itchy feet. (laughter) I wanted to see the world, you know, and I knew the only way that I could ever move around was to have a job doing something. M.F.: So, you went to Flint and you were still working for the YWCA? Jones: Yes. And of course, there they had all kinds of lasted women in the automobile plants. I / from '26 or '27 until page 39 - Jones about the spring of '28 in Flint. A very short time. M.F.: You were running an Industrial Department and did you hae young women, the same as before, or were these trade union people, most of them? Jones: No, most of them were not trade union. They were just really organizing the trade unions in the automobile industry at that time. That's when the sit-down strikes and things were going on. The' YWCA was a pretty conservative group there and they didn't like the fact that we sent industrial the girls to/industrial summer school at Ann Arbor, I guess it was then. So, they said that I was organizing a union of household employees and I said,"I'm sorry I haven't succeeded." (laughter) M.F.: Were you trying to organize one? Jones: No, not at all. We always talked about standards for household employees, we had done that for years and years in the YWCA. At any rate, they made it very clear that they would like to have me resign. I said, "Well, you can fire me, but I'm not going to resign." So, they didn't rehire me that year. Then I went to Richmond, Virginia. M.F.: You were transferred with the Y? Jones: No, you're not transferred, you just choose a page 40 - Jones YWCA, they let you know where the openings are and if they are interested in you, you write back. That's where I met Lucy Mason. M.F.: I see. So, you came to Richmond in ... . Jones: 1928 . . .to '32. There were tobacco workers there predominantly. That was the group in the YWCA. M.F.: In Lucy Randolph Mason's book, To Win These Rights. she says that as an industrial secretary at the Richmond Y, you were "unusually successful in opening people's minds to progressive ideas." She says that you contributed a great deal to making the Richmond association a social force in the community during the time that you were there. Jones: Lucy was the real social force. You know that. (laughter) M.F.: When you came in 1928, was she the Industrial Secretary? Jones: No, she was the Executive Director. M.F.: I see. And how long had she been there? Jones: Oh, quite a while. I think that's the only YWCA that she ever worked in. Then she went with the Consumers League and from there to the Mine Workers. M.F.: What was it like when you first got there? Did you get along well with her? page 41 - Jones Jones: Oh, yes. Wonderful. She was one of my very best friends, or was until she died. In fact, I had gone over to Atlanta to see her and I stopped by to see another friend along the way and they said, "Did you know that Lucy died?" I said that I was worried because I hadn't had a letter for sometime. So then I did not continue on. M.F.: Well, when you went to Ridmond in 1928, how did you see the work of the YWCA there compared to the group that you had been with in Denver and the group that you had been with in Flint? Jones: Well, it was a very, very good group because they . . .many of the women in the YWCA were beginning to be interested in the unions and the tobacco workers had sent organizers down through the area. So, Liggett and Myers and . . . what was the other one . . .well, quite a group of people from the two large plants were very much interested in unions. Now, they didn't organize right away. I would guess that probably they were not fully organized even when I left in '32. I don't think they were fully organized. But also, some of the textile workers were beginning to organize. Not the southern textile workers . . .by that, I don't mean cotton makers, but the people who were working in the clothing page 42 - Jones factories. M.F.: The garment workers. Jones: * Esther Peterson was down organizing and somebody else . . .I've forgotten her name, but she used to be the Industrial Secretary of the YWCA and left the YWCA to go in as an organizer with somebody else, with the Amalgamanted, I think it was at that time. M.F.: But you don't remember her name? Jones: No. M.F.: Could it have been Gladys Dickerson. Jones: No. Let's see, what was her name? I don't think that she was the Industrial Secretary for very long. She was there for a couple of years. I haven't the faintest idea what her name was. Jones: She had been there before you? Jones: Yes. She immediately preceded me. Jones: Did you see the work that the Y was doing in Richmond as really effective? Was it satisfying to you as far as ... . Jones: Oh, I just loved working there. I was very fond of it. We had a terrific board. What a wonderful board. It was during a bad depression, you remember those years were very bad years. In '28 and '29, there were these long lines of people standing in line for food and members of the board would go down and take cameras and take pictures you know and try to bring into people's minds what was going on. Then, we had a wonderful young group of board members who always went to *Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America page 43 - Jones industrial conferences with us and they taught at some of the conferences and they were just terrific women. M.F..!. So, it was similar to the situation that you had in Denver where the board supported the work of the Y. Jones: Oh, very much. You see, they wouldn't have kept Lucy if they hadn't been supporting Lucy, too. M.F.: Right. Do you remember a Mrs. J. Scott Parish? Jones: Yes. M.F.: Wasn't she president of the board far awhile. Jones: In Richmond? M.F.: Yes. Jones: I don't know. I can't place her anywhere. I just remember the name. I don't remember her. M.F.: Do you remember any particular people? Jones: I remember Mrs. Fred Scott who always used to . . .she is dead now, she died of cancer, but she was a marvelous person. When they had hearings in Richmond, just before I left the Southern school and she testified at the hearings for integration. She was a marvelous person. M.F.: Were most of the members of the board women? Jones: All of them were. I think that they usually are in YWCAs. I don't know of any men. M.F.: About how many industrial workers were involved in Richmond? Jones: I haven't the faintest idea. I know that we had a household page 44 - Jones employees club, which was a good sized club. We must have had maybe 150 or 200 tobacco workers in the industrial club. Then we had one smaller club and that was younger workers. M.F.: How much contact did you have with these people? You were the Industrial Secretary and also sort of educational director there? Jones: No, I wasn't educational director. M.F.: Just Industrial Secretary. That was enough? Jones: (laughter) Well, we had classes always with the industrial groups, you know, and we had lending libraries. M.F.: What kinds of classes? Jones: Well, we had classes in economics, simple economics, we had classes for people who wanted to study drama. We put on many plays, They / did Tom Tippet's Mill Shadows the year after I left, we also worked on Green Pastures and we had a chorus, we brought in different people to teach. M.F.: As Industrial Secetary were you sort of heavily involved in the interracial work that the Y was trying to do? Jones: Well, I don't think that I was heavily involved, I was involved. I remember that we had a Negro YWCA and a white YWCA there. I remember when I was planning for a discussion series that I was going to have for our staff meeting, I had suggested a Negro professor to take charge of the group and I think that some of the staff were a little rebellious, but they got over it. I don't mean that they were rebellious, I mean that they thought it was kind of a funny choice for me to make. page 45 - Jones M.F.: Did you have exchange programs between the two Ys or anything or anything like that? Jones: They always had exchange staff meetings. We didn't have exchange programs, no. I don't think so. M.F: Did the black YWCA have anything resembling your industrial ... department? Jones: I dont' remember what they had, really. I remember that the secretary was a very good friend of mine, they had one executive director and then she had several part-time workers, I think. M.F.: What was her name, do you remember? Jones: I haven't the faintest idea. M.F.: The household employees group that you had, were they black or white? Jones: They were white. M.F.: You don't hear very much about white household employees in the South. Jones: Well, you did in Richmond and many of the girls were children of immigrants that came over after the war and they had settled up and down the Virginia valleys and their fathers were farmers. Many of the girls had gone through high school and whatnot, and they didn't want to work in factories and there was no office work for them so they went to work in homes. I know that Mrs. Fred Scott had a beautiful girl who worked for her for years, a wonderful gal. I would guess that there must have been at least twenty, twenty-five white girls in the household employees. page 46 - Jones M.F.: Had any of them been in different jobs and lost their jobs because of the Depression and had to go into domestic work? Jones: I don't know. They were very young, I doubt if they had. M.F.: What was the relationship that the Y had with the Richmond Urban League? Jones: Well, I don't remember that. I'm sure that there was an Urban League at that time, I can't remember whether there was or not. I know that there was when the Southern school was founded, I mean when we moved there, but I don't . . . M.F.: You don't remember working with them at that time? some Jones: No. I don't remember it at all. I know that/members of our staff were very anti-segregation, I know that. I don't remember any demonstration of any kind. M.F.: Do you remember the Ridmond Association . . .Lucy Mason wrote about it when she was talking about you in her book .... Jones: Well yes, I remember the Association but I probably wouldn't have thought about it the same way that she did. M.F.: What was the Richmond Association? Jones: Well, it was a typical YWCA of that time. M.F.: Oh, she was just referring to the Richmond YWCA? Jones: Yes. M.F.: Oh, I'm sorry. That's my mistake. I thought that she meant an association sort of consisting of different groups in Richmond. Jones: No. The YWCA. page 47 - Jones M.F.: I was thinking that it was sort of a super organization of different .... Jones: No, but there was an organization of that kind. They had just begun to have the Gommunity Fund and there was a council of women on the Community Fund and many of those women were the women that we took down to the bread lines during the Depression and got them very much interested in what should be done about the unemployed. I found some of those funny old pictures the other day, there were long, long lines of people standing in line waiting for food. I know that one of our Community Fund directors was named Arthur Guild. Now, his wife, June, was a . . .well, in the South she would be a radical. In San Francisco, she would probably be a mild liberal. (laughter) She was really always leading some kind of a discussion or something on the plight of people. I think that he died and she came out West, I don't know. M.F.: It seems to me that in Richmond there were a lot of middle-class women who were very involved and very concerned. Did you think that at the time? Jones: Well, I knew that it was true because we had a Sunday night discussion group. I have never been in a group that was as exciting as that one. We had people from West Hampton College. We had lawyers, we had high school teachers, we had health workers, we had . . . I was the only one from the YWCA in the group. There must have been about fifteen or eighteen of us. We had it every other Sunday night for discussion and it was a fascinating group. Now, since then, when I went back to be at the Southern school, two of the families had broken up, the wives had been in this group. There were men and women in the group. Two had died and some had moved away, but it was a very exciting group page 48 - Jones of people. We worked on all kinds of things. For instance, one woman's husband worked for a rubber factory somewhere, so she brought us contraceptives and the Industrial Department shared the contraceptives around among the club girls, (laughter) How that happened, we had one girl who had an abortion and almost died and that got everybody really uptight about abortions and we decided that it was time to do something about it. A lot of these ""girls were married but they had to go on working and they couldn't stop and have children. M.F.: Did you have any hint as to how widespread self-induced abortion was among the women? Jones: No, but we know that it was widespread. We did know that. M.F.: That was the main form of birth Jones: Yes. M.F.: Were they open to the idea of other forms of birth control? Jones: Oh, yes. yes. M.F.: Eager to get ahold of it? Jones: Yes. Well, even when I came out to San Francisco, it was very difficult for girls to get hold of contraceptives. M.F.: Did the Y ever get into any trouble for doing that, or was it all really under cover? Jones: Well, we thought that it was under cover, but when I went back to the Southern school, I went over to the hospital one day and was talking to one of the doctors and he said, "You don't remember me." I said, "Yes, I do." He was very familiar to me, but I couldn't place him. He said, "Well, you remember when you had contraceptives at the YWCA desk?" (laughter) page 49 - Jones M.F.: How did he know? Jones: Well evidently his wife was in the group that knew we were being furnished them, I'm sure that he was a very liberal guy. We had a very liberal industrial committee. M.F.: Why do you think that so many men and women there were into these kinds of . . .for the South, as you said, "radical" kinds of activities? Jones: Well, Richmond isn't fully a completely southern city. Even if you go down to Norfolk or other places like that, there were many more dyed-in-the-wool southerners. M.F.: Were most of these people like Lucy Mason and had very long traditions in the South or were they from somewhere else? Jones: Well, most of them had pretty long traditions in the South. I know that. I can verify that by things that were said and done in the group. They had long traditions in the South, but they were young women who had played with ideas a lot. They knew what they wanted out of life. M.F.: Were they very much aware of braking tradition? Jones: Yes, very much. M.F.: And eager to do it or afraid to do it? Jones: Not afraid, but cautious. They weren't recklessly going out and throwing themselves in front of a train, they were taking a little caution. I know that we ha- two or three people from West Hampton College that were just the most stimulating women, terribly interesting M.F.: Did you ever know a woman named Dorothy Markey, or Page was her maiden name? Jones: No. page 50 - Jones M.F.: She went to West Hampton College. I just wondered if you might have known her. Jones: No. M.F.: I wondered if you could give me some more hints about Lucy Mason and what she was like to work with, how she was perceived by other people and how she went about doing her work. Jones: Well, Lucy was truly a southern woman, but she was a liberated southern woman. She was really a southerner and she played on the fact that she was a Randolph, you know. She was well received. People loved her. She was very easy to work with, completely easy to work with. M.F.: Was she a hard worker? Jones: Oh yes, she worked very hard. She didn't know too much about doing any discipline of staff or anything , you know. Everybody just went their own way, but we all had our own ideas and they seemedtn merge pretty well. M.F.: Was she a creative person? Was she into new things and different ways of doing things? Jones: Oh yes, she had worked with the Consumer League and been all over the country. She knew what people were doing elsewhere and could overcome opposition in a very remarkably typically southern way, you know, you think that you're not giving in but before you know it, you have. (laughter) M.F.: She manipulated people obviously, or not? Jones: She didn't even realize that she did it herself, I'm sure of that. I'm perfectly sure that it was not an intentional thing, I page 51 - Jones think that it was something that was just born in her. M.F.: I've wondered many times about her work with the CIO and Jones: I didn't know much about that. You see, I left the YWCA before she did and by that time, I was out here. M.F.: But when you went back with the Southern school, did you ever hear anything about the kind of work that she had done? Jones: Oh, several people that were on her committee I knew. But I did hear a lot of . . .every now and then I would hear people say, "Well, it's not like when Lucy was here." You would always hear that complaint from good friends. I know that I was on one committee at the Y and they didn't call a total committee and they fired the industrial secretary or decided not to reemploy her and the rest of the committee who weren't at the meeting all began telephoning me and saying, "Well, this never would have happened if Lucy were here." I've forgotten what it was all about now. I'm not sure what it had to do with, it had nothing to do with labor or anything in that field. M.F.: What was her relationship to the Southern School for Workers? Jones: Well, she knew Louise Leonard very, very well and we used to raise money at the YWCA to send girls there and Lucy was always very helpful with that. I think that she probably visited the school and spoke there several times. I'm not sure. M.F.: What about when you came back to Richmond with the Southern school? Did she come in and out or did she ever participate? Jones: Oh, she was gone by that time, she was down in Atlanta. M.F.: But I thought that she worked with you in some way. page 52 -Jones Jones: Well, I don't remember her ever being in Richmond while I was there. Now, she may have been. I just don't remember, but I think that I would have remembered it. I saw a lot of her in Atlanta. M.F.: But she was enthusiastic about what you were doing? Jones: Well, she was interested, I don't know whether she was enthusiastic or not. M.F.: There was one other thing that I wanted to ask you about Lucy Mason. Did you ever know anything about her being at all a mystic or into the supernatural at all? Jones: Oh, yes. M.F.; Was she into that when you were with her in Richmond? Jones: Well, she had been . . .yes, she was. She used to always tell me about talking with her friends, you know, those that were long gone. M.F.: Was that sort of a strange aspect of her personality or ... . Jones: Well, it didn't bother me, you know. I would listen and be interested, but that was all. I know that she had one friend, Katherine Gurwick, she was always talking with Katherine. M.F.: Was anyone else into that? Jones: Not that I know of. M.F.: I was reading some of her correspondence and she started writing about that and I just found it unusual. I was wondering if the people around her knew about it. Jones: I don't think that many people did, maybe a few may have. M.F.: Did she ever try to get you into it? page 53 - Jones Jones: No. I'm too pragmatic for that, (laughter) M.F.: When you left Richmond in 1932, where did you go then? Jones: Here. /_San Francisco/ M.F.: You came here with the YWCA? Jones: Yes. M.F.: And did you start an Industrial Department or come into one that was already set up? Jones: I started one. There had been a reorganization of the YWCA done by a committee of people from the national staff and they had recommended that there be an Industrial Department. They also recommended that I be asked to set it up. It happened that on that committee was a very good friend of mine, needless to say, or otherwise they never would have known that I existed. Then, another friend of mine was asked to come out as a result of that. So, we kept writing back and forth, "Well, I'll go if you'll go." I finally ended here. M.F.: Who was the other friend? Jones: Annie loe Watson who took over the International Institute. She was a marvelous person and did a magnificent job in San Francisco in the social work field, just really a terrific person. M.F.: Did she leave the Y and go into social work? Jones: Well, the International Institute left the Y while she was director, but she was always very active in the social work councils. We all were at the Y, too. That's how we knew each other. M.F.: Did you have trouble deciding to leave Richmond? Jones: I never had trouble deciding to leave anything, (laughter) page 54 - Jones M.F.: It had been good for awhile but you were ready to leave .... Jones: Well, you know, you always want . . .San Francisco was someplace that I had always wanted to be and so I decided that that was the thing to do. And you get stale after awhile, you know, working with the same group. You may introduce many new people to the group but still there is always a big hangover of people that you know intimately and so you always want to move on . M.F.: Well then, when you came out here and set up the Industrial Department, what was the situation here? Did you have the support of a board? Jones: Oh, yes. We had a very good board. M.F.: What were the women involved in, what kinds of industries? Jones: Well, they were practically all trade unionists. They were in the biscuit factories and they were in clothing factories. We helped a lot in organizaing)&amp;gt;demonstrations for a high minimum wage and we watched the women go and come in the Chinatown factories to see how many women carried home goods and couldn't ever find them taking home anything to work on page 55 - Jones and yet we knew that they were cb ing homework. So, we found out what was happening was that the Chinese children would come by from school and put their mothers' homework in their school satchels and take it home. Then we got up early in the morning and had a line of women there from the union and some of us from the Industrial Department and we took the case to court. The case was dismissed because one Chinese woman testified and immediately the case was dismissed. We were furious and we went up to the Attorney General's office and the City Attorney's office and said, "Why this?" He said, "Would you have had me punish that girl? She didn't know what she was saying. She was Chinese, she was having to speak through an interpreter and that wasn't what she was saying at all." This woman was saying that she had never seen homework being taken out and she was very happy with her wages and whatnot. Everybody knew that she couldn't really be saying this truthfully. M.F.: Did you have any relationships with the Chinese women? Jones: Well, we had a Chinese YWCA. M.F.: Was that part of the Industrial Department? I mean, was there a Chinese branch like there was a black branch? page 56 - Jones Jones: There was a Chinese branch, there was a Japanese branch and there was a central branch and the Mission Street branch. M.F.: Well, how did your Industrial Department .... Jones: Well, you could join any one that you wanted to. I took one night in each one. M.F.: I see. So you were Industrial Secretary really for all of these. Jones: Yes. I was head of the Industrial Department and then we brought in an assistant. M.F.: Did you know the Chinese women and talk with them? How did they feel about this group taking the case to court? Jones: Oh, they were delighted. The Chinese women wanted to see it done. M.F.: Were they worried about losing their jobs? Jones: Well, those women were not, because they weren't the ones intimately involved in the garment industry. They were doing other kinds of jobs, restaurants and things like that, but they knew that once you could crack it, you know, you were really helping all of Chinatown. M.F.: So, the women that you were working closest with were not in sweated trades? Jones: Well, one woman was in a very sweated trade. She page 57 - Jones was in one of the garment sweat trades and she went to work when she was nine or something and they used to hide her under the table when the inspectors would come through. So, she really knew the whole inside story of the garment industry. M.F.: And she was trying to get help to crack it? Jones: Yes. You see, even the people that didn't want to lose their jobs, their families even wanted it. They just knew that these people were being imposed upon. I've forgotten what the settlement was. The judge got a settlement for all these people and I've forgotten. It was an enormous amount of money, but they had to pay them for working more hours. M.F.: So, what happened when the one Chinese woman spoke and said that she was very happy and the case was thrown out? Was this another case that you were taking about? Jones: No, that was the same case. M.F.: It was brought back again and settled? Jones: No, no. The judge just went to the division of Industrial Welfare and made the settlement happen. He said, "You've got to get this settlement." So, they did. They went after these factories and got it. They did it that way, I'm sure. It was a long time, I suppose that we must have worked on that case for three or four months and then in the meantime, the ILGWU started organizing and they page 58 - Jones started working in the factories and they got a Chinese union. But still today, the Chinese are not really organized, the garment workers. There is ore union, but there are dozens of shops, as you well know. Only last year, the papers were full of Chinese girls walking out of a factory in this neighborhood just down the hill here. I think that they were being organized and they walked out ... I think that walkout occurred three or four months before there was some settlement. Then there is still not a strong union. The Chinese people are hard to work with in many ways. It's so hard to learn their language, you know. I understood from my Chinese friend down the hill here, who comes by every other day, in fact he was here about twenty minutes before you came, he says that the man who was organizing them did such a poor job of organizing. I don't organizer know whether that's true or not, maybe the -J just couldn't get at the Chinese way of life enough to know how to do it. I don't know. M.F.: When you were working a different night a week with each of these YWCA groups in the thirties, were any of the groups together at all, did they ever meet together? Did the Chinese groups tend to stay together and .... Jones: Oh, the Chinese girls tended to stay together, but not as much as the Japanese. The Japanese group stayed to itself page 59 - Jones more than the others. That, I think, was due really . . .well, there used to be an old saying in our department, "Well, you have to ask the girl's grandmother." The grandmothers really did settle things for them pretty much. Now, we could go to their branch and we could do any of the activities that we wanted, but their grandparents wanted to keep them in the neighborhood. They didn't want tnem running around. The Chinese were much more . . .well, I remember when the war broke out, the Chinese girls were'the first to volunteer to go down and picket the Japanese ships, you know, with all kinds of other girls and all kinds of people in town. The Chinese girls were quick to do that. M.F.: Did the YWCA employ any of the Chinese women or the Japanese women as secretaries? Jones: Oh, yes. All of them were staffed by their nationalities. We also had many Chinese on the staff otherwise. We had dance teachers and various things. I know that our loveliest modern dance teacher when I came out here was a Chinese woman. The national YWCA had a very wonderful Chinese woman who managed the office and was in charge of their national^ office here. M.F.: Was there any interaction between the industrial women that you worked with and the business women in San page 60 - Jones Francisco, was there a business woman's club, too? Jones: Well, I had both in my department. Yes, there was a . . . . (End of Side B of tape 1) M.F.: Had that been the case in Richmond? Jones: Well, you see, the only one there was the Negro branch and we did have meetings, I know that we had meetings, but I don't remember where they were held, but I know that we always had staff meetings together. M.F.: No, I meant between the industrial women and the business women. Jones: In Richmond? I don't know . . .1 really don't know whether we had much interaction or not. I think that we had more friction, really, than interaction, because we would both want the same room the same night . . .(laughter) I think that was it. It had nothing to do with the individuals in the group, it was just that we were always fighting for space in that little building. M.F.: What about in San Francisco, were you involved with clerical workers at all? The organization of clerical workers or office workers? Jones: Well, I wasn't involved in any of it, no. I page 61 - Jones had nothing to do with working with office workers at all while I was here, except in the clubs. But I do know that we had a number of union workers in the clubs, but we weren't involved in tne . . . .I'm sure that we had workers who belonged to Local 3. I don't know whether we had with the other big local or not. I'm not sure. That was so long ago. I think they were just getting underway with the office workers. Office workers are slower, you know, if anything could be slower than southern textiles, it is an office worker. (laughter) M.F.: How long did you stay in San Francisco with the Industrial Department? Jones: I left in '38. M.F.: And why did you leave? Jones: Because I wanted to try and see what it was like down in the Visalia Valley. M.F.: And you were still with the YWCA? Jones: No, I went down with the State Department of which had Welfare / set up an office for agricultural workers in the Visalia Valley, where the Okies were all pouring in. I worked down there for about a year, I guess. Then they cut the staff and I left. M.F.: What was your job? What did you do? Jones: Casework. Admittance for welfare. page 62 - Jones M.F.: What did you think of that, it was a different experience for you? Jones: Oh, it was a wonderful experience. You've read Carey McWilliams' Factories in the Field, it was all during that period of time. First of all, we had a political group that had been meeting at the YWCA fcr months and months and we had elected a man that we thought was going to be a real liberal. That was Olson. On the day of his inauguration, he had a slight stroke or something and his son really took over for him and he became very anti-liberal, really. But at any rate, he had set up this relief situation. So, I thought that it would be good to learn a little something about how you did that. So, I said that I would go down. The first paycheck that I got was so much more than I thought it should have been, it wasn't much I assure you, but it was much more than I thought and so I said, . . .1 went to the director and said, "I don't understand this. I was told that this was what I would make." He said, "Well, go cash this check and they can't take any of it back." gQ ^ went out and cashed the check. The next month, the same story. The next time that I went back, I said, "I think there is something really wrong." He said, "No, they decided that you had enough experience to put you in this category and they just paga 63 - Jones automatically put you in it." I said, "Well, I don't know any more about casework than a jackrabbit. I'm learning on the job." He said, "Well, just forget about it, everybody else is too." M.F.: Did you feel good about what was being done for these people who were going on relief? Jones: Well, you know that at that periodof time we had . . .now, whether this was a state or national law, I think it was national, but all the immigrants that came into California had to prove if they did not have a visa, did not come in properly had to prove that they were here before 1922 or something like that. My main job was to verify the fact that these people had been here and we had all kinds of records that you could look at. I only lost one family that couldn't prove anything. M.F.: Had they come in recently? Jones: We knew they had come in recently. You could usually find something, you could find a funny old picture and say, "There, he worked on the railroad and he was eleven years old." (laughter) So, it was kind of fun. But then when they had to cut staff, I was not due to be cut but there worried. was a man in our office that really was/ well, he was married and had a family and he was going to be cut. I said, "You know, I'm through." I'd learned what I'd page 64 - Jones wanted to know. M.F.: Was anyone there at the time working to try to improve the conditions of farm workers, improve the hours or the pay? Dr. Jones: Yes, we had/Kreps, down at Stanford, and then Dr. Paul we had/Taylor over at the University of California, we had all kinds of groups who were working on the farm labor situation. M.F.: Did you get involved with any of them? Jones: Oh yes, I knew a lot of those people. I wasn't heavily involved because I was employed most of the time, but you know, they would go up and down the state talking with people and getting data so that they could take the case to the legislature or do whatever they thought had to be done about it. Of course, there are still some of the same people, Dr. you still see/Taylor, you know. He's working against this group that has so much land in the Valley, you know, where there which are supposed to be 160 acre farms on / you get your ir rigation free. So, he is really a terrific man. M.F.: Then, when you left the job in the Valley, where did you go? Jones: I can't remember to save my life. I probably came back here and worked for the ... page 65 - Jones Democratic Women's Council, I think. Let's see . . .'38, '39 . . .oh, I worked for the National Youth Organization next. I did a project down in southern California and that didn't last long. That was in a segregated area, oh boy. Practically everbody in my group was Negro, because the town in which theyhad this wouldn't even let . . .no, it was the town that had another project similarto mine that wouldn't let a Negro stay overnight in the town. M.F.: Where was this? Jones: Down in southern California, out of Los Angeles. One of those small communities down there. M.F.: What was your project to do? Jones: Well, we weie teaching girls so that they could get household employment and boys so that they could work on farms. We had a staff, but it was a very poor staff, badly staffed. I didn't last long. I just couldn't take it, it was terrible. So, I came back home and we were getting ready for an election and I worked with the Democratic Women's group in working on that election. M.F.: Were you a big New Deal supporter or a big Roosevelt supporter? Jones: Oh, yes. I worked in all his campaigns. Then I went on the OPA for awhile as the acting consumer representative page 66 - Jones in the western states. That was the vilest job, it was a most reactionary group. M.F.: Why, what did they do? Jones: They didn't want price control, but they were running it, you know. M.F.: Did they make sure that it didn't work? Jones: I think they did. (laughter) They certainly made sure that I didn't work. I just got so mad that I quit. Then I worked in the Health Department for awhile, I mean the Army's health department, sending shipments overseas (drugs and whatnot). M.F.: Did you ever join the Army? Jones: No. I wasn't in the Army, I was just in the health department. Then I went back to the Southern school. The only way that you could get out of a war job, you know, was if you were going back to teaching. Did you know that? M.F.: No. Jones: Well, in California that was true, the only way that you could leave on your own, you had to have a good excuse. Either illness or your family needed you or you could go to be a teacher because we had such a shortage of teachers. So, I said I was going to teach and went back to the Southern School for page 67 - Jones Workers. (laughter) M.F.: I was wondering how you were contacted about becoming the director? Jones: Well, Louise had known me for a long time. She wrote to me asd asked me. M.F: Had you been good friends? Jones: We were friends, we weren't close friends, but friends, yes. I had known her and had known her husband and I would say that we were good friends in one way, but not very close friends. I didn't know her background or family or anything until I moved to New York later after she had left. M.F.: Did you know anything about why she decided to r esign? Jones: I haven't the faintest idea. I have a feeling, and now this, I'm not at all sure about, but I have a feeling that she thought that the summer school plan wasn't quite sufficient. Because when she wrote to me she said something in terms of the effect that the board was thinking of setting up an office in the South from which they could conduct education in \arious communities. I never would have gone to work in the Southern Summer School because I didn't belie/e in spending all that amount of money for one six week experience for one person from a community. I just thought that it was wasted money. Now, page 68 - Jones that's an awful thing to say because I think that our Bryn Mawr girls did an awful lot for the labor movement, but somehow in the South, this going back to where you had no unions to connect with . . .to me, it seemed . . .well, I 'm glad to hear that so many people did feel that it meant a whole new life fijr them. M.F.: But it was still an individual experience rather experience eventually than being a community/and a lot of those people/left their c ommunity. Jones: Yes, I know they did. In fact, some of them did end up in the labor movement as organizers and doing very good jobs . . .I've often been so proud of Polly, I'm so glad she lost her job at Amalgamated. Did she ever tell you how she lost her job? M.F.: No. Gladys Jones: She walked into/Dickinson's office one day with a Wallace pin on and,oh boy, Dickinson had a fit and had her fired. So, I heard that she had lost her job and I called about six or eight people on our board and said, "Let's hire her." They said, "O.K., go ahead, we'll take your word for it." I sent her a telegram, "Stop by Richmond on your way home." She did. M.F.: How did you first meet her? page 69 - Jones Jones: I haven't the faintest idea. I had been back in the South for two years with the Southern School. I suppose that I met her through Southern School things. I just don't know where we first met. M.F.: After McLaren resigned and you took over in 1944, what was her lelationship to the school after that? Jones: Well, I don't know that there was any relationship, really. M.F.: Did she support your work or help you in the transition? Jones: Oh, she gave me names of people, you know, that she thought would be interested. She came to several of the . you see, I used to have to go to New York and raise money every year, she gave me names of several people and she would go to some of the meetings. M.F.: What kind of work did she go on to do after she left the school? Jones: Frankly, I don't remember. There was some job somewhere but I've forgotten where it was. Then she worked with ALES, you know. M.F.: The board actually made the decision to move to Richmond in '42. Do you know wny they decided to move to Richmond in particular, and to have an office in the South? page 70 - Jones Do you know of any other people on the board who might have thought, as you said you did, that the Southern Summer School setup was really not effective? Jones: I don't know and I didn't know that they made that decision in '42. You must hae gotten that from the papers. I didn't know that, because it was '44 before she w rote me. M.F.: When she wrote you, had they already decided to go to Richmond? Jones: Well, I don't think so. I think that I decided Richmond. I think that there wee a number of places they were thinking about. I thought that Richmond was where you could get more leadership to bring in when you needed something done. M.F: When you returned to the South, was it difficult for you after you had been on the West Coast for so long? Jones: No, not at all. M.F.: Were you able to pick up a lot of the contacts that you had had in Richmond before? Jones: I picked up several of them and then I just plain got* so busy that a lot of them, I didn't hold. M.F.: Were you sort of working in a different group than you had been before? page 71 - Jones Jone s: Yes. M.F.: What was your relationship to the YWCA during the years you were with the Southern School? Jones: I was on the board, as I said, until they fired this person . . .then we discovered that they dropped the Industrial Committees, so that was the end of that. There wae one or two people who were on the staff there that I was friends with all that time, but I didn't do anything with t hem. M.F.: You left the board when they dropped the Industrial Department? Jones: I wasn't on the board, I was on the committee, the Industrial Committee. They just got rid of us, you see, by dropping the department. I don't know whether they dropped the department or just got rid of the secretary. I never did know. And to tell you the truth, by that time I was so much more involved with the other organizations in Richmond that I was working with. M.F.: Was Eleanor Copenhaver involved with that? Jones: I don't think so. She may have been, but I'm not sure. M.F.: When you first became director of the school in '44, who were the people who were most helpful to you in page 72 - Jones getting started? Jones: Well, I don't know really. I don't know. One of the YWCA secretaries helped me find a location, made me stay with her until I found housing and until I found an office. M.F.: Who was that? Jones: Elizabeth Richardson. She died many years ago. She was never known as being a liberal, she was a true Virginia^ you know, traditional, but she was a very good friend of mine and some of my friends from West Hampton College were glad to have me home and came to see me and things like that. But as to helping me get started, I just don't remember anybody helping me get started. I don't think that I wanted anybody to help me get started. (laughter) M.F.: What was your relationship with Mary Barker? Did she stay on as chairman of the board? Jones: Yes, for a year, I think, at least. Then we elected Dr. Davis, who was at William and Mary. M.F.: Was she in ill health and planned to resign? Jones: Yes. M.F.: Did you have contact with her over the years that you were running the school? Jones: I always wrote to her and heard from her, but I don't think that I ever saw her but maybe once. I spent one page 73 - Jones evening in her home with the three sisters and . . .1 guess maybe twice, but that was all. M.F.: Did you consciously try to move the school in new directions from what it had been doing before? For example, in interracial work, they had never accepted black students at the Summer School and you did so much with interracial work in Richmond. Jones: Well, you see by this time, the unions had kind of broken the patterns, too. Now, the AF of L unions, they were still in separate unions but in the CIO, they were in the same union, although often they were segregated within the same union, as you well know. I wasn't consciously trying to break any patterns. I was trying to see if we could train leadership for the unions so that they knew what they were getting. That's the thing that was uppermost in my mind, to try and see that they could push themselves ahead through their unions. M.F.: Were the unions still expanding at a rapid rate, the people that you were working with were new union members? Jones: Absolutely new and even some of the unions that had been established for a longer period of time didn't really have very educational union meetings. The president and the officers would kind of run the union. You know that there are some unions that still do that. So, I was very much interested page 74 - Jones in our trying to build democratic unions and teaching people how to run union meetings and how to settle grievances, how to speak from the floor. You know, we would get all kinds of little mimeographed pamphlets on what the functions of a union committee were and so forth and so on. Then, all the unions begin using them, you know, so we begin to lessen our using them and use theirs for their own purposes. But the only new thing that we did really in the school was to start the"S chools of Government" and try to get them more literate so that they could really understand how you got the kind of legislation that you needed to get. M.F.: Did you feel that the work of the school in the past had been spread over too large a geographic area and you wanted to concentrate on a smaller area? Jones: I didn't really know enough about the school in the past. I visited that one day and that was all that I knew . . .but we sent people to the school from Richmond and they would come back but they weren't involved in unions. I don't remember them being very involved in the Industrial Department Have you seen Jesse Smith in Richmond? M.F.: No. Jones: I don't know whether she went to the school or page 75 - Jones not, whether she went to the school or went to Bryn Mawr. I don't know which. Her name is Jesse Moseley, incidentally. She is the one of the old club girls that I still hear from. Mrs. Douglas Moseley in Richmond, Virginia. She wasn't terribly excited about the moving of the office to Richmond. I kept up the relationship, but by that time,she was married and had a child and was not as involved in things, but we were always very good friends. She worked in the Ligget and Myers tobacco factory for many, many years. M.F.: Did any of the workers associated with the school after 1944 sort of learn the history of the school? Did any of them know, for example that it had been founded for women workers originally? Jones: Well, I'm sure they must have known it because carried all of our publicity / "formerly Southern School for Women Workers" and so forth. I don't think that most of them really connected it with a school. This was more union activity in their minds, because we went into the union halls to have most of the things that we did. When we went to Washington, we took the problems that they had found in their unions to look up our Congressmen or to look up the committee that worked on that problem. I learned more from those schools of government page 76 - Jones than I ever knew from any trade union office in my life. I took a group of lumber workers up during the first school of government. There were two or three of them and so we decided that one of the things we wanted to do was to find out about unemployment compensation and about workmen's compensation. So, we set up these meetings and one of the men came to me and said, "Do you know, I've learned something that is going to save my union millions of dollars." I said, "What do you mean?" He said, "We didn't know that if a man was killed on the job that his family could have compensation. We are taking care of the wives of three men who were killed last year on the job." I tell you, it is just that kind of thing that just knocks you . . .how little . . .now, it's true that their international unionman came in perhaps once every two or three months and looked at them and gave them a speech, collected their dues and went out. But they had never told them about their rights as workers, they didn't know and of course, they were Negroes and so nobody in the town was going to look them up and tell them. M.F.: Did you work with both AF of L and CIO unions? Jones: Not many AF of L unions. M.F.: In the papers, it sort of comes out that a goal of yours was to sort of bridge those two groups. page 77 - Jones Jones: Well, we tried to get them together, but they didn't really . . . There were some CIO unions that wouldn't work with me. They weren't going to hae anything to do with"Brownie Lee Jones, she was a Communist 1' I heard about that and I wrote to Phil Murray and I said, "Now, this is one of your field workers that is doing this and I am going to blast him all over the newspapers if you don't stop this." I tell you, it was cleaned up right away. But you know some of their union men were no better than the hidebound old guys in the AF of L. They just had the power in their hands and they had an ignorant group of workers and they wanted to keep them that way. I'll never forget a union . . .1 won't name this one because it is one of the real progressive unions, but one of the unions that I worked with, the union members had never seen a copy of their contract and I was called in to give them a shop steward's course and I said, "Where is the contract?" Well, they didn't have a contract. "Well, how do you know when you have a grievance?" "Well, we just go to complain about it. If somebody is hurt, we go and complain about it." I said, "You don't know?" I tell you, their international representative just blasted me for calling for the contract. He said that it wasn't anybody's business outside of the union to see that page 78 - Jones contract and he wasn't going to give it to me. M.F.: Did you ever come between workers and the hierarchy in the union? Jones: No, theonly thing I ever had to do in any relationship like that was when a worker would come into my office bleeding and he wanted me to take him to workmen's compensation, the office, you know. M.F.: Why did he come to your office? Jones: Because he didn't know any place else to go. So, I would call Mr. Pugh and say, "Mr. Pugh, So-and-So is here from Norfolk and he has been injured. Shall I take him over to Workmen's Compensation?" So, I'd take him over there and they would say, "You can't represent this man, you're not in his Mr. union." I'd say, "You call Mr. Pugh." They would call/Pugh. That was the only good thing Mr. Pugh ever stood for, he would see that I got that kind of a chance to help workers out. M.F.: What was his position? Jones: He was the head of the CIO in Virginia. M.F.: Did you have a good relationship with him? Jones: Yes. He was cordial and good but he never did page 79 - Jones anything particularly for us. He didn't interview any of the new people or anything erf that kind. When the PAC people were coming through, you know, he would ask me if they could use one of our small offices and he would come in and see them and be very genial and nice, you know. He was an older man and his fire was kind of burned out. (laughter) M.F.: Who were the best supporters you had among the CIO in Richmond, or in the South. Jones: Boyd Payton, Dan Powell, Paul Christopher and . . .oh .... M.F.: Dan Powell, what was his position? Jones: CIO-PAC. Let's see, Paul Christopher, what was he doing . . .1 don't know. Boyd Payton, of course, was textiles and then the woodworkers man, I've forgotten his name. He's left that area, now. The International Woodworkers of America and the paperworkers' Education Director,*Nat Goldfinger recently who was / on the national staff of the CIO . . .those were all very good friends of mine. M.F.: Were they really looking to you to sort of fill in as an educational department for a lot of the CIO unions? Jones: Well you see, the unions sent money to us until they begin to hire their own educational directors and then of course, they didn't do it and that's when we really realized *Just read in paper a few days ago that he had died. page 80 - Jones that we were just doing their job for them and unless we could get enough support from the labor movement, it was useless to try and drag it all out of liberals. You see, the Rosenwald Fund gave us a good break. M.F.: Why do you think that the CIO unions started setting up their own educational departments? Jones: Well, some of the AF of L had too, you know. M.F.: Right. Why did both of them do that rather than going with independent labor schools? Jones: Because there is a good deal of difference in the way unions are run and I think they wanted to be sure that their people get what they want them to have, to tell the truth. It is just like Catholics want to send their children to a Catholic school. M.F.: When you were involved with the Tidewater OPA project, was it much like the work that you had done in California earlier, were the same sort of people in price administration in Virginia? Jones: What do you mean in Tidewater? Do you mean . M.F.: There was a consumer education program or price control program that you were trying to get set up ... . Jones: I don't remember doing that. You must have me mixed up with somebody else. page 81 - Jones M.F.: No, I just remember reading a little bit about a Tidewater OPA project that was going on that the school worked with in some way or supported. Jones: Well, we went to all kinds of government hearings up and down Virginia and we brought workers in to testify, but I don't remember anything on price support, but we could easily have done it. Or it could have happened with some of the other staff and I wasn't even thoroughly aware of it. M.F.: Were you involved in cost of living programs? Jones: Oh yes, we did a lot of that, but that was related to minimal wages, federal and state. M.F.: Trying to get more minimum wages rather than trying to control prices? Jones: Yes. I remember that we had one wonderful hearing in Richmond, just marvelous and then we went down with the textile workers and put on two more, one in Durham and one in Winston-Salem . . .I don't know. M.F.: What was the response to those programs? Jones: Well, the workers were excited about it, but the thing that was interesting was that in Richmond, we had such a wide range of people who spoke for it, among the ordinary citizens I mean, among which one was a Catholic priest. So, when that got out . . .first of all, the CIO sent us a hundred page 82 - Jones and fifty dollars for us to hire someone to take verbatim the whole thing, you know, and then they typed it up and it was all sent around to various unions. So, the unions saw that we had this Catholic priest and a couple of protestant ministers and people like that and that's why textiles wanted to start theirs. But I had an awful time getting a Catholic priest someplace, I've forgotten where it was, one of those places. I couldn't find anybody who really knew a Catholic priest, but we finally found one. M.F.: Were people in the community opposed to having minimum wage hearings? Did you have any trouble from industry? Jones: No, no. Not at all. Even our own representative from Virginia came down to the hearing, a Congressional representative. There may have been . . .well, I know that Reynolds, the Reynolds company, one of the sons told me that he would testify. Well, when the time came near he called and said that he couldn't do it. I knew that something had happened. M.F.: But they didn't try to stop the hearings? Jones: No, they didn't try to stop it at all, no; M.F.: I wondered what kind of support you recieved from churches in Richmond for the school? Jones: I never much went about churches . . .1 don't know. page 83 - Jones M.F.: Did you receive some support from individual ministers? I remember reading about a Reverend John McKinnon from the Unitarian Church. Jones: Well, if there were any, it would have been the Unitarian Church because that is where two or three of my friends went, Mrs. Hill and her sister and Ann Gellman . . .and then the rabbi, one of the Jewish rabbis was very interested in the school, but I don't know whether you could call it support. They didn't do anything for you, they were always pleasant, you know. M.F.: What about working class churches, did they ever support the group? Jone s: No. M.F.: What about black churches? Jones: Well, black churches did because they were all interested in politics and we were working with the NAACP on getting people to vote. M.F.: Didn't you hold some of the voter registration schools in black churches? Jones: Yes. The Longshoreman's school down in Norfolk was in a church and I think one or two of the others. One was in a protestant white church, but there were Negroes in that class I don't remember where that was, but it page 84 - Jones was in one of the working class districts in South Richmond. M.F.: Did you have any feelings for the differences in t he ways that black churches reacted to a union and the way that white churches acted toward a union? Jones: I think the black churches reacted very differently to the CIO unions, from the white churches. Because they realized that in the CIO they were not segregated, that they were trying very hard not to be. M.F.: So, they would have encouraged and even tried to help t heir members get into a CIO union? Jones: Yes. I think that's very true. And of course, we had quite, oh I would say twelve or fourteen people from the NAACP and the Urban League and the unions who worked quite closely together on the political aspect, on the poll tax thing. We worked like dogs on that from one year to the next. It wasn't a consciously done thing, I think that the CIO unions were just more receptive to the Negro and therefore, the people talked about them more. I mean, among the Negro clergy and the Negro church people. I know one AF of L union in Richmond told me once that there "would never be a nigger" in their union and that after all, "they were a very selective union and only their own sons could ever become a member of the union, " or something like that. page 85 - Jones M.F.: A really old craft union? Jones: Yes, a really old craft union. I was just shocked about that, it was the first time that had ever been said outright, where somebody was boasting about it. I'm sure that union is long gone because they only had twenty-five members. M.F.: A little too exclusive. (laughter) Did you work with some of the black AFL unions? Jones: Oh,yes. M.F.: How were they treated within the structure of the AF of L? Were any of them trying to change over to join the CIO? Jones: Many of the white members of the AF of L Tobacco Workers Union saw no reason for them being segregated, they would have liked to have been together, but there weren't enough of them that would have liked for them to be together. That was all. But some of the nicest friendships that I saw in the labor movement were between white women and black and white . . .black and white men and women in the Tobacco Workers union. They knew each other, they respected each other, they talked their grievances over together, they really were good friends. It was really a lot of fun to watch them working on something. M.F.: And these were in the AF of L Tobacco Workers Union? Jones: Yes. Of course, they had a very liberal president, page 86 - Jones you know. M.F.: Who was that? Jones: John O'Hare. I think that's his name. Wasn't he on our board? I think that he was. M.F.: Well, were they a real exception to the rule, sort of a moderate between the two groups? Jones: . . .(looking at document) I know that he was on the board, but I don't know when this was done . . . John O'Hare. Maybe he was on the advisory committee. Oh, here. Yes. He was the son of a coal miner and was really a very fine man, a wonderful guy. M.F.: How did the AFL international, the people who were employed by the international react to the CIO unions coming out for integration and the possibility of integration within AF of L unions in an area like Richmond? Jones: I don't know. Some of them would make cracks about my working with both blacks and whites in the same place and so forth and so on. Those were local union people, the heads of the locals, you know. There were three or four that really went out of their way to be a little nasty about it. But in general, they ignored us, you know. You see, we never worked with a union that didn't ask us to work with page 87 - Jones them. So, if they didn't want us, they didn't have to have us. M.F.: When you were working on the poll tax campaign, did you ever work with Virginia Durr on that? Jones: Well, in the Southern Conference, I did. And that was when I was working in Richmond in the YWCA, 'way back then, you know. When we were working here in the poll tax, it was much later and I saw Virginia once or twice, but I don't think that we were working on the same project. M.F.: Were you around when she was running for governor of Virginia? Jones: No. That was in ... . M.F.: That was in '48. Jones: "48? I didn't even remember that. M.F.: Yes, on the Progressive ticket. Jones: I didn't remember that. M.F.: Did you work at all in the Wallace campaign? Jones: I went to the Wallace meetings at Norfolk where we . . .almost all of us, about three or four thousand people, almost all of us, if they had had enough police, would have been a rrested. We were determined to make it a black and white meeting and not separate seating or anything. The police tried page 88 - Jones to keep us out but we came on in and they ringed around the back of the building and so the chairman of the meeting called on*Charlie Webber to pray . . .(laughter) . . .Charlie prayed and prayed. I'll never forget that. He prayed and prayed and the police didn't have the heart. They just folded up and went away. (laughter) Then Wallace came on. That was so funny. M.F.: Were you a real fan of his? Jones: No, I wasn't and I advised him not to run. I was one of the people who protested his running. M.F.: Did you know him? Jones: Well, he gathered a group of us together, about twenty people, after that meeting and he asked . . .no, it was before that meeting . . .1 said, "I don't think that you have a chance, we haven't got enough people, you will never get votes in the South." He said, "You don't favor my running?" I said, "No, I don't." M.F.: It wasn't because you weren't on his side politically? Jones: No, I knew that he didn't have a chance and I thought that he would nnly create enough disturbance that we would probably lose to the Republicans and I was just *The Rev. Charles Webber, who worked in the state CIO office on political actions. page 89 - Jones determined that I didn't want to see that happen (End of Side A of tape 2) (Note: Some of the original transcript has been omitted here in retyping. It is a discussion about Helen Baker, SSW staff member, and her son.) M. F.: Well, you said while we were having coffee that you had been the head of a Socialist Party group in Richmond . . . Jones: No, I said that I was the secretary. page 90 - Jones M.F.: Secretary, I'm sorry. I beg your pardon. That was when you were there with the YWCA in the late 20s and early 30s. When you were back, what was the political situation in Richmond? Jones: Well, the political situation in Richmond in the period from '44 to '50 was a very muddled picture, you know. We were having all these . . .1 really don't know how to explain it. We were having several cases brought before the courts on poll tax and that was when Battle and all that group were carrying around in Virginia. It was really a muddled political picture. As far as voting was concerned, we weren't getting people on the rolls to vote for people, we were getting them on there to show that they could vote. That was our intention. M.F.: Did you have any feeling or grasp at all for the hope of any kind of political organization at all in Virginia? JOnes: Well, we had a Voters League among the Negroes, you know, a very good one. They did a lot of that. Now, I checked out of the partisan politics part of that. All I did was work on the poll tax business. I suppose . . .well, I know that the PAC always had their slate of people, but even then, I didn't work CIO-PAC from the standpoint of the people. I worked to see that workers knew what they were page 91 - Jones voting for or what the issues were. M.F.: Were you supporting particular pieces of legislation as opposed to individuals? Jones: Yes, much more, and using letter writing campaigns a nd that kind of thing, teaching them to use their abilities to get what they wanted, if they could just get enough of them w orking on it. M.F.: Tell me a little bit about the CIO-PAC group and who was active in it, who you worked with in particular and how it was set up nationally and how it was run locally? Jones: Well, I know nationally, there is the CIO PAC department and on that group, Dan Howell was one of the people in the South who was a paid person there, Henry Moon . . .did you ever hear his name? NAACP . . .Henry Moon was a paid person there and Ann Mason. Now, they came down to the South and set up PAC statewide and we had PAC conventions you know, once staff a year. Then, the national/would come in and there would be a discussion of issues and candidates. And even then, there wasn't any wide system of supporting out of dues and then later on it became a system where you paid so much each year for each member for PAC. But at that time, I don't remember anything like that . . .there could have been . . . M.F.: That was fed in through the unions . . .there weren't people who belonged just to CIO-PAC? page 92 - Jones Jones: Well, there were some individuals who . . .but unless you were a union member, you didn't have any voice. M.F.: For example, were you a member? Jones: No . . .I'm a member of the teacher's union. M.F.: So, you were a member of a union? Jones: I could have been a member of PAC, yes, and of course . . .well, when the poll tax books were ready, they came into the Southern School office and sometimes the national would send two people down to work on it and maybe two people would come from the state office and they would come and go t hrough all the poll tax books and see where their memberships stood in paid up polls. M.F.: The poll tax books? Who kept them? Jones; They were kept by the state. M.F.: How did you arrange to have them come through your office? Jones: The CIO arranged that. I don't know how they got them. I suppose they just paid for them. I think that you can pay for a poll tax book. M.F.: Oh, you could just get a copy? Jones: Yes. Not their official book, you know, but a copy and then everybody would check their membership lists against the books and when they had checked the ones that were voters and the others were not, then you knew what you had to page 93 - Jones work with. There were two years that a professor from one of the Eastern colleges . . .Anttoch, came down, he and his wife, and we just had two little tiny offices and he shared one of these tiny offices with us and they checked the poll tax books for most of the unions. M.F.: When you say that you checked the books and found out who had paid and who had not and who you had to work with therefore, what did working with those people mean? Jones: It meant really getting them to pay their poll taxes. And of course, you know that if you paid your poll tax every year it was a dollar and a half. If you didn't pay them every year, it was five dollars, if you let three years go by that you didn't pay them, you put up five dollars. There were many people who had to put up as much as five dollars to get on the books. M.F.: Was there any way to help those people get that money? Wasn't that a lot of money for people to have to pay? Jones: Well, I know lots of people who helped other people do it. I did myself for many cases. M.F.: Well, the thing that I think I'm trying to understand page 94 - Jones is that at the same time that you were fighting to have the poll tax rescinded, you were still trying to get people to pay it. Jones: Well, you could only get it rescinded if you got enough people to vote to rescind it. M.F.: Oh, I see. Jones: And it wasn't an "either/or", it was a "both/and." M.F.: I've wondered if in your work with the unions you wae ever interested in planning or helping them to plan programs just particularly for women workers within the union? Jones: We didn't think about women. I don't remember ever thinking about men and women being different. Never in my life. M.F.: Well, the only reason that I ask that is because of all work that you've done in the YWCA. Jones: I know, but even so. M.F.: Well, you wete working with women then. Didn't you think about it then? Jones: No. They were just people. (laughter) We always had lots of boyfriends and the husbands would come to supper with them and their boyfriends would come. M.F.: Were there any programs . . .or was there even a page 95 - Jones a problem at that time in Richmond with getting women into the unions? Or once they joined, getting them to participate in the unions? Jones: Well, I think that there has always been that problem and there still is today. Women do not participate as much in unions as men do. M.F.: Why do you think that is? Jones: Well, I think that they just have so much else to do. You work hard all day and you go home ad you have to feed the family, wash the dishes and get ready for the next day. I don't think that it is any reason of not wanting to, I think that it is pretty much a question of . . .most unions, where they are in a high paid job, the women, I'm sure, are practically as active as the men. But most of the unions, for women, are not high paid jobs. You know that. They are the 1 esser paid places. M.F.: I wondered if during that period from '44 to '50, you were at all aware of women losing their jobs after the war, even though you were working primarily with people in unions at that time? Being pushed out as men came home. Jones: Well, you know that in the South that wasn't so true, because women's work has always been textiles and page 96 - Jones tobacco and that kind of thing and they weren't pushed out because they hadn't taken any man's piece. But now in San Francisco, had I been here, I'm sure that I would have seen a lot of that, because women were pushed out here. In fact, there are only twelve shipyard workers left of the three or four hundred that worked in the Todd Shipyard down here. M.F.: There are twelve left? Jones: Yes. That was written up in one of our papers t he other day. M.F.: Were any of the unions in Richmond that you were working with especially responsive to the needs of women workers? For example, were any of them working on getting nurseries set up or trying to get women to participate in the unions? Jones: I think that Boyd Patton, probably more than any one person in the South that I know was concerned about what was happening to women workers and about their children. I don't think that he had any projectin mind, but he was just concerned about them. M.F.: Was there any clue as to why he was? Jones: Well, probably because he had children of his own, you know. I don't know. M.F.: Was the CIO . . .of course, it's pretty well known that the CIO was concerned about getting black members in unions page 97 - Jones and nonsegregated unions. Did they have the same kind of feeling at all about women? Was it a policy, or was it more that they were interested in integration and getting blacks into it? Jones: Well, I think that the CIO tried to get everybody in a union, black white, male, female, young and old. I think there effort was to try to get as close to a hundred percent membership as you coid get. Weren't they the first unions to start the idea that if you didn't belong to the union, you had to pay the equivalent of union dues? To the union, because they protected your rights. I think that was on the basis that that way you would really begin to get a hundred percent of the people in. Now, I'm not sure that they were the first union to do it, but I know that when it was done it was thought that would bring everybody in. M.F.: I remember reading about some discussion groups that t he Southern School held in 1944 with representatives from the unions, women workers from these unions and also representatives from community women's clubs. I think that the League of Women Voters and the YWCA and the National Association of University Women and the American Association of Social Workers and the National Council of Jewish Women all page 98 - Jones came. Do you remember that at all? I think that the decision was that they were going to oppose the ERA, which was coming up as an issue, the Equal Rights Amendment, and I just wondered if you remembered that. Jones: I don't remember that. I think that it must have been a meeting at the YWCA with all these people there, but I just don't know . . .'44. M.F.: Do you remember the ERA even being disucssed? Jones: Oh, I remember having discussion s about it, yes. M.F.: How did industrial women look at the ERA, the women in the unions? Jones: Well, it wasn't very much discussed among the women in the union. They were too busy with other things, but you know, it's the state clubwomen who have been more involved in that, don't you think, all the way through. at I can remember when I was working/ALES, we just began to see the beginning of militancy among women workers in unions. I remember two women's conferences we had where, really, I was just excited about how militant the women had begun to be on certain problems. M.F.: What were they angry about? Jones: Well, they weren't angry, they were just determined that they were really going to carry their load and they were going to carry it and carry it well. What was good for men was page 99 - Jones good for them too, you know. M.F.: I just wondered if at this point, in 1944, if there was any feeling that ever got to be very strong or notcieable on the part of women in trade unions or industrial women, that if the ERA was passed, protective legislation that they had would be taken away? Jones: I don't think they thought about that. Really, I think that has been introduced by the opposition since the movement has gotten strong. I don't think that at that time anybody felt that that would mean a loss of jobs for women. See, we were still a country expanding at that time, we weren't closing down like we are now. M.F.: Right. Did you think that women working within the labor movement like the women who worked with the schools, thelabor schools, but also the women who worked as organizers or who worked for the CIO, were more or less effective because they were women? Or was it completely irrelevant? Jones: I just never have thought about being a woman and I don't know if I thought about my friends being women. I just really . . .I am the least conscious of any person I know about the women's movement. I just haven't the faintest interest in women's liberation. I've always been liberated. Everyone says, "But you know that you were discriminated against." Well, I didn't feel it. Maybe I was, I don't know. I suppose page 100 - Jones that men made bigger salaries. I know that educators in the unions made far more money than any of the rest of us ever did. But that wasn't because we were women and they were men, it was because we didn't have the money and they had it. M.F.: Did you know any women well, ever, who worked as organizers for unions? Jones: Yes, I knew several. M.F.: Were any of them working in the South? Or where were they working? Jones: Well, no, there weren't many women working in the South. Not very many and I don't remember any distinctly. There was one, Clara somebody. She worked for Amalgamated. M.F.: Hutchinson? Jones: No. You are thinking about a prominent woman, this was a young girl. Clara . . .she spent Christmas with me once. I asked her what she wanted us to do for Christmas and she said, "Let's have a Christmas tree. I'm Jewish and we've never had one." (laughter) So, we had a Christmas tree. Oh, she was a wonderful kid. Now, she had a hard time in the labor movement because she felt discriminated against. I know she did, but I can't remember her name to save my life. M.F.: Why would she articulate feeling discriminated against? page 101- Jones Jones: Well, because they were always sending her into very difficult kind of situations, you know, where she thoughfe men. . .their excuse was that she had patience, you know. But she used to feel that they really exploited her by sending her to very difficult situations. M.F.: Do you remember Polly's reaction when she worked with Amalgamated, or her feeling about Amalgamanted? Jones: Oh, I remember when she got fired, you know. M.F.: But that was for her politics. Jones: Yes. I don't remember her feeling about Amalgamated, do you know? Did she tell you about it? M.F.: Well, she talked a little bit about being sent into areas like Louisville, Georgia where there was a little tiny plant and she went into the town and they thought that s he was a prostitute and the guy kept sending men up to her room in her hotel. That was her story. (laughter) Jones: I don't know, I never heard that. M.F.: How about Lucy Mason, when she worked with the CIO, do you think that she had an advantage not only being a Mason and a Randolph, but a woman, maybe? Jones: Yes, I do. M.F.: Did she exploit that in the same way that she did the dher? page 102 - Jones Jones: Well, you know, unconsciously. It's done. M.F.: What about the other women that you said you knew who wae organizers? Jones: Well, I knew Esther Petersen, God knows she's never been discriminated against. She has gotten as high as any woman I know in the labor movement has ever reached. M.F.: Do you think that she would have gone higher if she had been a man? U.S. Jones: No, she was head of the/women's Division of the Labor Dept. U.S. / and I don't think that the average man would get to be head of that part of the iaborDepartment. Do you think he would? Let me see . . .Jennie Matyas I don't think that Jennie ever felt exploited. Rose Pesota never did. Did you ever know Rose? She was a dressmaker. She might have been exploited, I don't know. It's been so long since I isad the book about her life. Jennie Matyas i know has never been exploited. She lives here, she was with ILG and is still on their board. M.F.: What is her last name? Jones: Matyas . . .well, that's her unmarried name. Her name is Jennie Charters. She's in the Sequoias here page 103 - Jones now. M.F.: What about .... Jones: I'm trying to think . . .1 can't remember any others than those. Oh, I remember the office workers group down here. The San Francisco group, we used to know them very well, but I don't think they . . .1 think that those women in the union, you know that it is a woman's union predominantly and so they can get as high as any man could get at any time and I don't think that they have ever felt that they were downgraded. Although, the AFL-CIO labor journal here has stories all the time about the women's movement, you know, about women's rights. M.F.: Do you think that the women you knew who worked as organizers perhaps had to . . .well, let me rephrase that. A lot of the people in the South as organizers, say the TWOC group for a very short time, they didn't stay with it very long. It seems to me that the life of an organizer in many ways is sort of . . .it involves a lot of travel, it involves maybe not even being able to have a permanent home, certainly something that would be difficult to do with a child. Jones: Well, I think that's true even without children. You know, most women really do want to have a home of their own. 156 Labor unions--Officials and employees--Southern States. Women labor union members. National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. Southern Summer School for Women Workers in Industry (U.S.) AFL-CIO. No None 0 Yes No No No Unknown Sound Text Interview with Brownie Lee Jones by Mary Frederickson, 20 April 1976 G-0030, in the Southern Oral History Program Collection #4007, Southern Historical Collection, Wilson Library, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill #4007, Southern Oral History Program, http://www.lib.unc.edu/mss/inv/s/Southern_Oral_History_Program_Collection.html University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Library. Southern Historical Collection. University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill /dc/sohp/ http://dc.lib.unc.edu:80/cdm/ref/collection/sohp/id/11114 2016-05-05 2016-05-05 11114 11156.cpd /sohp/image/11156.cpd..