 Story_ID: 40694 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Amelia Ashley Ward, A-M-E-L-I-A A-S-H-L-E-Y hyphen Ward, W-A-R-D. Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: September 17, 1957, Magnolia, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Newspaper publisher. Speaker 1: Okay, and what newspaper is it? Speaker 2: The Sun-Reporter Publishing Company Group. Speaker 1: Okay, which includes several papers, right? Speaker 2: The Sun-Reporter is our flagship; it's published on Thursday. The California Voice, the oldest black paper west of the Rockies, is published every Sunday, then we have our seven metro papers--the Metro Reporter Group--Oakland, Richmond, Berkeley, San Francisco, Stockton, San Joaquin, Vallejo [California]. Speaker 1: All right. And ma'am, what is today's date? Speaker 2: November 4th, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at the Radisson Hotel, 5000 Sierra Point Parkway in Brisbane [California]. Story_ID: 40695 Speaker 1: All right. Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask that only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter)--What would be my favorite food? Fish; I love fried fish. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: When it's cold, so probably the fall--late fall, early--yeah, winter. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Vegas. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Fake it until you can make it (laughter). Story_ID: 40696 Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Louise James Ashley, L-O-U-I-S-E J-A-M-E-S A-S-H-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 25th, 1940 in Magnolia, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. And what do you know about her side of the family? How far back (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--My mom's side? Speaker 1: Emm hmm. Speaker 2: Not that far; I just know about her parents--and that's about it. Speaker 1: Well what did they do for a living, and what are the stories about them? Speaker 2: My mom's mom was a housekeeper. I think back in Mississippi, she worked at a couple of hotels and did some maid work to support the family. My grandfather was a barber, and he was well-known in the town; everybody went to him to get his hair--to get their hair cut, and my mom and her siblings didn't really, really have a rough life because, you know, my grandparents worked, so that's basically what--they were really, really Christians in the Baptist tradition back then, small town, but everybody knew everybody. Speaker 1: Okay. Where is Magnolia located in relationship to say Jackson [Mississippi] or-- Speaker 2: It's about a hundred miles, I think, south of Jackson-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but when we fly in to Magnolia, we don't fly in to Jackson, Mississippi, the large airport; we fly in to New Orleans [Louisiana] and then we drive about an hour and a-half to get to Magnolia; that's always been the easiest. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And why is that? Speaker 2: I don't know, that's--I mean that's just what we've always done with the family, so I've kinda followed suit throughout the years. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So orientation is more towards (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, I think we had a lot of relatives in New Orleans. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So--now what was life like for your mother growing up in Magnolia? Speaker 2: Mom--like I said, if they were poor, they really didn't realize it. She was the oldest, she had two younger sisters, my mother went to Pike County High School, she met my father [Amile Ashley] who was right up the street in McComb, Mississippi, about twelve miles away, she was a majorette--very beautiful, shapely woman, my father was a sports star; he played, I think, two or three different sports, so they met, they got together, she got pregnant with me, they soon married and, you know-- Story_ID: 40697 Speaker 1: Can you tell us anything about the black community in Magnolia [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: I left when I was five [years old], we moved to California. We followed my father [Amile Ashley] out here, and I don't remember much about that as a little girl because I was five. Speaker 1: So this was about like 1962? Speaker 2: Right, I was born in '57 [1957] so we left in '62 [1962], '63 [1963], and so I don't remember much about it; I know that I don't particularly like going back (laughter) and staying for a long period; it's certainly different from California, it's not somewhere that I think I really would have wanted to be, you know, to have gone to school and been raised there. Speaker 1: Yeah, so is that a part of the story, that it wasn't a pleasant place to be? Speaker 2: I don't think so--not from you, you know, now. You know, I run a black newspaper so it's all about equal rights, civil rights, and not backing down and fighting for your rights, and I don't think that Mississippi would have been the place for me to be (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So are there any--now this is '62 [1962]; this is when the Civil Rights Movement is really heating up-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in '62 [1962]. And so two years later, you know, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] would be down there registering people to vote, people would be killed--everything. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, so-- Speaker 2: James Meredith and all that stuff. Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So are there any stories in your family about the racial situation (unclear)? Speaker 2: I think that my father's brother had to leave Mississippi because he got into a fight with some--a feud with some of the white folks down there, so he had to leave his family, leave his whole living condition and move and relocate fearing for his life or going to jail. And so he died a couple of years ago, and I think that every time he would come to town, he would kinda have to sneak in for a funeral or something, so I vaguely remember my father telling me that story. Speaker 1: So still that conflict, you know, haunted him even 'til he passed away (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I think it haunted him, yeah, he couldn't live there, he couldn't come back there, and I don't know if it's a situation where my grandfather got him outta there or if he had to get outta there, but yeah, it was bad there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So was your family the first family to get out of--I mean was your, I guess, your personal family the first family in your general, larger family, to get out of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I don't think our-- Speaker 1: --or your nuclear family (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, we were, probably we were, but a lot of other people were getting out too, just for a better life, to move and get the better jobs in the city. Story_ID: 40698 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now did your mother [Louise James Ashley] have aspirations when she was growing up? Did she wanna--'cause she finished high school, right--at Pike County [Mississippi?]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Did she talk about what she wanted to be when she grew up, and that sorta thing? Speaker 2: No. My mother, she-my youngest sister was five weeks old when we moved out to California. We stayed with a relative, and then we all moved because my aunt also followed us out here--my mother's middle sister. We all lived kinda in the basement in a one-bedroom place; it was about five or six of us. And so we lived there for a while; I can recall my aunt going out to find cigarette butts because we were broke. We had no money; my father [Amile Ashley] was working and he sent for us, and so things got better but as a little girl, I remember not having very much, living in the crowded one-bedroom, eventually moving up and moving to the projects in Bayview Hunter's Point [San Francisco, California]. And of course things were different then; you didn't have all the crime and all that, so--yeah, I remember all that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And it kinda--hmm? Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: --and it kinda helped to shape me into the person--the woman I am today. Story_ID: 40699 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Amile, A-M-I-L-E Ashley, A-S-H-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Oooh, February 2nd, 1937. McComb, Mississippi. Speaker 1: In McComb; is that close by-- Speaker 2: About twelve miles from Magnolia [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us what you know about your father's side of the family. Speaker 2: My father's real mother died when he was a baby; he was the baby of the family. It was about--let's see, my father--it's about six or seven of them so he was the baby. His real mother, her name was Mary Ashley. Not Ma--was it Mary? I don't remember all that, but she died--his real mother died, he had a stepmother that raised him and they--I remember her being very mean, very mean, you know. And so his father was Virgil-- Speaker 1: Is there a story about what she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Why was she so mean? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--What she--or how she treated him, I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, I think she was mean, she'd beat him--yeah, that type of thing. Things that wouldn't be allowed now, but she was just very mean, and she was a stepmother. Speaker 1: What did his father do for a living? Speaker 2: I wasn't that close to that side of the families (ph.); I know them. I think his father--I'm not so sure, but he, over a period of time, acquired a lot of property and helped his family up in McComb; it's called Algiers, that part of McComb, but they were raised in Algiers, A-L-G-I-E-R-S. And I'm not so sure what he did, but he lived to be in his nineties so--but I'm not so sure what he did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, because we moved out here, he had a lotta grandkids and stuff. He was not like my mother's side of the family; it was a smaller, closer knit group. My grandfather and grandmother loved us, you know, unconditionally. We were--my mother's children, the three of us were their only grandkids for years, so we were very close to them. When we moved out here, they moved out here later, and kept us and everything, so we were very close to them. So I was not that close to my father's side of the family-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because they were back--they remained back in Mississippi. Speaker 1: And I guess I'm wondering--I'm guessing that your father was not that close to his side himself, being this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--He was--Oh, no, no, I mean I don't think that that was unusual for back in Mississippi getting whoopin's (ph.) and extension cords and goin' to pick the switch that you were gonna get, you know, whooped with. I just remember that she was very mean, but he was still close with his family; they spoiled him. They spoiled him. My father was, again, the baby, good lookin', sports star, so they really spoiled him. You know, that probably affected him later in life where he really couldn't do the things that he should have been doing as a father, and now as a grandfather. Story_ID: 40700 Speaker 1: Well, you know, my father [Amile Ashley] was in and out of the house (laugher), you know; he was in and out of the house. My--they eventually divorced, but when he came out here, you know, he became a playboy. You know, my mother [Louise James Ashley] basically raised three girls by herself, yeah. And that's because of his upbringing--spoiled, got his way--yeah. Speaker 2: Now as a sports star--I mean did he--was he courted by colleges and that sort of thing? Speaker 1: I think he was, I think he was as a basketball player and as a football player but, you know, he married my mother when he was--I was born when he was twenty, I was born when my mom was seventeen and so he had to start a family, and so that's when he left and moved to California. He eventually got a job as a longshoreman. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. So--now he finished school in McComb [Mississippi]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: All right, all right--where he was a star. Now are there any school records that he set or anything? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I have no idea, I have no idea. Speaker 2: All right, all right. So is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 1: In school; my mother was a majorette, my father a sports star. Majorette back there was like a cheerleader out here, you know. In the south, they have the bands and the women with the little short fitted outfits and tossin' the baton and all that stuff; that's what my mom did. Speaker 2: So they probably met on a football field or something like that, or a game--a basketball game (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--And he affectionately called her Shorty 'cause my mom was short but she was stacked. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So when you think about--but there's no story about how they met (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I don't remember the story. Speaker 2: He was at this certain game or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--It, it, it, it had a (ph.) unhappy ending (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 40701 Speaker 1: So when you think about your parents' personalities, their sense of humor, how they look, how they walk, talk, what they're interested in, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Certainly temper-wise, probably my father [Amile Ashley], but I inherited my mother's [Louise James Ashley] heart--give her last dime, always willing to help someone, I would rather hurt myself than hurt someone else--that type of thing. Story_ID: 40702 Speaker 1: Okay. And can you name your brothers and sisters for us, and tell us what they're doing? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--My middle sister, Shonda (ph.) Ashley Chriswell (ph.), and she writes for me; she's my religious editor at the newspaper, she has been for years. She writes the Sunday School lesson; it's very popular. People buy the paper every Thursday just to get their Sunday School lesson and be prepared for Sunday School for Sunday. She's also a great, great speaker; she's sought after all across the Bay area as a speaker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's Shonda the middle; Shonda is 50--she'll be fifty-two next month. Then my baby sister Lytoria (ph.) works for FDIC [Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation]; it's a (ph.) insurance company that insures banks. She just made fifty she's also a religious leader over in the East Bay. She's an usher and a financial assistant at her church, and we're extremely close. Lytoria travels with me when I go to visit my son [Evan Ward]; she's kinda been the backup mommy. And Shonda is very helpful, you know; she babysits and stuff like that, so they've all pitched in to help me as a single mom with my son so, you know, I love my sisters dearly. Story_ID: 40703 Speaker 1: So your father [Amile Ashley] moved out here before the rest of the family, right? Speaker 2: About six months before. Speaker 1: Yeah, now he came out here to get a job as a longshoreman (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--To look--to get a job--no, he--I don't know what he--he got a job, maybe he was a janitor or something but he eventually, I guess, got his papers or hooked up with someone who was a longshoreman. I guess back then you had to buy your papers or something like that, I can remember; so he eventually hooked up and he worked on the waterfront for about 30 years before he retired fifteen years ago and moved back to Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was in his late twenties when he came out here, I guess, you know. Speaker 2: I was five-- Speaker 1: (Inaudible response). Speaker 2: No, he was about twenty-five [years old]. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: Mid-twenties, okay. Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: All right, so it's 1962. Is there any--so he just heard of a better chance to come out here and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Everybody left the south for a better chance. Speaker 1: Okay. I know it's obvious to most people now we--they think about that, you know, but since this is historical, I don't want anybody, you know--I ask these questions, you know, so people can actually tell us why, you know, they got out of there. Speaker 2: I think he left for a better life, and I think he left too because, you know, my father was not one to be bowin' down and takin' orders and bein' submissive to, you know, the slavery mentality back there. He, you know, he only could take being called "Boy" for so long (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause he had a temper, I mean his brother had to leave. Speaker 1: I've heard people say that before, so it almost implies that if you stay there too long, that's what you're gonna be doing if you wanna stay alive (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--He probably would have ended up in jail with his temper. Story_ID: 40704 Speaker 1: so you were born in Magnolia [Mississippi] and you come out here at age five. Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory. I know that when we moved on Divisadero [San Francisco, California] and my mom [Louise James Ashley] and dad [Ashley] used to walk me to school for a few days, but one day I crossed the street and I fell down in the middle of the street and a car stopped just in time and I almost got hit, and I didn't wanna tell my mother and father because I thought I was gonna get in trouble 'cause my father was like really strict; I mean, you know, when it was time for us to tell the time--to learn how to tell time, he kept us up all night and drove it in our heads and stuff, so I didn't wanna tell them that I had fallen and almost gotten hit by a car but there are eyes all around the neighborhood and so they found out, and so I didn't get in trouble; I thought I was gonna get in trouble. Instead, they got up--my mother got up and made--and walked me to school every morning until she was comfortable that I knew how to cross that big street, so I really have that memory. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 40705 Speaker 1: Now I know you mentioned church several times. What are your earliest memories of church? Speaker 2: I don't have any memories back in Mississippi of going to church, but when we came out here, we were always in church and Sunday School. The first church that we joined out here [San Francisco, California] was Ebenezer Baptist Church on Divisadero--Reverend J.H. Pierce, and mom [Louise James Ashley] used to dress us all alike. We used to sing in the choir, go to Sunday School, and I can always remember her--if something was dirty on our face or somethin', she would take her hand and get a little spit and (laughter) wipe it off. I mean memories like that you treasure. But we were always in church; I remember Easter, getting my hair pressed and curled and the new dress, the Easter basket--yeah, things like that. We were always in church. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Who was the pastor there? Speaker 2: J.H. Pierce, the late J.H. Pierce. Speaker 1: Was he pastor there a long time? Speaker 2: Yeah, we eventually--when we moved to the other side of town, we joined another church, Cosmopolitan, and that was Reverend Calvin Blanford [sic, Colvin Blanford], and then from there, we joined the church that was really, really instrumental in my life; it was when I graduated from college, we joined Providence Bap--New Providence Baptist Church--Reverend C. Scott, and there I was founder of the Young Adult Christian Movement, and we worked--we used the church and worked out in the community to incorporate young adults into the life of the church. We brought out various speakers and everything, and I also was instrumental in bringing all the elected officials into the church so that, that's where I really, really, really worked a lot. Speaker 1: Okay, so that church had a--more of a political consciousness to it than the others? Speaker 2: I was the political conscience (laughter). Speaker 1: So you're the one that brought it in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, I was the political--my pastor was old school, and a lot of the members were old school; in fact, a lot of them didn't like me because they thought that I was doing too much for the church; they wanted to just stay--and then a lot of 'em were just jealous. You know, I was college educated and I wanted to expose my church and I wanted the politicians and everybody to know that we existed out there also and we were doing things, and so I often ran into problems with the older women in the church. It was not always a happy setting for me there, but they appreciated when the church would fill up with people from everywhere, and the church eventually grew and we had to build a new church. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 40706 Speaker 1: You said you eventually moved to Hunter's Point [San Francisco, California]? Speaker 2: We lived--when we relocated out here, we lived with a relative, then we got (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Was that in the Fillmore (ph.), or-- Speaker 2: Over in Fillmore-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then we moved into a little alley way where we had the one-bedroom; that was on Divisadero Street; then we eventually moved to Bayview Hunter's Point. On Hunter's Point--I mean on Harbor Road where we were in the projects, we stayed there for a while, my father [Amile Ashley] was working--he had just started working at the waterfront, then eventually we moved back on Divisadero in apartments, and my grandmother and grandfather had relocated out here from Mississippi and they lived around the corner in the Eddy Street Projects [San Francisco, California], and so they would care for us in the evening when we would get out of school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then after that, we moved over to Ingleside (ph.) into a house; we rented a house, that's when things kinda picked up for us, and eventually we bought a house on Vernon Street. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 40707 Speaker 1: So what was the black community like when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Let's see. Younger--I remember my aunts partying to the Temptations and Aretha Franklin, and then there was a period when I was about ten [years old], when Martin Luther King [Jr.] was killed in '68 [1968]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: --and that was real bad out here, I mean for the black community out here and I guess everywhere. My grandmother and grandfather they had lost a member of the family--when he was killed. I mean everybody really took his death really, really, really hard; I mean they had killed The King. So I remember that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Can you remember how you felt, you know the--what happened that day when you--how you found out about it? Speaker 2: It was all over the news, and I remember my grandmother and grandfather crying, I remember that there was a strike and--for the stores, and we had to wait in line to get things, I can remember going--because he was--he died shortly after--let's see, April--he died April, my grandmother (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(Inaudible response). Speaker 2: --April 4th. My grandmother died right after him, I think. So I just remember the sadness in the community. It was a strike goin' on; I remember the strike at the stores. Speaker 1: Was this--the black community was boycotting the stores or what? Speaker 2: No, no, it was just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Employees were on strike? Speaker 2: Yeah, employees--you couldn't get certain things, I remember that. But I just remember when he was, when he was killed, it was just this great sadness, like we had lost our leader, and I was about 10--ten or eleven. Story_ID: 40708 Speaker 1: And I think I was going to Anza, not too far from where we lived [San Francisco, California]. Speaker 2: What is Anza? Speaker 1: Anza was a (ph.) elementary school. But basically, my parents [Amile Ashley, Louise James Ashley] kinda--I wouldn't say shielded me from that; I knew there was bad times, I knew that we were not treated fairly as blacks like--I mean, you know, I know that there was a lot of racial hatred and stuff. Oh, boy, do I know that; it's all coming to me. Speaker 2: What examples of racial hatred? What are some of the things that happened? Speaker 1: I can recall being a student at Aptos Middle School and--was it Aptos? it was Aptos Middle School, and we were there and, you know, we were trying to get along with everyone, and this little white girl kept calling me a nigger, and so every time she would call me that, I would hit her, and she wouldn't stop calling me that, and I kept hittin' her and people were around and they heard her and she just wouldn't stop. So they called me in the office, they called my parents up because they didn't want me to graduate with a class from middle school, and so it was an African American--a black counselor there; what was her name? Miss Barney--and she got involved in it and worked it out and I was able to graduate, but this girl kept callin' me a nigger and I was just pissed off. Every time she would call me that I would hit her, and I would hit her hard and she would keep callin' me one. Then finally she broke down and cried. Speaker 2: 'Cause it probably hurt (laughter). Speaker 1: It hurt me too--the fact that she was calling me that; I mean this was what, in the '70s [1970s]? Can you believe that? Yeah. It was horrible. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was really, really bad; so I had that experience at school, so that was racial hatred and, and racial hatred--I mean you, if you think that racial hatred isn't still in existence, look at [President Barack] Obama (laughter). I mean here you have a black president and every--they're freezing everything up. He can't get anything passed. Story_ID: 40709 Speaker 1: I was asking off-camera if they took any action against the girl that kept calling you the N-word. Speaker 2: No, but they wanted to take action against me. Speaker 1: So what was the racial composition of the school [Aptos Middle School, San Francisco, California], pretty much? Speaker 2: The majority of blacks went to Denman [James Denman Middle School, San Francisco, California]; it was another school, and I think that where we lived, it dictated that I go to Aptos and so it was majority white--probably 25 percent black, majority white. Speaker 1: Okay, and how do you spell that? Speaker 2: A-P-T-O-S. Speaker 1: Okay, Aptos, okay, all right, all right. Story_ID: 40710 Speaker 1: So what were you interested in growing up? What did you like to do? Speaker 2: Writing, slang books, expressing myself (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--What is a slang book? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--A slang book was something like--it was real popular back then. We would pass it around to all of our friends, we would start it up and we would come up with a subject, "Ain't no mountain high enough," and then we would fill in the rest, and--we wouldn't say, "to keep me from gettin' to you," like the song, we'll say, "Ain't no mountain high enough," and I probably would answer, "Because I'm gonna do what I wanna do and I'm gonna be me and nothin' will stop me," something like that. So it was just an express yourself type thing, and we loved it. Speaker 1: So they were passed around in class? Speaker 2: We passed it around the whole school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I mean whoever our friends were, we passed it around; that's how I started writing. Speaker 1: Hmm, slang book, okay-- Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: --all right, all right. I may have heard of it but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And it's something that--"I'm in love with," and you can fill it out. It's just like--now it was a (ph.) older version of what--Facebook (laughter). The Facebook is a newer version now of the slang book of the olden days. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Story_ID: 40711 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So how old were you when you first started writing? Speaker 2: Middle school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you--I read that you had some favorite writers. Speaker 2: Giovanni, Gwendolyn Brooks, Sonia Sanchez. Who else? I was really into Gwendolyn Brooks and Nikki Giovanni, Maya Angelou. Speaker 1: Now did you--were you exposed to them at school? Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in my literature classes, English classes. Homazell (ph.) Davis, my English teacher at Abraham Lincoln High School [San Francisco, California], exposed us to a lot of that; then there was also Barbara--Barbara Husbands, one of my favorite teachers at Lincoln, and then there's Mozell (ph.) Davis when I attended San Jose State [San Jose, California], and I was having problems with one of my teachers and I thought I was this great writer and I said, "Well, you know, he's failing me." She's part of the African American Studies Department, and so she said, "Let me show you how you do." And she taught me about this thesis and she said, "This is how you prove your point. This is so because--" so she told me how to break it down, and whenever I would do that, they couldn't fight against me. So it was a thesis and she said, "This is so because"--it's vaguely--it's getting away from me, but that's how I learned; I would come up, I would state my point, and back it up. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. So--Abraham Lincoln High School; is this a primarily black high school? Speaker 2: It was a mixed high school; I loved it, I loved Abraham Lincoln High. Speaker 1: And what part of town is Lincoln in? Speaker 2: Out in the Avenues; we call it the Avenues in San Francisco, out there kind of by the beach-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so we had to catch the bus there. A lot of us certainly didn't live out there. Speaker 1: It was a part of a busing plan the city had, or did you have the freedom of choice in terms of schools in those days? Speaker 2: I don't think it was a freedom of choice back there, I think it was basically based on where you live-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so at that point, we were no longer--when we moved on Vernon, we were really no longer in the black, black part of the community, we had kinda moved on up. Dad [Amile Ashley] had a--you know, he was a longshoreman; he had gotten a settlement from getting hurt on the ship, so he used that as a down payment. Speaker 1: Oh, your father? Speaker 2: (NODDING HER HEAD YES). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 40712 Speaker 1: So did your parents [Amile Ashley, Louise James Ashley] like actually stay married for a long time? Speaker 2: They stayed married but they weren't together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Dad left when we were--we were small. I was in junior high when he left, my sisters were younger; then he came back and he left again. I was in high school, maybe out of high school; they were still in school. We lived on Vernon Street [San Francisco, California]. So they were married but not together for a long time, and I think he finally filed for divorce. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were saying earlier, your mother basically raised you by herself? Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: (Inaudible response). Speaker 2: Because we--you know--he was there, I would say, up until I was in middle school, and then he was in and out at that point. So mom basically-- Speaker 1: Well, you know, he got you through middle--you know, middle school. But when he left, did he contribute to the household? Speaker 2: No, not really. He left us with the house, not free of--I mean mother had to pay for it; she eventually lost it and we had to move, but--no, he didn't pay much child support or do anything like that. Speaker 1: So when he left, things got tougher (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Tough, I remember one Christmas we--mom didn't have any money, and I was able to get a charge card at Mervyn's, and I had maybe $40.00 on that charge card and I was able to go and get all of us a robe, and we were so happy with that robe and we, we were really happy; everybody else had presents and presents to open, but we had the one robe and we were really, really, really happy and grateful for that. And my father would come around to show us how well he was doin' and he would have on all his fancy clothes and be in his fancy car. Speaker 1: You think he was trying to--I mean agitate your mother or something like that? Speaker 2: I think he was just trying to show us he was fine, he was livin' high on the hog. Speaker 1: But he didn't have an issue with you all did he? He had issues with your mother if you--or--I guess. I mean that's what I-- Speaker 2: I mean if you don't take care of your kids, you have issues (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I don't know who he was trying to prove a point to, but we certainly remember all that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Story_ID: 40713 Speaker 1: So how were your grades in school? What kind of student were you? Speaker 2: I was certainly smarter than my grade, I mean--than my grades reflected. I was smart; I'd do the Honor Roll, then I would do the fool (laughter)--take time off. In high school they were pretty good, junior high they were good, elementary they were extremely good, but I think I had a little rebellion thing goin' on. College [San Jose State University], I had good grades; one semester they probably didn't know I even existed because I didn't go, but I would always come in at the end and do what I need to do and catch up to get out-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I don't want my son [Evan Ward] to hear this (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, okay. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--But I was able to, you know, catch up; I didn't--all--you know, I could have done a lot better. Speaker 1: Okay. You know, you'll get control of the DVD you get (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--(Laughter). Yeah, I, I was able to, you know, to graduate and all that stuff; good grades, but certainly I had the freedom in college to show up when I wanted to and not show up, and I did that. But I can tell you that I was the only one of all the people that I hung with--all my girlfriends or all my friends, to graduate on time. I probably was the only one to graduate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, of all the ones that I went there with and the ones that I was very close with, I was the only one to graduate--to get a degree. Speaker 1: Okay. You mentioned that you were going through a little rebellion. What was the rebellion about? Speaker 2: Well, you know according to the shrinks, because I had the one-parent household--that type of thing, probably. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then, you know, I had to--I missed--I always say I missed part of my childhood because at fourteen, fifteen and sixteen [years old], I was out there working to help supplement the income in the house, so I had to turn over my money to help my mother [Louise James Ashley] with the household. And so I wanted to buy clothes and have a lotta school clothes like a lot of my friends, and I only could buy one or two things because I had to help with the household-- Speaker 1: Emm. Speaker 2: --at fourteen, fifteen and sixteen [years old]. You know, no prom for me because--not because, you know, my mom couldn't afford to go, but it was just all kinda issues. But my sisters were able to go to the proms and all that, but I missed all that stuff. But as a result, I've had a fulfilling life later. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had to take on a lot of responsibilities (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I had to take on a lotta responsibilities; I had to help my mom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had to help care for my sisters, I had to get home and cook the dinner. So I missed out on a lot. Speaker 1: Now where did you work? Speaker 2: Wells Fargo Bank, Crocker Bank [Crocker National Bank, San Francisco], I had various summer jobs. Speaker 1: Okay, in high school? Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: So were these difficult to get, you know, the summer jobs in a bank? Speaker 2: I got them based on the on-the-job training programs in the community that they had back then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Placements. Speaker 1: Who sponsored these-- Speaker 2: They had--like Chocolate City and things like that in the black community where you would go and sign up for jobs. The counsellors would get us jobs. Speaker 1: Okay. Chocolate City is a-- Speaker 2: I meant to say it was a community-based group, where they help low-income and disadvantaged kids get jobs and things like that-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --so I'm sure that's how I got mine; counsellors that I had met. Speaker 1: Now in school--I guess grade school through high school, don't take me to college yet-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --who were the teachers that you respected the most, or the mentors that you had on that level? Speaker 2: Grade school, grade school--Ella Barney in grade school; I loved her. In middle school--what was his name? I could see his face, I cannot come up with his name. Grade--middle school, middle school. I can't remember that, but high school, certainly Homazell Davis, Barbara Husbands. Story_ID: 40714 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you mentioned you were about nine or ten [years old] when Dr. King [Martin Luther King Jr.] passed, and 1968 was sort of like a, you know, a black consciousness movement (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It was black consciousness; I knew that we weren't equal though, and I knew that we were treated like second-class citizens. I knew that I was not equal to, you know, you know, the white--the little white girl. Speaker 1: Okay. But did you--what I'm trying to get at is did you--how aware were you of the black, I guess, literary world; I mean the black newspapers, the black bookstores, that sort of thing here in San Francisco [California]? Speaker 2: No, at that age, I wasn't in tune to that. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I know they had Marcus Bookstores (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--But I knew about the Black Panthers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I knew about the Black Panther paper, things like that. Yeah, 'cause my father [Amile Ashley] was certainly into that type of stuff; they kinda had a little movement goin' on at the waterfront. Speaker 1: Did you ever read the Sun-Reporter when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was in high school--high school and college. In fact, my mom [Louise James Ashley] suggested that I go there to do my internship and-- Speaker 1: In college or-- Speaker 2: --in college. Speaker 1: All right, all right. Speaker 2: But when I--I was familiar with the pimps in a paper at the Sun-Reporter, the fashion shows with the pimps-- Speaker 1: Now what's that? Tell us about this? They actually had some kind of a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, they had a pimp parade and, you know, the Ward brothers over in Oakland [California] and all that stuff; I mean these guys were pimps and, I mean--yeah, that was part of our culture back then; you had the Black Panthers, pimps--yeah, those are actually part of our culture. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean you would see these guys with the big hats on and the Cadillacs and things like that--yeah, that was actually part of the culture. Speaker 1: All right, so they'd be reported on in the paper alongside of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--They reported on everything that went on in the black community. Speaker 1: Okay. You know, they call that, in Chicago [Illinois], the Players Ball (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, right; they had a Players Ball out here (laughter), yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 40715 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So when you were on--were you involved in any of the activities in high school? Did you do any photography in high school? Speaker 2: I was on the drill team, I was in the journalism class; yeah, high school was my--it was a good time in my life. Even though my parents [Amile Ashley and Louise James Ashley] were separated most of the time, it was really a good time in my life. Speaker 1: Okay, so even though you were working, you were able to participate in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I worked during the summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But during the school year, I went to school, and even though we didn't have as much in terms of, you know, some of my girlfriends would have five and ten Dollars on 'em a day, I wouldn't have that; I would have to go home for lunch sometimes or whatever. We would go home and probably make a mayonnaise sandwich and go back like we had a (ph.) Italian salami and cheese sandwich like the rest of the people 'cause we were proud. My mom struggled to raise us and I think when I was in high school, busing was goin' on and she didn't want my sisters separated, so she sent them to private school so that they could go to the same school. Speaker 1: Is this a catholic school? Speaker 2: Catholic school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so they wouldn't be bused, but I was happy at Lincoln, I had a lotta good friends, so I was very happy there. Speaker 1: All right. So did graduate with any distinctions or anything? Speaker 2: I think I got some awards and I got some scholarship money to go to San Jose State [San Jose, California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Part of the EOP Program, Equal Opportunity Program. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 40716 Speaker 1: Now did--was there--how did you choose San Jose State [San Jose State University]? Speaker 2: It was close to home; I didn't wanna go too far away, but I wanted to be far away where I could come home when I wanted to. I didn't wanna be that far from my mother [Louise James Ashley] and my sisters. And San Jose [California] was real popular at that time; it had one of the best journalism departments in the country and that's why I went there, and I--yeah. Speaker 1: San Jose State, that was the school that Tommy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Tommy and John Carlos Speaker 1: Tommy Smith and John Carlos Speaker 2: --the Black Power sign? Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, did you remember that from '68 [1968], and from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I don't remember it, I learned about it later. Speaker 1: Okay. That's one of the--yeah. Okay, so in--you graduated from high school in-- Speaker 2: Seventy-Five [1975]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1975. What was going on in '75 [1975] when you graduated? Speaker 2: Wasn't that a part of the SLA movement and stuff like that? The Patty Hearst (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, the Symbionese Liberation Army, right. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I'm thinking it was around that time. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I can't remember any--too much negative stuff 'cause at that point, life was just--I was just happy; life was good for me, I was, you know--look--into the boys (laughter), going to college--yeah, so I was happy at that point. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So San Diego State and then you mentioned (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--San Jose. Speaker 1: San Jose State, yeah; I'm sorry. I don't know why I said San Diego. But you mentioned Mozell (ph.) Davis there. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was just part of the Black Studies Department. Also, there was Steven Milner down there; he's still down there now. And these were not just teachers, they embraced the black students down there and they kept us on course and they helped us deal with all the anxieties and all the anti-stuff down there. All we had to do was go to them and just sit down because they wanted us to be successful, and they went a step beyond being just a regular teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. So was there a black student organization? Speaker 2: This was the African American Studies Department-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then I think we had a black student union also. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And then you know, you talkin' about a time when we left our environments from home, we had financial aid money and we lined up to get that money twice a year, we can go and buy us some clothes and some jeans and stuff, and pay for our dorms and our education, so it was a good environment and we followed the football team, and a lot of these guys were going pro, so we were just having fun, and you know, just--life was good; our parents were still young, a lotta the people weren't dying around us--yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. You make a good point because this was the age when there was a lotta financial aid money (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yeah. And if you couldn't get that, you got the student loan, yeah. So you, I mean-- Speaker 1: Yeah, unlike today. Speaker 2: Unlike today. If you don't get a scholarship, your parents are paying what--$250,000 for your college education? Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you have a sense then that those--the financial aid and the gains--those kind of--that kind of entre was due to the civil rights (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yeah. Then you had Bakke come and say--remember the Allan Bakke case [University of California v. Bakke, 1978]? Later in California where he filed lawsuit because he wasn't able to get into a college because they--he said they were giving preference to minorities and to blacks, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, right, it was reverse discrimination. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. So this is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--But I mean we needed--yeah, we had the--I mean we needed help to get into the--break into the system. Story_ID: 40717 Speaker 1: I didn't ask about O.J. Simpson; did you know his family at all? Speaker 2: I knew of his family-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and his mother was right in the community [San Francisco, California] all the time, right around the corner at the Senior Citizen every day until she died. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She died, Eunice Simpson died about ten years ago, right? Yeah. Speaker 1: Anybody else that you remember growing up in the community? Speaker 2: Huey--I know I remember Huey Newton, Bobby Seale, Angela Davis. Speaker 1: Were they familiar figures, I mean around the community? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you know. They were familiar until they went to jail and stuff--Angela Davis. Dick Gregory used to perform out here; we're real close. Dick Gregory, who else? You know, those are some of the ones that come to mind now. Speaker 1: Okay. I didn't ask you this, but flashing back when you were growing up, was there a black entertainment venue in Fillmore [San Francisco, California] or any other neighborhoods that-- Speaker 2: It was--what was the name of the place? Wow, wow; it was one right on--right on the corner of Fillmore. I can't think of it; I didn't go there, but it was a venue, yeah. I didn't go there because I went to the Circle Star down in San Carlos [California]. They had the stage and--turned around and circular stage, circular audience, and the stage turned; I remember seeing Teddy Pendergrass and Peabo Bryson and Minnie Ripperton. Everybody who performed came to the Circle Star. Speaker 1: Okay, that's in San Carlos? Speaker 2: (NODDING HER HEAD YES). It's closed now; it's closed now, but it was a real popular setting-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Oh, and then there was the Cow Palace; that's where the Jackson Five came, and I remember my mom [Louise James Ashley] bought us tickets; she had gotten a lawsuit, she had--she had gotten a settlement from a lawsuit and she bought the tickets, and I was--we were really, really--I was going, my sisters were too young, and I was going to see the Jackson Five--Jermaine Jackson, and the ride that I had, my mother's friend, her car broke down and I couldn't believe that, I was devastated; I couldn't get a ride anywhere. I had the tickets and I cried myself to sleep. I woke up the next morning and my eyes were swollen; I cried myself to sleep. I had really--if I--and that's another thing that I remember in my life, something that was really disappointing that my mother was able to afford this ticket and my mom couldn't drive, and her friend was gonna take me; the car broke down and I couldn't find any other way to get there and I cried myself to sleep. Speaker 1: How old were you then? Speaker 2: Jermaine's age (laughter). However--if he was--I think I was in high school or junior high school, yeah. Probably thirteen, fourteen [years old], I don't know, but I cried myself to sleep. Story_ID: 40718 Speaker 1: What was the campus like, I mean at San Jose [San Jose State University, California]? What was the number of black students at San Jose State? I mean not the number but proportion, I guess--just roughly. Speaker 2: Probably, probably 30 percent because you had Santa Clara [Santa Clara University, California] who was right next door and that was the, the academic college. But San Jose, we had about 30 percent. It was enough of us and we, yeah, we basically knew each other--maybe twenty, twenty-five. Speaker 1: So you're saying Santa Clara State [sic, Santa Clara University] was more academic than (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, it was more the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--you expected than (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --San Jose State. Speaker 2: Right. San Jose--when I got there in the black community, it was known as the party school. We partied every weekend, and we really did. We partied every weekend, you know. Isley Brothers, For the Love of You, all that was out and Kool and the Gang, Let's Get Down Tonight and all that, so we partied back then. It was really, really, you know, we had fun, and some of us--we got our, we got our classes and we graduated. Speaker 1: And some had too much fun-- Speaker 2: Some had too much fun, some didn't graduate, a couple of us fell by the wayside with drugs that we were unfamiliar with--Angel Dust. Gil Scott Heron was popular during that time and he would come and sing on the campus, so some of us lost our way to drugs. Speaker 1: Yeah, Gil Scott had a song called Angel Dust. Speaker 2: Right. And some of us became alcoholics. Speaker 1: Okay. So how did you avoid all that? Speaker 2: My home training. You know, I knew better. When my father [Amile Ashley] was home, he would beat the hell out of us if we had done anything (laughter) wrong, and my mother [Louise James Ashley] didn't tolerate it, so my home training; I'm grateful for that because I certainly could have fallen by the wayside, I could have gotten pregnant earlier, but I would act up and do some things but I would always pull myself together. I never did the drugs but all--didn't drink, but I'd pull myself together and do what I needed to do. I didn't fall victim to the pressures of being in college and I would often pretend that I was kinda like the set of people who were doing the things but I never was, yeah. So it was my, it was my home training. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 40719 Speaker 1: What were you writing about in college [San Jose State University, California]? Speaker 2: I was a photo-journalist at college. I used the camera; that's when I learned to use the camera to tell the story. A picture is worth a thousand words, so in college--there, I was a photo-journalism major and I remember some racism I encountered there with my professor. You know, it was unpopular for a black girl to be taking pictures and being able to afford Olympus--an Olympus camera and the lenses to go along with it and he, on the surface, always acted as if he was okay but he would always grade me harder. In fact, I had to go to the department and make him change my grade; so did another girl from Iran--yeah. And so--he was older; he was good, and I learned a lot, but he was rough, rough. Speaker 1: Do you think he resented you because you were a woman or black, or both? Speaker 2: I think it was both, I think it was both; I think he had a problem with women and I think he had a problem because, you know, I was a black woman. I just had an incident, you know, where--and I won't say when--where one of the professors--Well, I don't wanna talk about that (laughter). Speaker 1: Go on and tell the story. Speaker 2: (Laughter). I don't wanna talk about that; it's just things--some things never change, you know? So it's fine. I don't wanna talk about that. Speaker 1: Does this have to do with the relationship between male professors and female professors? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know. They think they can get over on you--oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Story_ID: 40720 Speaker 1: All right. Now this is--now you were in college when the Jim Jones thing went down. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: What was-- Speaker 2: Oh, my God. My good friends, my good friends--and I won't call any names. We were in high school. Was it high school? No, it was junior high 'cause my father [Amile Ashley] was home, and it's so funny because my boss, Carlton Goodlett at the Sun-Reporter was Jim Jones' doctor. So he took a lotta flack from being associated with Jim Jones, particularly when the Guyana tragedies happened, and Jim Jones was able to get a lot of the black church members from Macedonia Baptist Church [San Francisco, California] to come over to his fold, and so now I see how it happened because my girlfriends made me believe that going with them and going to this church would be really fun. They used to travel every weekend--get on a big bus and go outta the city to retreats, and they would have all this food, and they made it sound like it was so fantastic and they told me how he cured their father of cancer and how he made him spit up the cancer right in the church and stuff, and so, you know, my parents raised me--I was pretty smart. So finally, I said, "Well this is fun; I wanna go to this too." So I talked my parents [father and Louise James Ashley] into allowing me to go because after all, they knew my friends' parents, they knew that we were real close, and so my father dropped me off at Peoples Temple, that's the name of the church on Fillmore Street, one night. And so I got in there--and this is the Wounded Knee--when the Wounded Knee situation was going on and, and Jim Jones was talking about how he delivered food over to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--South Dakota, right. Speaker 2: Right. So I'm like--so I get there, and I'm happy, I'm going away on a trip for the weekend, we're gonna have fun, and so I see him and he's looking at me like he's paranoid like, 'Who is this? What is she doing here?' And I didn't really believe in spitting up the cancer stuff but, you know, I believed in the fun and stuff. So he was really paranoid and he scared me; he had on this red robe or something, had dark glasses on and so he was looking at me and I looked at him, and so he went and he got on the microphone and he was talking to the people but we were getting ready to go and stuff, they had packed food. So all of a sudden, he said--and forgive me for my language but I'm a young girl, I'm in junior high school. He says, "If you don't believe in my shit, I'll stop you from shittin'." I got on the phone; I called my father and told my father to come get me. And that was it. Can you believe that (laughter)? I mean I'm so glad that I was raised to have a mind of my own, that no religion or anything can make me do something that I shouldn't do, I'm not gonna--and so when he said that, something clicked with me. I said, "Oh, I'm not goin' with this; these people are crazy, he's crazy." So I had my father come pick me up. He said, "I figured you were gonna have me come get you." I was through with that. And then a couple years later, that's what happened. Story_ID: 40721 Speaker 1: We were talking about Jim Jones and the Peoples Temple here in San Francisco [California], and what was his--what was odd to me when the story broke and all that, was the history of Jim Jones and Peoples Temple and his--that here is a white pastor with a lot of-- Speaker 2: Indian-- Speaker 1: --well, yeah--what kinda Indian is he? Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: Yeah. I know I've heard that before; people say they're Indian and they may (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah. Speaker 1: --have like one-eighth or one part of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, I know. Speaker 1: --a story in the background that makes 'em a--you know, but I don't know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I just, I just, I just didn't feel him, so-- Speaker 1: But he--but what was his standing in the black community in those days? How did people regard him? Speaker 2: I think a lotta people didn't regard him highly; I think it was--some of the African Americans and basically the ones from Macedonia [Macedonia Missionary Baptist Church, San Francisco, California]. He had about 800 of the--700--about 4 or 500 of the members from Macedonia and then he had some members from a church in the East Bay and they were looking for some kinda spiritual element, and they found it in him that they didn't find in the Baptist church. So I don't know what it was, but when I first met him and I was in my early teens, I could see that it was something wrong, and I got outta there. I mean I wasn't gonna join the church but I was just gonna travel with them for the weekend, and I could see he was paranoid because he was wondering who I was and then when he got on the speaker talking about--he was acting as if he was some God, I was through, yeah. And I don't see how other people didn't see through that. But then people--you know, there are churches and mosques, and things that people really, really kinda fall prey to, I'm just not like that (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you have any idea--I often wonder why--how--whether he called himself a Indian or whatever, he seemed like a white man to me-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --being in charge of a black congregation, especially in that time period. It seemed like it would be hard for, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, they blamed my boss; they blamed Dr. Goodlett [Dr. Carlton Goodlett] for helping with that. Terry Francois and Dr. Goodlett--Terry Francois was a supervisor, black supervisor, and he came and had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--That's a political position, right? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, he came and had a head-to-head talk and fight with Dr. Goodlett over his affiliation with Jim Jones. And you remember it was Leo Ryan who went down there to investigate it and he was killed--ambushed--yeah. Speaker 1: Right, the Congressman. Speaker 2: Yeah, Ryan. And--yeah, and Jackie Speier who's now--what is she, a Congresswoman or--she was with him; she was his aide, and she survived the attack. But it was a mess down there; I don't know--and then I think--I just, I just couldn't see it, and I was young; my parents [Amile Ashley and Louise James Ashley]certainly didn't fall into that. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You said something else that intrigued me, too, that you came up in a very religious household and you said you were trained to think on your feet (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, think on my own, you know. I wasn't gonna go to any kinda church and go with a pastor; I mean look, if you tell me that you're supposed to be about the bible and you don't practice what you preach, I understand that because, you know, you're human. But I'm certainly not gonna be weak enough to let you use me and, you know, where I would harm myself. I mean I have--I can think for myself. Speaker 1: So you did, you knew some people that went down (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--My best friend. No--they didn't go to Guyana, I think they broke from him before then (laughter). Yeah, I think something happened and they broke from him before the Guyana trip. Remember, they went to Guyana for--they gave up their property and everything to go down there for a better land, a better world, you know. They gave up everything. And you know, I took on a pastor in my paper--a black pastor. We were on Sixty Minutes because we took on this pastor who ripped off these elderly parishioners from this Baptist church in San Francisco [California]. He was flamboyant, he was gorgeous, everything. And these older people signed over their property to him and they lost everything, and we investigated him and he went to jail. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Reverend Thomas McCall. Speaker 2: That's Reverend Thomas McCall. We broke that story, yeah. We broke that story and they were calling threatenin' to kill me and everything. But we broke that story, he went to jail, and he surfaced again in Oakland [California] and now he, I think he's dead; I think he died a couple of years ago. But he was a--that was another Jim Jones (laughter). Speaker 1: And that was 1997-- Speaker 2: Yes, '97 [1997]. Speaker 1: --or-- Speaker 2: It was--yeah, it was--'cause we had just moved over to Bayview Hunter's Point [San Francisco, California], but we started the story over in Fillmore in like '94 [1994], '95 [1995], and one of the parishioners came to the office and she was mad, she wanted to beat me up and everything but she was, she was kinda sick; she was kinda sick in her head, but these are the kinda people who fall prey to the Jim Jones and the Thomas McCall, so you have to be really, really careful about that. Story_ID: 40722 Speaker 1: You said the kind of people--is there something that--is there like a profile of the kind of person that gets involved in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, this--this woman had really, really been brilliant but she had had some kinda illness that caused her to have some psychiatric problems and she called him [Reverend Thomas McCall] Father. And look, I'm not callin' a preacher Father (laughter), you know. I barely wanna call my father [Amile Ashley] Father, you know (laughter). But I'm not calling a preacher Father. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: All right, so you think they need (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Can I take a drink? Speaker 1: Sure. So you think they're very, very needy people that get involved, or they have a-- Speaker 2: They have some kinda weakness. They're missing something; some kind of elderly people, you know, who don't have their--they're missing something. Speaker 1: It would appear to me that most of Jim Jones' followers were black. Speaker 2: They were. (Unclear), but look, you're not getting' my property (laughter). You know, you're not getting' my property, you're not--I mean you're not takin' advantage of me. I mean I'm simply not partyin' like that so--but when I saw Thomas McCall and I heard about this new guy and I went down to meet him, and after church I waited for him and I went up to him, and he was hesitant about wantin' to talk to me and so I said, "Hey, I'm Amelia Ashley-Ward and I publish the Sun-Reporter and I've been trying to do a story on you." "Oh, bless you, bless you, bless you. When can I do that story? Oh, bless you." So I went up to talk to his wife. I said (unclear). I said, "Who are you?" "Patricia Ann McCall." And I'm like, okay. And so I could see that whole scenario, so I knew what that was gonna be about. And I had some distant family members who followed him for a minute, but I mean I could read--I could see right through that. Speaker 1: So it's just a reverberation of Jim Jones? Speaker 2: Yeah, I could see right through that. You know, they have pulpit pimps; it's a lot of 'em out there. You have to just be very careful. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: After all, they're men first. I mean, you know, my pastor, who was a good pastor--he was a good man and he was a good pastor, Reverend Scott. He used to say, "Some are called, some are sent, and some went" (laughter), in terms of preachers, you know. So you just have to know the difference, but you're not gettin' anything from me. Story_ID: 40723 Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is interesting because the Peoples Temple massacre takes place in Guyana in 1978, and I think you graduated from San Jose [San Jose State University, California] in '79 [1979], right? Speaker 2: Seventy-Nine [1979] I graduated from San Jose. Speaker 1: And it was then your mother [Louise James Ashley] suggested that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Go do an internship--I had to do an internship--she told me to go to the Sun-Reporter. Speaker 1: Yeah. And during that time, Carlton Goodlett, the founder, is an M.D., a very respected man on the West Coast (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--He's a--he's doctor-doctor; he's a medical doctor, general practitioner, and he's also a child psychologist. Speaker 1: Right. So he's on the hot seat for his support of Jim Jones. Speaker 2: Yeah, but he defended his position and he defended very well; he told them he didn't know. He said that he didn't know that, you know--they couldn't blame him for the blacks leaving their churches to go to Jim Jones just because he was Jim's physician--yeah. And they couldn't. And he said that--I think later he said that he could see that he, you know, that he probably was a little psychotic or something, but he said that they couldn't blame him for that. Yeah, he was on the hot seat but overall, he was well-respected; he was probably the most progressive leader in the black community, or one of the most progressive leaders in San Francisco [California]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right--and the country. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he was the first president of the black newspaper publishers to get 'em into the White House. Story_ID: 40724 Speaker 1: So--now when you went down to the Sun-Reporter, you spoke to the co-founder, Thomas Fleming-- Speaker 2: Tom Fleming. Speaker 1: --yeah. Was this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Doc was out of town. Speaker 1: Yeah, was this the first time you met Tom Fleming? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Well tell us about that. Speaker 2: I went into the office and he was this big, boisterous man, you know. Well-dressed and always had a hat on, nice vest, sittin' in a front office, talkin' loud, you know, lettin' everybody know, you know, who he was. And so I went in, I was shakin' in my boots. I said, "Mr. Fleming, I'd like to do an internship here" and blah-blah-blah, and he--"Child, come on child, you can do that, or we don't have much to pay you but come on, come on, you know, come on. You can do your internship here." I said, "Well, thank you very much." He just accepted me just--right there on the spot; then he talked my head off about another two hours, but he was just a walking dictionary, full of knowledge. So--and then I met Dr. Goodlett about two weeks later and he was very, very friendly, you know. He liked my work; they had to protect me around there 'cause they had a cast of characters there, baby; oh, my God--the cast of characters (laughter). Story_ID: 40725 Speaker 1: So we were talking about Dr. Carlton Goodlett, and this might be a good time to just ask you like what is the--kinda give us a history of the Sun-Reporter and how it was founded, and what it's meant to the black community here. Speaker 2: Tom Fleming was already there working; he and another gentleman were the co-founders of the paper. Dr. Goodlett came in and won it in a poker game (laughter), and so--and Mr. Fleming stayed there; Doc kept pumpin' the money into it from his medical bag. One time they got in trouble and a group of black businessmen bailed 'em out. So basically--and I know that next May, we will celebrate our 70th anniversary; but the Sun-Reporter has always been the voice of the black community in northern Bay Area [California]. Speaker 1: It goes back to 1944? Speaker 2: Nineteen Forty-Four [1944], '45 [1945] with Thomas Fleming writing a lot of the columns and Dr. Goodlett writing a lot of the editorials that helped shape the course of black life in the Bay Area and nationally, you know. He opposed the Vietnam War, he ran for governor and came in third; Cecil Williams was his campaign manager, or treasurer, and Dick Gregory was a part of it. So he's always been this big figure, this big progressive figure, you know, fighting with the students. Danny Glover and the students at San Jose--San Francisco State [San Francisco, California], when they were boycotting, taking on the car dealerships that didn't wanna sell to blacks, yeah. So he's been--he was really, really, really out there. Speaker 1: Okay. You say he was fighting alongside the students? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay--Danny Glover, okay. Story_ID: 40726 Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. He [Dr. Carlton Goodlett] later became like a father figure to me--the father figure--I worked for him from 1979 until he left in '90 [1990]--I think he left for the last time in '96' [1996]; no, he may--he may have left before then. I know that I was pregnant when Evan, my son, in '92 [1992], and he was goin' back to be with his son; he had Parkinson's Disease and he had gotten--he had developed prostate cancer and so he couldn't--and he could no longer really walk, and so his son came and got him and he called me and I was tellin' him, "Bye," and he told me--I cried and he cried because I'd been with him all those years and I literally had helped to hold that paper together. When everybody else would go against him and stuff, I was there and I would take the paper, I would get it printed if the printing staff would act up or whatever. So he made me promise to keep that paper goin' and--but I was six months pregnant and I was crying, he was crying, but he came back. He got better and he came back and got his apartment back. He could hardly walk, but he kept this apartment where you had to walk up three flights of stairs and he would--you know, he would walk on the cane or the walker, and then if he was able to kick off, he would take off walking, you know. And so I can remember the days that I would take him home but it was raining and he really couldn't get to goin'. I said, "Doc, kick out." And he couldn't get it goin'. I'm out there getting' drenched in the rain (laughter), waitin' for him. So then he would kick off and he would take off. But he came back and then he was at the hospital when my son was born. My son is Evan Carlton for Carlton Goodlett. And he stayed out here a few more years and he got sicker and then he had to go back with his son, and that was the last time that I saw him because he didn't die from the Parkinson's Disease, he died from prostate cancer because he was sevety-five [years old], I think, when they diagnosed it because I was up at the hospital and they didn't wanna do anything for him because of his age and because he had the other illnesses, but I think people think he died from the Parkinson's but he actually died from the Prostate Cancer when he was eighty-two [years old], back in '97 [1997]; he died in January of '97 [1997]. And so I arranged and had the service out here for him. But that was a really traumatic time for me also; I knew that he was gonna die because he had been sick for a long time, but it was just--it was like I lost, you know, a father. But he was just--he was controversial but he was brilliant, would fight for causes that he, you know, believe--you know, he would fight just for anything--I mean just for--against unjust causes. He didn't care who he stood up against, he always--he lived and he believed that the pen was far mightier than the sword. Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: Emm hmm. Speaker 2: And he [Dr. Carlton Goodlett] was a Ph.D. and a medical doctor. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a child psychologist and a general practitioner. Speaker 2: So did he work at those professions all the time that he was associated with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I don't, I don't remember him ever working as a child psychologist all the time, but he had his medical offices right on the lower level of the building and the newspaper offices were upstairs. Speaker 2: And the offices were on Fillmore [San Francisco, California], right? Speaker 1: Thirteen Sixty-Six Turk, 931-5778; I'll remember those numbers as long as I live, 1366 Turk and 931-5778. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Look, I was in the hospital in labor, getting ready to give birth to my son, and Mr. Fool (ph.) was on the phone asking me for the combination of the safe and I'm literally goin', pushin' out my baby (laughter). I mean no rest for the weary (laughter). Story_ID: 40727 Speaker 1: Being involved in a black newspaper is an intense experience in this one especially? Now when you started out, did you start off mainly as a photographer or-- Speaker 2: I was both; I did both. I was a photographer and a writer. So I remember I was a women's editor, I wrote news stories, then I had a problem there because it was already an editor there and he was white, and so when I got there, I think he felt threatened because I was a legitimate journalist and I was in the black community. And then we had another political reporter there, a columnist--Edith Austin, and she was just anti-this white guy being there in a black newspaper, and so she let it be known; so I think he became a little, you know, afraid, so eventually he left and I took over, but--yeah, I traveled to Barbados and I did a--to Mississippi, and I did photo essays. I won first place for my photo essay in Mississippi, and I think I won another first place for the one I did in Jamaica, then I had my work published in People Magazine. Speaker 1: Yeah, now you're hoppin' way ahead of the early days, but yeah, those are important stories. But in the early days, like what was a typical day like for you? Speaker 2: At the Sun-Reporter? Speaker 1: Yeah, when you started. Speaker 2: First of all, I worked there for two weeks not knowing what I was gonna make (laughter); that was Dr. Goodlett [Dr. Carlton Goodlett]. I didn't know what I was gonna make so--I had a car, I would get up--I lived with my mom, I started working there right out of college; Doc hired me, he told me after my internship to come back and he would give me a job and he held true to his word. So I started working there in May of 1979, right after I graduated. I wrote news stories, I went on assignments, took pictures. I had a lot of problems there at first because there were some people who were already working there who didn't like the fact that I was coming in, that I was college educated, and that Dr. Goodlett and Mr. Fleming [Tom Fleming] both liked me; so I didn't have an easy time. They hid my stories, they, they did all sorts of things, and then I had to stand up for myself and let them know I wasn't gonna take that. And one columnist didn't like when I became editor and I wouldn't do what she wanted me to do and put her stories on the front page, and she invited me outside to fight one evening, and so she told me in front of everybody, she said, "When it stops raining, we're gonna go outside." So I decided to take my stand; I said, "Why go outside? It's enough room up here" (laughter), and so that was the point--that was the first part of me lettin' them know that I didn't come there to play paper dolls. Story_ID: 40728 Speaker 1: Okay. So about how long had you been there at that point? Speaker 2: A couple months--two or three months. Then, it was a situation where--you know, I always had problems there; Dr. Goodlett [Dr. Carlton Goodlett] and Mr. Fleming [Tom Fleming] always protected me. I had problems there with an older woman who was the church editor; she resented me and eventually Doc had to ask her to retire. And then I had a problem with a guy there when I was pregnant; he had been there a long time and I had to deal with him, then I had a problem with some of the other younger--of the ladies who worked there, they were from the real bad areas of town, in Richmond [California], and they didn't like me and they were--they threatened me and they would actually fight. And so I had to protect myself and really stand my ground because I felt that I belonged there and I was not--and I wanted to be there and I wasn't gonna let anyone run me from there, so I had to really, really buckle down and develop a rough side and let them know that they weren't runnin' me away. And I survived. Speaker 1: Okay. So this was--about how many people were involved on the staff of the Sun-Reporter? Speaker 2: Probably about ten. Speaker 1: Okay, and were they all paid or just-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they were paid. In fact, I kept this one columnist on when I took over the paper, even when I moved the paper to its current location when everyone knew that I owned the paper and I was the boss, and this woman simply would not act right; she resented me being the boss because she had been there longer and she thought that her column was bigger than the paper itself, and so when Chauncey Bailey, who worked for me for a while, was killed, you know, a few years ago, she wanted to write all this bad stuff in her column about the people who had killed him, and these boys were still out on the street, and I wouldn't allow her to do that and she slammed the phone down, she said all kinda stuff, so we had to part ways. But I'm just tellin' you that it was never easy for me because people did not wanna accept the fact that a younger, black woman--and these were black folks, you know, had come to take this thing over. And I was doin' a very good job. The paper hadn't won any awards until I had gotten there. I stopped the police blotter and the guts and gory in the paper because I felt that our kids needed something else, so I got Doc to see another way. And so they really resented me, and it was not easy. I've had this kind of resentment even in my church and stuff; I've, I've, I've cried a lotta nights because my own people have resented me and rejected me. Story_ID: 40729 Speaker 1: Now this is what you just mentioned, the blood and guts, those bleeding headlines (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--They thought they sold papers. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was in the St. Louis, American is famous for that, the Chicago Defender (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And they did, they did. Yeah, they did but we had to show another way. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: That was like traditional way to sensational headlines-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --was--that's the mainstay. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Hey, I didn't know that my boyfriend was shot in a club until I got back and read it in the Sun-Reporter (laughter), 'cause he didn't tell me; he didn't want me to know (laughter). After I read the Sun-Reporter, I'm like, "Oh, my God, it's a police blotter." Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I mean, the headline, "Man Shoots Wife's Lover in the Head, then Shoots Himself in Foot." People would buy that paper (unclear), "Who is this? Do I know 'em?" And it probably still would sell--yeah. Speaker 1: So this is the kinda--this is what it would lead off--the lead headline would be like that but then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It would be reversed and black and white on the front of the paper every week, 'cause it sold papers. But you know, how many papers can you--thirty--what? It was like fifteen cents per paper? I'd rather give it away free; I can get a bigger circulation hit off of givin' it away free--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So was that another discussion about how to--I mean increase of a circulation by getting the paper out there, rather than-- Speaker 2: Well, I think that they believed that that's a point, and it did--it actually did. That type of headline sold papers. Story_ID: 40730 Speaker 1: One of the aspects of the Sun-Reporter was something called the Community Room? You wanna tell us (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (NODDING HER HEAD YES). (Simultaneous)--The Sue Lilienthal Community Room. I don't--It was upstairs, and Doc [Dr. Carlton Goodlett] would meet with various leaders and people up there, and--yeah, they would come there and meet right in that room, and it was right next to the production room, and they would close off the production room and people would come there and meet; he would meet politicians there, but later he would have everybody come down to his office down in the Medical Building--in the Medical Department. Speaker 1: Okay, so those are just meetings with Dr. Goodlett and the staff-- Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: --and not--'cause I was thinking it might be community (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--When I was there--I think that that happened before I got, before I had gotten there but not--no. Speaker 1: Okay. So if you were somebody who's in the news and you came to town, you would meet with Dr. Goodlett? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. You couldn't--if you were running for any kinda political office and you wanted support for the black community, you had to come meet with Carlton Goodlett. Speaker 1: A note I have here is that Malcolm X (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, Malcolm X, Paul Robeson, Martin Luther King--they used to meet all down at the Bedford Hotel [San Francisco, California]. Everybody came to town met with Carlton Goodlett. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So I understand that everybody knew that. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Story_ID: 40731 Speaker 1: Now you had photos published in not just the Sun-Reporter but in Jet and People Magazine too, as well? Speaker 2: Cepia (ph.), (NODDING HER HEAD YES). Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have--what are some of your favorite stories over the years? Speaker 2: That I've written over the years? Speaker 1: (Inaudible response). Speaker 2: I told the story of a young woman I made--I, I won a national award--Dr. Hemsa (ph.) Sumchi (ph.). Hemsa lost her mother. I think her mother committed suicide; I don't know where her father was, and she was from a real poor environment and she used people in the community. Dr. Goodlett [Dr. Carlton Goodlett] was one to help her get on her feet. She had a baby early out of wedlock, and she was able to go on and become a doctor, a neurosurgeon. So I told her story; it was--I used her--she was Janice Porter, and something, I said, "Now call her Dr. Hemsa Sumchi (ph.)." So I told her story. Who else? Oh, another young woman--three generations of breast cancer in her family, and she out--and her mother and her grandmother outlived her and she died in her twenties. Sheila--I told her story. That one was real--what else? Oh, and one of my photos, I took a picture of this a-hundred and twenty-something year-old black man in Oakland [California], and I really, really captured that photo and I won an award with that one. That was one of my best photos. I took a photo of Rosa Parks when she came to town and she kinda had her hands up; she's lookin' up in the air and it was like she was praying--great photo. So those are some of my favorites that I can remember. Story_ID: 40732 Speaker 1: Okay, one of the stories that you won an NNPA Award [National Newspaper Publishers Association] for was a story about African American women in Mississippi, right? Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: And what was the story about? Speaker 2: It was photo-journalism. I went there and captured the women in their day-to-day lives and what they do--the women with no teeth, who are happy as could be sittin' on their porches or doin' their work--the real, real voluptuous sisters, you know, sittin' on the porch with their hair all braided--that type of thing; just life in the south, the care-free life in the South. Speaker 1: Now did you go back to Magnolia? Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went right back to the town that I was born-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and did a photo essay. Speaker 1: All right. Now you had another story about--or was it a story--where you shot the photos for 'Sepia'--I mean it was the story about Reverend Cecil (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Reverend Cecil [Reverend Cecil Williams]. Speaker 1: Tell us about him and what the story was about. Speaker 2: Well, you know, Reverend Williams is this gigantic figure here in San Francisco [California] who has the church that feeds the homeless, and he just takes care of the down-trodden and disadvantaged that other people ordinarily wouldn't deal with, so he's just developed this whole community called GLIDE [Glide Memorial Church], in which people have housing, they have meals, they have child care, they have shelter, and people who come to--people from all across come to visit this church, and you have Bono, who's given thousands--hundreds of thousands of dollars; you have Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], who gave million (ph.); Bill Cosby--you have the story of--what's Chris'--that story--the movie that they did with Will Smith about the guy who lived the guy--GLIDE for a while and he got on his feet-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --right, so (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--He and his son (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, he and his son--Will Smith and his son told this story; I can't think of Chris' last name, but Cecil Williams and Maya Angelou--all these people come to him all the time and they say that he's actually doing what the church ought to be doing. And so I remember Dr. Goodlett, when someone wanted him to take on Cecil Williams, Doc said, "Oh, no; I'm not gonna mess with any man who feeds a thousand people free every day (laughter). Story_ID: 40733 Speaker 1: Now these are the decisions--you mentioned the Chauncey Billop (ph.) story-- Speaker 2: Bailey. Speaker 1: Bailey, yeah-- Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: --Bailey story (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Chauncey started working for Dr. Goodlett [Dr. Carlton Goodlett] as an editor of the California Voice before I got there, and he and Doc had, you know, some dispute. Chauncey was a free spirit, and so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Where was the California Voice based? Speaker 2: In Oakland, on the East Bay. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: So Chauncey got in--they had some kinda dispute 'cause Chauncey was a free spirit, so he went to work for the Oakland Tribune. He was a real, real, talented guy, real talented guy, and he went to work for the Oakland Tribune and so when I took over the paper, he also wrote for me, I paid him and he wrote stories for me, and so finally--he had some issues with the Tribune and he left, and so I helped him go back to--it was some--Barbados or somewhere, and so he came back and he started to work for the Post [The Oakland Post] and that's when he was doin' the series on the Muslim Bakery [Your Black Muslim Bakery] that got him killed. Speaker 1: What was the issue with the Muslim Bakery? Speaker 2: He said--he was talking about their finances and--I think their finances and how they were treating--supposedly treating people and all that kinda stuff. But I was told that the story had no teeth, like it wasn't a strong story, but--yeah, he was investigating--doing some investigative reporting and--yeah, they said it led to his death. Speaker 1: Yeah, the people that were investigating (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--were accused of killing him, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So these are Muslims that are involved in this bakery (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, right. Speaker 1: So--and you were saying that this--now this case has been picked up by the Maynard Institute and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --a lot of the--National Association of Black Journalists (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yeah. It was really, really tragic. Speaker 1: Yeah, they've held this up--him up as an example of investigative journalists and--so what was the issue at the Sun-Reporter about the article? You've said that there was some sensitivity about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, it was--one of my columnists decided--because--again, she didn't wanna follow instructions; she thought that she had been there longer than me, so she just wanted to do her own thing separate from the paper. She thought she was bigger than the paper so she wrote something about it and she called the alleged killers certain names and stuff, and I didn't want that in the paper like that 'cause no one had been brought to justice or anyone--no one had been officially accused, and she was callin' them names and stuff, so I told her "No," so she got mad because I wouldn't let her do it and, you know, we parted ways. Speaker 1: Okay. Is that a difference between having a journalist involved, I mean in charge of the paper and having people that are not used to having restraint? I mean or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. She's just--she was older. My problems have come from older women who felt that they had been there longer and blah, blah, blah, so even though I was her boss and I was giving her a paycheck, she still thought that she could do what she wanted to do and she was bigger than the paper so she didn't wanna, you know, you know, follow any of the guidelines or anything, and she really resented working under me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was a real popular columnist and I took a lotta flack from some people but a lotta people didn't mind at all. Story_ID: 40734 Speaker 1: How did you get involved in a--now you started doing editorial work, you said, a couple months after you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--(NODDING HER HEAD YES) I was taking pictures and--because--at first I was a writer, I was just a straight journalism major, then I decided I was bored with that so I added the photo-journalism, so I was always able to write; then I added the photo-journalism. Speaker 1: Okay, and then you took on editorial responsibility? I mean as a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I became the editor-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the editor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I was a women's editor and then I became the editor of the overall paper. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, and eventually you become the managing editor in '85 [1985], right?-- Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: Okay, then in '94 [1994], the publisher; that's nine years later. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So--but it hasn't been a smooth transition. Speaker 2: No, not at all. For the moments that I have the glory, it's great; I mean for all the awards that I've gotten, from the people that I've met along the way, for during my part to leave my legacy for giving a voice to the community, there have been some highs and there's certainly been some lows (laughter); there have certainly been some lows, but I wouldn't trade it for anything. Speaker 1: Okay. Doctor Goodlett passed away in '97 [1997]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. And then shortly thereafter, you acquired the paper. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about that now. Speaker 2: You know, when Doc was alive, and when he was sick and before he left here, he was always sayin' he was gonna leave me a portion of the paper 'cause he knew that it was in my heart; he knew that I would keep that paper goin' and, you know, that's just talk, so--but I actually--the Sun sold the paper to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So this is what they call the Sun-Reporter Publishing Company? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And--which includes the-- Speaker 2: The three papers--the Sun-Reporter, the California Voice and the Metro Group. Speaker 1: The Metro Group--now what locality does it focus on? Speaker 2: Throughout northern California--Oakland, Richmond, Berkeley, Vallejo, Stockton, San Jose, Peninsula, and I'm missin' one--San Francisco, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: It's free, and so I circulate on Tuesdays; it's our largest circulated paper, but it's a free distribution. Speaker 1: And does it have a different focus than the California Voice? Speaker 2: We try to zero in as much as possible on the various communities that it serves like Vallejo news, Richmond news, things like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And again, that's our free paper, and it goes to more areas. The Sun-Reporter is our paid circulated people; people subscribe to it, pay for it at the stores and at the various venues to get it. The California Voice is our oldest paper; it's circulated the first day--it's our first paper of the week on Sundays and it goes to all the black churches--primarily to businesses, things like that. Speaker 1: Now is that the oldest black paper? Speaker 2: Oldest black paper west of the Rockies. Speaker 1: Okay. Founded-- Speaker 2: Nineteen, Nineteen [1919]. Speaker 1: Okay. I thought it had a history. Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, right. So you maintain offices in all these places, or-- Speaker 2: No, no, we can't afford that anymore-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --no way. Story_ID: 40735 Speaker 1: 'Cause now, we're dealing with the digital era, which I don't think is gonna really, really last that long for us because people are kinda showing advertisers now that when they look online, they don't wanna look at the ads in all these pop-ups; they get right to what they're looking for. Speaker 2: So what does that mean for the paper? Speaker 1: That means that's good news for us because they're trying to replace us with digital, and so--my son [Evan Ward] goes online all the time but he's not looking for clothes online, he's looking to see what Snoop Dogg is talking about, who Rihanna is with, or he's looking for gossip or something like that or he's on Twitter but he's not looking for ads, and so they can't tell me when I pay for his clothes that he's gonna shop online, so my argument is that he's gonna look at the newspaper because he's looking to see what's goin' on in the black community, what upcoming sports stars are coming, what's goin' on with the black church, and things like that that he can't get in the daily papers, and that he can't get on T.V. So people are still gonna wanna hold that newspaper, that grandmother is gonna see what her high school grandson is doin' in sports, what's goin' on in the various churches, and she's not gonna go online and look for that; she's not gonna sign on period. And you know, we all are goin' blind for bein' online so much anyway. I mean my, yeah, my eyesight has gotten really, really bad from bein' online all the time. And I can tell you, I can't stand pop-ups, and I'm not looking for ads online, so I think that they're saying they're starting to see that. Speaker 2: Now that's interesting because all over the country, we interview people with black newspapers--local papers, and everybody's talking about trying to get (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well we all are gonna try to get online, but the fact of the matter is, is that we're years away from bein' profitable with digital media--years away. And again, the proof is in the pudding; are we looking online for ads? I'm certainly not. I mean are you? And then we're riding public transportation, they're ripping off our cell phones and our computers; it's not safe to take those anymore. It's safer to have a magazine or a newspaper in your hand that you can read, so you won't have to whip out your phone or your computer. I think all that is gonna come into play with this digital media. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a dynamic that a lot of people haven't thought about. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, really. You're always gonna want that--I mean when you look for photos--again, you know, young people is one thing, but they're not doin' all that shopping looking for ads online, but the middle-age person and the person who's getting older now, they're simply not gonna sit there and go online and stay online all day looking for ads and reading stories; they're not gonna do that. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. And you're right here near Silicon Valley [California] (laughter). Is that the thinking of the mainstream newspapers too? Speaker 1: I met with some publishers of mainstream newspapers and they say just give them a newspaper any day. And, you know--and look at how the guy just bought the Washington Post; he--I mean, why would he throw his money away buyin' a newspaper? Because he knows, he's done some research where this thing is gonna flip again and newspapers are gonna be what's goin' on--yeah. Story_ID: 40736 Speaker 1: So you've moved from responsibility to responsibility, and also--in terms of NNPPA (ph.) too, right? Speaker 2: NNPA? Speaker 1: Yeah. Tell us what NNPA is and what you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--NNPA stands for the National Newspaper Publishers Association, and it's the largest black print organization in the country; it has a membership of over 200 newspapers from across the country--yeah. And so we have our annual conventions at various places, and our regional conventions. I think in January we're going to Puerto Rico, and then in June we're going to Portland [Oregon]--yeah, Portland. And we come together all the--as many, you know, the majority of us come together and we talk about things like advertising and print--the print industry, and we--so that--you know, go and fight for advertising from various corporations, and stuff like that, and we--like for [President Barack] Obama, we take credit for--in large part, for his victory because we kept him out there week after week after week, across the country in our papers every week, every week. We told his story, and we supported him no matter what. Speaker 1: Now was Sun-Reporter Publishing involved in NNPA when you arrived? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Doctor Goodlett--again, was one of the first--he was two-term president of NNPA; he was one of the co-founders of the Black Advertising Agency, Amalgamated Publishers--that represented the NNPA, and he was the first president to ever get them in the White--the black publishers into the White House. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: So NNPA--was it founded like in the early '70s [1970s], late '60s [1960s], or-- Speaker 2: Oh, no; it was founded in the early--when was it founded? Probably in the '40s [1940's]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Sengstacke [John H. Sengstacke] founded it, I think, in the '40's [1940s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 40737 Speaker 1: All right, so--now are you a member of the National Association of Black Journalists? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, I'm strictly newspaper. Speaker 1: Yeah, now that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--The Black Journalists has a lot to do with radio, T.V.--not necessarily print. We're print, they're broadcast. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--a lot of print people but it may be--are they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--We're strictly print (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--a lot of them like seemed to be members of the mainstream (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, mainstream and--yeah. Speaker 1: People of Washington Post and the New York Times-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --so the black newspapers are really not that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, we--you know, we plead our own cause and we talk specifically to, and target, our community. Speaker 1: Right. And that phrase you just mentioned, "We plead our own cause," (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--We wish to plead our own cause; too long have others spoken for us? Speaker 1: Yeah, goes all the way back to 1829? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Somewhere back in the 1800s. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's our logo on our editorial, "We wish to plead our own cause." Speaker 1: (Unclear), yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, and so--okay. So there's a cherished history of black newspapers that comes up to this point in being the authentic voice of the black community. Speaker 2: Emm hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. And we will--there will always be a need for us, you know. Even in 2013 with a black president, can you imagine that we're still having the race question, you know. [President Barack] Obama can't get anything done; is it because of his race? You know. Story_ID: 40738 Speaker 1: What's the status of black newspapers today in terms of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Strugglin'. Speaker 1: Okay. Are we losing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Strugglin'. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--a lot of papers? Are we growing or shrinking? Speaker 2: You know, from our organization, I haven't heard about too many that's closing down, but I know that they're struggling to get more advertising, and fighting to get more advertising. Speaker 1: Where is most of the advertising coming from today? Speaker 2: Corporations car--General Motors, Toyota--it's a fight, though. Department stores still--Macy's, no longer Nordstrom; still food chains. What else? Some health care now, thanks to the Obama Care [Affordable Care Act, 2010]. What else? First Five, things like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nearly (unclear)--Comcast, Comcast, banks. Speaker 1: I know there's some criticism a few years ago that the black newspapers were getting lots of ads from cigarette companies and liquor companies (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--We don't get that anymore. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. We now have the ob--why you shouldn't smoke, the anti-smoking ads. Speaker 1: Is there a story about how that turned around? Speaker 2: The complaints--you know, complaints; and now they're--no, you don't see too many liquor ads and things like that. Usually have the beer ads; you still get the beer ads, Super Bowl is loaded with them; so you still have the beer ads but not too many smoking ads--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, you're not gonna have a lotta soft drink ads 'cause people are taking on the sugar industry, you know--diabetes and things like that--yeah. Speaker 1: So what's the largest stream (ph.) in revenue from the black community itself? Speaker 2: Car companies--you mean where do we spend our money? Speaker 1: No, no, in terms of where you get your advertising dollars. Is there a segment of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Banks--from the black community? Speaker 1: Yeah--black banks or black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, no; you--small businesses you get some; you know, you--little classifieds but no, you get the--the majority of the money comes from the corporations, and rightfully so. We spend billions of dollars and we have the data to prove it. We spend billions of dollars with corporate America every year so, you know, there should be some reciprocity; we spend billions. Speaker 1: What's the relationship between say the Sun-Reporter Publishing and black businesses in the area? Speaker 2: We have a good relationship with 'em. You know, we give them discounts and we cut where we can to--in fact, I'll be coming out in a month or so with a big business directory; discount prices for businesses--small businesses, black businesses. Any business who wants to do business with African Americans can advertise for a small price every month. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 40739 Speaker 1: You know we alluded to it throughout the discussion, but what's the--I guess the editorial policy or journalistic philosophy of the Sun-Reporter? Speaker 2: Policy--I don't know we have--If I really--if we really have a policy. I try not to run stories that are not beneficial to the community. I mean, I'm not gonna--if you--you--if you--you could be a gangster or whatever, but if you're not coming in and hurt--I mean I just try to--my philosophy is trying to put out a newspaper weekly that's gonna help the community make good decisions, you know, based around their lifestyles and things like that; give them information where they can make the decisions they need-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --show them the places they need to go, show them who their friends are, who their friends are not; that type of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. And in terms of endorsements, how do you make your endorsements? Speaker 2: We have editorial meetings, have them come and talk with us and we read about what they stand for and what they don't stand for; that type of thing. And we generally listen to--like for years, we worked with Willie Brown who's the most celebrated black politician, certainly in California--one of the--in the country--he was the speaker of the California State Assembly until they put term limits on him, and he was a two-term mayor [San Francisco, California]. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: But we'd listen--you know, we consult with Barbara Lee. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 40740 Speaker 1: Now what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I would hope that we stand together on issues that are important to us, whether we're in the income level of twenty thousand a year or two Million a year; I think that we all need to stay focused on the things that are important to our community and the things that are important to our next generation--education, good medical care, health--things like that, and I think that we have to pool our resources to take care of our communities. I'd like to see us pay more attention to our youth and not desert them once we have acquired enough money because, although I can send my kid to a certain school, if you don't take care of the kid that can't go to the same type of school and help--include him into the family setting, then we're gonna lose him around--along the way or we're gonna create a cycle of violence where it's gonna re-visit us. So we just have to stay focused and stay together and each one reach back, teach one and reach one and bring 'em forward, and I think that's what it's all about in our community. Speaker 1: Okay. What's the biggest local concern here in the Bay Area [California] for the black community? Speaker 2: Health, jobs, education; it's universal. Crime--black-on-black crime, housing. Speaker 1: Okay. Are we losing in--when I think of the Bay Area, I think of--when I think of black folks, I think of Oakland [California], basically, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And Oakland's losing out, but we've lost a whole lot in San Francisco [San Francisco]. San Francisco--it's funny, San Francisco does not have the popu--we have about what--seven or eight percent? But the seven or eight percent, in terms of spending money with corporations and stuff, we are in the high percentage, so we have a lotta people here with our small--with our small circulations, we make a whole lotta money. Speaker 1: And so (unclear)-- Speaker 2: The income is real high. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And so we--and so people still wanna reach out--my market is supposed to be small in terms of actual numbers, but in terms of spending power and money, this is a (ph.) area that they certainly concentrate on because you have a lot of professionals here. Speaker 1: Okay. And is there a typical occupation for the--are they mostly educators or-- Speaker 2: Educators, lawyers, doctors. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 40741 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point in your career, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: Probably not. You know, I believe that we all--you know, it's fate; you all--we all get what we're gonna get and we all do what we're gonna do. Would I have gone to a white paper? It was never really my desire; I wouldn't have had the freedom, I wouldn't have probably had the fun, I wouldn't have met the people, and even though it's a rough time now, I've been blessed. I think that if I died tomorrow, some people would say--most people would say that I made my contribution, I gave a voice to the voiceless, I stood up on the side of right, I helped a young black woman who was raised in her district become a supervisor when they said it was no longer fashionable. When black politicians turned against her, I stood up with her by myself, along with the State Attorney General Kamala Harris--the three of us, and we fought against the establishment; we fought against the well-to-do blacks. We were out there all by ourself (ph.) and we fought because she was raised in that community, she was the best candidate, and we were not gonna let people tell her what she couldn't do. And we didn't jump in that fight because we thought we were gonna win it; we jumped in the fight because it was the right thing to do, and low and behold, we won it too. Speaker 1: Tell us the story. You kinda generalized it, but tell us the specific (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--The story of London Breed? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: London Breed was born and raised in the projects in the Western Addition [San Francisco, California]. Her family members, you know, some of 'em got in criminal trouble. She was raised by her grandmother, this old woman from the south; she watched family members die--some get shot around her and everything, but London did the right thing. We told her to go to school, get her education, and make something of herself, so she did. She got a Master's and so when she wanted to be appointed supervisor in District Five, which is now a diverse district--progressives and everything; it's big. Mayor Brown--former Mayor Brown and people like that told her, "No, don't run; you can't win, and I'm gonna go with the--support the existing mayor." And so they came up with this other woman who was not born in that community, she moved to the community, probably so she could run, and so they threw London down, you know, just threw her on the ground. It's like how do you do this to someone that we've told, "Do what you need to do, go get your education and good things will happen to you," and then we don't support them? So that's what happened to London. The mayor appointed someone else, so she thought long and hard, so she decided to run for the seat on her own, even though people said it was impossible for her to run. After all, Ed Lee had lost in that district; it, it was, primarily, you know, progressives, Asians, very few blacks, very few blacks--big district--the largest district in the city. So they told her she couldn't win. Hell, I didn't know if she could win, but I know that it was--the right thing to do was to stand behind her and support her. So Kamala Harris, the former District Attorney of San Francisco and now the Attorney General of the State of California, marched in with her to City Hall last year, around this time I think, for her to sign her papers, and so while Kamala--when they walked in, I was standing against the side of the wall and Kamala like looked at me and like, 'Oh, thank God you're here.' So it was like--it was just the three of us, basically, fighting this battle, and London did the right thing; she went and knocked on doors every day, she was at the farmer's markets, the flea markets--everything. She got money from people she didn't think she was gonna get money from. We took a lotta flack but we won. Story_ID: 40742 Speaker 1: Okay. You spoke earlier, and I was recalcitrant for not following up and digging in on it, but I'll ask about it now--of your mother [Louise James Ashley] winning a lawsuit. And when you were talking about, you know, how fighting the system and fighting, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--She didn't--it wasn't a lawsuit like that, it was just maybe a car accident or something like that; nothing major, nothing major (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay, so it wasn't anything major like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But did your mother--did she have like a spirit of resistance herself? Speaker 2: My mother--she certainly talked to us about that, but my mother was quiet; quiet, subtle, smiling all the time, but she would tell us the right thing and she would encourage us to fight against injustice. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm sorry, I thought a settlement (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, no, no, no. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--legal issue. Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 40743 Speaker 1: But--well, at any rate, when you look back again, at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: London Breed [District Supervisor, San Francisco, California] (laughter). Yeah, London Breed, taking a struggling paper back in the '90s [1990s] and fighting to keep it goin' and goin', to solicit help from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and people like that, to restore the advertising and keep it going. Speaker 1: Okay. You certainly--I mean you own, you know, the paper. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It owns me (laughter). It owns me; it's not something that I think I wanna do forever 'cause it's a lot--not for too much longer. It's a lotta stress tied to it, you're constantly fighting for advertising, and stuff like that. So at some point, I wanna chill out and I want every day to be Saturday and Sunday; I don't wanna always have to look forward to Monday and startin' this all over again. I need some more Saturdays and Sundays in my life; I need more weekends. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Does that make sense? Speaker 1: (Inaudible response. Speaker 2: I live for the weekend because I know that for those two days, that nothing--that I can just chill out; that everything else'll be waiting for me on Monday. Speaker 1: Are things getting easier? Cause you describe like kind of when you first arrived (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, no. Speaker 1: --with being seen as a--as this professional, you know, graduate--college graduate (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, they don't get easier; not in this time. The economy is extremely bad, you're still strugglin', fightin' for advertisin', working--I mean looking for ways to constantly survive. So it doesn't get easier, but at the end of every Thursday when I put out that major paper, I can exhale for a few days before I get back to it, and I take pride in the fact that every week, I've done something to help someone and change their lives, so that makes it easy. And I have a son [Evan Ward] that's twenty-one [years old] and he's not interested in dealing with the newspaper but he's certainly learned how to fight the fight for what's right, how to stand up, how to be a man, and do what's right. Story_ID: 40744 Speaker 1: I have one son. Evan is twenty-one [years old], he's a student at Middle Tennessee [Middle Tennessee State University] in Murfreesboro, Tennessee. He's a mass communication major; he wants to broadcast--he wants to be a broadcaster, and he also is on a football team back there. And Evan went to school here in San Francisco [California]; he graduated from Archbishop Riordan [Archbishop Riordan High School], an all-boys school. His father [Lovie Ward] left us when he was seven, so I basically raised him-- Speaker 2: Where did you meet his father? Speaker 1: At school; we were living in the same community, so we were--I met him at school. Speaker 2: At San Jose State, or where? Speaker 1: Here, in San Francisco. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We went to--well, we didn't even go to school together. He went to Denman [James Denman Middle School], I went to Aptos [Aptos Middle School], but we went to elementary together and we kinda stayed in contact, so we started dating while I was in college, and once I graduated, we married when we were twenty-five [years old]. We had Evan about nine years later, and so he left us when Evan was seven, so I educated Evan--basically paid everything for Evan, kept him in private school. His father died when he was fifteen [years old]; he got pancreatic cancer and he died within five weeks of that--of his diagnosis, so I had to finish, you know, raisin' Evan by myself, and so I sent Evan to Hargrave Military Academy [Chatham, Virginia] right after he graduated from Riordan, for post-grad year of some football because he started playin' football later in life, and he told me he wanted to still play football. So I sent him there for shelter and to grow up a little more, and so he stayed there about six months and then from there, he went on to Middle Tennessee. So he's certainly a young man that I'm very, very proud of. That's my contribution to the world--the fact that my son is gonna carry on and he's gonna make a contribution to make the world better. Story_ID: 40745 Speaker 1: Now, are you pretty comfortable with your decision to stay in the black newspaper publishing business, rather than have gone to a--like the San Francisco Examiner, or someplace like that? Speaker 2: You always have your thoughts; I could have made more money, I could be doin' this, but I believe that in this life, you get what you get and you do what you do, and I just, I just think that--I'm still comfortable. I'm still comfortable, I've had certain freedoms doing what I do, I didn't have the editorial frustrations of being over on the other side; I basically can make my own decisions. I've had my problems; maybe it wasn't as financial--you know, maybe it wasn't--I didn't make all the money that I could have made, but I've certainly been able to provide for my family, take care of my mother [Louise James Ashley] before she died, give my son [Evan Ward] a great life, and so--yeah. I mean, you know, I, I have my own home, things like, so it's been fine. I mean--and do I ever think about it sometimes?--of course. Speaker 1: Is there any place, any venue, organization or meeting where the black journalists, the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], that work for these major white-owned papers come together with the black newspaper world? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. But the ones that work here, I'm very close friends with 'em--yeah. I'm very close to 'em. Look, I've had to plead their cause and fight their case. When Dorothy Reed had the braids in her hair at Channel 7 [San Francisco, California] and they wanted to get rid of her, it was the black press and the black ministers that took to the streets and demanded that they keep her. When Belva Davis, who's a good journalist out here--she worked for the Sun-Reporter, and when she went to work for the--one of the major stations and they didn't wanna keep her, Dr. Goodlett [Dr. Carlton Goodlett] demanded that they send her to school and keep her. So they owe us a lot; they owe us a lot, because we could say the things and do the things that they couldn't do 'cause we were free-- Speaker 1: Free to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --and we could call a spade a spade. And we used our front pages to do it many times, so when they tried to tell me that we didn't do it and we didn't count, I know that we did because I know that I was out there for Dorothy Reed. I know that when they wanted to mess with some other ones and they were afraid and we got involved and they told us to back off, we backed off, but I know that we have done more good than bad. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to consider before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, I'd just--I'd just like to say that this life for me has been fulfilling. If, you know, if we're Christians, if we wanna be Christ-like, or for whatever religion we have, this is the job where you fight for what's right, you stand up for what's right, and you make sure that those who are without are remembered, and you work for them to be taken care of. And if that means that I didn't become a millionaire doin' something where I couldn't contribute to the betterment of the country, then I'm fine just where I am. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you wanna tell us about your youth ministries? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay--No? Speaker 2: I had 'em (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Now you had something that you created in the church you go now-- Speaker 2: Yeah--no, no; right now, I'm not as involved in the church as I had been. Hey, I worked a lot in that church [New Providence Baptist Church, San Francisco, California], and I took a lotta beatings, but--you know, because people don't want you comin' in to their space, you know. Even though I had a right to it, I paid my dues and I paid everything, they still wanna hold onto what they have. So, you know, I left that church that I helped to build because they wanted to keep the minister in place and fight against me, but then they wanted me to come back because he did some real bad things so--you know, I'm fifty years old now, I'm over fifty--I'm tired, I don't have that fight in me anymore. The only thing I wanna do now is, you know, continue with my publishing, maybe do some consulting, maybe some lobbying--some consulting in terms of the black community. I'll continue to watch my son [Evan Ward] grow and do the things that he has to do, and just sit back, you know, for a minute, you know. Life hasn't always been that easy for me; I've been fighting, you know. It's funny--in my personal relationship I'm always dating, always have a man around; it's funny, I don't know how to--I haven't mastered keepin' one but I know how to get rid of 'em (laughter). So, you know, I just need to sit down and sit back and now do some things for me. Yeah, 'cause it's been a long time; I've been doin' this--I've been at this since I was twenty-one [years old]. Story_ID: 40746 Speaker 1: We were just talking when I came in. You were saying that you fly often to Tennessee to see your son [Evan Ward] play football. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I've earned the right to do that. Speaker 1: But you are concerned about the whole football head injuries issue (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, I'm concerned about all the injuries. And the funniest thing is that I took him--I, I wanted him to be a normal kid, you know. My mother [Louise James Ashley] spoiled him; he was raised by women, and so he's a big kid so I wanted him to be normal, so I took him to the coach up at Riordan [Archbishop Riordan High School, San Francisco, California]. I said, "Can you do anything with my kid?" He said, "Yeah, he's a big boy; we can put him on the football field." Well, Evan started liking it, so he told me at the end of his junior year, "Mom, I wanna play football but no one is lookin' at me." So I went to Coach Carter--he's a real famous coach, put him--spent a lotta money, put him in all these camps and everything. It was late for him to get him going because he--that's something he wanted to do. Then I thought about it recently; I said, "Oh, Lord have mercy, if I have introduced my son to something that's later gonna harm his health and all that, I would never be able to forgive myself." So now I'm tryin' to pull back, and there's a lotta politics involved in D-1 [Division 1] sports; it's like slave-owners, you know. They own you, you do what they want you--they--want--they use you, they don't use you, they, they--you get hurt and they shoot you up so you can still play--so they can win; it's all about winning, all about winning. And do we want that? Do we leave one slavery to enter into another one? And these are primarily black boys--I don't think so, and I think that's a discussion that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and people need to start having. Our kids are intrigued by the money and buyin' our momma a house. But at the end of the day, I had to think about this; I said--I traveled because--and my kid is not playing that much right now, he's a sophomore [Middle Tennessee State University]. I said, "Well, if he's ever out there, do I wanna see him on T.V. layin' on the field and I can't get to him?" You see what I'm saying? So then I called him, I said, "Look, go to your class every day." He's a handsome kid, I paid for his teeth; he has perfect teeth. "Get in front of that camera, boy, and smile and make you some money" (laughter). So I'm kinda backin' away from that because of the injuries and of the politics of it. Story_ID: 40747 Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as someone who started this journey in high school, took it to college, had an opportunity to go and work for the mainstream media but decided that I wanted to go back and do something for my community, to help uplift my community, to give a voice to the community. So I think I'd like to be remembered for standing up even when it was unfashionable, even when I was afraid at times, when it was a lonely journey, to make the world in my community a better place. Speaker 1: All right. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And I sacrificed a lot for that, but it was worth it. And I think that when they're reading my obituary and I'm being eulogized, then they have no choice but to say what was right--that I worked to make the world a better place, and I worked to uplift my community, and that I gave birth to a son that ended up being a good model citizen who will one day make his impact...