 Story_ID: 323598 Speaker 1: I wanna start by slating that my name is Evelyn Pounds, and I am the interviewer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer. Will you state your full name and your date of birth? Well, state it and then spell it for us. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Amalia Amaki. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: A-M-A-L-I-A, A-M-A-K-I. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was born-- Speaker 1: Your date of birth. Speaker 2: --July 8, 1949. Speaker 1: And the location of birth? Speaker 2: Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is February 15, 2006. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? If you don't wanna give the address of your home, then you can just say that it's in your home in-- Speaker 2: Well, it's in-- Speaker 1: --Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 2: It's in my home in Atlanta, Georgia. Story_ID: 323599 Speaker 1: Now I'm just gonna ask you a few People magazine-ish type questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh God, I have so many, let's see. If I had to pick one it would probably be cookies (laughter). That's terrible, I know. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: There's a tie, Santa, probably Santa Fe, New Mexico. Speaker 1: All right, and the other one? Speaker 2: The other one, there's this, there's this precious little town called Beausoleil in, in France. It's just, I, I, I call it just up the hill from the French Riviera, but it's, it's, it's a little working-class town, and, and it's called Beausoleil, a beautiful sun. I love it. I haven't been there in years, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I'd, I'd love to go back there. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: The glass is always half full. Story_ID: 323600 Speaker 1: Now tell us something about your mother. What was her name? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Mary Lee Hill Peek. She-- Speaker 1: Where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Newnan, Georgia. Speaker 1: Would you spell Newnan for us? Speaker 2: N-E-W-M--let's see, Newnan--N-E-W-N-A-N. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Newnan, Georgia, which is about, I would say just slightly over an hour south of here, if you went down 85 [Interstate 85 (I-85)]. But she grew up outside the city. She was--her, her parents were, were farmers. She was--I, I always thought of my mother as very wise. She was quiet. She had an amazing sense of humor. She was very clever. I, I grew up hearing her sayings. I still refer to those sayings. I hear her voice in my head all the time. Speaker 1: Share some of those sayings with us. Speaker 2: Well, see, they, they come up at the moment that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you need them, but probably one of my favorites is, she had this saying that--well, some of them were obvious, things like nothing worth having comes cheap. But she also would, would--I'm trying to think of the one about working hard. Now I, I can always pull it when I'm teaching. But she said hard work doesn't always result in a lot of money, but hard work always results in positive results. And, and I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's wise. Speaker 2: --I like that. Speaker 1: That is. Speaker 2: You know, she said work hard, something good comes out of it. Speaker 1: That's right. And when, her date of birth, when was she born? Speaker 2: My mother was born August 25, I'm always getting this wrong (laughter), have to ask my sisters--1935. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Is that right? I think my mother was born earlier than that. She was 19-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Twelve or nineteen-- Speaker 1: Hold on a second. Speaker 2: August 25-- Speaker 1: Nineteen fourteen [1914], sorry. Speaker 2: Fourteen [1914], okay. Speaker 1: Nineteen fourteen [1914]. Speaker 2: I knew that was a little too-- Speaker 1: That's it, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, 1914. Speaker 1: The children--okay, go on, and-- Speaker 2: And, and she was, the things I remember about her, she was a quilter; she was a good nurturer; she was, my mother somehow managed to convince all six of us that each of us was her favorite. I don't know how she did that. It was, it's, it's real--it's really funny sometimes when, when we get together now, and we're all convinced that we were really the favorite daughter. How she managed to do that, but I think she had a knack for finding a way to give all six of us quality time alone with her. And I think that did it. Speaker 1: That did it? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right-- Story_ID: 323601 Speaker 1: Did she [Amaki's mother, Mary Hill Peek] share many stories about when she was growing up in Newman--Newnan [Georgia], when she was a little girl? Speaker 2: I don't remember a lot, except that she had some health challenges as, as a young girl. And I do remember her talking about how she was spared the hard work outside of the home. So because of that, she really became proficient at doing things inside the home. Her, her parents were farmers. Her sisters and brothers had to, to literally work that farm. She, because of, of some, some health situations, was confined pretty much to the house. But for that reason, she learned to, to make things, to make draperies, to--she was an, an excellent homemaker in terms of, of keeping the house orderly and clean. And, and she was a, a, a good cook. She was a good manager of, of, of money. I mean she really could, could budget with, with extraordinary skill. And I think she learned to, she learned to make everything from scratch, syrup. I remember once she had recipe that called for brown sugar, and she only had the, the granulated sugar. Well, she knew what to put in that granulated sugar to make it simulate the taste of brown sugar, so just little things like that, that on the surface you take for granted. But they really added a quality of life to growing up with her, as her daughter, than, than I think I would have realized in, in a different situation, just little, little things. Speaker 1: Do you remember how she made syrup? Speaker 2: I know somehow she put sugar in a hot pan. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But that's about--and, and I think it, it, it, it would liquefy once the pan reached a certain temperature. Speaker 1: Right, 'cause everybody is basically in custom of just going and buying it off the, the shelf-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: --and, and that's it. But she-- Speaker 2: And, and she had these flavorings that, that she would add to the, to the, to the syrup. It was, it was just wonderful. But she, she believed in making things from, from scratch. She loved to bake her own bread. And I think those were be- because she spent so much time growing up in the home. She just became very good at it. Story_ID: 323602 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your father. What is his name, or what was his name, and when was he born and where? Speaker 2: Norman Vance Peek. He was born in, now I always thought he was born in Macon, Georgia. His sister at one point said no, they were born in Greene County [Georgia], which is in the Lake Oconee [Georgia] area, and that they moved to Macon when they were very, very small. But he was born September 25, 1890-- Speaker 1: Eight [1898]. Speaker 2: --eight [1898]. Speaker 1: Now I do have that one. Okay, all righty. Speaker 2: And, and my father, believe it or not, is as wonderful a cook as my mother [Mary Hill Peek] was, my father was a better cook. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Father--excellent, excellent cook. And my mother had no problem yielding the kitchen to him. She loved his cooking, absolutely loved it. He was very creative, very creative person. I can remember being second and third grade and having these leather and brocade totes that he made. And, and you know, totes are the hot things now. Everyone has a tote, but when, when, when, you know, we were second, third grade, those were not my common everyday items but he made those, and, and we carried our books and, and other things in them. And the, the students were always, you know, the, the classmates were always curious where we bought these totes. And we always proudly, you know, announced that, you know, our father made 'em, that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --he made these. And he called them shopping bags, cloth bags. Speaker 1: Did they just open at the top, or did they have a flap, you know, where they opened? Speaker 2: They would just open at the top, and they literally looked like shopping bags, except they were made out of fabric. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But you know, just very, very creative, was an, an excellent gardener. We always had the sort of star yard in, in the neighborhood because he was so good at, at--you know, he'd take things that we had assumed--you know, a winter storm would come through; spring is, is not quite blooming; there's no green that you can see, and he would snip that thing down and, and nurture it. And by the middle of summer you had this beautiful shrub that had, that we said he had brought back to life. But he was just very, very, very creative. I, I think as an artist myself that I get some of that sense of design from, from watching my father put things together and, and, and lay out gardens and, and cook, and, because he, he put a lot of emphasis on not just having food taste good but having it look pretty. Story_ID: 323603 Speaker 1: Did he share any stories with you about his growing up days? Speaker 2: You know, my, my parents [Mary Hill Peek and Norman Peek] were really sort of tightlipped about growing up. They, they, they, they talked about their parents sometime, and I think that was because, by the time I was born, both sets of grandparents were dead. And so they, they talked about the, the personality traits of, of their parents. Apparently they came from slightly different households. My, my, my father's family grew up, my father grew up in a family where there was a lot of, of reading at the table. His father would read the newspaper, and everyone had to listen. And they would tell stories. They'd sit around on the porch at night and tell stories. And, and my father, as a result of that, was a great storyteller. And you never really knew if he was, if it was fact or fiction, he was so, he was so convincing. My mother, on the other hand, seemed to grow up in a much more prim and kind of proper situation, where you, you know, you, you ate your meal quietly at, at the table, you did not eat until everyone had, had, had, had gotten in. If it, if it meant waiting until eight or nine o'clock at night for that final meal, you, you did it; everybody sat around the table, ate together. So it was a, a slightly different--very quiet. You could tell they had a very, a very quiet kind of interaction as a family. On the other hand, you know, my dad's family was always, you know, loud and laughing and you know, very boisterous kind of upbringing. And, and I always thought that that was an interesting attraction, you know, this idea that opposites attract. Story_ID: 323604 Speaker 1: Did they share any, any stories about how they met or when they met? Speaker 2: You know, my mother [Mary Hill Peek], and like I said, you can never tell sometimes because my father [Norman Peek] would tell these stories, and my mother would sort of laugh, but she never challenged him; she never called him on it. And, but I remember once she was joking with one of her sisters. It's, it was her next to older sister. And they were talking about my mother walking down the street and my father leaning up against the building and swinging this pocket, this pocket watch, wearing a zoot suit and saying something like hubba, hubba, hubba when my mother went by. And so there was something, there, there was something interesting that happened on the street, and I think it was Ashby, Ashby Street [Joseph E. Lowery Boulevard] here in Atlanta [Georgia]-- Speaker 1: In Atlanta. Speaker 2: --that, that, that incident supposedly happened. And my, my mother gave him this, this, this look, 'cause I don't think she was that impressed with him the first time she, she saw him. But he, as the story goes, knew that she was the, she was the one for him when he saw it but the, the thing, somehow I could see my father in the, in the zoot suit and swinging the watch. You know, he was just, he was, he was that, he was very gregarious-- Story_ID: 323605 Speaker 1: And what did he [Amaki's father, Norman Peek] do? I mean you--what, what type of profession did he have? What was his interests (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When they met, when they met he was a singer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was a singer. He-- Speaker 1: So the reason for the zoot suit and the watch-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, it would've been the-- Speaker 1: --and the hubba, hubba and-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a, he was a, he was a singer. And I think she [Amaki's mother, Mary Hill Peek] had a lot to do with him terminating that career, because she, even though she had been told from the time she was about fifteen or sixteen years old that she would not have children--this is what doctors told her--I think she still had her mind set on a family. And she did not--I don't think she felt that was a, a good idea to have her husband, as she put it, gallivanting all over the country and not being home with his family. So I think she convinced him that he needed to pursue another career. Speaker 1: Okay, and what group was he-- Speaker 2: You know, my, my earliest-- Speaker 1: --with? Speaker 2: --recollection of my father is, and, and I've, I've had this conversation with a couple of my sisters this week because I was trying to determine exactly what he did, but he was employed at Walgreens. And I just remember that it was, it was considered highly unusual at that time because he handled money. And at that time it was, here in the South, you know, having a business and having white clientele, because the clientele was, was, was basically white, and having a black employee handle the money, that was a very unusual situation. But, and we're, we're still not sure exactly what he did. I thought he worked a lunch counter, that, that, that, that was what he did. All we know is we remember he would--we would rush to the door when he would come in, because Walgreens at that time made these little, these little almost square pints of ice cream. It came in these little squares, and you opened them up. Do you remember those? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And we each had a favorite flavor. And I think it was on Fridays, we would each get our own pint of ice cream. My favorite was fudge ripple. I still remember it (laughter). And, but I, I know there was one sister who loved lemon--what was it called? Lemon chiffon I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Another liked Neapolitan; someone else liked black walnut, and he would--we'd eat so. I remember that, and, and he, he would, he could bring those eight pints of ice cream, 'cause he'd, he'd bring one for my mother and, and for himself as well because he got them, as an employee he got them 50 percent off. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But then I, I also recall by the time I think I was midway through elementary school [John Hope Elementary School; John Hope-Charles Walter Hill Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], he was really what we call now a, a landscape architect. Now they weren't, they weren't calling him that at that time, but he would go to various homes and business and lay out their, their gardens, and he would maintain them. And in between that, I can recall when I was very small up until right when I started high school [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia], we saw very little of my father from about October until mid-January. And that's because he was catering parties. The kitchen was, the house was always full of these, these wonderful aromas. He would start making fruitcakes for his Christmas parties the first of October. And he'd bake them, put them in these little tin containers, and put jiggers--I guess that's what the little glasses are--jiggers of--I don't know if that was bourbon. It was some (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or rum. Speaker 2: --liquor, but he'd--maybe it was rum. He'd sit that glass in that, in that opening, and that would keep it moist but also flavorful. He was known for his cakes. And by-- Speaker 1: That sounds good (laughter). Speaker 2: --by Christmastime, he would just pull these, these tins, they were all on top of cabinets and--but from October on, the, the house was just robust with these wonderful aromas. He made bourbon balls and orange chiffon cakes and what, what he called a hummingbird cake-- Speaker 1: Was that a cake? Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a cake, and tarts, and chess tarts, and I still don't know what a chess tart is. Speaker 1: That's what I wanted to ask (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just know that they were good-- Speaker 1: --what that was (laughter). Speaker 2: --because he would serve these parties, and, and if, if there was overage, he would bring it back. And we'd stay up sometimes (laughter) hoping that the, these leftovers from the parties and--but I, I can, I can remember that very vividly. So he-- Speaker 1: I wonder if a chess tart is like a chess pie, which is-- Speaker 2: Probably is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Out of an egg-- Speaker 2: --a little small-- Speaker 1: --lot of, lot of eggs used to make them. Speaker 2: But I, I remember they're very, very popular, very popular-- Story_ID: 323606 Speaker 1: Christmas was an interesting time growing up because I have this unusual ability sometimes to hear things in my sleep without waking up. And I would always at, at, at, on Christmas morning I knew exactly which one of the piles was mine. And, and I always--my mother [Mary Hill Peek] always wondered. She said, "What is, what is with this one?" But what, I would hear them discussing on--"Give the doll with the blue dress, put that in her stack, and put this one in, in this stack," and that sort of thing, so I would hear them discussing where the things went. So, you know, the Santa Claus thing never really worked with me 'cause I could hear, I really could hear and remember in, in my-- Speaker 2: But they still had the Santa Claus fantasy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, they played-- Speaker 2: --going? Speaker 1: Oh, they played it-- Speaker 2: Right, okay, all right-- Speaker 1: --they played. Speaker 2: --but you saw through it. Speaker 1: And you know, I tried not to ruin for my younger sisters, but I, you know, I knew 'cause I, I heard them getting it together. And it was just Christmas was a wonderful time, and-- Speaker 2: Now did he [Amaki's father, Norman Peek] do any of the cakes and pies for the family also (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yes. Speaker 2: --to leave those around. Speaker 1: Oh yes. And we-- Speaker 2: But you're just looking at-- Speaker 1: --each had our favorite cakes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I can remember he'd rotate. At Thanksgiving he'd do a, a slew of cakes, and he'd hit half the favorites, and Christmas he'd do the other half. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then we always got our favorite cake on our birthday. That was our birthday cake, was, was our favorite cake. Mine was coconut. And, and you know, the cookies and the coconut and all that probably explains to this day why I struggle with high cholesterol. But, and, and like my mother, he did everything from, from scratch, grated the coconut; he used the coconut milk in the cake. I mean his coconut cakes were wonderful. Story_ID: 323607 Speaker 1: Do you remember--I know you said that your grandparents were all deceased by the time you were born. But on your mother's [Mary Hill Peek] side, do you know the names of your grandparents? Speaker 2: You know, I should, but I-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --don't, I really don't. Speaker 1: Do you remem-- Speaker 2: My oldest sister [Deborah Peek Crockett] always can throw those names out. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I just remember, I, I, I recall seeing a photograph of them a few years before each of them died. They died very, relatively close together, both sets of parents did. And my mother said she, she--that didn't surprise anyone because they were, her parents were almost inseparable. And she knew that they wanted, they would want to go together. That was, that was just their thinking. It turns out we were--I think I was in my teens--when I learned from my mother's oldest sister that their mother was Choctaw; she was full Choctaw. And at the time, well, we knew she was full, she's full Indian [Native American]. It was years later that she told me she was Choctaw. Well, I remember asking her when she said that, and I'm, I'm fully adult at that point, and I said, "What is Choctaw, you know, where do, where do they come from?" And she said, "Well, I don't know where they originally came from, but her family originally came from the Carolinas, from South Carolina, but ma--many of them ended literally walking to Oklahoma." So she said, "You probably have Choctaw relatives in Oklahoma." Speaker 1: Has anyone done the family history to date? Speaker 2: I have--no one seems to really cared but me (laughter), so that, that is something I've, I've, I've, I've tried to trace it. It's, it's, it's, it's, it's very interesting because there is, there is this resistance. You know, there, there are people in the family who really don't wanna deal with that, that Native American part of, of our heritage. And I, I, I know her sisters, a couple of her sisters said that, you know, it was such a challenge dealing with being African American in the South that, you know, they grew up hearing their mother say that you were better off if you were black. It was worse to be Indian. So, I, I, I think she instilled that in them, and they just sort of turned away from it. Speaker 1: Okay, and the father, though, was, was black? The husband was black, your grandfather on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Was, was, was black and, and was a, was a farmer. And my mother was real funny. She said you know, she said, "We, we thought we were wealthy." She said we, we were, you know, we were, said when they were growing up, they were considered wealthy because, by African American standards, because they had, they had their own land; they had a mule (laughter), and she said you know, if you had livestock, you know, this was, this was considered, these were signs of wealth, the way certain cars and, and living in certain neighborhoods would be considered today, so it, it was, it was very interesting. And she said they didn't sharecrop and, and which was what so many of their neighbors did; that--so they sort of looked at as being a little, being rather prosperous. Speaker 1: Did any stories pass down as to how they got the land? Speaker 2: I think her father inherited that land from his mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So his mother, my great-grandmother was a, was a landowner. Story_ID: 323608 Speaker 1: I'm gonna start by stating that we're gonna pick up at the point where your father [Norman Peek] and mother [Mary Hill Peek] met. Because we had a technical difficulty on roll one at about sixteen minutes into the tape. So how did your father and mother meet? Did they share any stories about how they met? Speaker 2: The best I can, the best I can recall is the story that my, my father, who, who was a singer, was leaned up, leaned against this building in a zoot suit, swinging a pocket watch as my mother walked by. That was her first encounter. And he said something, my aunt said, like hubba, hubba, hubba to my mother, who wasn't overly thrilled with, with, with way that he addressed her on the street. I, I believe it was on Ashby Street [Joseph E. Lowery Boulevard] here in, here in Atlanta [Georgia]. And, but he subsequently, I, I, I assumed convinced her that his intentions were honorable, and they married. And my mother probably was responsible for him terminating his performing career because growing up in a, in a close family, she did not consider having her husband away to be the most ideal situation. And even though she had been told as a young girl, I think she was about fifteen or sixteen years old when she was told she would never have children. I think my mother, being a woman of, of deep faith, still had high hopes of having a family and knew that if that was the case, my mother also was, was brought up in a situation where her mother worked in the home. So with, with, with this kind of idea of a family structure, her husband needed to be there. Story_ID: 323609 Speaker 1: It is ironic that she was told she would never be able to have children, that this was something she would just have to learn to live with, that my mother [Mary Hill Peek] subsequently had six daughters. Speaker 2: And how old was she when she started having children? And tell us the story that's associated with how she started to conceive. Speaker 1: Well, you know, it was really interesting. It was, my mother talked about having her, her prayer time. She would always start off our, her days before daybreak. She'd, she'd get up and, and for some reason she would sit near or in front of a window. And on, on this particular occasion, this would, would have been--let's see, my oldest sister [Deborah Peek Crockett]--so this would have been in the early '40s [1940]. There'd been a, a, a really bad storm. It was springtime, and the weather was trying to change, and, and there were severe storms in the area, and it said that it pretty much stormed through the night. And she thought about whether or not she should even get up, because my mother was terrified of, of thunderstorms, really terrified. And, but she decided to get up, and, and she said she looked out the window and there was, said she could literally see the, the, the storm clouds rolling away. And she said they were rolling like a beach ball, rolling along the sands of the beach, and said right behind these rolling clouds was this, was this streak of sunlight. And it was almost as if the, the rays of light were pushing the clouds away. And, and she said she looked just to the right of that sunlight, and there was the most vivid rainbow she had ever seen in her life. And she took that as a sign. And, and, and she said the colors in the rainbow were so vivid, it's, it's like they were, the colors were reflecting on the trees and just everything. And she said it was like a fantasy, like looking at a fantasy, and she really took that as a sign. This was in the spring, and my oldest sister was born that following January. Speaker 2: And how old was your mother at that time, approximately? Speaker 1: At that time, my mother was in her thirties; she was around thirty-five, and which was very late for her generation to begin a family. Story_ID: 323610 Speaker 1: We talked earlier about why she [Amaki's mother, Mary Hill Peek] had these fears of the weather, of the storms. And would you relay that experience for us? Speaker 2: She was very terrified of storms because of a, a, a storm that came through Newnan [Georgia] when she was a little girl. She was, she said she was five or six. And, and they had gone into the cellar and, because this, there were tornadoes in the, in the area. And they had assumed--they heard all of the disruption outside, and, and suddenly there was this calm. And they assumed that the storm was over, but apparently there was, there were, there was more than one tornado. And her, her father had, had opened the, the door out to this cellar and was carrying--she was in his arms. And just as, as he stepped outside of this cellar, she said she sort of looked to the right, and she said the sky was this yellowish color; she said it was very ominous looking sky. And she looked to the right, and she could see another twister coming. And she literally saw it miss them; it literally sort of bounced over the area where they were, because it hit a hill. But it slammed into a barn that was on their farm. And she said it was like an explosion going off, and that, that memory was just etched in her mind. And she was just, just--every, I think every thunderstorm reminded her of that event. Speaker 1: And you said that she would have you hide, or she would hide when-- Speaker 2: Oh, when the, oh, when the-- Speaker 1: The weather changed? Speaker 2: Growing when the, when there was a thunderstorm, you, you had to cut everything out, off, unplug it; you had to come and sit together; you couldn't talk; you couldn't eat; you couldn't read; you just had to sit there and be still, and, and be quiet until it was, until it was over. And, and you couldn't sit near a window. It was really funny because she'd unplug everything and cut everything off, but she'd cut lights on. And there was a really a, a funny incidence once in a severe thunderstorm where the power went out, and we had, we had just sat down to dinner. And I think my father [Norman Peek] had, had said the grace. And we grew up, you'd, you'd have grace, and then everyone said a bible verse-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --around the table. And we had just done that and we'd, I mean literally had just picked up that first morsel of food, and the power went out. Well, it was one of those sudden, you know, sometimes storms would come up suddenly. And my mother didn't have time to prepare us by telling us to unplug everything and that sort of thing. The power suddenly went off, and we just sat there because we knew with a storm we couldn't talk; we couldn't do anything, so we just sat there. My second oldest sister, Gwen [Gwendolyn Peek White], apparently was very hungry, because when the lights came back on, her plate was clean. And we tease her about that to this moment. She, not only did she eat everything on her plate, she did it in silence. Now how she managed--and the funniest part is we had, we had a chicken dinner that night, so how she managed to manipulate that bone without making a sound, but she did it, and we tease her to this day about that. Speaker 1: (Laughter) What, what did your mother have to say or your father? They just looked in awe? Speaker 2: Well, we, we all had to laugh. It was mother who noticed it. She said, "Where is your food?" And my sister's response was, "I ate it." (Laughter) But that was my mother and those storms, I tell you. Story_ID: 323611 Speaker 1: We were also talking, you know, about your mother's parents and some of her growing up experiences or what could be remembered from when she was growing up in, in Newnan [Georgia]. And we talked about her mother being Cherokee--Choctaw. Speaker 2: Choctaw, Choctaw. Speaker 1: Ta- Choctaw Indian [Native American], full-blooded, and your--her father being African American, and you're wanting to actually start to do the, the family genealogy-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --to pursue that. Did your aunts share any other stories about, you know, the, the parent--grandparents with you? Speaker 2: Apparently my-- Speaker 1: Or your mother [Mary Hill Peek]. Did she share anymore stories? Speaker 2: My mother talked about my grandmother being very quiet. But she said she wore white, that she almost--all of her memories of her are of her mother in white dresses. I know I've seen only one photograph of her, and it was very late. The photograph were take--was taken very late in my grandmother's life, and sure enough, she was wearing a white dress in that, in that photograph. She also talked about, there was a way sometimes my mother would part my hair down the middle and put these two big braids on either side. And she and my aunts would always say you look just like your grandmother. Well, I also noticed in that photograph that, that was--I recall that, that was how her hair--so she apparently had this sort of standard way in which she would wear her hair and, and fashion her clothes. I do remember my mother talking about her mother making the best lemonade (laughter). And with her having health issues as, as a little girl that would be, I know she probably spent a lot of quiet time with her mother. But she, she almost, almost talked about lemonade as if it was her little treat, this little special thing that her mother did for her to make her feel okay about not being as active as, as her sisters and brothers because she couldn't run. She, she really had issues with winter, so she really had to stay warm during winter. And I just think that she spent a lot of one on one time with her, with her mother, so her mother came up with these little ways in which to make her feel that she was contributing just like her brothers and sisters were-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --contributing. Speaker 1: And her father? Speaker 2: You know, my mother, my mother's on--the only thing I can remember repeatedly hearing her say about her father is that he was quiet but firm. She said he was quiet but firm, that he--she had talked about him being very saddened. She remember, remembered an older brother joining the [U.S.] military, and she talked about how that saddened her father, that he, he, he rarely told them not to do anything when they, when they made a decision like that. But she said he's, he, he bore his thing, she said he, he carried his burdens quietly. That's how she saw--and I remember one conversation where my nephew, my oldest sister's [Deborah Peek Crockett] son, threw his head back and laughed. And my mother said, "Oh, my God, he looks like my father." So that, that was one of the, the first real references to-- Speaker 1: So she had a daughter who looked like her mother-- Speaker 2: Her mother (laughter). Speaker 1: --and a son who looked like-- Speaker 2: And a grand, grandson-- Speaker 1: --grandson who looked like-- Speaker 2: --who looked like her-- Speaker 1: --her father. Speaker 2: Yeah, she said it was the way he threw his head. She said, she said, "That's amazing." You know, she just, she--I, I do remember that very, very clearly that she, she said that, so. Story_ID: 323612 Speaker 1: I think that she also was so much younger than her brothers. I know that she and, and one of her sisters, my Aunt Alfa [ph.], they were born close together so they grew up being very close. I think the, I think there was a gap, particularly between her brothers and she and her next older sister. So, she, she almost talked about them growing up as if they grew up sort of separate from the other, the other kids. Speaker 2: About how many brothers and sisters did she have, if you remember? Speaker 1: There was a total of eleven of them. And I think by the time my mother [Mary Hill Peek] was a teenager, her brothers had, had grown up, left the house, started careers, that sort of thing. So she, she seemed to be much closer to her next older sister, who was-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --my Aunt Alfa. Story_ID: 323613 Speaker 1: Now, your father's parents, do you remember anything about them, 'cause you said that they were also deceased by the time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were. Speaker 1: --you were born? Speaker 2: They were. I just remember my father [Norman Peek]. He didn't talk about his mother that much. Now his mother was full Cherokee. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was Choctaw on your mother's side (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Cherokee--on my mother's side. Speaker 1: And it was Cherokee-- Speaker 2: Cherokee on my-- Speaker 1: --on your father's side. Speaker 2: --father's side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I mostly recall him talking about his father and his father being very smart. He, he talked about him doing--they had a, what he called a one-room schoolhouse and said the, the saying was, everyone grew up with them hearing about his father being the student who would sometimes fill in when the teacher couldn't make it. So, apparently, he would, he would even facilitate working with the younger kids when the teacher was there. He would sort of work like a teacher's aide. And as a result, my father was saying, "Well, you know, we were reading long before," he said they were reading long before they started going to school. He talked about his father--I do remember him commenting on one occasion about conversations he had had once with his father about slavery. And he never was quite sure if his father was born in slavery. But he knew his grandparents were. And even with--said his, his mother that my mother [Mary Hill Peek] would, would tease him when they were first married, when they disagreed about things, if they had a, a little disagreement. He would say, "Well, my father told me this." And she said, "Well, you know, your folks came from slavery, and they probably didn't get the story right." Speaker 1: (Laughter) That was a standing joke-- Speaker 2: So it was-- Speaker 1: --in the family? Speaker 2: You know, that was kind of a standing (laughter)--and so, he would talk about how that would, that just kind of became this little inside jab that she would--, "Well, you know, your, your people were slaves, so, you know, we, we can't expect you to have too much right." So, but he said his father was, it was not something he discussed with him, but he emphasized an education. And for that reason, you know, we grew up with my father saying the things--there was no question that we would go to college. It wasn't if you would go; it was a question of where you would go. And I think that's because getting a, a good education was something that his parents emphasized. But he, nor, I don't think any of his--I think he had one sister who, who he said went to college and became a teacher, but I don't think any of them did. And I said so you--he said, "Well, we were rebellious." Story_ID: 323614 Speaker 1: And he [Amaki's father, Norman Peek] always wanted to perform and sort of resented that he did not learn to play piano, because he wanted, he, he not only wanted to sing, he wanted to play and sing. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And he was a member of a group, right? Speaker 1: He was a member of a group, the Deep South Boys. It was a quartet, and they did for a period, my dad said about fifteen years they toured throughout the Southeast and occasionally would go to larger cities in the Midwest, Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan], places like that. That, and that's what he always wanted to be, was a, a, a performer. I think he said there--a show came through Macon [Georgia]. And I think that, that, the, this, this blind musician--I think his name was Blind Willie [Blind Willie Johnson]--as a little boy, said he was little. And I think that he was called blind something, but he could do everything. He a--he said he had a harmonica in his mouth, and he played the guitar, and he had cymbals between his legs; he was like a one-man band. And he said he was at--I think he just got so intrigued by that, that he said what a great thing to do, you know, travel all over the world, and, and, and sing, and see new places, and meet people. And, and he'd always had a good voice. He said they discovered when he was a little boy in church that he had a good tenor, that he was gonna probably develop and have a good tenor voice. Well, it turned out he was a baritone. But my father, even when he was singing with the Deep South Boys, if he had to take over the tenor part in a particular song, he's, he had that range; he had the ability to do that. Magnificent voice, but we sort of grew up being a little embarrassed when people would ask him to sing. He, he sang in the church choir. And whenever there were events in our, in our schools and elementary school and high school, and my father would walk in, they said, "Oh, maybe would could, can convince, you know, Mr. Peek to do a song." And we were--I guess because it made him stand out in a way. You know how silly you are when you're a, a, a young person, but we were always embarrassed; we'd go to the back and hide and that kind of thing. But he was, he was, he had a voice that was really well appreciated in, in the community when we grew up, and he loved to sing. He would sing when he cooked. All that cooking I told you that went on-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --between October and--he would, he would sing, and he--we grew up with, listening to Billie Holiday, and, and Bessie Smith, and Ma Rainey. And I heard these women's voices, and Dinah Washington, who he thought had--and Ella Fitzgerald, he said, "That's, that's a voice you only get every hundred years." He was very impressed with, with her voice. And I, I remember the one the--well, there were two male voices he really celebrated, and that was Nat King Cole and Tony Bennett. Tony Bennett had a fabulous voice. So we grew up with all this music and, and singing in the house, and he--and, and we could always, we could kind of tell what mood he was in by the song that he was singing. And if he was singing 'Get Away Jordan' (laughter), we knew not to bother him that day-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) get away-- Speaker 1: --just let him cook. Speaker 2: --leave him alone, huh? Speaker 1: Just let him cook. He was not, he's not, that was not a, you know, that was not the day to play tricks on him--so, very interesting coded way that--and I don't think he did it consciously. I think it was a very subconscious thing he would-- Speaker 2: So, but he did-- Speaker 1: --he would do. Speaker 2: --give up the group when-- Speaker 1: Oh yes-- Speaker 2: --he got married and then-- Speaker 1: --oh yes. Speaker 2: But he did have a chance to, to tour some because there was a little bit of a difference between your mother's age and his age. Speaker 1: And his age, right, right. Speaker 2: We talked about how old your mother [Mary Hill Peek] was when her first child [Deborah Peek Crockett] was born, but he was at least a few years older-- Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: --than that, so. Speaker 1: --he was--there was a nice gap between their-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --between their ages. And, and he, like I said, he got to satisfy I think that, that need, because he was, he sang in the, in the church choir, and, and they sang every Sunday. And he frequently was asked to sing for other events. He sang at people's weddings. He sang at funerals. He, and, and often he would opt to sing at the funerals of his friends, and he said that was his way of saying goodbye to them. So he, he--it, it, it--he didn't, it's not as if he, he was completely stripped of that outlet. And so, and I think he was, you know, he was a, he was a real family man, so I, I think it was a, in that respect, it was a sacrifice that didn't--it wasn't even a sacrifice. I think it was something that, it was an easy decision for him. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, and with the gardening and the cooking, that was another creative side of him that was able to, to get out. So, I think he was, I think he was okay with it. Story_ID: 323615 Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: My earliest memory is, I remember this quilted thing. Now I thought it was a quilt. My mother [Mary Hill Peek] said she believes it was a blanket, that it was my baby blanket. I remember being--I guess I was laying on my stomach, but I remember sort of raising up and looking at that blanket and seeing this flower. It was like a, it wasn't a rose, but it was more like a carnation, that, that pattern. And, and I know this sounds weird, but I think I must have been three or four, somewhere in there, 'cause I know I had not--at five we were off to kindergarten. My mother (laughter), she, she couldn't wait, so it had--it was pre-kindergarten. And I remember seeing that and having this urge to wanna copy it somehow. Speaker 1: You wanted to reproduce that some way (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I think that, I think that interest in being an artist, that, that real awareness was, was that early. And I remember I was just fascinated with it. I just stared at my--I, I mentioned that to my mother late in her life, and that's when she said, "I don't think that was a quilt. I really think that was your blanket, because you had a--your blanket was a, a deep beige and had these rose colored flowers with green stems." And she said, "I remember that very vividly because you wanted to tear that up and put it in a picture when you were about second grade." I still had that blanket. And, but I told her, I said, "I had this urge to, to--," and she said, "I sort of remember" 'cause I, I think I frightened her, because I kind of pushed up on my arms so that I could see it. And I think I held that position for so long she thought something was wrong. And that's what kind of tripped her-- Speaker 1: Her memory-- Speaker 2: --memory. Speaker 1: --of it too. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 323616 Speaker 1: We were talking about your experience with the discovery of the flower when you were pre-kindergarten and using this, and thinking that this is the point where you decided to become an artist. And your mother [Mary Hill Peek], you said you, you kind of shocked her with the story, so--and her response was? Speaker 2: Well, she, she--it, it--she remembered it, and she said that was a, well, first she, she corrected me and said it wasn't a quilt. It was, it was a blanket, and it was a blanket that was, that was given to me by my aunt, my aunt who she called sister, so we grew up calling her Aunt Sister. And this was an aunt who didn't have children but who was very involved with all of us growing up and was like a second mother to us for all those years. But my mother--my parents were very encouraging of, of this creativity once it, once it really fully manifested. By the time I was in kindergarten I was already drawing little things on my tablet. You know, we had these ABC, these alphabet tablets-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that you took to kindergarten, 'cause they, they taught you your alphabets and how to write your name and that sort of thing. And the first thing I remember, my kindergarten teacher noticing these flowers that I drew in the, in the borders of my tablet, but also she was amazed at my ability to copy the letters. So I think that, that creative ability was useful to me early on because I could look at something and, and copy it almost to perfection at a, at a very young, very young age. And I, I remember I was the first person in the kindergarten class to write my name on the chalkboard-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and very proud of that, and, and I actually went inside it. We had different colors of chalk at that time, and what the kindergarten teacher would do, we'd write our letters and our name in the white chalk. And she'd come along with yellow or pink or some other color and correct it, and that way you could see the correction. Well, I got so fancy with writing my name that I would write my name and then make a shadow of the letters with the, with the colored chalk, and she just thought that was so creative. You know, so I was sort of building a reputation starting in kindergarten. By second, third grade I was doing bulletin boards for other teachers. My teachers would literally give me ten, fifteen minutes away from my class to go and help another teacher do things for their bulletin board. So by that time, it was--I was sort of in the swing of developing skills as a, as an artist. Speaker 1: That's very young age--young age. Now what elementary school did you go to? Speaker 2: John Hope Elementary [John Hope Elementary School; John Hope-Charles Walter Hill Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Right, did it also have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On, on Boulevard. Speaker 1: --kindergarten attached to it? Was, or was-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --kindergarten separate at that time? Speaker 2: Kindergarten was a part, it was provided at that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at that school. And it's like I, I went kindergarten through seventh grade-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at John Hope, which was right down the street. We got accustomed to, because there were so many of us, we would bunch up and walk to school together. I think our parents expected us to--well, we did everything as a group (laughter), you know, because there were so, so many of us. But John Hope was down the street, starting eighth grade, went to Howard High School [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia], which was around the corner-- Story_ID: 323617 Speaker 1: Well, tell us something about the community that you lived in when you were going to, to John Hope [John Hope Elementary School; John Hope-Charles Walter Hill Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] and even before then. Where did you live, the name of the street, and just-- Speaker 2: We--I can remember the address. It was 201 Boulevard is where, where we grew up. And it was, it, it was a wonderful community. We were--the neighbors then, you know, you were raised by everybody, so we grew up--I was always one who looked forward to going to school. I loved summer, but I always got excited in the fall because I loved going to school. I was one of those unusual young people. But I had wonderful neighbors who admired my parents [Mary Hill Peek and Norman Peek]. And we, I remember we had a neighbor. Her, her name--my mother's name was Mary. This neighbor's name was Mary, and she had I think about four or five sons, and they were all adults, and they were always bringing her sweets. We had a popular candy store in Atlanta [Georgia] at the time called Mary Ball [Mary Ball Candy]. Mary Ball was fabulous candy. The peppermints were good; the chocolates were good. It was in Downtown Atlanta. And her sons, between these four sons, almost every Sunday one of them would bring her Mary Ball candy. Well, she would always share that candy with us. And then we had, we had another good friend of my mother's that lived around the corner who, I don't know what she did with her cornbread, but she just made the best--my mother's cornbread was pretty good, but it was something; there was a crunchiness about the, the, the, the outer part of this woman's cornbread. And she would (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she put cornmeal in the oil before she-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: --put the batter in the-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Is that the trick? I-- Speaker 1: Well, I had an aunt who made cornbread-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --kind of similar to that. You could almost eat it like it was cake. You didn't have to put anything on it other than butter (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I just love this woman's cornbread, and, and she knew it. So, it was not unusual for her, if she saw us playing, 'cause we had friends that lived on Johnson Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were actually in the block of Boulevard, between Houston Street [John Wesley Dobbs Avenue], which is where Howard [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia] was, and Johnson Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she lived on Johnson Avenue. We had friends on Johnson Avenue. And she would see us playing, and if, if, if after we played, before we'd walk home, she'd say, "I have some cookies," or "I baked some fresh cornbread." And you know, you'd eat buttered cornbread then; it was delicious. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so, we were kind of spoiled. Some summers, we had a lemonade stand (laughter). I mean it was, we would-- Speaker 1: Oh, you did? Speaker 2: --literally--oh yes, we did. Speaker 1: How much did you sell it for? Speaker 2: Five cent (laughter). Speaker 1: Five cents-- Speaker 2: Five cent a glass. Speaker 1: You had the--oh, you had the glasses or did you have the paper cups? Speaker 2: No, we, we had, we, we called them glasses, but they were really paper cups. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: But we'd always, and we always would look for the ones with the little flowers. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know I had this thing for flowers. But we, we--I can remember the lemonade stands. I remember one summer my mother even allowed us to sell hot dogs, because Boulevard was a main thoroughfare at, at-- Speaker 1: And it still is-- Speaker 2: --that time. Speaker 1: --isn't it, pretty much? Speaker 2: You know, I think it, it pretty much is. 'Cause Georgia Baptist [Georgia Baptist Hospital; Atlanta Medical Center, Atlanta, Georgia] was down the, down the street, and that, that's an interesting situation, because we actually lived, I can remember there was an icehouse across the street. We would go and get a cake of ice, break it up, sell our lemonade, you know, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Scripto [Scripto Pen Company] was down the street, right across the street from-- Speaker 1: What is Scripto? Speaker 2: Scripto was a fountain pen, ink pen-- Speaker 1: Okay, the ink pen-- Speaker 2: --manufacturer. Speaker 1: --manufacturer, okay. Speaker 2: And it was one of the big employers in the, in the community. Not too far away, a few streets down and around the corner, there was a, a Nehi drink company [Nehi Corporation]. And I don't think they bottled there. I think it was a distributor house. They'd bring them there, then distribute them to the various grocery stores and package stores. And we had a little store that was called a snack store where you could go and buy potato chips and-- Speaker 1: Like your corner store-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --like your 7-Elevens are now? Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 323618 Speaker 1: A friend of my mother's [Mary Hill Peek] had a beauty shop about two blocks up from us. It was the funniest thing because every Easter she would do our hair. That would be her Easter present to us. All six of us would go and get our baby doll curls done. And it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Were those-- Speaker 1: --so it was a very-- Speaker 2: --were those the Shirley Temple still? Speaker 1: --co--yes, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: It was a very, you know, it was a very loving, very friendly. You couldn't do anything wrong, especially us. Everybody would tell on us, you know. And you know, it was the kind of community where everybody was free to discipline. Speaker 2: It takes a-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: What is it? It take a community to raise a child. Speaker 1: Oh, it was--and, and, and, and it was not unusual for, you know, neighbors to say don't you do that. And you would stop, because you knew you really were gonna be punished if they had to go to your parents and say, you know, I saw her doing this or that, and I told her stop and she didn't. You know, you were supposed to-- Speaker 2: What was always amazing-- Speaker 1: --respect that. Speaker 2: Yeah, what was always amazing during those times too was, say for example, you were coming from school. The distance between school and home, if you did something right outside the schoolyard as a child-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --and made it home to your parents-- Speaker 1: That's right, before you got there. Speaker 2: --before you got there. Speaker 1: That's, that's right, that's right. Speaker 2: And this was before telephones were very popular. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right and I'm telling-- Speaker 2: And we always wondered how that grapevine operated (laughter). Speaker 1: It's, it's very interesting. It's very-- Speaker 2: And mother would be there ready to discipline-- Speaker 1: Oh yes. Speaker 2: --by the time you got there too. Speaker 1: Oh yes, oh yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was when all the neighbors--oh, a lot of the mothers did not work too, so that was when they were really raising the child. But let me ask this: how did the icehouse figure, factor in? You said there was an icehouse there in the neighborhood [in Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There was an icehouse-- Speaker 2: This was--you all-- Speaker 1: --and people would-- Speaker 2: --everybody had refrigerators then though, right? Speaker 1: Right. People would go and still buy blocks, big blocks of ice, and they'd chip them up, put them in tubs, put soft drinks and beer in them, and have--it was very common on the weekends for someone in that community to have a fish fry. And we loved it because when our, when our neighbors did it, my mom knew--you know, up until she passed, Fridays were not a day that she did a lot of cooking of dinner. And I think it goes back to that, because somebody in that neighborhood when we were growing up would have that fish fry, and it wasn't to raise money. They would cook fish and share with the whole community. It was, it was a very interesting thing. And someone would send us, you know, someone would come up and say, "Send two of the girls down to get your, to get your food." And you know, you'd go down and come back with these paper plates with fish sandwiches. And they'd call 'em sandwiches, and it's where they've taken the fish out of the grease and put it between two pieces of bread. And the, the grease really acts like the--you know, there was no fancy tartar sauce. You know, you, you slap that mustard and, and ketchup up there. And, but they were just very interesting and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And someone had gone fishing-- Speaker 1: --friendly times. Speaker 2: --right? I mean this was-- Speaker 1: Right, right, exactly-- Speaker 2: --these were fresh fish. This wasn't fish that-- Speaker 1: --fresh fish. Speaker 2: --was bought from a fish market? Speaker 1: Oh no, oh no, fresh fish. Speaker 2: And they were whole, were they not? Speaker 1: Fresh fish, and, and I can remember there would be occasions when, when people would say--we had one neighbor in particular who, who fished a lot, and she didn't like freezing fish. She said fish is a, is a food that you're supposed to eat fresh. And she would say, you know, you gotta eat heavy tonight, which meant her husband had a big catch, you know. But it was, it was, it was wonderful. And they'd have beer for the adults and, and soft drinks for the, for the kids. Sometimes my father [Norman Peek] would bake his infamous pound cake. And we'd top that fish dinner off with a, with a hunk of that, that pound cake-- Story_ID: 323619 Speaker 1: And it just, you know, I just remember, people talk about the good old days, but I just remember growing up and it being, more than anything else, a very happy--you know, we did a lot of laughing in our house--a, a, a very happy, a very rich, we, you know, from school to, to church, to the grocery store, to--no matter where we went, you know, it was, it's like people were happy to see us. And, and that was a, that was I, I think a very--we took it for granted. I, I think we just assumed that that's the way it was supposed to be, and maybe it is. Speaker 2: And that yea-- Speaker 1: Maybe it is supposed to be that way. But a lot of it had to do with I think the, just, just how people in the community felt about my parents [Mary Hill Peek and Norman Peek]. My mother was one of the best-liked people in the neighborhood [in Atlanta, Georgia]. We would have situations where people would look for us. And they'd see kids out playing. I remember on one occasion they asked a neighbor's kids say, "I'm, I'm, I'm trying to find the Peek residence. Where does, where, where do the Peeks live? I'm trying to find, I'm trying to find Mary Peek in, in particular." And this little boy said, "What do you want with her?" you know, just very protective of her. And it turned out it was her cousin, you know, and, and a cousin that she had not seen in a, in an extended period of time. But they just laughed. They said this little boy, you know, looked like he about five or six years--, "What do you want with her?" you know. So it was that kind of, kind of thing, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I think she was like a little--I think she was like the, the person that kids when they were afraid to tell their parents things they'd come to her, and she'd (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They could confide in her. Speaker 1: --comfort them, and yeah, um-hm. Story_ID: 323620 Speaker 1: Now what church did you all attend? Speaker 2: We grew up attending Wheat Street Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia]. My father [Norman Peek] and Reverend William Holmes Borders, who was the pastor when we were growing up, were the best of friends. So, it was no--Wheat Street was it. And it's, it's interesting too because people thought they were related. Most people thought that they looked alike, and so much so that in certain situations they would confuse my father for Reverend Borders. I remember my mother [Mary Hill Peek] telling me that she had--I think she was pregnant with my third oldest sister, Vicki [Vicki Peek Robinson]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she had, she got ill. And she wanted to make certain that there was no problem with them pregnancy, so she had a couple of her neighbors rush her to the emergency room at, at Grady [Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia]. And she said one of the nurses, 'cause they were saying well, you know, when you gonna get to her? You know how emergency room situations, you can--'cause sometimes by the time they get to you, you've gotten better--you know, you've sat there so long. Speaker 1: (Laughter) You sit there so long. Speaker 2: Well, they kept saying well, when you gone get to her? She, she really needs, you know, she's, she's, she's expecting a child, and you know, we're, we're concerned about her--and said this woman came to her and said, "I know you think you're special because you're married to a pastor, to a preacher, but you just have to wait your turn." And my mother said she knew that she-- Speaker 1: That they had gotten-- Speaker 2: --was mistaken. Speaker 1: --'em mixed up. Speaker 2: Gotten 'em mixed up again. But she said it was a common, it was a common thing. Speaker 1: They resembled each other that much. Speaker 2: They, well, that's what people thought. Now we, of course, didn't see it. Speaker 1: So what were--I, I know you got dressed up for Easter, and went to Wheat Street, and dad-- Speaker 2: Went to Wheat Street-- Speaker 1: --sang some at-- Speaker 2: --new outfits. And you know what was funny growing up, is when we were small there were six of us, so they would go out and buy Easter outfits in twos. So the two youngest had the same thing on; the next two had--you know, and it would be, it was kind of cute because all six of the dresses were the same dress, just the first two might have pink, the next two might have yellow, the next two might have blue; you know, it was that kind of thing. The shoes were the same, so my mother just, you know, she, she-- Speaker 1: And the hair and decoration (laughter), and the ribbons, and-- Speaker 2: We all, we all had the little--and the ribbons matched the color of your dress. My mother did color coordinate. But she bought things in, in sets of twos, I thought that, so I think there were moments when people wondered, does she have twins? You know, just what's going on? You know, it was--we thought that was so funny-- Story_ID: 323621 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you know where she [Amaki's mother, Mary Hill Peek] bought them from? Like what stores she bought them from downtown? Speaker 2: There were stores in the community. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: She--we rarely, when we were growing up, would shop downtown. We, we, we shopped in the neighborhood. There was--being on Boulevard [Atlanta, Georgia], we were on the block of Boulevard that was just maybe two or three blocks removed from Edgewood [Edgewood Avenue]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Edgewood Avenue had a number of shops on them, and one of the shops, and I don't think they bought many clothes from them, but there was a, a family, the Danimans [ph.], Daniman had a grocery store on the corner of Edgewood and Boulevard. It was called Daniman's Grocery [ph.]. The husband ran the grocery store. His wife had a variety store across the street, and she ran the variety store. But there were a number of little shops along that strip (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now were these blacks who had these stores or were-- Speaker 2: They were Jewish. Speaker 1: --these Jewish store--okay-- Speaker 2: These-- Speaker 1: These were Jewish. Speaker 2: --these were Jewish stores. But that's where most of our, most of our--we, we eventually--we usually would go downtown to buy shoes; we would buy shoes, hats, things like that. But it's interesting, the clothes, coats, things like that, we, we basically bought those--and most of the time we would go to Rich's; we went to Rich's Department Store downtown. Speaker 1: Now Rich's had a history of not allowing blacks to buy from Rich's, but during this particular time, you're in the-- Speaker 2: You know, you-- Speaker 1: --early-- Speaker 2: --you know what's interesting? You could, for many years, my mother said you could shop there, but you couldn't have credit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They would not do layaway to blacks, and she said there were, there were sometimes this, this is at the time we were growing up, certain items, they would pretend not to have any in your size in the stockroom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that kind of thing would go, would go on. What later became Macy's was, when we were growing up, it was Davison's. You couldn't even go in Davison's. They would--my mother would--by the time I was a teenager, you would see blacks shopping in Davison's. But when we were small, my mother and father [Norman Peek] wouldn't even go in there because they said they would meet you at the door and ask you to leave. So, because she was saying there was a time when Rich's would at least let you go in there. But she'd say-- Speaker 1: Davison's-- Speaker 2: --you had to have cash. There was no layaway; there was no--and that's where--I'm trying to think of the big department store that was, it was another Jewish store, Jewish-owned store, but they advertised heavily in black newspapers, on the radio their layaway plan, and they targeted that black community. What's the name of store? It'll come to me. It was a big de- big, big store downtown--Kessler's. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was call--I think that was it, Kessler's, yeah, Kessler's. Story_ID: 323622 Speaker 1: And then later we got a store, another Jewish-owned store, Newberry's [J.J. Newberry Company], Newberry's. But Kessler's was way ahead of Newberry's. They would, they would advertise, you know, layaway plan, you know, start buying now for the--they'd, they'd advertise, they would start advertising right after school was out, like in, in early June, to, to start laya- laying away clothes for your kids for the fall. And so Kessler's was, was, was where a lot of, a lot of people--and then I remember Bakers [Bakers Shoes] and Butler's shoe stores-- Speaker 2: Shoe stores. Speaker 1: --started allowing--and see, with my mother [Mary Hill Peek], with, you know, with us--with them having six kids and you know, you're wearing out shoes and, and outgrowing shoes so, so, so quickly, they needed to be able to buy on time, pay for things on time. You know, can you imagine getting six kids ready to go to school at the beginning of the year, and you know, you all want new clothes. So the, the shoes stores, I can remember going to, and we--they'd always comp--comparison shop, 'cause Bakers and Butler's often would carry a lot of the same shoes. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And they'd go and sometimes I'd be only like fifteen cents difference-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in the shoe, but they, they learned how to-- Speaker 2: But that meant a lot. That-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --that was a lot between-- Speaker 1: When, when you're multiplying-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --six times, you know, so-- Speaker 2: That could get another pair of shoes, okay. Story_ID: 323623 Speaker 1: I remember that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But do you remember when John Wesley Dobbs picketed Rich's Department Store? I believe it was because they wouldn't hire blacks-- Speaker 1: That was it. Speaker 2: --to work there too. Speaker 1: That was it. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, and-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --because of Rich's history-- Speaker 1: And I think-- Speaker 2: --in the black community. Speaker 1: --and I think that's when my parents [Mary Hill Peek and Norman Peek]--'cause seem like that was in the fif- was in the '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: It seems like it was in the '50s [1950s]. I-- Speaker 1: In the '50s [1950s]-- Speaker 2: --don't remember. Speaker 1: --'cause I think that's when they shifted and started going to these Bakers, the--I remember there was a salesman at I think it was Bakers, not Butler's, I think it was Bakers. There was a salesman there who, at one time, had been the manager at Daniman's [Daniman's Grocery (ph.)]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he indicated to my parents, said well, you know, come in; you know, we'll work something out. And I remember that was the first time I went in there and tried on some shoe. I remember my--I wanted these red shoes, and my mother said, "You're gonna wait and buy those when you start (laughter), when you start making some money," because I think I went to the most expensive pair of shoes in the--and I had been doing that kind of thing since, you know. And, and it's not that I look at the price. It's just I--and my mother used to crack this joke. She'd say, you know, she didn't say caviar, but I've forgotten what the food was she--maybe she did. She-- Speaker 2: Was it a beer pocket and-- Speaker 1: She said you, you know, "You got caviar taste on a Kool-Aid budget (laughter)." Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: That's what she used to say. But I, I remember that. We--and that was when we, I think that was when they shifted-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and stopped. And I remember the year they--we lined up and marched into Bakers for the first time to get those shoes. And, and you know, the Rich's clock was the big thing. Meet, you know, we're gonna meet under the Rich's clock. Well, they decided--it seem like this was when that picketing was going on that we--'cause they, they gave us--my dad would give us fifty cent and say go find, go buy you a little snack, and then we're gonna meet, you know, after we'd done our little shopping, we're gonna meet--we normally--he normally would say we're gonna meet at the Rich's clock. Well, Planters [Planters Nut and Chocolate Company; Planters] had a peanut store-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --on the other side of Broad Street [Atlanta, Georgia] across from Rich's. And he switched that year and said we're gonna meet in front of the Planters peanut store. That was a big mistake because waiting in front of that store, we sat there smelling those peanuts. And by the time my dad got there, we're like we gotta have some (laughter), we gotta have some. So it was a big mistake, so he found another rendezvous spot for us after that. But, but I do remember that shift, and it was-- Speaker 2: And that was-- Speaker 1: --very abrupt, very abrupt. Speaker 2: Let me ask you one question about Daniman's. A lot of the Jewish stores that were located in the black community, were these items that he was selling, these clothing items, shoes, et cetera, were they brand new, or were they secondhand-- Speaker 1: No, they were new. Speaker 2: --or were they--okay. Speaker 1: They were new, yeah, they were new things. Story_ID: 323624 Speaker 1: We talked about the, the Jewish-- Speaker 2: Daniman's [Daniman's Grocery (ph.)]. Speaker 1: --store, Daniman's. And you talked about the black lady who sold the clothes-- Speaker 2: Yes, she-- Speaker 1: --and put her name, then and monogrammed her-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --name and put her labels and sold them in the-- Speaker 2: Amazing, she, she would, would stitch her name, make her own little monograms, as you said, and put them--but she sold these clothes in, in Daniman's variety--I think I was called a variety store or a clothing store or something like that. And my, my mother's [Mary Hill Peek] comment was that, you know, this woman could sew so well that, you know, her clothes didn't even look homemade. And, and it was-- Speaker 1: They were really depth on that store bought clothing. Speaker 2: Yes, on store bought clothing Speaker 1: Yeah, so they didn't-- Speaker 2: And, and I thought that it was just, it just seemed so unusual to me that she would make clothes, and they would be carried by this, by this store. And they would proudly display them in an area and identified them as, as this woman's line of, of clothes. But I, I remember going by her house some years later with a teacher. And her living room was, was like her business, like her--where she would, would measure her, her clients. And, and she had like a coat rack in the living room, and she had these clothes on the rack with people's names pinned to it. And, and I remember she had to go in the back because she had, my teacher was looking at the fabric that she had bought to do her dress. She was getting a dress done for a recital, and she was getting a dress made for that. And-- Speaker 1: Was this a music recital, or was-- Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Speaker 1: Yes, okay. Speaker 2: And, and I, I seem to remember that she, if I'm not mistaken, she taught me social studies, but apparently she, she had this singing career that she did on the, on the side. And, and I remember this woman opened the door, these double doors, and she said let me, she said, "Let me check my stock." That's how she put it, "Let me check my"-- Speaker 1: Okay, this is her stock of fabrics? Speaker 2: Her fabrics. And she opened these double doors. And I was told that this was like a parlor, that this was an older house in, in the, in, in the days when that house was built, that was a, that was a parlor. But she just had these bulks and bulks; it was like a little mini warehouse of, of fabrics. And we, we went through these fabrics, and this woman picked this satin. That's when I learned what crepe back satin-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was. Because-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --she must have said, "Oh no, I love this crepe back satin." The lady would say, "Well, look at this, and this would look lovely with--." She said, "No, I love this crepe back satin." So, and she'd pick this lovely kind of a salmony color of, of satin. And that's what she wanted her recital gown to be made out of. Story_ID: 323625 Speaker 1: --That was just kind of etched in my mind, because I thought she was an unusual person. She lived--she was very active at that time, the woman was, with the, with the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YCMA)], and bragged about the fact that she could walk just--that she was just a few doors from the Butler Street Y [Butler Street YMCA, Atlanta, Georgia], and said that with pride. Speaker 2: Well, that, and that must have been prime territory. Is that, was that nice-- Speaker 1: Well, I think it was in, in that-- Speaker 2: --a nice neighborhood? Speaker 1: At that area it was just such a hub events in the community at that time, you know, the--in a, in a in addition to the Y, you know, you had the Royal Peacock [Atlanta, Georgia] was around the corner and-- Speaker 2: And what was that? Speaker 1: The Royal Peacock was a must stop for all black performers at that time. My father [Norman Peek] used to tell me you were nothing if you didn't perform at the Royal Peacock. The Royal Peacock was a, was a club on Auburn Avenue that entertainers from the--my dad it started in the '30s [1930s], from the '30s [1930s] until, I would say the, the late '60s [1960s] is when the Peacock, the popularity of it started to wane, because of the, the Civil Rights Movement, and performers were able to appear in other, in other locations. But the Royal Peacock was jumping. There were, there're some of the most fabulous photographs of, of blacks in the, in the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s] lined up outside the Royal Peacock waiting to get in. It was, Auburn was the jumping place. And this was during a time when, I think it was 1955, '54 [1954] or '55 [1955]-- Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955]. Speaker 1: --somewhere in there, is when Fortune magazine did a feature on Auburn Avenue, which John Wesley Dobbs called Sweet Auburn-- Speaker 2: Sweet Auburn. Speaker 1: --and said this is the richest black street in America. And, but everything was on Auburn. You had Atlanta Life Insurance Company [Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --WERD [WERD Radio, Atlanta, Georgia] was around the, the corner, one of the first black-owned radio stations in the country. There were, another insurance company was on Auburn at that time, two banks, black-owned. It was just a, a very prosperous-- Speaker 2: And the Masons had the Prince Hall [Prince Hall Grand Lodge, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 2: --at the, on that, that--their headquarters. Speaker 1: --right, the Odd Fellows Building [Odd Fellows Building and Auditorium, Atlanta, Georgia], and it was just-- Speaker 2: And Big Bethel [Big Bethel A.M.E. Church, Atlanta, Georgia] was there too, right? Big Bethel still -- Speaker 1: Big Bethel was there--Wheat Street [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] was down the street. I remember going in Yates and Milton [Yates and Milton Drugstore, Atlanta, Georgia]. Mr. Milton [Lorimer D. Milton] was one of those people who was very fond of my dad. We'd go to the soda fountain at Yates and Milton almost every Sunday and get our-- Speaker 2: Now what was Yates-- Speaker 1: --free food and drinks. Speaker 2: This was a, was this a restaurant or a clothing store? Speaker 1: It was--Yates and Milton was really a pharmacy. But you know, back then large pharmacies had soda fountains in them. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you could buy sandwiches and, and food items but--and I remember they, they did a vanilla, they had a Vanilla Coke. This is before, you know, Coke [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] came out with their-- Speaker 2: Right Speaker 1: --new one. And they, they would take the Coca-Cola and put vanilla syrup in it. That was a hot drink when I was a young girl. And Mr. Milton would treat us, so we couldn't wait to get out of Wheat Street on Sundays so we could rush up to Yates and Milton and get our little soda for free. And I remember Big Bethel was between Wheat and Big Bethel and, and later Ebenezer, Auburn would just be almost a gridlock of, of cars, because the, the churches would let out at about the same time. And it was just a, Auburn was a jumping-- Speaker 2: So, how-- Speaker 1: --you know, happening street, you know. Speaker 2: --how far was your house on Boulevard from Auburn Avenue? Speaker 1: We were, let's see, we were two--see, Boulevard crossed Auburn-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Edgewood [Avenue]. So we were, we were still in that, in that basic neighborhood. Speaker 2: All right, so is the house still there today? Speaker 1: No, it's not. Where we grew up is now where--they literally disrupted that community to put 75 [Interstate 75 (I-75)] and 85 [Interstate 85 (I-85)], to extend that, that highway (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, we're you're--get down on there, down by where John Wesley Dobbs [John Wesley Dobbs Avenue] is down, crosses under and over the free-- Story_ID: 323626 Speaker 1: Now name your siblings in order (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, the oldest-- Speaker 1: --of birth with, including yourself. Speaker 2: Okay, the oldest is Deborah [Deborah Peek Crockett]. She was Deborah Jehosheba. You could tell my mother [Mary Hill Peek] and father [Norman Peek] read the Bible. Deborah Jehosheba. Speaker 1: Spell Jehosheba. Speaker 2: Oh, I hope I can, J-E-H-O--let's see, Jehosheba, J-E-H-O-S-H-E-B-A, Deborah Jehosheba-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was, was the oldest, then Gwendolyn [Gwendolyn Peek White]. We tease Gwen, and we say you can tell you were gonna be the odd one because they didn't give you a middle name. Gwendolyn was next; Vicki Elaine [Vicki Peek Robinson], and she's V-I-C-K-I-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --Vicki Elaine, then there was me. I was born Lynda Faye [Lynda Faye Peek; Amalia Amaki], L-Y-N-D-A, F-A-Y-E, and then my sister, Betty Elizabeth [Betty Elizabeth Peek]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We, we, we tease her now because we said, you know, you could tell you were gonna have to be told things twice because, you know, Betty is, Betty is, is, is kind of, a, a nickname or a shortening of Betty is Beth, so with Elizabeth it's like repeating her name twice. But we just teased her about; and then Harriett Ann [Harriett Ann Peek]. Harriett Ann is the youngest, and she's H-A-R-R-I-E-T-T; she has two Ts. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And it's funny 'cause my--I can't remember if it started with my father or a crazy uncle. We had an uncle who would singe our names. And that's how we would, (laughter) when we were small, how we, would, would remember the order of everybody. But he would literally sing our names, (singing) "Deborah Jehosheba, Vicki Elaine, Gwendolyn, Lynda Faye," that's--(unclear)--you know, he'd just (laughter)--(unclear)--he was real--and he did that so he, he said because otherwise you'll never remember Jehosheba, you know. But my mother said my dad was reading the Bible and came upon that name and gave he said--she said, "And he put that on my daughter (laughter)." Story_ID: 323627 Speaker 1: But you know what's interesting about the names, I changed my name in 19--I think it was 1974, if I remember correctly. I'll double check it for you, but I think it was 1974. And it was only after I changed my name that my mother [Mary Hill Peek] said: you were the only one I named. (Laughter) Your father [Norman Peek] named all the other five. The one who I named changes her name. So she took it personally. Speaker 2: So how did she, how did she actually feel about it? What, what were-- Speaker 1: But then she told me years later that she had done the same thing when she turned eighteen, she changed her name. Speaker 2: Did she tell you what her-- Speaker 1: I never knew this. Speaker 2: --name was before? Speaker 1: I think she said her, she was born--her, her parents thought--her, her, her paren- her father wanted another son. And you, you, you know her generation, if they had decided on a male name, they just--and if, if they decide on a male name and a woman was born, they just feminized the name in the, in the spelling. Speaker 2: Yep. They did. Speaker 1: But they kept that name. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So I, if I remember correctly, she said her name, that on her birth certificate it said Michael Marian. If I'm not mistaken, it was Michael Marian. Speaker 2: And they left it like that? Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: The father, your-- Speaker 1: It's either Michael Marian or Marian Michael. Speaker 2: Marian Michael. Speaker 1: But those were the two, and she said, "No, I had to get rid of that." And, and then, and they added a, a--she had a, a, a third--she had two middle names, 'cause the Lee was in there, and she kept the Lee when she changed her name. She changed the Marian to Mary. Marian was the name of someone in her family, in, in her father's family. She said she's, she's not sure. She thinks it was a sis- it was either a sister and a--or an aunt. And he--all of her, I think all of her sibling had names of other relatives. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's, that's just the way they did. It was a way of, of showing honor and respect-- Speaker 2: Exactly. They did do a lot of that. Speaker 1: --to those, to those to those relatives. But she said oh, no, that's, you know, that's got to go. So as soon as she was legally able to do it-- Speaker 2: She changed it. Speaker 1: She changed it to Mary, and she kept the Lee, Mary Lee Hill. Speaker 2: So she couldn't be too upset with you because she had done the same thing. Speaker 1: She had done the same thing but had never told us-- Speaker 2: But if you had not-- Speaker 1: --had never told us. Speaker 2: If you had not changed your name you would not have known that. Speaker 1: Would have never known. Speaker 2: Weren't they excellent with keeping secrets? Speaker 1: Weren't they though? Speaker 2: They would keep a secret in a minute. Story_ID: 323628 Speaker 1: And I'll tell you another one that's very interesting. When I changed my name, I had always--I had decided in the first grade that I was changing my name because growing up in Atlanta [Georgia] there was this white weatherwoman on WSB [WSB-TV, Atlanta, Georgia], and her name was Linda Faye. Speaker 2: (Laughter) You all had the same name. Speaker 1: So from kindergarten [John Hope Elementary School; John Hope-Charles Walter Hill Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] all the way through high school [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia] I had to live with "Lynda Faye [HistoryMaker Amalia Amaki], how's the weather?" So the first--kindergarten wore me out. And if, you know, like the--I remember once the--we were about to get out, and you know, kindergarten, they didn't keep you as long as the other students-- Speaker 2: Right, they did turn out early. Speaker 1: So they let you out early. But I remember my mother [Mary Hill Peek] came to the school to pick, pick me up. And she said I brought a, she said I--she got there early, and she let the teacher know that she was waiting. And she said, "I brought her galoshes, her raincoat, and an umbrella because it looks like it's going to rain." And even the teacher turned to me and said, "Oh, Lynda Faye, you didn't, you didn't know the weather forecast for the--," and the kids just fell out. And I said now my teacher's in it. So by first grade-- Speaker 2: It's a conspiracy (laughter). Speaker 1: --I'd had enough. I had had enough. I said I'm changing--and I grew up with this idea, even though my mother swore up and down, I grew with this idea that they had named me after her. Speaker 2: But they hadn't? Speaker 1: My mother said she just liked the name Lynda. Speaker 2: Well, was Lynda a new, a new, you know, a weather girl at that particular time when she--did she tell the weather at that time before, during the time you were born? Speaker 1: When I was born, and she was the weatherwoman WSB from the time I was--let's see, I think she left--I stopped seeing her maybe when I was in like the ninth grade, something like that. But by then, you know, it was in them; you know, they were wearing me out. And-- Speaker 2: And they did tease a lot. Speaker 1: Oh, it was awful. Speaker 2: They'd--it was--and, but a lot of times it was your mother's name that they would call and tease you with or your last name if it was different, just anything that would just egg you. Speaker 1: They were, "How's the weather?" And she was blond, and they would: do blonds really have more fun? You know, they just cracked these little--and then they'd say things like, "What happened, Lynda Faye, did you, did you trip and fall in an oven?" You know, they'd just make-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 1: --all these little jokes about the--I'm just, you know, and kids could be cruel. Speaker 2: Yes, they have not changed (laughter). Speaker 1: And it was--I just had--they had worn me out. And I decided-- Speaker 2: Well, tell us though-- Speaker 1: --I said I'm changing when I grow up--- Speaker 2: Tell us-- Story_ID: 323629 Speaker 1: Tell us why you chose the name that you chose? What's the story behind the name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, it's interesting because from, literally from about the fifth grade, I was looking--every time I saw somebody's name that I thought was pretty, I'd write it down. I had this little name diary. Speaker 1: You were on a mission. Speaker 2: Oh yes. I would--and I had made up my mind. I, I had this little name diary, and I'd say, "Oh, Arlie, how do you spell that?" You know, I'd write all these names down. And then when I got in high school [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia], I had a, an eighth grade teacher who was just phenomenal. And I'd always loved poetry. My mother [Mary Hill Peek] used to read poetry. But this woman would start each day--she was an English teacher--she would start each day by reading a poem to us. And one day she read this poem by [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni, and you know, I can't even remember the title of that poem, what that poem was about. But I remember her reading this poem, and Nikki Giovanni was just starting to kind of come out. And this lady was, was excellent. She, she was reading stuff she--I remember the first day--I'll never forget it--she read a poem by Georgia Douglas Johnson, and she said, "Does anyone know who she is?" And everybody's looking at the floor. You know, you don't want her to call on you. And she said, "You should know her because Georgia Douglas Johnson lived in a house right around the corner from Howard High School. This woman came from this community. She was important to the Harlem Renaissance." I mean she just gave us this little education. I had never heard of Georgia Douglas Johnson. And she read this poem by her, and though my--what was my teacher's name, 'cause she was very dra- she was very dramatic and an excellent orator. You know, she read this poem, and years later [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou wrote something, and the title is a line from this woman's poem. And the minute I heard the title I said, "That's Georgia Douglas Johnson." And I remember Maya Angelou came to--this was years later--came to Georgia State [Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] as a speaker, and I was asked to introduce her. And when she took--when she came up to the podium, she started reading--what was that thing, 'The Heart of a Woman' [Maya Angelou]. Is that it, 'The Heart of a'--I almost thought of it. But she, she gave that title, and I said under my breath, Georgia Douglas Johnson. She said right, and she was so impressed that I knew who Georgia Douglas Johnson was. But it was because of this eighth grade teacher. Well, she read, but she read this poem by Nikki Giovanni, and I just loved it. You know, she didn't hit all the popular-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --poets, you know, and I loved that about her. And, and I said Nikki, I like that name. So from eighth grade on, I planned to--Nikki was going to be my name, Nikki. Story_ID: 323630 Speaker 1: Now I don't know why this couch plays so heavily in my memory, because I'm fast forwarding years later, and I'm literally at the point where I have gone to an attorney. I have gotten the forms that I need to fill out for the legal name change. I'm not saying a thing to anybody. And I remember I was sitting--I'm in college now--I'm sitting--you know, I think I had graduated [from Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia]. I had finished. Speaker 2: Yeah, you, you had gradu-- Speaker 1: I had finished; I had finished. But I was at my mother's [Mary Hill Peek] house, and I remember she had this velvet couch that was kind of--it wasn't a chaise lounge, but it, it kind of had that--remember those couches that were kind of, they were almost like Louis XV-- Speaker 2: A duchesse brisee-- Speaker 1: --style or something, yeah-- Speaker 2: Duchesse brisee. Speaker 1: --and, and had this deep, almost a beet red upholstery on it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And it was, and it was-- Speaker 2: That velvety-- Speaker 1: --like velvet. There you go. Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: There you go. Speaker 2: Sculptured velvet. Speaker 1: And I remember I was sitting, I was kind of leaned back on that. And I don't know why that plays so, that, that rich red, but it--and I, I was a--I said, "Now, Nikki Peek doesn't sound good." That, that's not musical. I, I remember sitting there thinking, and I said but, you know, this is, this, Lynda Faye [Lynda Faye Peek] is just not my name. And I heard like a, it's almost like a, if I'd had an earphone up to this right ear. I heard [HistoryMaker] Amalia Amaki. I heard it just like that. And I did just what did. I kind of looked, and I said mom 'cause my mom was in the kitchen. I said, "Mom, did you say anything?" She said, "No." I said, "Okay." And I said Amalia Amaki, I like how that sounds. I said I wonder how you spell it. And I wrote the Amalia, and I said now Amalia is almost Amelia. It's Amelia with an A. And I wrote that down, and it's like my hand just kept going. And I wrote A-M-A-K-I, and I said I like that. And it's like I immediately felt at home with it. But you know what's interesting? Speaker 2: What's that? Speaker 1: My mother, the last year of her life said--I said something about "Mom, what happened to our relatives that were in New York [New York]?" 'Cause I was planning a trip to New York, and I was saying, you know, I need to--next time I go, I need to look them up, said what happen to them? She said, "The Hills are no longer in New York. Now, the Amakis may be up there, but there are no Hills any longer living in New York." Speaker 2: Now why would she make a statement like that? Speaker 1: That was her, that, so she was cracking up, so you know, I laughed; my sisters laughed; everybody fell out. And years late--and, and, and but later that day, and this is--we--you know, it's the last year of her life. Of course we didn't, I didn't know this at the time. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: She said, "Have you ever researched that name, Amalia?" I said, "Mom I heard this voice in my ear." I went through the scenario with her. And she said, "Seems like it's somebody in our family that was named something close to that." And I said, "Could it be Amelia?" She said, "It might be." She said, "But then, too, it might be Amalia." She said, "Because it seems to me that my father used to read something in the Bible, and there was a character named Amahl." And she said, "I thought it was A-M-A-H-L," and she said "you should look that up. You should research it, 'cause" she said "there was a reason he loved that passage." And that's all she would say. And she said, "But there was somebody in the family," and she said "you know, there were certain things when I was growing up when it was discussed, we had to leave the room." Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And she said, "So, I was the generation that didn't get the story because I was a (unclear)." She said, "I didn't press enough; I wasn't nosy enough." And she said, "But you should research that. Why don't you research that?" Speaker 2: Have you? Speaker 1: I haven't, and I--so doing this is really helpful, because I'm gonna--you know, it's really making me realize how important those things, 'cause she was giving me a clue. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: She was, she, it was her way of saying something to me. Speaker 2: And this was on her side, on her side of the family, either her mother's side or her father's. Speaker 1: Or her father's. She said, "You know, you really should re--." She said, "Now I don't know anything about that Amaki." But she said, "That first name, you need to research that. There may be something in your family." She said it just like that. And I told her, I said, "Mom, I heard this, this, it's like--." And I said, "I heard it," and I said, "I thought it was you." But I just thought it was very--and it's--I said it's--it felt good the minute I said it. You know, it felt like me. Story_ID: 323631 Speaker 1: Okay, now you went to John Hope Elementary [John Hope Elementary School; John Hope-Charles Walter Hill Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Elementary. Speaker 1: Now, any teachers who stand out with you right now, who influenced you? Speaker 2: My third grade teacher, Ms. Epps, E-P-P-S. I remember Ms. Epps. Ms. Epps told me that, she said, "You know, if you ever stop talking and really start listening, you're destined for greatness." Ms. Epps said that to me in third grade. And now I'm gonna tell you why she said that in a minute, we get off--(laughter) I talked all the time (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's stop right here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you know why-- Speaker 1: --for a tape. Let's stop for a-- Speaker 2: --because I, I, I picked up things easily, and she'd have to go through things so many times with the other students, and I'd get bored. Story_ID: 323632 Speaker 1: Now tell us about Mrs. Epps. Speaker 2: Ms. Epps (laughter). Speaker 1: Your third grade teacher [at John Hope Elementary School; John Hope-Charles Walter Hill Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Well, you know, Mrs., Ms. Epps was one of these, she was just, she was just so gentle. You know, she had such a, a gentle manner about herself, but you know, she meant business. But you knew she cared about the whole person. And, and if you were in her class, you were her children. It was, it, it was clear. But, and she had her way of, of, of making the point that because--she knew that I talked because I was bored. And she made the mistake of allowing me to sit next to my best friend. And when we had, when we had math problems or whatever, I was always the first to finish, because I, I, I just grasped things very quickly. And when she had to repeat things over and over for the benefit of, of the students, I got bored so I would talk, and, and you know, crack these jokes, and draw pictures. And I remember once she caught us, my best friend and I playing, it was Deborah DeShasier [ph.]. And she caught Deborah and I playing tic-tac-toe (laughter) while she was giving us our history lesson. And she suddenly asked us what we were doing and said, "Whatever you're doing, you know, you're gonna have to bring it up to the front and share it with the class." Well, she got us up there, and she started asking us question about this history lesson that she was giving. And of course we couldn't answer it because we weren't listening. And I remember to, to sort of get out of it, I thought, I told her something that I did know. And she said, "You know, that's wonderful, but you'll learn later in life that you never volunteer information." So I learned two good lessons from Ms. Epps: you never volunteer information; and I learned that if I would become a good listener that, that I could accomplish some things. And you know, I, I think I have carried--I still talk a lot, as you can see, but, but I, I have developed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Those are two good-- Speaker 2: --some pretty good listening skills. Speaker 1: --two very good lessons-- Story_ID: 323633 Speaker 1: What kind of child was the young Lynda Faye [Lynda Faye Peek] like or the young [HistoryMaker] Amalia Amaki like? Speaker 2: Adventuresome. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think of all the sisters, I was probably the ones that, the one that concerned my parents [Mary Hill Peek and Norman Peek] the most. Speaker 1: When you say you were adventuresome, what did you do? Did you take trips that you shouldn't have taken, or-- Speaker 2: Yes, I would. You know, I would, I would wander off, and you know, I was--and, and always with a, you know, with a learning experience in mind, you know, I would explore the neighborhood [in Atlanta, Georgia]; I would--and, and I don't think the parents minded that so much. It's just I think it was troubling to them that I would do it without letting them know. I'd just wander off. I loved to play marbles. It drove my mother crazy. She thought that was so unladylike. We didn't wear pants. You know, my mother thought, you know, that wasn't ladylike, so I had to learn to shoot marbles standing up, and I was very good at it, and had all the big cat eye marbles of the boys in the neighborhood. And my mother just thought it was awful, you know, just--and that's really when I, I first encountered the buttons, because she had these two beautiful button tins. And I'm, I'm calling them tins, but one of her button containers was glass, so you could see through it. I could see these beautiful buttons. And occasionally she would bribe me, and tell me I could play with her buttons if I would stay away from those boys. See, she was worried about me hanging around with these boys. That was her, that was her concern. Speaker 1: Yes, because boys were the ones who shot marbles. Speaker 2: And I, I was fascinated with those things and the, the whole process of, of--I, I really think if I had tried I could have been a good pool player, because it was something about, you know, how getting that angle right and everything to, to, to take this one object and have it move another object out of a space and then have it take that--that, that whole dynamic was just very interesting to me, plus I liked the look of the marbles. I liked the sounds of 'em and, and that sort of thing. But that-- Speaker 1: That was all glass. Speaker 2: Mm-hm, but it had drove my, my mother just, you know, just you know, "Can't you play with our little girlfriends" that kind of thing. And we did that; you know, we did the--my sisters and I played games. We loved--we were very active in that respect. Speaker 1: And what games did you all play? What were some of the childhood games? Speaker 2: Well, we did the traditional stuff, the hopscotch, the kickball, badminton. We loved badminton growing up. Sometimes we'd play hospital. We had this little red wagon, and we'd take turns being the patient and the doctor. And that was one of my favorite things to play, was hospital. And we'd take turns being the siren, you know, making the, the sound, and-- Story_ID: 323634 Speaker 1: We would, we were terrible about imitating people, so we'd sometimes get in the backyard and imitate people, you know, falling out at church and stuff like that. Speaker 2: That was always a-- Speaker 1: Until we got caught, you know (laughter). Speaker 2: That was always a good one to do, you know, just do a church scene all over again, yeah. Speaker 1: And, and, you know, stuff that, 'cause we were in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, which role-- Speaker 1: --church so much. Speaker 2: --did you play when you, when you were doing, when you were doing church, when you were having church is what they call? Speaker 1: I was always one of the, you know, the sisters in the white who would fan-- Speaker 2: One of the ushers? Speaker 1: --the people and (laughter), one of the mothers of the church (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, okay, when they fainted and-- Speaker 1: When they faint, you go-- Speaker 2: --when it was-- Speaker 1: --lay your little thing on (laughter) 'em and, and fan them, you know, and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: You know, that's amazing. Shirley Caesar tells about when she was a little girl and how she would always get in trouble with playing church. Speaker 1: Playing church, oh yes. Speaker 2: You know, and all that. And they would just have a whole church service (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If you your parents caught you, you were whoo, you were in serious trouble. You may as well have stolen something, you didn't, 'cause you didn't play with that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But we just, you know, it was just--and then we'd imitate people, and, and then-- Speaker 2: And lots of comedians have made money off of imitating people. My brother was really-- Speaker 1: And we did, yeah. Speaker 2: --he was really good at that, coming up with the voices and the demeanors and-- Speaker 1: And it's a part of, you know, it's, it's a way of really sort of bringing them into the fold, and you know, it made them a part of the whole family experience, and it's, and it's also a good way to remember them. Speaker 2: And it's an art to it. Speaker 1: It makes it easy to remember. Speaker 2: Because everybody-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --couldn't actually capture-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --that person, either physically, verbally, or whatever. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: So it was actually an art to it. Speaker 1: It's, you're exactly right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You're exactly right. But we did, you know, my sisters were, and I were pretty physically active. We didn't--we had dolls, but I don't think any of us were really doll play--we didn't play a lot of house. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know, we played hospital. Sometimes we'd play school, and that was always hard because my oldest sister [Deborah Peek Crockett] always insisted on being the teacher. And when she couldn't be the teacher, then she would promote herself up to principal. She never got to be a student. She was always somebody in charge, and to this day, she's still rather bossy. But we, we played school, and every once in a while we would play, and I don't know where we got this from, but we would play grocery store. And then the, the, the other game, I'm sure all kids did it, the other thing we'd love to do is sit on the front steps and watch the cars go by, and you'd claim the cars: that's my car, you know. And, and you, you try to grab it before somebody else claimed it. And of course, you know, the, the raggedy car, nobody wanted that one, but the nice, shiny, bright, you said oh, that's my car, that's my car. We'd play--I don't know if you did that, but we used-- Speaker 2: No, we, we did all that. Speaker 1: --spent hours doing that. And then we'd, we, we were, we were really bad because we teased each other; we'd sit on the stoops and, stoop, the front steps, and as people would go by, we said that's your husband (laughter), you know. And of course, you know, the, the, the object of that game is, at the end of the day, as bad as the one they gave you might be, for yours to end up being the best pick for the day, you know. And don't let somebody come by who had a little too, too much to drink. It's a (unclear)--that's your husband, you know (laughter). We were awful. Speaker 2: And you had to say it first. You had to give (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You had to say it first, you had to-- Speaker 2: --him away before they-- Speaker 1: And you had to give it to somebody. Speaker 2: --gave him to you. Speaker 1: That's Harriett's [Harriett Ann Peek] husband; that's Gwen's [Gwendolyn Peek White] husband. You know, you had to give that away real fast. We-- Speaker 2: And, and see, that's so much fun, because here is creativity again. You had to be creative with, with what you had to, to play with. Now, you just, just go to Toys "R" Us [Toys "R" Us, Inc.] and some of them department stores, and this is what the children-- Speaker 1: There, there you go, that's right. Speaker 2: --have for toys-- Story_ID: 323635 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you know we played family in the winter. We played the, the family games, the Monopoly, the Sorry. My mother [Mary Hill Peek] didn't like Old Maid. We, I remember we sneaked and got us a little--'cause all the other kids played it. And I remember one day when she hit the roof. I must have been about, seemed like I was seventh or eighth grade when somebody brought a Ouija board in there. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, I was gonna ask about Ouija-- Speaker 1: She said, "Oooh no." My mother hit the roof. She said, "You may as well have an old eight ball (laughter)." You know, she-- Speaker 2: An eight ball? Speaker 1: An eight ball, you know, this thing-- Speaker 2: From-- Speaker 1: --that was supposed to tell your fortune. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know, this eight ball. I mean she did not like that. She threw, threw that Ouija board away. Speaker 2: Well, I didn't like Ouija. Did you like Ouija? Speaker 1: Well, see, we were just curious 'cause you, you know, it was common, and everybody was talking about the Ouija board. The Ouija, my mother said, "No, you're not gone Ouija in here." Speaker 2: So you all had to get rid of the Ouija board? Speaker 1: That she threw it away. It was no, you know, there, there was no discussing, that kind of thing. For some reason, she didn't like cards, you know. She didn't even like Solitaire. You know, she didn't like you having cards in the house, so we had to play the little innocent games. And I remember we had, we had these--remember when you could buy these log cabin things, and you could build your own little log (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Your, your own little house, yes, with those little like-- Speaker 1: We would play with those and-- Speaker 2: --logs or sticks like. Speaker 1: Right, and pickup sticks and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, that kind of thing. I always liked Jackstones, but it was something about those log, building those log cabin things I just love. And I tried to figure out how to, how to put wings on it, that (laughter), you know, really couldn't have. So I started, I discovered Elmer's glue (laughter), you know. So I would just glue my--you know, I'm back to that gluing though-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I'm, I'm already back to it, so. But those were the kind of little fun things we did-- Story_ID: 323636 Speaker 1: Then I remember when we were really small, every Easter we got the little dyed chickens. Did you get the little baby chickens? That was common (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The candies that-- Speaker 1: No, the real-- Speaker 2: --no, the candy-- Speaker 1: --chickens. Speaker 2: --the real, the little ones on the, some are on a stick? Speaker 1: You got a chicken. And they were real chickens, and they would dye them. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Little chickens, we would get little chickens as-- Speaker 2: The little chicks, the baby chicks? Speaker 1: Little baby chicks, and they'd grow up, and my daddy [Norman Peek] would cook them. And I remember (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Now wait a minute, they gave 'em for Easter? Speaker 1: We got real chickens for Easter. Did you--yeah, and they would dye them. I don't know why they did that to the little chicks. They, they'd dye the little chicks. And there was always a competition to see whose chicken would survive the longest. Well, usually (laughter) it had to do with which one, you know, grew up, got fat, and my daddy cooked or whatever. And to this day, I don't eat chicken. Speaker 2: (Laughter) 'Cause you never wanted to see your chicken become (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I, I don't know if it's, if that's in it, but you know, I never cared for chicken. But I remember my youngest sister, Harriett [Harriett Ann Peek], her chicken was the last. It looked like she was gonna make it. And her chicken was doing real well, and one day she, I don't know if she tried to play with it or what, and it kind of pecked her finger, and she kicked it. And it, she kicked it, and it, it went under the washing machine, and that was the end of her little chicken. So, but you didn't get little chickens? We got them every Easter. Speaker 2: We had them, but we would grow--well, we would have the eggs-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --and have the eggs to hatch by putting them under a light. And they would hatch and become little biddies-- Speaker 1: Oh, wow. Speaker 2: --or little chicks. Speaker 1: No, we didn't-- Speaker 2: And then after a period of time, she would put 'em in the barnyard, I mean in the chicken coop with the rest of the chickens. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: But it was like a nursery for them, you know, like, uh-huh, when she would get the eggs and do that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We got actually a little chick. Speaker 2: But we didn't get 'em as gifts. Speaker 1: We got actually a little, little chicken, we sure did. Can you imagine? Speaker 2: But sometimes a chicken, your chick would--did you have to care for them too? Speaker 1: That was the whole--that was the whole deal. Speaker 2: The whole was to care for the chick. Speaker 1: 'Cause I can remember some years when I was on a punishment I didn't get one (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, really? So it was a reward? So you had to--okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was on a punishment, more than once (laughter). Story_ID: 323637 Speaker 1: And just little things like when I was a little girl, the first thing I wanted to be was a stuntwoman. Now where that came from--I've always been a movie buff. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I would lov- I loved nothing more than spending my Saturdays in the movie theater-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --loved the theater. Speaker 2: Now which theater did you go to in Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 1: Sometimes we went to, there was a theater on Auburn [Avenue], and sometimes we would go to the theater on Ashby-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --on Ashby Street [Joseph E. Lowery Boulevard]. Speaker 2: Now these were black theaters? Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Speaker 2: So you were in Atlanta, and you had the separate theaters? Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Speaker 2: Okay, and you didn't have to go through the back doors at this, this neighborhood (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I have to tell about the first time I went to the Fox [Fox Theatre, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: First time I went to that Fox Theatre, because the Fox was, was an integrated theater only to the extent that whites sat downstairs-- Speaker 2: And blacks sat in the balcony. Speaker 1: --and blacks had to go sit in the balcony. Well, my dad [Norman Peek] you're not going in there. Well, I remember this year when 'Li'l Abner' came out, and everybody was buzzing, 'Li'l Abner,' 'Li'l Abner,' you know, the movie 'Li'l Abner.' And I wanted to go so bad. So me and my little best friend, Deborah DeShasier [ph.], we decide we're gonna sneak in there. So we told our parents we were going to the library, and we strutted our little selves down to the Fox Theatre and went in there and saw 'Li'l Abner.' And when we came out, both sets of parents were standing there waiting for us. Some neighbor apparently saw us going in and went and told our parents. They were standing right there waiting for us. That was the most frightening day of my life 'cause I thought my father was gonna kill me 'cause he had very specifically said-- Speaker 2: How old do you think you were then? Speaker 1: What grade was I in? It seems like I was in the, seem like I was in the seventh grade. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: 'Cause I know I was--it was toward--'cause I remember all the little special stuff they did when you graduate from high school they didn't do--graduated-- Speaker 2: From-- Speaker 1: --elementary school. They didn't do it for me. They said, "No, you, you know, you just, you, you weren't good." So I said okay, but I remember that. But I loved the theater, and I wanted to do these stunts. So I would do things like, I was always climbing. My mother [Mary Hill Peek] said, "You in a tree with a dress on, now just, just think about it," you know. And so I was always, you know, falling and spraining ankles and you know, doing stuff and getting them all--I had this, this knot on my wrist for years when I was a--and, and, and I think I had just fallen on that arm so many times that it was just my, my mother would just--she'd said, "All I could do is pray." And I'd say I'm not gonna do it again, and she said a few weeks later, right back up in that tree, walking a--you know how you had them embankments, these walls? Speaker 2: Like a levy, or was it just a wall? Speaker 1: They're kind of like, like embankments from the yard to the, to the sidewalk-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and that kind--and I'd love to walk that thing and close my eyes, and was like this child just--and I'm, so, I'm always scraping up something and (unclear). And, and, and she just--they, you know, they'd tell me not to do things I'd do, and I'd end up being punished. And I think my two younger sisters [Betty Elizabeth Peek and Harriett Ann Peek] were almost ideal children because when they were really small, they were able to look up and see all that punishment I was under, and they knew, you know, if you do that you're gonna be pun- they really understood-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --there was a price to pay, and so they just didn't do it. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And they were very good, they were--I-- Speaker 2: That's one of the advantages of being--coming after the one who's not rebellious but who's rambunctious. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think I was the most rebellious of all of them. Story_ID: 323638 Speaker 1: I remember when, when the Civil Rights Movement was gearing up, and there was a lot of activity going on in the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And a lot of demonstrations and stuff happening in the city. My mother [Mary Hill Peek] would say, "If that one makes it home, I know I'm safe, 'cause my other kids have enough sense not to get all up in that stuff." But she was always worried about me. And I remember I stayed, I stayed after school for something. It was my senior year in high school [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia], and I stayed after school. There was something I was involved in at school, but I had forgot to tell my mother. And some riot or something happened in the city, and it had, it originated on the Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] campus, right there in front of Sage Hall [Sage-Bacote Hall]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --on what's now Clark Atlanta University's campus. And my mother just knew I was in it. My sister said she paced that floor. She paced a hole in that floor. And I came home like nothing (laughter), you know, and didn't even know about it, because you know, without cell phones and stuff like that, you didn't, you didn't know a lot that went on until somebody either ran up to your-- Speaker 2: And told you. Speaker 1: --front door and told or you saw it on the, on the 6:00 news. And I just remember when I came bopping in like nothing, and my mother said, "I don't know whether to hug you or hit you," (laughter) you know. And I said, "What?" And I said, "I was at school." And she said, "You weren't down there with--" 'cause she knew I was, oh-- Speaker 2: She knew were right in the center of it. Speaker 1: Well, I was curious-- Story_ID: 323639 Speaker 1: I had worked on the school paper, and I had already decided I wanted to be--forget that stuntwoman stuff. I think I wanna be a journalist. You know, I thought it was exciting. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I thought journalism-- Speaker 2: Now was this high school [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia] or-- Speaker 1: This was high school. Speaker 2: Okay, this was, was high school. Speaker 1: And see, I had, I had--I was a senior. I had already started having these meetings with the counselor. By that time, I was thinking I wanted to be an artist, I will say. She said, "Well, you know, that's wonderful, but you need a real job." Speaker 2: That's what your mom [Mary Hill Peek] said? Speaker 1: That's what the--no, this is what the counselor would say to me. Speaker 2: Okay, the counselor said this, okay. Speaker 1: My mother was very supportive of my interest in the arts. But this counselor was--and she saw that as her job, as, as, you know, really helping students to find that career path. And she said, "Art is really beautiful. You know, you're really good at it, but you need a real job." And I had done this writing on the paper, and she had all--she would, she would always critique, this counselor would critique everything I did for the school paper, and she'd said--this is a little school publication--and she said, "You ever think about writing? You write well." And I said, "I don't wanna be an English major," 'cause to me that was being, that's what English majors did. And she said, "You, you seem to like news; you like--." I said, "I do." I said, "I could be a journalist." She said, "Well, why don't you study that?" And I did get my first degree in journalism and enjoyed it, but it, you know, the, it wasn't the career that I, that I really, really wanted. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And it, it--you know, I kept going back to that flower on that blanket. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know, the art was the thing. Story_ID: 323640 Speaker 1: During high school [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia], did you participate in any extracurricular activities? I know you wrote for the school paper. Speaker 2: I was involved with the school paper; I was on the--we had a good debate team. See, that's where that talking came in handy. I was on the debate team; I know I was, my last two years I was on the yearbook staff; I was in student government; I was involved with the honor society; I was, my senior year I was president of the honor society at school; I was in the French club; I was in the math club; I was in the science club, and, and we were excellent. We went, we made the state finals-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at the sci- at the state science fair. And even though we were not selected to go to the nationals, we were the alternate, and we were the alternate team, the team that, that came from my school. And when the--by the time the, the nationals were held, it turned out they were held in Atlanta [Georgia] that year. And because we had been the finalist, and apparently some of the comments that were written about our project--we did a project about, it was called What If. And it was what if you could find the weaknesses in an individual's human brain? And is this not what we're doing? I mean it was just the idea that we were thinking-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And it was called What If. And what if you could, you could do something to the brain like electric shock or something and cause that, that weakness to strengthen? You know, how would this affect intelligence? How would this afflec- affect memory? How would this affect things like colorblindness? I mean it was, these were some--and we raised more questions than we answered 'cause we couldn't answer them, 'cause we were--it was what if. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now how did you graphically show this 'cause you had this project-- Speaker 2: We had--I actually--see, this is where the art skills came in--I actually made a brain. I actually did a model, a clay model of a human brain. And then we used dyes to represent levels of, of electric shock. 'Cause what this came from was I read this piece in Reader's Digest about a man who believed his ability to remember to see just a lot of things improved when he experienced low rate--when he had a low rate shock experience. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was struck by lightning. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the lightning hit the, I think the lightning hit the chair that he was seated in and then went through his body. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he seemed to, he seemed convinced that something happened when, when that happened, that he, he suddenly could, he said his eyesight seemed to improve. He, he talked about these improvements in his, in his ability to, to, to, to see, to hear, to remember. 'Cause he'd had a, a real serious memory problem from, from an injury that--I think a trolley, he fell off a--his mother was running with him to catch a trolley, and just as she stepped on, she lost her balance and was jerked back. And, and his head hit the side of the--so he took the--and he always thought that that affected his, his memory, and his vision, and all these things as he grew up. And, and so we started talking about well, what if there's something you can do with the brain that would cause--you know, if, if, if there're known flaws, is there a way you can, you know, if there is a way you can, can go in and fix it. So that, that was our What If project. And they thought it was so interesting, we actually got to present, even though we did not formerly compete in the nationals that year. So there, there was, those were some real-- Speaker 1: Now what other places would national have been held other than if it had been in Atlanta? It would--would it have been in another state--I mean city in Georgia-- Speaker 2: Yes, it travelled. Speaker 1: --or would it have been another state? Speaker 2: It, it, it was the, it was some kind of science-- Speaker 1: That science fair, okay. Speaker 2: --fair, and it, it, it rotated. Speaker 1: Around the United States? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That was, that was excellent. Okay. Story_ID: 323641 Speaker 1: So you graduated high school [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia], and what did you do next? Speaker 2: I ended up at Georgia State University [Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia]. I had, I had applied to all these wonderful schools and was initially going to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], going to Columbia University. I, I had been accepted to Columbia, and it was during this time that my father [Norman Peek] passed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When my father passed, I really did not want to leave my mother [Mary Hill Peek]. Now what I thought I could do for her, I don't know, but I just didn't feel like it was a good time to leave her. And I made the final decision that I was not going away to school very late. I have the utmost respect for Georgia State because I had not even applied to Georgia State, and it was already August, and my mother saying, "I, I don't want you not to go to school. You need to go to school." And I said well, I--you know, it's too late. I've turned everybody down. It's too late. And I went to Georgia State, to the--I, I literally got on the phone, called the director of admissions, made an appointment, went to see him, told him my situation, how when my fa- my father had passed in April. It was right before, you know, I'm in the middle of, of planning for graduation and all this stuff and just decided I wasn't gonna leave my mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I told--so I'm, I'm telling this guy, the director of admissions, all this stuff. And he's saying, "Well, you know, you, you've missed all the deadlines." I said, "I know, but my mother wants me to go to school." Well, this guy pulled my transcripts, and when he saw my grades, he said, "You know, I think we can find you some, some money. And what we'll do is we'll put you on a waiting list." By the time--I had to take the bus down to Georgia State. By the time I got home, my mother said, "Some man called from Georgia State and said he's found you some money." They gave me a Regents Scholarship to go to Georgia State. And I had I think like a week and a half to declare a major, to write this, there's this statement they make you write about why you wanna go to Georgia State and why you wanna--so, I had about a week and a half to get all that stuff in, and I made it. And that fall I-- Speaker 1: You attended-- Speaker 2: --started Georgia State. Story_ID: 323907 Speaker 1: So you made this bold move, and you got accepted into Georgia State University [Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Now, to make--you had gotten accepted into other schools also. Name some of, give us some of the schools that you had applied to. Speaker 2: The ones I remember, I, I had applied to, I know Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], 'cause Columbia was my first choice, Wake Forest [Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan]. I'd applied to the University of Michigan, even though it was cold. I had applied to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. I had applied to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. For some reason I had this California thing going big time. I think I had applied to about three schools in the California system. Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit about the, the preparation that you had gone through and what made you so sellable as a potential college student at that particular time? Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I, I had good grades in school [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia], but I had participated the summer after my junior year, I had attended the Morehouse College Intensive Study Program. I think that's what they called it. Speaker 1: And this was in (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this was-- Speaker 1: In what year was this? Speaker 2: This was in the summer of 1966. Speaker 1: Six [1966]. Speaker 2: And this as designed to give you some idea of what college was like, to sort of take some of the, some of the shock of, of going to college out. So we actually, for the summer, for nine weeks, we actually lived on campus; we went to classes. I, I took a lot of the fine arts courses. I remember I took drama; I took painting. Floyd Coleman, who chair the art department at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] taught me painting. I took poetry reading and writing, took--everyone had to take math and, and English composition. But that was sort of the, the course of what I, what I, what I took. And LaTanya Richardson, Samuel Jackson's [Samuel L. Jackson] wife, was, was a participant in the program that summer. That's the year that we met and-- Speaker 1: She's a native Atlantan too? Speaker 2: She's from Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She, I think she was at Turner [Henry McNeal Turner High School, Atlanta, Georgia], a student at Turner High School at the time. But it, it was this, this wonderful. But they also, toward the end of, when we had about I think it may have been midway through the program, they arranged for us to take our SAT exams- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at, at, at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And I remember after the scores, when the scores came back, Mr. Mann [L.C. Mann] called me in to his office and said, "You need to really think very seriously about where you want to go to school because with, with these scores and your grades, you can, you can probably go where you want to." And I wasn't, I wasn't shy. I think I applied to fifteen--it was at least fifteen schools I applied to. And my parents [Mary Hill Peek and Norman Peek] did not have to worry about, my mother didn't have to worry about the application fee. Because, because of my scores they were waiving the application fees. And you know, I think I go one rejection letter, and that one rejection letter was from a Florida school. I think it was, it was either Florida State [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida] or the University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida]. And they turned me down because they did not offer the major that I was interested in, which, you know, I somehow I must have gotten the, the applications, that application mixed up, that curriculum missed--mixed--up with another school. And, and I'm sure that looked bad; that was not the right impression to make, to say well, this person didn't even research enough to find out whether or not we offered what she was interested in-- Story_ID: 323908 Speaker 1: I was accepted to the other schools and--but my father [Norman Peek] died that following spring. And I just felt strongly about not leaving my mother [Mary Hill Peek], my father April 4, 1967, my, my senior year. And I felt (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So he died short of graduation [from David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 1: Short of graduation and on my youngest sister's [Harriett Ann Peek] birthday. And-- Speaker 2: So how did, how did this affect you? Speaker 1: I just didn't want to leave my, my mother. I felt that, that close to her. I knew this was a very difficult time for her, and-- Speaker 2: It was a difficult time for you. Speaker 1: For all of us, really. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yes. And I just decided I was, was, was going to put it off. My thinking was I was, was going to put it off. Well, my mother had other ideas, and she said, "No, you're going to school, you're going to school, you're going to school." So I decided I would go to Georgia State [Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] and, and consider that. And I at--I called the director of admissions and made an appointment to meet with him and went to the admissions office, and told him my story, and laid it out. And, and at first he was not very optimistic, but when he got my transcript, he, he had told me he'd see. And I had to take the bus to that meeting, so by the time I took the bus back home and got home, my mother told me, "Some man called from Georgia State and said he's, he's found you some money." And it turned out he, they offered me a Regents Scholarship to attend-- Speaker 2: And what scholarship was a Regents? It was a--spell that for us. Speaker 1: The, the Board of Regents, apparently the Board of Regents for the, for the, for the University System of Georgia designated for each school a certain part of their annual budget for scholarships and they were called the Regents Scholarships, and he was able to get me one. Speaker 2: That was good news. Speaker 1: And that, that, that was, that was excellent news. Story_ID: 323909 Speaker 1: Now what did you say you majored in? What was-- Speaker 2: I majored in journalism. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And went there with the idea that I would major in journalism. In a year or so I'd switch my major to art. Well, I, I--the, the journalism worked out, and I, I stayed with it. I had, had a really good experience with that, with that program at Georgia State [Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia]. The, the, the professors were real grassroots. They had all--most of the professors that I had had been--had reasonably good years of experience as newspaper men. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and newspaper journalism was, at that time, really seen as sort of a foundation, sort of field in the field of journalism. And I remember Dr. Greiff [George Greiff] (laughter), G-R-I-E-F-F--I think it's, or is it G-R-E? G-R-E-I-F-F, I think--and just how meticulous he was. But it was a, it was a good experience. But the art, the, the sort of interest in art had a place in that journalism, because the, one of the strong areas that they emphasized, coming from this newspaper background, was layout. And when I took the layout class, I was labeled the layout queen, 'cause I, I just had this--but that was that, that art, design ability kicking in. So it, it had a place. And by the time I left Georgia State, because we, we were exposed to so much, we, we went to Grady's [Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia] emergency room at two a.m. on a Saturday morning, just to see what that was like. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We sat in on court hearings. We--you know, they were preparing us for whatever: if you were gonna be a foot reporter, or if you're gonna be a court reporter, or I interned one summer at the weather bureau, in the event that you--you know, I was-- Speaker 1: Had to do (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) going to become Linda Faye and, and give the weather, you know. The, the exposure was really, really broad. I, I interned one summer with, with a magazine, and, and, and really, that was a wonderful experience because I learned that I loved feature writing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and feature writing is still something I-- Speaker 1: That-- Speaker 2: --I, I do every now and then. I, I love feature writing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think that was--I found my niche. But they were so sort of comprehensive in, in what they exposed us to. We went to--I remember when there was a, an election. I think it was the, must have been the governor's, the gubernatorial race. And we actually--one of the candidates had, had, had taken a trip, and they were flying him back into Dobbins [Dobbins Air Reserve Base, Marietta, Georgia]. And they loaded us up all into this van, and we went out to Dobbins and covered the landing of the--I mean the, the exposure was really vast, and comprehensive, and it was fun. You know, they found ways to make it fun. It was challenging. I even took a law course. They, they, they required us all to take journalism law so that we would know what lines not to cross as a journalist. And, and it's a fascinating, very, very--I don't know if Georgia State even still offers that journalism degree, but I just--it was a wonderful experience. Story_ID: 323910 Speaker 1: And I worked on The Georgia State Signal [The Georgia State College Signal; The Signal], which was their-- Speaker 2: What is-- Speaker 1: --newspaper and actually won two awards for feature writing on the Georgia State [Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] paper. So it was a, it was, it was a very good experience. And I also--because of that, the relationship I had with the, with the faculty and, and, and the, the other students, I remember in the spring, if I'm not mistaken, it was the spring of 19--7, I think it was 1970--I don't think it was my senior year. I think it was my junior year. I was among the group of students in journalism that was inducted into the professional journalism society [Society of Professional Journalists], Sigma Delta Chi. I still have my--my professors were very proud of that because, I never researched it, but Mr. Greiff [George Greiff] was convinced that I had very quietly and without incidences integrated the Georgia chapter of Sigma Delta Chi. So he was convinced I was the first black member of that professional organization in the State of Georgia. And his whole point was, you know, you see there is a way to achieve these thing without incidence. And they just did it. They sent the name in with all the other names. The regional director came and, and did the induction ceremony, and we pulled it off without a hitch and had our reception, and, and got our certificates, and I went on. Now what's interesting is I never got--I got the welcome to Sigma Delta Chi materials from the national organization later that year, but I have gotten absolutely nothing from them since. Speaker 2: Not 'cause (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I think after I got--there's this, you know, this packet, welcome to Sigma Delta Chi, Delta Sigma Chi. This is the history of the organization and blah, you know. All that stuff came from the, from national. I never got my membership card, and I have not heard from them since. In fact, I've been thinking about just going online sometimes and saying you know, I want to update my membership, and pay my dues, and get my, and just see-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --what happens. Speaker 2: Because once you're member, you're-- Speaker 1: You're a member. Speaker 2: --always a member. Speaker 1: You're a member. Speaker 2: So it's just a matter of getting on the-- Speaker 1: It's a professional-- Speaker 2: --on the rolls with the dollars. Speaker 1: There you go, and becoming financial. Speaker 2: That would be interesting, yes-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and to see if you are in the history of the organization. Speaker 1: To see what they did with-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --those records because I have my paperwork, so they can't, you know. It was very, very interesting. Story_ID: 323911 Speaker 1: So you stayed at Georgia State [Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia], and you got your journalism (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Finished in '71 [1971] with--I ended up with a degree in journalism and psychology. Speaker 1: Okay, now how did psychology enter into it? Why did you decided to pick up some psychology courses? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I took--we had a requirement to take either psychology, sociol- there were, there were these behavior science requirements in the core curriculum. I took the psychology course, this Introduction to Psychology, and I just loved it. And I said I'm going to take another one. I took the second course, thinking it was gonna be an elective and loved it. And then by the time I was signing up for a third, the chair of this, of psychology called me, and he said, "What are you doing (laughter)?" 'Cause he saw this name and you know, they, they really are sort of hands-on with their students. And I said, "I just love these classes." He said, "Well, would you like to change your major?" I said, "No," and I said "can I minor in it?" He said, "You sure can." Well, it turned out, I had more credits in psychology than journalism when I finished. I met the journalism-- Speaker 1: Requirements. Speaker 2: --requirement, but I was taking all these psychology--and I loved these like theories of personality and of personalities and that kind of thing. I liked looking at the behavior of people that are classified as normal. Those were the interesting, you know, cases to me. So, I was taking all these course, and it turned out I had so many psych courses that the, the people in psychology were preparing to have my degree say psychology. The people in journalism said, "Oh no, she's a journalism major," and this and that. So, on my transcript at Georgia State--Georgia State does not really offer the dual major. My transcript says dual major. Story_ID: 323912 Speaker 1: It's very interesting. So, and I really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That whole experience at Georgia State [Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia], from beginning on to graduation-- Speaker 1: I had a really good experience, though, and even though there were moments when it was challenging. You know, I was, I was there when, that's where I was student-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And you know, so I had to sort of work through that. Speaker 2: Now this is a predominantly white university. How was the campus at that particular time? What was the atmosphere? Speaker 1: It was challenging, it was challenging. I think one of the things that really helped me 'cause I'm used to being active and doing things outside of the classroom and that sort of thing. And it was, it was very difficult. Georgia State had a very good debate team. You know, I had come off an award-winning debate team in high school [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. They absolutely refused to put me on that debate team, just little, little things- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --like that. And-- Speaker 2: But there were no blacks on that team? Speaker 1: No. And so, I think one of the things that helped me get through was when I joined a sorority 'cause it was hard. You know, I said I don't have a--you know I don't feel attached to this place, and I have to feel attached. I got on the newspaper [The Georgia State College Signal; The Signal] and immediately was embraced with the newspaper, but some of the other organizations that I made an effort to join were, in fact I joined the French club at Georgia State. Well, they would just, "Oh, we're so sorry. We forgot to tell you the meeting was changed." So I'd show up for these meetings, and no one else would show, so little things like that. They had their way of telling you, you know, we really don't want you to be involved. So when that happened, that gave me this group that, that I could feel like I was a part of, because otherwise, you go to classes. Georgia State didn't have a campus, you're, you're commuting. You know there wasn't, there wasn't, there just wasn't the same kinds of opportunities to bond with fellow students and everything the way--and then we were on the quarter system, which meant the classes just, you know-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) semesters, they weren't semesters; they were quarters. So, it's like every nine, nine weeks you, you switching and you know, so it was very, it was very difficult. People were working. A lot of the--at that time, I think some, I think at that time more than half of the student body were workers. They, so they would work and work the classes in. They'd, some people would actually take classes during their lunch. They'd take extengent- extended lunch breaks (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Extended lunch breaks running through their classes. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 323913 Speaker 1: How did the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination affect you on campus [at Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia]? Or did, did there--was the student body affected by it? Speaker 2: There was a black student union on campus that had just, you know, it was right at the, right at the point of exploding when I got there. And because of the things, like I said, you know, people would--you'd make the effort to become socially involved and, and, and, and they'd play these little games. And, and then there were students who had some very difficult situations to occur in the classroom from their professors. And we had a really smart guy. He turned--he was a, a business major in, in, in insurance; he was an insurance major in the business school. And I remember he was president of the black student union, and he was a, he was a data person, you know, he kept data. So every time somebody reported an incidence, he'd go to that, he'd call that student, say, "Tell me everything that happened, and what day was it?" So he had this, he was keeping this file of just incidences on campus. And I remember we had brought [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young to the campus as a speaker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Must have been my freshman year (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you a member of the black student union? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Hey, this is one of the few things that would take me, you know. But, but I like, but I liked that because in most of my classes I did not have black classmates. And I wanted to get to know the black students, so to me that was just a natural. And I remember Andy, Andrew Young had, had, he'd been on campus to speak, and he had really talked about the need to be involved. And he said the, you know, "There's a lot of things going on, on, on black campuses." He said, "But you need to have things going on even more than they do" because you, he said, I'll never forget it, he said, "You are in the lion's mouth." And so, you know, he just kind of got everybody, you know, kind of, you know, everybody was ready to go. So we had planned, if I'm not mistaken, the black student union had planned a march for that Saturday. And that was the week that, that King was--so everybody was scared. I was calling my good friends who, who were in black--that's Ryland [Ryland McClendon], said, "Ryland, you think they gonna burn the school down (laughter)," you know, because you know the--and I will never forget the first, the day after his funeral, the day after--it was the first class meeting after his funeral. You walked on that campus, you could hear a pin drop. People were afraid to make eye contact with you. It was just, I mean it was like, almost like a zombie-like situation. And all of a sur- sudden--I heard--what is this song? It's a song that James Brown--these students were singing, "Say it loud, I'm black, black and I'm proud." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You just heard that, and it was getting louder and louder and louder. And the black students, the black student union had organized a march, not only on the campus, but through Sharp, I think it's Sharp Hall [sic. Sparks Hall]. It was like the main building on the campus. And I looked up and here were, it had to have been thirty or forty black men, black male students, walking through there, singing that song, 'Say It Loud - I'm Black and I'm Proud.' And then they were beckoning for people to just-- Speaker 1: Join in. Speaker 2: --join. But it was just something about all these black males coming out with these husky voices. And I mean it stunned everybody. And people are like (laughter)--and I remember they were just beckoning people to, to get in the thing. Story_ID: 323914 Speaker 1: By the time they got to the, to the end of that hallway--see, they're passing president's office, deans, admissions, just all of the administrative, the-- Speaker 2: And it was set up to be like that, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, exactly. By the time--and they were gonna go out, which was on--what is that? Gilmer [Street, Atlanta, Georgia], exit on Gilmer-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --which was--the building was right at the corner of Gilmer and Courtland [Street]. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Just as they got to those steps at Gilmer Street, public safety said, "You can't walk through these buildings like that." And I mean for a second there you didn't know what was gonna happen. And the guy who was, I almost called his name, who was the president said, "We are students, and we have a legal right to walk the hallways of our university [Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia]." He said it just like that. And the, the guy just said, "No loud talking and no loud--," and he and, and, and another guy said, "This is a free country." And it's like they were taking turns saying these little things. And I remember I went home and told my, I told my mother [Mary Hill Peek] I was so impressed. I said, "Mom, I've never been more proud to be black than I was that day, 'cause they took the--," but my mom said, "You know, it, they were," she said "it's because they were together. You can do a lot when you work together. They were together." But I will never forget that, that look. You know, you heard this sound. You know, it was, it was awesome, I was awesome. But they got, after that, they got real nervous if they saw more than two (laughter), you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was almost like-- Speaker 1: --black students together-- Speaker 2: --back to the old codes-- Speaker 1: --they got real nervous. Speaker 2: --yeah, the codes-- Speaker 1: They thought it was gonna-- Speaker 2: --were almost-- Speaker 1: --'cause they, we kind of got through, and that thing could have gone either way because there were white students yelling out racial slurs and all kind of stuff, and they just ignored 'em. They just kept saying, "Say it loud, I'm black and--," they just, just ignored 'em. And it wouldn't have taken but one of them to retaliate, and that thing could have gone either way. But they were disciplined; they had planned that thing; they did what they said they were gonna do. And they got outside, and we went over to Hurt Park [Atlanta, Georgia], which is right across the street. They had a rally, and that was the end of it. Speaker 2: Well, when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was very interesting. Story_ID: 323915 Speaker 1: Did you go to view his body or to play--pay tribute to him [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] when he was at Spelman's [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] campus, or did you not get a chance to-- Speaker 2: You know, I did not view the body. I had this thing about dead people, you know. I saw a friend--when I was in elementary school [John Hope Elementary School; John Hope-Charles Walter Hill Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], the--her name was Julie [ph.]. Julie was my little art friend. Julie liked to draw and do stuff like that. And Julie, when I was in the fourth grade was kidnapped, and raped, and murdered. And when she disappeared, I remember Julie and I used to walk to school together, I mean just little things. And when she disappeared, it was, it was very hard on me. You know, I was just in the fourth grade. And when my--I remember the day that I came home, and my mother [Mary Hill Peek] told me that Julie--she said, "You need to come and sit down." She took me in the kitchen. She got me a glass of water, and she said, "Julie is not coming back." And I said, "Did they move?" You know, 'cause I'm thinking, you know, trying to think. She said, "No, she's not coming back." She said, "Julie has gone on to heaven." And I said, "Why would she do something like that?" I mean it's just not making sense to me as a, as a, as, as someone that age. And when it finally soaked in, that she was telling me that Julie had died, she said you know--I had a hard time with it. I went to bed, and I mean my mother had to almost kill me to get me to get up out of that bed and go to school the next day. But it just, I, I just couldn't, I could not function. I shut down. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother told me I didn't, she said, "You didn't speak for weeks." And that was frightening, 'cause I'm the one who's, you know, I always-- Speaker 1: Always chattering. Speaker 2: Mm-hm, she said I just, I wouldn't speak; I just wouldn't say anything. And, but she said she got this idea that maybe if I saw her. So I went to Julie's wake, and it was something about seeing, and she didn't look like Julie. I mean there was enough there for me to know, but she looked so--and it was what she had been through. And I think that traumatized me so that I just don't like looking at-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But I could see her face. She didn't look like, you know, it was Julie, but it wasn't Julie, that kind, that kind of thing. But it did help me to understand that she was not coming back 'cause that was--waking up saying did I dream that Julie--my mother said no, she's not coming back. But that was, that was horrible. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And just the idea of a-- Speaker 1: That was a trauma, yes, it was, at that early-- Speaker 2: Some of those sick-- Speaker 1: --age too. Yes, it was-- Story_ID: 323916 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer. And this is a completion interview. Would you please state your name and today's date? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Amalia Amaki, September 9, 2007. Speaker 1: Great. Story_ID: 323917 Speaker 1: At the conclusion of the last interview, you were talking about the sense of pride that you felt after King's [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death and, and what was going on at Georgia State [Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] with the students. Talk to me, let's, well, share a little more about that time in the era. Speaker 2: That was--I, I still think of, of those college years at Georgia State as, as being transforming years for me because, I won't say I was naive because my parents [Mary Hill Peek and Norman Peek] didn't really allow us to be naive, but I think I did take a lot for granted. And King's death, I think more than anything else, was like, it was like an alarm clock going up--going off--and suddenly I woke up, and I started thinking seriously about not just how things were changing around me, but what could I do to make a difference in the world. For years we've been sort of preached to by our parents about serving: that everyone's born with a purpose. And that purpose in the end, if you really walk in your purpose, which sometimes we call that your destiny, at the end of the day you're really a servant, you're serving. And I think I started thinking seriously about it because having him gone and being confronted with all of the things that he had done as a servant, I think it really, I, I just woke up. And, and for some reason, there were certain people who were sort of present, who had a strong presence, in Atlanta [Georgia] in particular, that, being that age, I just assumed that they would always be there. And having him, as I put it at the time, having him gone, you know, realizing he was gone, it reminded me immediately of what it was like to have lost my father and the shock of that reality, that he is gone, and he's not coming back, and what do you do now? And interestingly enough, I think my whole idea about what I would do professionally, everything changed. I never--while I was at Georgia State at that time I was a journalism major. I was aspiring to be, my dream was to become a feature writer for a magazine and then at some point, to own and publish my own magazine. I thought about that, and it was, it was still a, a sort of a secondary goal for me. But what became more important was speaking out. I, I think I'd probably been--I won't say I was passive. I've never been passive. I've all, always been a little over the top. But I think I thought a little bit more about when you take advantage of those occasions to speak. There were certain situations at Georgia State after that time when I made a point to make my voice heard. I knew there were students who were more shy, more timid, less likely to speak up than I was, and that's a--you've, you've been given a big voice because that may be one of the areas in which you can serve. You can give a voice to people who don't have a voice. And I became a little bit of a nuisance to the administration at, at, at Georgia State. But by the time I graduated, they acknowledged that not--they didn't always agree with me, but they did respect the fact that I had the courage to speak out. And one of the things they did was, I was honored at graduation as, as one of the important leaders in my graduating class. I did receive the leadership award. Story_ID: 323918 Speaker 1: Gwen Patton [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton], who worked with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], you know, during this era in, in Tuskegee [Alabama], coined a phrase, student activist. Would you consider yourself a student activist? Speaker 2: I think so; I think so, very much so. One of the things I did, I had joined a sorority. And by my senior year I was questioning whether that was, not that, not the decision, but how that would impact my life as I went forward. And I wrote things for the newspaper, for The Signal [The Georgia State College Signal; The Signal]. It was called The Signal. I joined the newspaper staff so that they would not turn my articles down. I wrote articles about things like--because I could not do exposes, I would go to other students and say, "How, how do, how do you feel as a black student on a predominantly white campus?" And I would develop articles around their little vignettes, the little comments that they would, that they would make. And I would edit them in such a way that they would be what I call palatable to the newspaper staff. One the, one of the things that that resulted in: one year there was a, there were, there were Sigma Delta Chi awards, which were, Sigma Delta Chi was a national journalism society [Society of Professional Journalists], and they gave awards on various college levels in each region. The Southeast region senior college level--for many years Georgia State [Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] would, their newspaper would be nominated for things they never won. For the first time they won, and it was for the features that I had written. So, that, just winning that award, I think even changed their attitude about the kinds of things that I was putting in the paper, because they were very nervous sometimes. Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the things that you were writing about? Speaker 2: The, well, the interviews with the students, and, and one of the interviews was conducted right after there had been a major demonstration, walking from the state capitol to the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] campus, and it was organized by SNCC. And the--I deliberately interviewed Georgia State students who had participated in the march. I had participated in the march. It was actually a march that was primarily, I think, made up of AUC [Atlanta University Center Consortium] students. But we were very frequent on that camp, on the campuses at AU [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. So we found out about it, and we participated. And as we marched, I would ask the students how they felt about being a student; what did they think would be the outcome demonstrations of that type? So they were really like opinion-based articles. But what was interesting about it is, at one point, students were threatened. And they were told by administrators at Georgia State: if you continue to participate in marches of this type, we will take your scholarship money away; we'll take your grant money away, because it's, it's, it's considered subversive activity. And the, the funds that we are using to assist you in getting your education, these are federal funds, and you can't fight that hand that feeds you. Well, I decided to write an article about the threats. And as you might imagine, there was a real battle between me and the editor. And I finally said, "Well, where would you prefer to see the article, in The Georgia State Signal or in the Atlanta Journal [Atlanta Journal-Constitution]?" And that was the--you know, so it was always, you know, those kinds of tensions, but in the long run, I think those were the articles that subsequently got, started people to looking at the newspaper and thinking of it a little more seriously. Because generally, The Georgia State Signal would run article after article about makeup and the meaning of, you know, the history of Valentine's Day, and Miss Georgia State, and, so they were, they were what I call fluff articles. And these were--I felt really challenging them to do things that related to what was going on at that time. Subsequently, what happened is I was only allowed to submit an article every other issue. So that's how they sort of put a muzzle on me. But the good thing about it is it meant I had longer to develop the articles that I did submit in the paper. And I started doing articles on students who had graduated, students of color who had graduated and what they were doing, because some were, were becoming quickly very successful. So even that was sort of countering the general idea of what black graduates were doing once they left Georgia State (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who-- Story_ID: 323919 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were some of your classmates? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, you're going to make me think. Well, one person who I was very close to, who was also activist in her own right, was, her name, her name was Ryland Needham at the time, N-E-E-D-H-A-M. She is McClendon, Ryland McClendon now. Ryland was very interested in urban development, that sort of thing, and, and after college returned to Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] to get her master's [degree] in urban studies, and became involved with a lot of, of housing development projects that were under the auspices of the City of Atlanta [Georgia] and occasionally things that the City of Atlanta was doing in partnership with the State of Georgia. She, she married Raymond McClendon [Raymond J. McClendon], who, I don't know if you remember Raymond, but he was very involved with the election campaigns for Maynard Jackson, Ryland; let's see, Maxine Tanker. I think she's still Tanker. Maxine is, I think she works in the Superior Court. She's a, a manager of one of the offices for the Superior Courts for the, for fil- Fulton County [Georgia], Fulton County. Let's see, who else? I'm trying to think of the tall woman who was a grad student who was our advisor who is an attorney now. In fact she, for many years, was the assistant attorney general for the State of Maryland, and then she went to Oklahoma, and--oh, what was her name? Valerie [Valerie Watts], what was Valerie's last name? Valerie--oh, it's gonna come to me at two in the morning. I wanna say Watts, but I think Watts was her maiden name. But Val, and Valerie was one of the people who really encouraged me in my, in my thinking and, and, and some of the things that I was doing and so did Caroline Young, care--I'm sorry, Caroline Long, who was, who is the daughter of Ralph Long, who was the principal at my elementary school [John Hope Elementary School; John Hope-Charles Walter Hill Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], the elementary school that I attended. Caroline, who was also a graduate student at Georgia State at the time that I was an undergrad school, Caroline was very encouraging, very militant, very--and, but I, I, and I, and I say that with affection because she was not an advocate of violence or anything like that, but she was very much an advocate for pushing at the seams for change. And because she knew I had a very strong personality, she encouraged it. She said, "People aren't gonna like you, but you have to decide what's important to you." I will never forget that. She said, "A lot of people are not gonna like you because they don't like strong women. A lot of people don't like strong women, but you have to side, decide what's most important to you." And, and she was one of the first people to tell me, you know, when you, when you're given, when you have the capacity for a big voice, and you have the capacity to command the attention of other people, you have an obligation to speak for people who can't speak for, for themselves. So Caroline was very--and, and I really, I really thought she, she guided me, 'cause she would say, "Okay, calm down," you know. She knew exactly when to, when to draw that line, and she was one of the few people who could, not just me, but you know, I was in the company of a number of undergraduate students who, some were a little more compulsive than I was. And, and Caroline had that calming sort of capability that, that I felt was very important to us as a group of, of young students at that time. She was wonderful. Story_ID: 323920 Speaker 1: Were there any men that were a part of the student leadership or grad students that were there to help out? Speaker 2: You know, I, you know, whenever, whenever I think of men I always think of people that were really inspiring us who were other places. Like [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding was, was, was, was one of those people who I can remember having a tremendous impact on I don't think just me but us as a group (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who is Vincent Harding? Speaker 2: They weren't really classmates. Vincent Harding came to Georgia State [Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] as a speaker, if I'm not mistaken, on three occasions while I was a student there. And he, and, and most of his talks were about being responsible, you know, being responsible as a, as a, as a person who is in a position to, to--he saw getting an education as getting a privilege, and he promoted that. But he also thought that you didn't get, get it and sit on your laurels. You know, you, you, you, you built, as he said, you built as you climbed. You know, you didn't just take it and leave. You, you, you got the education; you added some building blocks to that thing, that, that, that process; and then you inspired the ones who were coming after you to continue to do the same thing. He was very much opposed to what he called antisocial behavior: using drugs, consuming alcohol, abusive behavior, violent behavior. You know, he said you can protest without a rock. And I think he was, he, he was, you know, I always think of Vincent Harding more as a speaker than anything else. I really can't tell you what his profession was. But another person was, there was a poet, Don Lee [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti]. I don't know if you remember Don Lee. I just thought he was the most amazing human being in the world the first time I--and I heard, I would go to hear Don Lee speak at places like Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. He never came to our campus, but as I said, we were frequently on the campus of the AUC [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] because that's where we, that's where, that's where we drew a lot of our, I don't want to call them black models, but for lack of, of a better way of putting it, that's where we drew a lot of that encouragement from. And I, I remember him. He just, he just blew me away the first time I heard him speak. Those two men really stand out. And I just had this thing for Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton]. You know, I was in that group. I was a Huey Newton groupie, I guess (laughter), you know. I just thought he was--you know, he wasn't just handsome, 'cause I tend to think all the Panther were handsome. But-- Speaker 1: Well, most of them. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, most of them. I just thought they were very handsome. But there was a, I don't know, just almost like a finesse about him that I found sort of contradictory and, but it was, it was the, it was a kind of, of, sort of a kind of yin and yang that made it, made him more, to me more threatening to people that needed to be threatened and just a really complex personality. And, and I'm really drawn to those kinds of I think personalities, people who are obviously complex, people who I think even the people who are close around them they don't really, they only understand them about 40 percent. I find those people very interesting, and I, I've sort of put him in that category. Story_ID: 323921 Speaker 1: So in 1970--'71 [1971] is when you actually graduated [from Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia], is that right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And are you thinking you're gonna get your master's [degree], or you're gonna go to work? What are your thoughts when graduation time is, and when you're about to get your degree? Speaker 2: You know, it's really funny because when the--in, in 1971 I can't even tell you who the graduation speaker was, because while the graduation speech was going on, I was sitting there thinking okay, what next? And I had intended to go to graduate school in psychology. I had actually applied to a few schools in psychology. And if you had asked me on graduation day what I would be doing the next year, I probably would have told you I'm going to get a master's in psychology at Wake Forest [Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] 'cause that's where I had decided I was going to go. But then, I think it had a lot to do with sort of rethinking some things that had happened since my father's [Norman Peek] death. I was becoming increasingly aware that there were some health issues with my mother [Mary Hill Peek]. I was becoming a lot more attentive to my two younger sisters [Betty Elizabeth Peek and Harriett Ann Peek] and, and hoping that, okay, I hope they go to college. You know, I gotta encourage them to go. So I decided that it might be good to take what was then intended to be two years and grow up some more (laughter), because I, I really felt that I needed to, I felt I needed to experience the world from, with, without being under the wings of a parent and because I had been at home throughout my, my college years. So I got a, worked and got a job with Southern Airways, and got my own place, and stunned my mother (laughter) because I, I had actually signed the lease and started my furniture to furnish the place before I even told her I was moving out. So, but I did it that way so she wouldn't have much strength in talking me out of it. And it, it ended up being, instead of two years, it ended up being thirteen. And you know what happens, you start making money, and that little money gets good (laughter) you. And, and I left-- Speaker 1: Well, what did you do for Southern Airways? Speaker 2: I was in reservations. And I'm very happy that I took that job because I had no idea how much I loved traveling until I took that job. And the first trip that I took was to Bermuda, so I, you know, I really jumped in there with both feet. But when I took that first trip, I said this is what I wanna do, you know, this is, this is what I like, and I loved the adventure. And I'm one of those weird people. I like, I like taking trips alone, because then I can be spontaneous; I can plan something and change my mind, and I'm, I'm not disappointing or ruining it for somebody else. But I just--that for me is still the biggest source of discovery for me, is, is to just plan a trip, go somewhere I've never been before, and just see what happens when I get there. And I took, I tried to take a trip a week (laughter) because I could. After six months I could travel free on, on most airlines. But I took two or three trips every month for the five and a half years that I was with Southern. Well, then I realized--that's when the creative interest started stirring back up, and I decided I wanted to go to art school. And that's how I ended up at New Mexico [University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico]. Story_ID: 323922 Speaker 1: In your travels, where were some of the other places that you traveled? You said Bermuda, but where else did you go that--what sparked that wanting to, to now do some type of art? Speaker 2: I, I think it was seeing what I saw, and I--when I was on these trips, I would take--I had a little cheap camera, but I would take these photographs. And I, I had already, I already had a strong interest in drawing and painting, but this is when the photography really kicked in. I found I loved photography. And Bermuda was so beautiful that I said I can't stop now. And I, actually when I got the job [with Southern Airways] I listed ten places. I said okay, where are ten places that you must go before you leave this job? And I think number one on the list was not Bermuda. It was Paris [France]. I said okay, you gotta go to the great cities, so I had Paris on there, London [England], Rome [Italy]; I actually wanted to go to Berlin [Germany], and I went. I had Berlin on my--you know, I can't--I gotta go to Eastern Europe. I wanted to stick my head in Russia. I said I'm scared, but I'm gonna see what happens. Speaker 1: And did you do that? Speaker 2: Yeah. I wanted to go somewhere in Asia, so, of all places, I picked Bangkok, Thailand. I don't know how that came about. I said you know, Bangkok sounds kind of exotic. Where else was on that list? The one place that was on that list that I did not go was I wanted to go to Tokyo [Japan], and I didn't go to Tokyo. I'm trying to-- Speaker 1: Did you go to Africa? Speaker 2: I went to Africa five times, 'cause--the, the place in--you know, there was one place on the list and that was Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. I wanted to go there because I knew there was some Ethiopian connection in my mother's [Mary Hill Peek] family. So, Addis was on there, and I also wanted to go to Rio, Rio de Janeiro [Brazil]. So that was sort of my list. And then I started and I went to Rome, and I said I've gotta come back. I, to this day, I still love Italy. So I ended up going to Rome. I came back. I said I'm going back. I'm going to Florence [Italy]. Florence is when my, I think it was my third trip to Florence when I said I've gotta go to art school, because I was so--you know, art is everywhere. I think that's probably still the city in the world that has the most art per square foot of any city in the world. It's just art everywhere. And I, to this day, I love Italy. I went to the southern part of France and just loved it. There's still a place if I had unlimited resources, I would own property in a little village just north of the French Riviera they call Beausoleil [France], beautiful sun. It is absolutely, it's breathtaking, tiny little village, no wealthy people. They just, everybody is sort of a worker: they grow flowers; they grow food; they're carpenters. But it's, the view is just spectacular; it's a beautiful place. I would love a home in Beausoleil. Speaker 1: Now, these trips are in the '70s [1970s] into the '80s [1980s]. How were you treated by other people as American and then as a black woman? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'll tell you something funny that often happened: often I was not, until I opened my mouth, people did not think I was American. I remember I was in London for about four days before people realized I was not--what did they thing? They thought I was Samoan, which I thought was--you know, I said it's kind of exotic, you know. You know, what do Samoans do that, you know, folks from the U.S. don't do? But my, my voice would always give it away. And then I remember--now in, when I went to, my very first trip to Africa was to Nigeria. And I had sort of befriended a British couple on the flight. So when I got to Nigeria, I sort of had a, you know, I, I was sort of in the company of a couple that was well respected in most of the villages that I followed them to because the husband had been doing research on that part of Africa, that, that whole region in Africa for about twenty-five years. So that was kind of interesting. I always stunned people though because my first trips to Africa I felt more like a foreigner than when I went to places in Europe. And I think that's because the places that I went in Europe were those big cities, and they were used to tourists. So, I don't know if that--but I think in a lot of the places in Europe they thought I was from Africa (laughter). Story_ID: 323658 Speaker 1: So you worked for Southern Airways for five and a half years (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Five and a half years. Speaker 1: --and your interest in photography blossoms. So tell me what happens next. Where do you begin to work after the airways, Southern Airways? Speaker 2: In--that's when I go to school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I go to the University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico], and it's-- Speaker 1: What made you choose, what made you choose that school? Speaker 2: Well, it's kind of a fluke (laughter). But the University of New Mexico had at that time one of the best programs in photography in the country. And there was a wonderful photo historian there who was teaching there named Beaumont Newhall. And there was also a wonderful--and it had a national reputation just like Beaumont Newhall was Van Deren Coke and Van Deren Coke was, I think he sort of had one foot in the photography department and the other foot in the museum, in the university museum. And it was really Van Deren Coke who convinced me that it would be a good idea to go to UNM [University of New Mexico], and, and he was right. I had a, had a wonderful time, wonderful time, wonderful time. Speaker 1: So tell me what were the differences from, there had to be a big difference from Georgia State [Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] to the University of New Mexico. Speaker 2: Okay, at University of New Mexico you could count the African Americans on one hand (laughter). That was the first thing. I remember the first day when I walked in and told the dean of the fine arts school that I would, in fact, that I would, in fact, be interested in pursuing the degree there, and he immediately got on the phone and called the dean of the college of arts and sciences and said, "We got one." So apparently, they had been given this mandate to go out and find--you know, a lot of that went on in the '70s [1970s]. After the activism of the '60s [1960s] people started looking for black students to bring into their program. That was a big change. The, just the look and the feel of the place, New Mexico was, especially Albuquerque [New Mexico] where the school was, it was basically brown. You know, I came from a, from green Atlanta [Georgia] (laughter), you know, with trees and grass. And, and here is this brown place, the, the look of the structures, you know the adobe architecture, the whole design of the architecture, radically different from what I had been used to. And the other thing was just the look and the feel of the desert, you know, it, it, you know, with the occasional rain; it would rain maybe once every two or three months. And you know, if you got wet before you got where you were going, you had dried off. It was just that whole experience of the, the dry air, the desert. But I very quickly came to really love the look of the desert, that, that, that sparseness has its own, its own beauty, its own appeal. I started liking the fact that you didn't have to worry about an umbrella. Story_ID: 323659 Speaker 1: I had wonderful experiences, interactions with Georgia O'Keeffe, which was one the highlights of my life, and-- Speaker 2: Well, tell me about that. Speaker 1: I, I, I had befriended a, an architect who was in the Albuquerque [New Mexico] area. And he was, he had this very almost surrogate son kind of relationship with, with O'Keeffe. And one Saturday morning, it wasn't unusual for him to call and say, "What are you doing?" And he, we'd go on these adventures. We did that about three times. Well, on this particular occasion he said, "Well, you know, get some stuff and we're going on an adventure." And I got really kind, a little nervous because I didn't know him that well at that point. And all I could see was, you know, the city was getting further and further away, and I'm looking out on this desert, and I don't see anything. And I'm starting to envision in my mind, you know, I'm seeing, you know, UNM [University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico] student found dead on the, on the Mesa. You know, I'm just, all this stuff is running 'cause I really didn't know him that well. And eventually I see this structure. And we get closer and closer, and he's driven me to her house, her ranch. And the minute I step out of the car, once I realize where I am, I get excited. I step out of the car, and he pulls off, and there's this cloud of smoke. And as the smoke clears, I look and sort of off in an angle to my left is this tiny woman. I had no idea she was so small. But then, you know, how you just sense that you're being watched. And I sort of look off at this angle to the right, and here are two little brown chows. And they look at me, and then they look at her, and they look at me, and they look at her. And I know those are not, you know, little kiddie dogs, you know. I know these are dangerous dogs, potentially dangerous. And finally she says in this really strong voice: "What are you doing here?" And I said, "Well, I came to see you." And she said, "Why?" And I said, "Don't you know who you are?" And she laughs, and the dogs just kind of look off and walk off, and they, it's as if they say oh, she's all right. And he [sic. she] says, "That rascal. I'm gonna get him." So she knew exactly who, who had done this. But I was with her, I can't remember now if it was two hours, four hours, but it was long enough for her to, she had made tomato soup from tomatoes. This woman had a garden in the middle of the desert and grew little small sections of vegetables. So we had tomato soup from tomatoes in her garden. We had a very interesting conversation until I mentioned Alfred Stieglitz. And she just said, "You know he's dead; he's dead you know." And I knew that was her way of saying she didn't wanna talk about him. But that was one of my--and she gave me good advice when she found out I was, I was interested in art. And she asked me how did I define myself, and I said, "What do you mean?" She said, "If you're an artist, then that's how you define yourself." And she talked about how she did not consider herself to be the best, best painter. That she said you know, "It's not about always being the best." She said, "I know I saw painters who were probably better painters than I was." She said, "But when my opportunity came, I was ready." So she said, "Always have work. Warehouse it if you have to, because when the opportunity comes, if you're not ready, they won't wait for you. They move on." It was good advice. She said you know--she, she never talked race, but she said, "I know you, you're gonna run into situations where people treat you unfairly for all the wrong reasons." She said, "Don't get mad. Become successful. That's the best way to get even." She said that's what she did. So it was a wonderful two, I can't remember now if two, four hours when, when, when Bart [ph.] came back. That was the, the architect who took me out there-- Story_ID: 323660 Speaker 1: Tell me about the people in the community in New Mexico where you were. Speaker 2: You know, I, I had a wonderful time. New Mexico surprisingly was a good fit for me. I hit the ground running. I don't remember really going through a transition in New Mexico. I, I made a lot of native friends, and that was like almost immediate. It was--in, in fact, there's one friendship that I developed there, and we still, about once or twice a year, communicate. And I like the way he put it. He said you know, it was like snapping our fingers, and, and we just clicked. But I had a wonderful experience. And I don't know if I was tapping into, into the native heritage. I don't know, but it was just a, an immediate fit. I had a sister who also came there. Her experience, she enjoyed it, but she was not as socially engaged as I was. And she, she blames her personality for that, but I think we both had very positive-- Speaker 1: Was there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) experiences there. Speaker 1: --was there a black community there, at that time? Speaker 2: I'm certain that there was, but we never really socked into it. We, me personally, I became very involved with the people who were in the immediate area where I lived, which was also near the campus. But I also had a second circle of friends that were in Santa Fe [New Mexico], the school being in Albuquerque [New Mexico] and then in Santa Fe. And in Santa Fe, I was not aware of, if there is a, a black Santa Fe community, I never found it, and it was something I did sort of look for. I'm, I, I'm pretty certain there, there are communities in Albuquerque, but I think they were sort of remu- removed from the university area at that time, so I didn't, I never really socked into it. There were a few students on campus that I was, I associated with from time to time. But interestingly enough, they did not become like the close friends while I was at UNM [University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico]. Story_ID: 323661 Speaker 1: Well, were there any tradit- new traditions that you learned about, about the people that lived there, or rituals, or things that you just did not know about, about those people who lived there? Speaker 2: I guess the biggest surprise was I was a little surprised at how sort of homogenous New Mexico was in some respects but then how culturally distinct groups were at the same time, meaning you go to UNM [University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico]. You see different cultural groups really sort of working in, in what seemed to me to be very natural kinds of relationships, interacting without a lot of tension and that sort of thing. But you leave the campus, and there may be a native festival, and it's, it's, it not only encompasses having the native foods and doing the native dances, but you actually have the opportunity to buy things that are made not just by native people but made by native people in the old traditional ways. And it's, it's very much, it, it has its place there; it has a, a firm sort of footing in the community. And then you'll go to, you know, then you'll go to a, a Mexican festival, and you see the same thing. And then you, you, you know, there's this whole what I called sort of traditional Caucasian kind of life that you can realize there. So, and so here are all these different cultures that have found a way to sort of co-exist. And when it's necessary for them to weave their lives together for the sake of, of you UNM and, and, and education and that sort thing, it happens. But then they also managed to maintain sort of the, the cultural identity of the different groups. I, I found that very unusual, and I, I have not seen that any place else that I've been. And I must say, there was also this sense that all of these cultures were mutually respected, and I think that, that surprised me. At the same time, you see the, you know, there, there, there are things that allude to stereotypes and certain--and when I, when I say traditional Caucasian, I'm really talking about, you know, cowboy, old, you know, Western. There's a, there's a very strong Western art tradition that you see in New Mexico, and it's very much supported and validated in, in journals and events and, and, but it is kind of interesting to see that, you know, to see the cowboy and the Indians [Native Americans] sort of getting along. It's, I, I just find that a little surprising. And I may just be seeing the surface, but I still feel that what I saw was not only interesting but important, and it's a model of what can be. Story_ID: 323662 Speaker 1: Who was the, the president of, of the university [University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico]? Speaker 2: You know, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You can't remember? Speaker 2: --cannot remember. Isn't that terrible (laughter)? Speaker 1: Were there-- Speaker 2: You move on and something else gets that spot, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: And what about any teachers that might have taken you under their wing? Speaker 2: Two, well, three, three people stand out. But the, the one who really stands out is Betty Hahn, Betty Hahn. Betty-- Speaker 1: Betty? Speaker 2: Betty, Betty Hahn, H-A-H-N, she taught me a non-silver photography technique that is the technique I use to this day when I make the, the blues quilts and the photo quilts. It's called cyanotype. And she didn't just teach that, but she taught a whole--when I took a course with her on non- non-silver processes, we just, we just clicked. But the other thing about Betty Hahn is she, she stayed on me, and she would not allow me to compromise quality one iota. I mean if the tiniest thing was imperfect in an, in an image, she would say, "You need to redo it. You can do better. You can make this better. This is not your best work." You, I mean she would, sometimes to the point of making me a little angry, but she eventually came to realize that she not only was doing that because she was a good teacher. I realized she had a, she had a valid interest in seeing me successful as an artist, and she, she pushed me. She pushed me hard. She was one. The other teacher was-- Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you before you go on to explain what non-silver process, I mean just very briefly. Speaker 2: Okay, most black and white, and this was the common, these were the common photographic techniques that you were taught at that time, basic black and white. And you get a black and white photograph because of the reaction of silver, first to light and then to chemicals on the surface of the paper. So silver is, is a critical sort of element in the production of a black and white photograph in, in most cases. These were--she taught processes that did not involve the silver in the making of the image in any way. And, and some of the, many of the process were very old. Cyanotypes, for example, are, are a form of blueprinting. It's why the, the subsequent image tends to be blue, and the initial image is blue. You can alter it with other chemicals and, and make it turn other colors, but the, the fundamental color is, is blue. And that was the one that, that, that really stuck with me. And she felt very strongly about it when she knew that I was interested in, in quilt traditions. But it, it was really fun. I mean if the stitch wasn't straight enough, or you know, was, she was on me. And it's funny because when, if I did a cyanotype tomorrow, I think I would flash back and hear her voice in my ear. That's, the, the impact that, that she had. Story_ID: 323663 Speaker 1: Another one was Garo Antreasian. Speaker 2: Can you spell that for us? Speaker 1: I hope I spell it right. It's G-A-R-O, Antreasian, A-N-T-R-E-S-I-A-N [sic.]. He was Armenian. He first taught me drawing, advance drawing, and he subsequently taught, I took a printmaking course for him [at University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico]. He was a very celebrated printmaker, internationally known. He was another one. He, he pushed me. He, in fact, he, he--I remember my first critique. He saw a drawing. He went up to the drawing. He did not know it was mine at that point, but he took it off the critique board and ripped it in two. And he said, "Who did this drawing?" And in a little mousy voice I said, "Me (laughter)." And he said, "You need to finish what you a start." He said, "You started off beautifully, and then you got lazy." And he said, "Draw it over." Well, I had drawn from a still life. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Let's, let's stop for a moment. Speaker 2: Okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: So you were saying that he told you to redo the drawing. Speaker 2: He tore my drawing in two, broke my heart. But he told me to do it over, and he said start--, "You, you finish the same way you start." And he said, "You started a beautiful drawing, and you got sloppy and lazy at the end." And he said, "Do it over." And the drawing had been from a still life that he had set up in one of the sessions. So I went to him after class, and I said, "I can't do the drawing over 'cause the still life is gone." And he said, "Are you telling me that you did no studies before you did the final drawing?" And I said, "I don't do studies." And he said, "Then you've got to draw it from memory," and I did. And the, the, the good news bad news is as a result of that first critique, he always knew my drawings. He had already picked up on my style. So even though the other students were often anonymous in the, in the crits, he always knew my drawing. By the time the course was over, after my portfolio review, because we had to make appointments to go to sit with him one on one, and we went through the entire portfolio for the, for the course, and he, that's when he suggested I take printmaking. He said, "You ought to take printmaking. I think you'd make a fine printmaker." And he said, "I happen to be teaching a course next semester, so you need to sign up for it," and I did. But he also, he, he surprised me. He said, "That last drawing that you did." I said, "Yes." He said, "What do you want for it?" And he bought one of my drawings. And there was no telling me after that that I wasn't going to be an artist, 'cause you know, I knew his standards were high. I was so, I was so pleased. So, and I did print, take printmaking from him. Story_ID: 323664 Speaker 1: And one of my drawings, one of my prints are in the permanent collection at the university [University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico]. Because one of the other things they do when you graduate, they have the option of selecting one work to keep in the permanent collection. They could not decide between two, so they asked if they could keep both of them. Well, since they were, one was, one was a print; one was a drawing that I had done two versions of. So I was--it was okay because I sort of had my own, my own copies of those works, but I was very flattered. Speaker 2: What was the drawing of? Speaker 1: The, the drawing that they kept, which was very similar to the one that he [Garo Antreasian] purchased, was actually an, an abstract drawing. It was, it was my response to a piece of music that I had heard. I was trying to be Kandinsky [Wassily Kandinsky]. So I, so I was convinced that I was gonna make this, do these drawings that really talked about sound. Then I picked three classical pieces that I really liked, and I tried to, not, not translate those pieces into an image, but to put on paper how they make me feel. And that's what they were; that's what they--they looked very, very sort of cosmic and what I call Carl Sagan-ish, had that kind of feel to them. But that's--and they were color drawings on black paper, and it was really a fibrous cloth-like, very soft, sensuous kind of surface to the, to the paper. It was a black Fabriano paper. I remember to this day. And it was very, they were very large drawings. They were about two and a half feet square. Speaker 2: So you're at the university there from--did you go there in '77 [1977], '78 [1978]? Speaker 1: I went there in '78 [1978] and got the art degree in December 1980. Story_ID: 323665 Speaker 1: So now you have your art degree. Speaker 2: Art degree. Speaker 1: What's next? Speaker 2: I'm gonna take the world by storm (laughter). I come back to Atlanta [Georgia]. And before I start working an official job, I very quickly get involved with a project to try to bring--build--a, an African American museum in Atlanta. It was called Collections of Life and Heritage [Collections of Life and Heritage, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] at that time. It's now called the APEX Museum [Atlanta, Georgia]. And I started doing volunteer projects for them, and it was through them that I met [HistoryMaker] Paul Jones and got involved with the Paul Jones Collection [Paul R. Jones Collection of American Art]. After I had worked for, done some volunteer work for APEX, I guess I'd been there about eight months, Mr. Jones had some African art and African American art that the Collections of Life and Heritage, the director was interested in doing an ex- an exhibition loan from Mr. Jones. He said, "I'll lend if you send some people over here to help me catalog what I have." I went with two other people. The three of us went one Saturday morning. I had worked briefly at the Atlanta Journal [Atlanta Journal-Constitution] when I was a journalism student and had worked under an editor at the Atlanta Journal named Paul Jones [ph.] who lived in East Point [Georgia], and this was a Paul Jones who lived in East Point. Well, I became a little irate. I said, "What is this white man doing with all this black stuff?" You know, so I made the others, I said, "You just let me handle this." So when he opened the door and Paul Jones opened the door, not the Paul Jones from the newspaper, I thought he was a butler or something. And I said, "We're here to see that Paul Jones (laughter)." And he said, "I'm Paul Jones," and I was so embarrassed 'cause I was ready to tell the guy off. But I went into this house and art was everywhere, on the floor; on the beds; he's opening closets; in the bathroom; in the kitchen, I mean just everywhere. And he had no written record of it. Well, we thought we had us a little project that we could knock out in two or three Saturdays. Well, it turned out, I ended up spending all of that summer cataloging his collection, and after the first day, the other two never came back. So I ended up cataloging his, his collection for him, and as a result, as people started wanting to borrow art from him, he would ask me, "Would you help them put a, put a show together?" So I was making interesting little amounts of money with museums, and institutions would pay me to put shows together from his collection. And at one point I said this--I could do this. I could do this for a career. And I started asking people at museums and at universities, I said, "What, how did you start?" They said, "Well, first you need a degree. You know, you need to know a little bit about the art." And I said, "Well, I know that from--." I mean I'm really drawing from my little art history courses at the University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico]. Well, I decided, that's when I decided to go back to graduate school and--go to grad school--and get the Ph.D. in art history, and I ended up at Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Now you had a bachelor's [degree] in--at the University of New Mexico? Speaker 2: I had a Bachelor of Fine Arts. Speaker 1: Fine arts, okay. And so you go to Emory. Speaker 2: And, and that's really funny too because when I leave, when I leave UNM [University of New Mexico] my goal was to work one year and then go and get the M.F.A. I actually had applied to some M.F.A. programs and got accepted, but by the time I'd gone through that process, I'd also applied to Emory. And Emory was, offered me a wonderful package, and I decided, well, you know, I can always continue to produce the art. And if the Ph.D. doesn't work out, I can always go back and get the M.F.A. That was my thinking, but it, it didn't turn out that way, and so I ended up at, at Emory, and that was wonderful too. I had a good time at Emory. Story_ID: 323666 Speaker 1: So from '81 [1981] to '85 [1985] before, when you go to Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia], tell me what, what you're doing during those years. Speaker 2: I'm, I'm doing freelance work as a, as a curator. I think between '81 [1981], '80--'85 [1985] I checked, I think I did seven shows. I, I put seven shows together for, for different museums, universities, and galleries. Speaker 1: It was all for [HistoryMaker] Paul Jones? Speaker 2: Right, from, from Paul, from the Paul Jones Collection [Paul R. Jones Collection of American Art]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I also was working what I call odd jobs. I worked for two and a half years as a wire transfer investigator (laughter). And that allowed me to really draw on the journalism. And I, what I would do, I, I would find lost money for, for, for a bank. For a brief period in there I was doing some work with things like the YMCAs [Young Men's Christian Association]. These were art related programs. I was doing art related programs for YMCA. I did an, an art school program for Fulton County [Georgia], did an art in the school program for the City of Atlanta [Georgia], did a summer art, literally did the art component for a summer camp for the City of Atlanta. I was combining those with the curating jobs and, and, and doing okay. It was enough to, for me to take care of myself. Story_ID: 323667 Speaker 1: Who were some of the other, other artists that you were, that you were looking at or even maybe admired their work? Speaker 2: Okay, tons of 'em (laughter), because I was, because I was working with museums and universities and that sort of thing, I was looking at a lot of art. But I, I guess the people that I can't overlook, in addition to Georgia O'Keeffe, who just remains very important to me, but also people like Betye Saar. Betye Saar takes personal items and, and would, would make these beautiful assemblages using gloves, and letters, and photographs, and old radios, the, the curve top radios, that sort of thing; Joseph Cornell is a person I still love his work to this day. He was primarily a, a, a box assemblage artist, Joseph Cornell; Man Ray, whose photography and film still influences the work that I do. While he didn't influence me by the, by his work, I always loved Jacob Lawrence. I think I like the man. You know, I just liked him. I, I actually got to meet him as a young artist. He was very gracious. He had no ego, and I just, I just loved him. There's an abstract painter from, who was born in Columbus, Georgia, named Alma Thomas, very much an influence on just what I think about when I think about what it means to be an artist I often think about Alma Thomas. Those are the, I think the biggies, you know. Speaker 1: Do you know the work of [HistoryMaker] Howardena Pindell? Speaker 2: Yes. I like her too. In fact, I do a lot of button work. Howardena Pindell really sort of burst on the scenes, from my perspective, when she did her tiny little-- Speaker 1: Little circles. Speaker 2: Yeah, the little hole-punch thing. Speaker 1: Hole-punch. Speaker 2: And I said you know, there's a connection there; you know, there, there's a, there is a, a similar--so she might, she's probably in, she's probably influenced me more than I even realize at this point. Speaker 1: And as far as photography, [HistoryMaker] Jim Alexander is a photography icon in Atlanta [Georgia]. Any of his work something that you-- Speaker 2: You know, Jim is, Jim is great. I would, I don't think I could ever be the great portrait photographer that Jim Alexander is, that P.H. Polk, Van Der Zee [James Van Der Zee], you know. But you know, the photographers who, the ones who really, other than Man Ray, I love [HistoryMaker] Carrie Mae Weems. I don't know if you're familiar with, with her work, but I love Carrie Mae Weems and her very staged, they're, they're very, some of her work is, the, the sequences are very staged, but they're so true to life that they just, they just speak volumes, strong narrative, her strong, she's just so sensitive to not only the stories she's trying to tell but the space that she's in when she tells it, probably the most sensitive photographer I know of in terms of, of, of doing that sort of thing. But I also--who else do I just love. I always think of--I like Lorna Simpson. She's another one, Lorna Simpson, a younger New York-based photographer, who's now graduated into, in film, into art films. And then there's a, another photographer, Clarissa Sligh. I like Clarissa because there's no subject that's not, that's not potentially an important subject for her. She did a, a very sensitive, well--just the way she framed it. She just took such care in, in documenting--I hope I'm getting it right, but I think it was a, a man who had a sex change operation and became a woman. I think I have the order right; he went from male to female. But it, and it, it doesn't sound like it would be, those photographs could be beautiful or sensitive or--but she managed to do it. And, and she, she managed to tell his story and keep him an individual and a, and a real human being. You know, he wasn't a freak or a, you know, and, and, and that's a very difficult thing to do, but she did it. So, there's something, there's just a, a, an unusual talent in how she tells another person's story that I think is just, just phenomenal. These are all people who I think make photographs that I could never make. And, and I think that's part of why they're so, they're so appealing to me, because they, they do--you look at those photographs and you don't just see the image, you see their talent. And that's to, that's, that to me is the mark of a, of a real master, and I have to put Jim in there. Jim is phenomenal. He is--if, if I named, if I had to name five great portrait photographers, I think Jim would be in there. Story_ID: 323668 Speaker 1: So let's go on to Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia], and this is 1985, and tell me about, about your time there. Your first year, you do what? Speaker 2: It was, it was very intense. It was very intense. Grad school is different from undergrad school. But I had some very caring professors, Clark Poling [Clark V. Poling], who was one of my first professors there; Edna Bay [Edna G. Bay], who was very much responsible for making certain that I go all the financial support, and moral support, and encouragement that I needed. Eddie Bay was, we call her Eddie, Eddie was wonderful. She was like my mom when I was there; [HistoryMaker] Richard Long, Richard Long to this day, I still consider him my, my mentor. It was, it was--and I made lifelong friends I think while I was there. Preston McKever-Floyd is back in South Carolina, but he's, he's still way up there on my friendship list. He's in philosophy and religion. I was also there at the same time with Akua McDaniels [M. Akua McDaniels], who's the chair of the art department at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And we've maintained our, our good friendship. It was a good time. Story_ID: 323669 Speaker 1: That first year at Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] is when I also started teaching for the first time. I started teaching one class at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] while I was a student. I was reluctant to do it. I didn't know if I could do it. Once again, it was Eddie Bay [Edna G. Bay] who stepped in and said, "You can do it." You know, it's a--she said it will, "Teaching makes you, can make you a better student," and she was right, she was right. Speaker 2: What did you teach? Speaker 1: Art history. I taught a, it, it was actually an art appreciation course. And it was like a survey of art that was taught to non-art majors. So we didn't have to go into a lot of the detail that was necessary when, when I subsequently taught the art majors. But I had a great time. And at the end of that first year, that's when I spent the summer in France. Speaker 2: And tell me about that experience. Speaker 1: It was--well, you know, naturally, going to France, spending the summer, Emory's paying for everything, I thought I was gonna be on vacation, but it was really courses, and Emory professors, three professors. It was broken up into three sections, and in each section another professor from Emory came and taught a session. But it was wonderful because it was--you didn't just learn about Chartres Cathedral [Chartres, France]. You learned about it, and instead of looking at slides, you were actually walking through the cathedral. It was absolutely wonderful. Story_ID: 323670 Speaker 1: So how long are you at Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: I, get the, complete the master's [degree] and the Ph.D. in '94 [1994]. I get the, I actually get the master's in '92 [1992] and the Ph.D. in 1994, and that was fun (laughter), because I actually completed all my coursework and my exams for the master's in--when did I complete that--in '80, I think it was '88, 1988. And I began taking immediately--they allowed me to bypass the thesis. I don't have to stop and write a thesis, so when I passed my master's exams, they allowed me to, that falling fall, to enter the Ph.D. program. I completed my coursework for the Ph.D. in 1992. And it was in 19--it was--no, I'm sorry, it was 1991, it was 1991. And it was at that point that they realized I'd never picked up the master's degree (laughter). You know, I was so excited that I got accepted in the Ph.D. program, I never applied to actually get the physical degree that says you've earned your master's degree. And when we discovered that we were already past the deadline in 1991. So that's why my master's degree says 1992 because they have to date it the date that it's issued and not when the, when all the requirements have been met. Speaker 1: And you have a master's degree in-- Speaker 2: Modern and contemporary Europe--I'm sorry, modern and contemporary European and American art. Speaker 1: And your Ph.D. is in? Speaker 2: The Ph.D. is in American art and culture. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, are you working in any other jobs while you're working on your master's and your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: Just teaching course at, teaching part time at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], occasionally I taught a, a couple of times at Kennesaw State [Kennesaw State University, Kennesaw, Georgia], taught at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] one year, taught at--so I'm, I'm taking--I'm supplementing what Emory is giving me with, with part-time teaching. Speaker 1: And you write for Creative Loafing. Speaker 2: I'm doing some critical writing, Creative Loafing, for art papers and occasionally for the Atlanta Journal [Atlanta Journal-Constitution]. Story_ID: 323671 Speaker 1: So what happens, what's the next big step in, in your life? Speaker 2: You know, the next big step started in 1991 when I completed my coursework. My graduate committee fell apart, literally. One of my professors became seriously ill and had to withdraw from the committee and subsequently died later that year. I had another committeeperson who was retiring, and because I had not yet started my actual writing of the dissertation, felt that that was a good point to get out so that I could get someone else in that slot who could carry me through that challenging process that's required for the Ph.D. And then third committee, a third committeeperson did not get tenure and therefore had to leave Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia], so I'm sitting here with no committee. And it was a, it was a real, it was a real struggle. It took two years to get that committee, to, to literally get a committee together. In the meantime, I decided that I would not let not having a committee stop me from doing my writing, so I started working on the dissertation of a piece on Georgia O'Keeffe. And about halfway into it, I think this must have been either, I think it was fall 1992 when I had done a, a good bit of research, because I'm, I'm literally working on this full time, doing this research, I was able to get some, to get a grant from Emory that made it unnecessary for me to work for a year. So I devote that entire year to research and writing on Georgia O'Keeffe. And at the end of that, I meet with [HistoryMaker] Richard Long. And Richard Long says (laughter) six words to me that I will never forget: "Do you want to get out?" And I said--and, and if you know Richard, that's, that's about how you said it: "Do you want to get out?" I said, "Yes, I do." And he said, "First we need to put you a committee together." He said, "I will focus on that, but you need to think about another topic." And his reason for that was, he said, "What you're doing is wonderful, but it's going to be several books. You need to think of a topic that you can do in two to three years, something you can do in two to three years." So I ended up we had several discussions, and I decided to do the dissertation on the history of all-black exhibitions in America. He went to work working on a committee. By the time my committee was formed, this is why I could get the dissertation in 19--in 1994, because by the time my committee is formed in 1993 I already had three of my five chapters written. So it really did expedite--he gave me good advice. He said, "Just, just continue to do the research. Do the research, and we'll worry about the committee, and I'll work on the--don't worry about the committee; I'll help you build a committee," and he did. But while I was working on Georgia O'Keeffe I had made contact with a professor at the University of Delaware [Newark, Delaware], William Homer [William Innes Homer], who was really the leading historian in the country on American art that related to Alfred Stieglitz, who had been her husband. And he was delighted that I wanted to do some research on Georgia O'Keeffe and had agreed if Emory accepted him to serve on my committee. Well, Homer was a big fish. And as a result, he asked me to send him information about I'd been doing. Well, one of the things he paid attention to was the work I'd been doing with the Paul Jones Collection [Paul R. Jones Collection of American Art]. And even though my topic changes, and he, the minute the topic changed, he said, "I don't know anything about African American art. I cannot help you." But the connection had been made, and he became sort of the, the conduit for a relationship being established between Paul Jones and the collection and the University of Delaware that subsequently brought me to the University of Delaware in 2001. So that little, that little hook that goes back, really goes back to early 1993. By 2001 I was on the faculty at the University of Delaware. Story_ID: 323672 Speaker 1: So when you finish your, your Ph.D., what, what happens next? Where do you-- Speaker 2: I start working full time at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] as an assistant professor of art history. Speaker 1: And this was in 1994? Speaker 2: This is 1994. Speaker 1: And tell me what that was like. Who are your, your fellow professors there at that time? Speaker 2: At that time, when I first started, there was Sharon Pruitt. We're still thick as thieves to this day. She's, she's since, she since moved on a few years after that. Sharon was probably my closest colleague there. Then I became very close to Mozell Spriggs, who was a professor of dance. When I first started at Spelman the department was under a division of fine arts. She was the division chair. Mozell was another mom (laughter); you know, she became like my mom when I was there. And she and Sharon were really the, the closest people to me. I was brought in initially by Donald Stewart [Donald M. Stewart]. I don't know if you knew of Donald Stewart when he was president at Spelman. And then I think by this time I think is when Dr. Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] I think was president by, by the time I was, you know, in a full time, in a full-time position. That was, that was an extraordinary experience because I, I really, to this day, I love the idea of teaching college age black women. Spelman to me is just a very special and unique place. And you know, if, if all things came together, I would, there's no place I'd rather be than teaching at Spelman. Speaker 1: And how long did you stay there? How long were you a professor there? Speaker 2: I was there until 2001, when I went to Delaware [University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware]. Story_ID: 323673 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that connection early on in '93 [1993], how did the whole thing come together, that you would leave Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and go? Speaker 2: Leave Spelman. Well, what happened, Homer [William Innes Homer] immediately began to sort of encourage the administration to pursue the Jones Collection [Paul R. Jones Collection of American Art]. When, when I made the connection with Homer, [HistoryMaker] Paul Jones was already in the process of looking for places that he could leave his art collection because his, his collection is very large, thousands of, of work. I think to this day, he still probably has one of the largest collections of African American art privately held anywhere in the country, thousands of pieces, and Homer was aware of this. And the University of Delaware [Newark, Delaware] had sort of prided itself in being one of the top schools in the study of American art. They had very little art in their permanent collection by African Americans. So he saw this as a--he called it a watershed (laughter). He said you know this is a great opportunity for us. The president, Dave Roselle [David Roselle], the president of Delaware, met Paul, visited his home, saw the collection, and agreed with Homer that this was something Delaware should pursue. And they decided to court (laughter), to court Paul Jones, which they did for several years. And subsequently in 2001, they signed an official agreement where he agreed to give them a sizeable chunk of his collection. And they agreed to a number of conditions that he had, the most important were that they would use the collection to change curricula, that they would partner with historically black colleges and universities [HBCUs], because as he said, if, if, if he had had his way and there had been an HBCU that could have digested his collection, he would have preferred to gift it to an HBCU. But he did not want it hidden in storage, so he also had them agree that there would be works from the collection on view at all times. They subsequently took a building on campus that was on the historic register [National Register of Historic Places], put almost $5 million into restoring it, and designated that as the home for the Paul Jones Collection. Well, he said, "Well, you know, that's wonderful, but I need a curator (laughter)." And that's when they said, "Well, there's only one person who knows the collection well enough to do that without there being a long dry spell with, with people trying to become familiar with what's in the collection." And that's when they made me an offer, and they dangled enough carrots in front of my face until they got me to bite on one, so. And that's, that's when I ended up going up, in 2001. Story_ID: 323674 Speaker 1: Is that the same time that you go to, to Italy, or is it before that? Speaker 2: Now I had made little touristy trips to Italy. In 2004, I was actually allowed to go to Italy and teach at a school in Florence [Italy]. It's a wonderful, wonderful institution. It's called SACI [Studio Arts College International, Florence, Italy], S-A-C-I--what is it--Student Art Centers International [sic.]. It's a school that teaches--that brings American students to Florence to study art. That was the most phenomenal experience. Some of the things that I was just able to do as a result of that trip were just amazing. Over and above, coming in, they hired me a scholar-in-residence to come in and teach photography. In addition to teaching the students photography, because I had the art history background, we wove a lot of, I was able to weave a lot of art historical information about the photographers, the periods that they were working, those sorts of things, into the courses. And we did a lot of the, I did a lot of the lecturing away from the studio, from the, from the darkroom area. So, we would actually go out to photographers. We went to a couple of photography exhibitions. We visited three photographers' studios, and these were--one was a photographer who I was not familiar with, but I saw him working on a project on the streets in Florence. And I just became so enamored with what he was doing I said, "Can I bring my class?" And he said, "Oh yes." And he had digital equipment everywhere. I mean it was, it was more than I even imagined it would be. And he essentially showed them how, in his work, he took advantage of the knowledge he had of black and white photography, how he transferred that into his C prints, his color prints, and then how all of that informed his digital work. So he was saying it's, don't let anybody tell you that it's meaningless to know how to do the old manual black and white. He said, "It makes me a much better digital photographer." So that was just wonderful. And then highlight of it for me was one of the things they asked me to do because I had worked with the collection [Paul R. Jones Collection of American Art] for so long was to talk about not just African American art but the challenges, the opportunities, all of that, with African American art and the academy. And I actually got to do that lecture at an academy in Florence. So it was, to me it was just more than I could have expected, to be projecting images by African American artists on this wall in the academy with Michelangelo statues around it with you know, with, with frescos by, by great Renaissance Italian painters, and to have those African American art images in the company of that. And many of the people who sort of stumbled into the lecture were tourists and Italians who I don't think spoke that much English, but it was amazing how they were drawn into it because they saw these images. So, to me it really spoke to the power of those of the images by the, the artists that I was projecting. That to me was--if, if, if anyone had told me that that could happen, I, I, I just couldn't imagine the, the academy even allowing that to happen, but they did. And it was, that was a wonderful experience, and, and my students really, really got a lot out of, out of having that. Because they even write me now and say, you know, "I always tell people that I witnessed a first because that had never happened in the academy ever before," so that was great. Story_ID: 323675 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your work. We talked about all of the jobs that you had, but let's talk about the creative and the things that you, that you create. Talk to me about what, what your artwork is like and what it means to you. Speaker 2: A lot of it--up until recently, and probably still--I'm, I'm, I'm thinking that it's not that way now, but it probably is--but a lot of my work was really a lot about me and my relationship with my mother [Mary Hill Peek] and my father [Norman Peek]. My mother and my father, the affection between me and my parents, you know, just how, just how we, we had very--my parents had very personal ways in which they expressed their love for all of us. So, we all grew up thinking we were each the pet, because they, they, they, they really did personalize it. And, and I think a lot of that comes out in my work. I know I do quilts because my mother was a, was a quilter and, and, and quilted with a lot of love. And I think, you know, I do these button construction things, and I, and I refer a lot in-- Story_ID: 323676 Speaker 1: So the button work, you were gonna tell me about the button work. Speaker 2: Yeah, some of the button work is--I emulate food, like candy boxes, and it looks like candy, and cakes, and delectables. And it didn't, the light bulb didn't go off for me until last year 'cause I've done that for about ten years, that I knew the quilts related directly to my mother [Mary Hill Peek]. And this light bulb suddenly went off about a year ago that the, a lot of the button stuff really comes from my father [Norman Peek] who was a great baker, a wonderful candy maker. And, and, and I remember when we were really, really small, these little name games he would play with us. Sometimes instead of--there were six of us, and instead of calling everybody by name, you know, somebody was, you know, milk chocolate with a little extra brown, and then somebody was deep dark chocolate, and somebody was--you know, and he'd--and, and you sounded like something good enough to eat. You know, you sounded like that, and, and he would also bring home these hunks of chocolate. So, you know, that was his way of, of telling us how sweet he thought we were. But I now know that, that candy, you know, the, the, the sweets and the delectables that, all of that, that's really the way that I sort of reunite with him. So the mother and the father are, are still very much there-- Story_ID: 323677 Speaker 1: The art making itself, I can't remember a time when, when I wasn't trying to draw or something. And, and I can literally remember taking pencils and pens, and my mother [Mary Hill Peek] used to keep a little pad by the phone, and I can remember taking that, her, her pen and that pad, and, and drawing things that I saw in the house. I remember a doorknob once, and a--and we had a real kind of ornate doorknob on the front door that just fascinated--the doorknobs and flowers. And, and then--and, and I, and I can remember trying to draw pre-kindergarten. I can literally remember being at home alone with my mom when dad's [Norman Peek] gone to work, and my sisters are gone to school, and, and I'm sitting there trying to draw. And I can remember even getting a little punishment for drawing on the walls (laughter), you know, that sort of thing. And then I remember when my dad brought me a little pad that was about the size of, of just a regular writing pad. And I don't know why I remember this, but it had twenty-one sheets in it, twenty-one pieces of paper, and some Crayola crayons. And he told me to draw on that and stay off the walls, and I, I remember that very viv- why I remember those twenty-one pages? I think I was showing off and showing him that I knew how to count twenty-one 'cause I wasn't five yet. And those were my first art supplies. Speaker 2: That's your earliest childhood memory of artwork? Speaker 1: Mm-hm, was that little--and I remember he, he, he brought that, and he got it at, at I think the store was called Kessler's, at Kessler's. But those were my first art supplies. Well, then I thought I was entitled, so when, when, when growing up, when my parents didn't buy art supplies, I'd always save twenty-one sheets (laughter) of my notebook paper. And I would actually write drawing paper sometimes across the top so I wouldn't forget and use it in school, but yeah, as far as I can, far back as I can remember. Story_ID: 323678 Speaker 1: My first attempt at making a decent sized image was some pieces I did in yarn. And I didn't sew the yarn. I had some burlap that my mother [Mary Hill Peek] had given me. And I had raked--when we, sometimes when we would do little chores we'd get money; we'd, we'd get paid for doing it. And I remember I had raked some yards in the neighborhood. And I had this little extra money, and I went to a Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] and bought some knitting yarn. Well, I didn't want to knit. I, I bought knitting yarn and Elmer's glue, and I literally took the yarn and glued it on this burlap my mother had given me. And I remember they were floral, a pot with flowers in them. And I think I did two, and my parents were so impressed. My mother gave me another big piece of burlap. I cut it in half, and I did these instruments, a violin, viola, and a cello. And then the, the, the second one was a viola, a flute, and I think it was a, a trombone. And one of my teachers at school--I think by that time I must have been about fourth or fifth grade--one of my teachers at John Hope Elementary [John Hope Elementary School; John Hope-Charles Walter Hill Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] saw them and mentioned them to her husband who worked for someone who was, who worked at Rich's. But to make a long story short, they ended up in a, in one of the furniture displays in Rich's downtown. My little yarn pieces of my instruments, Rich's framed them and hung them behind this couch in one of their furniture displays. And I'll never forget the day I came home from school and my mother said, "You, you made some money today." And I looked at her, and what had happened, someone had walked into the furniture display, had ordered the furniture and said they'd take one of everything in the display if Rich's would sell them the artwork. And they had called my mom, and my mom just made that decision (laughter) without me. But she took that money and started me a savings account at what was C and S Bank [Citizens and Southern National Bank]. And I'm still with, you know, all the changes that have gone through, I'm still with that bank today. And it goes back to my mother opening that little savings account with--they paid me, I think I made seventy-five dollars for each one of them. So I had a hundred fifty dollars and I thought I was rich. Well, you know, there's no stopping me after that. Story_ID: 323679 Speaker 1: I then started doing these drawings, and I would draw kids. And they weren't any kids in particular. They were just kids that were in my head. But my trademark for them was the oversized eyes. I made them, drew them with really large eyes. And I would sit on the, on the stoop in front of the house sometimes and draw these kids. I did most of drawing in the summer. But this was during a time when insurance men would come by and collect the insurance once a month. And I remember I sold the--they would--it seemed that every six or eight months there'd be a different collector. I must have sold ten of those kids to the--and then they would--this is when they brought to the, to the door, to the doors. Milkmen, I sold my little big-eyed kids to milkmen, to insurance men. We had a couple of neighbors who bought them. So by the time I started high school [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia] I thought I was really rich. I had, I had sold drawings. I sold them for like ten dollars. I didn't know, and my mom [Mary Hill Peek]--they were just on notebook paper. By the time I started high school, I had six hundred fifty dollars in my savings account. I really thought I was rich, but my mom wouldn't let me touch it. She said you can't touch it until you're eighteen. Speaker 2: Was there a reason why you drew the kids with big eyes? Speaker 1: You know, I don't know where that came from. I think, I'm not sure, but I think one of my trips to the library, 'cause I loved the library--I would get up almost every Saturday in the year and walk to the neighborhood library (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which library-- Speaker 1: --and just read. Speaker 2: --was that? Speaker 1: For a long time I went to the one on Auburn; it was on Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia]. I loved it, I loved it. I would sit and read. I would go by myself. And, and I think I must have come across a book in the library where, a, a children's book, where one of the characters in the story had big eyes. And I liked those big eyes, and I just exaggerated them even more in, in the little big-eyed kids, but people loved them. They would say, you know, "Have you done any more drawings of the big-eyed kids?" So that's what they would call-- Speaker 2: Did you name the prints (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I started calling them big-eyed kids. And they would be, like it would be big-eyed girl in the red dress or (laughter) big-eyed boy with the blue suit and, or the green pants, or the shorts, or the polka dot top, or the, mm-hm. And you know, I don't have a one. Everyone I ever drew I either sold, I think I had one or two that I gave to people. I gave one to Ms. Epps. Speaker 2: Did you sign them? Speaker 1: I, I--well, that was before my name change. I did, and, and I signed them--I hate this name now, but I signed them Lynda Faye [Lynda Faye Peek; HistoryMaker Amalia Amaki], which was my (laughter), which was my name before the name change. Yeah, I signed them. What I didn't do that I wish I had done now in retrospect is date them, but I, I didn't know to do that at that, at that point in time, so. Speaker 2: Have you ever thought about doing a limited edition of big-eyed kids? Speaker 1: You know, I haven't. Maybe I should. I haven't, you know, just come full circle. Story_ID: 323680 Speaker 1: So tell me more about the, the buttons, the button pieces-- Speaker 2: Now buttons, I started really seriously working with buttons around, I think it was maybe 1990. But I can remember I was a little bit of a tomboy growing up. I loved marbles. I loved shooting marbles. I could beat anybody shooting marbles, I thought. And my mother [Mary Hill Peek] would not let us wear pants. And I knew that I would get in trouble if I got down on my knees in a dress, so I had to learn to shoot standing up. I was always shooting marbles with the boys in the neighborhood [in Atlanta, Georgia], and this just drove my mother crazy. So she, she started allowing me to play with her button tins. She had two beautiful button tins. One was, was really metal, but it was floral, and it had this textured top, beautiful little knob that you--and she kept really, really rare and unusual buttons in that one. And then she had another container that was glass, and you could see through it. And I just liked the sounds when you'd run your fingers with them. And I'd pour them out and line them up like dominoes and play little games with them and stuff. And when she, when she learned that I loved her buttons, she would bribe me and say, "If you, if you don't, if you don't go out there with those boys for two weeks I'll let you play with my button tins." Well, I would be good for two weeks, play with her button tins, and the next day I'm right back out there shooting, shooting marbles. So we would go, you know, just around this circle over and over and over again. I have no idea where those buttons are. But around, I think it was around 1990 when I started wanting to do something different with some swatches, some photo swatches that I had left over from a photo quilt. And I decided I, I wanted to do something with them other than put them in a quilt format, so what will I do? And I decided to make them stand like individual photographs. And the more I looked at them, I think one was Bessie Smith, and I said it would nice if I put the little sequence on the dress that were like the little shiny dresses that she wore. So I did that, and I liked it, and instead of a pin, I put a button. It was a very ornate button. And I really liked it. So I went to the next one and I put, started putting buttons on it, and then the buttons started taking over. And then I started using it, using the buttons to sort of interact with actual photographs, like found photographs, photographs that I would get at flea markets and that sort of thing, 'cause I loved the, I loved the photographs from the '30s [1930s], '20s [1920s], '30s [1930s], and '40s [1940s]. I just love the look of those photograph-- Story_ID: 323681 Speaker 1: And I started building these assemblages with the photographs, and buttons, and jewelry fragments, and wood, and just whatever. And then one day I, I, because I had so many buttons, I would go to flea markets and buy them in, in bulk, and then I'd come home. And this was a real ritual for me. I loved this almost as much as doing the artwork with them. I would come home, pour them in the middle of the floor, floor and break them up by color; I would color code the buttons. And then I had done that after a flea market trip, and I looked at a pile of the brown buttons. And I saw a bunch of them that I said that looks like candy, and my mouth literally was watering. And I said wonder what I would do if I put them in a candy box? And I did that, and then I said wonder what would happen if I, if I put some on the candy box? So I started taking, making the box itself sort of covering it and, and sort of decorating it with, with buttons. And that's how the, how the, the sort of food, the delectable-type stuff came about. And once I started, you know, it went to cakes, and pies, and cookies. And it, it's, it's, it's just amazing how something that hard and non-edible and all that, but it causes the body to react just like the real thing. Oh, I've had kids try to snatch them and run 'cause they think it's really candy or a cookie or stuff that like. And you know, everybody gets upset with me, because I love it because that says that they were convinced it was what they thought it was, which is what I want to happen. But that's how the buttons got--but I loved, I liked researching them and learning all the stuff about how buttons used to be currency, how for there were periods of time when in certain places you could, you could only, you only wore certain buttons as a reflection of privilege. For example, there were certain but- buttons that only people in regal families could wear. You could be arrested for, for putting the wrong button on your garment because it was, it was designated for certain classes of people, how buttons were often a reflection of your, of the work that you did, just all of these--the [U.S.] military. Story_ID: 323682 Speaker 1: One of my favorite stories that really happened was after I got the commission in 1994, when I got a commission to do a piece for the airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] as a part of the, the activities that were going on because the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] were coming-- Speaker 2: The Atlanta [Georgia] airport? Speaker 1: The Atlanta airport, the Atlanta airport. And I did that piece, and years later I got a phone call from a man who said, "You don't know me, but it's taking me six months to get in touch with you." And he said, "I just had to tell you how important that piece at the airport is to me personally." And I said, "What do you mean?" He said, "I have been," he said he had been estranged from his daughter and his grandkids, as a result of being estranged from his daughter. He didn't tell me what it was about, but he said he had a flight, and the flight was departing from Gate E5, which is the gate where the artwork is. He said and the flight was delayed, and he said, "I was sitting there and I suddenly looked up and looked at your piece." And he said, "And I looked at that band going across the center connecting the two pie shapes." He said, "And I looked and I looked," and he said, "Those buttons look familiar." And he said he got up and he looked again. He said, "Those were the same buttons that were on the uniform that I wore," he said that he wore when he was in the Korean War, when he fought in the Korean War. And he said he thought about it and thought about it. He thought about when his--it made him reflect on his, his relationship with his wife, with the children, and he said he suddenly realized that, that thing that he had with his daughter made no sense. And he said, "I missed the flight because I rushed to a phone." You know, everybody didn't have cell phones. But he said he rushed to a phone, and he called his daughter. And he said, "Listen, I'm in Atlanta." His daughter lives here. He said, "I'm in Atlanta. I have to fly out tonight, but I want to come back, and I want to meet with you. I want us to get back together, and I want to know my grandkids." And he said he came back about three weeks later. This was before 9/11 [September 11, 2001], so you could literally come into the airport without a ticket and get to a gate. And he said he brought his grandkids. He sat under that piece, and he said he told them what it was like being in the war. And he said he just felt such a bond with his grandkids and had reunited with his daughter. And he said you know, "Your piece played a part in that." He said so--isn't that amazing? I mean a button, you know, but I he said he looked up there, and he said, "That was one I had on my uniform." Isn't that-- Speaker 2: Describe it. Speaker 1: --amazing? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Story_ID: 323683 Speaker 1: Describe the entire piece, because you gave us parts of it. But tell me so we can, I can get a-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --visual of it. Speaker 2: The piece is, it's photographic images on, on cotton that I did then configured into these two huge pie shapes that are on either end of the gate [at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia]. But then they told me you, we need something, you need something to connect them so that people know this and this goes together. So I just did this band of images. It's a long band of faces, but the faces are framed by these large silver buttons. And they're just silver buttons that sort of bulge out. Speaker 1: What's in each pie shape? Speaker 2: Faces. Speaker 1: Just faces? Speaker 2: And, and the, the whole piece is just about all of the--you know, when you, when you look out when a, when a--you know, if you look at a gate when people are about to board or look at a, look down the corridor as a, as a plane has--as, as its people have deplaned, and you just see these, this sea of--well, I do--this sea of faces. And to me, that's what airport travel is about. Here are all these diverse strangers who are unified in the fact that they're going to the same place at the same time on the same airline. So they, they're sort of united even though they don't know each other. And that's kind of what the piece was, was talking about, what, how travel puts you in the company of strangers, and you have this common experience even though you don't know each other. And some of the faces were of recognizable people, but some were not. Some were from the, the photographs I had, the photographs from the '20s [1920s], '30s [1930s], and '40s [1940s] that I had gotten in flea markets and that sort of thing. And, and I was talk, talking about that whole time warp. You know, I'm, I'm always disoriented by time when I fly. You know, you, you know, it, it either, it either feels like a longer period of time or a shorter period time than the trip actually was, so this whole thing of a time warp and who sat in that chair, you know, twenty years ago, that same seat that you're sitting in right now, just the, the common experience of that seat and all of that, so. But I was just amazed because I wanted buttons in it, so I just decided to frame the images with buttons. And I had gotten thousands of those buttons when a cloth store went out of sale and just had all those buttons in one big basket. And I had no idea that they had come off of uniforms that, that someone had. You can tell they were used buttons. They even called them used buttons. I had no idea they came off military uniforms 'cause they were so plain, you know, but, but very shiny, pretty, you know, swollen, what I call swollen buttons, 'cause they bulged out, ballooned out. Story_ID: 323684 Speaker 1: Was there any other interesting facts about buttons that you learned? Speaker 2: I think the currency thing was, was the--but I, I tell you, the thing that, one of the things I have, I have grown to appreciate more and more is, is how insignificant they seem, but then on a personal level how closely held they can be to an individual life. For example, I did a, a, a vest for a woman to give to her daughter. And the vest was literally made out of every button that she had saved off her clothes since she was a baby. As she outgrew clothes, she would clip the buttons, snip the buttons and put them in containers. So she had--so, here's a sort of evolution of her life in these--you know, this is her christening dress, and this was the button her christening dress. And, and she, I mean she kept very detailed records, and that was her way of staying very close to her, to her daughter as her, as her daughter grew up, and I mean the heavy, heavy, weighed down vest with those buttons but that, that kind of thing. And, and you know, I always tell people, you know, we think they're insignificant until we lose one. And then we tear up the house looking for that one little button, you know. And, and the, and, and then there's a lot of, a lot of historical information hidden in the materials that we used, the nature of, of, you know, how they're, how they're formed. You know, collector, button collectors, which I guess I've become, but they'll look at a button and say oh, that's a 1950s car coat button, or oh, that's a, that's a button from the, the side button dresses of the 1920s, be- because all that history, it's, it's, it's right there. And the other thing is, is when you find the buttons that have locks of hair in them, which I understand in the, I think it was the, it was the, it was the year between the wars, the years between the, the wars when it wasn't unusual for people to go to a tailor and a woman to get a lock of hair put into her, into a button. And then she'd sew that button on the jacket or the shirt of her husband or whatever who had to go away. And, and this was sort of a way to keep--and, and, and then I found a button that had the, a baby's first tooth in it, you know, the--so they're container buttons, and what people put in those I just find fascinating, you know, that, that sort of thing, so. Buttons are amazing. Story_ID: 323685 Speaker 1: You had mentioned that buttons were used for currency, and what did you-- Speaker 2: Button, buttons were once (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where? Speaker 2: --used as currency. Now, see, you're putting me on the spot now (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: But, and I know that for centuries the, things like cowry shells in--they may still use cowry shells for currency in parts of Africa, even today. But it's not, it, I don't think it was necessarily unique to a single part of the world. It was, it was a means of exchange. And you know, we don't, we don't always think of them as being important items of ornamentation on clothing now, but I think there was a time when they were. And you know, your buttons were your bragging rights, to, to a certain extent, so. Story_ID: 323686 Speaker 1: Talk more about, about your work. And you told me that the quilts were a part of a relationship with your mother [Mary Hill Peek]. Tell me more about your work. Speaker 2: You know, it's, it's, it's very hard to--I guess I'm so close to it that it's, it's hard for me to, to really talk about it. But I, I know a lot of it is the result of things that I'm, that I think it's, it's, it's how I show my affection for things. Like the quilts aren't just about the, the situations, or the people, or the images that are, that make up the quilts. Like I, I have a, a, a great respect for female blues singers, particularly those who were on the, what I call the cutting edge of, of making that music an important part of American cultural expression. But it does extend to, to my mom, but at the, at the same time it's dealing with, it's addressing things that are handmade, you know, just that, that human touch. That's, that's very important to me as a, as an aspect of, of the work that I do that transfers to the, to the buttons. The tactility of, of the properties of the buttons themselves, that's, that's very important to me. And when I handled those buttons, I, I'd go through this thing in my mind, you know. I wonder who, you know, who caressed this button, you know, what baby clung to this button on, on her mother's garment? You know, who, who lovingly re-sewed this button onto a shirt, or a coat, or a jacket? You know, so there, there are all these extended concerns and issues that I address in my work. I also love film. I love film. That's, that's one of the, one of the joys of my life is watching a good film. So a lot of the work relates to how I relate to film and, and how important I think film is. I think film is an extraordinary marketing tool, cultural manipulator; I mean it's, it's, it's a very power medium. And it's, it's, for me, it's like water. You know, water is something that's very necessary for life, but at the same time it can take life. You know, you, you have to, you have to respect it in the midst of--you know, you take a swim, and, and it's, it's wonderful; it's re- refreshing; it's, it's liberating, but at the same time you have to respect the properties of that water or it will consume you, and I mean New Orleans [Louisiana], Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], you know, Southern Mississippi, you know. And it's, and, and I think of film in that, in that same way. It's this wonderful international, universal medium that can absolutely consume you. So it, it, it, it's, it's like water; you know, it's this wonderful thing. And I, and I try to address those aspects of it. In, in my work I, I, I'm, I'm very sensitive to, to popular media in general, you know. If, if someone asked me, you know, "What, what inspires your work? What, what are you influenced by?" I really have to say almost everything that I see, you know, movies, television, magazines, billboards, stop signs, you know, traffic jams, you know, reflected sunlight. You know, I'm just sensitive to all of it. I'm just an ultra-visual person. And the, the most extraordinary thing down to the most insignificant thing has the, has the potential of influencing a piece for me. I saw a, I watched, after a storm, this, this steady drip of some water falling off the side of a house and hitting a piece of wood that was laying on the ground. And I was fascinated with that and started thinking about how amazing it would be to do something that talked about water in flight, you know, water not in the, in the place that it started or in the place that it ended up but in the process in between, just how wonderful talking about that and, and not so much about gravity but how the form of the water itself changes-- Story_ID: 323687 Speaker 1: You know, I'm all over the place. And I, for that reason, I really don't--I love the buttons; I love the quilts; I love photography, but I still love painting; I still love drawing. I don't think I have one medium. Speaker 2: And you loved them all? Speaker 1: I love them all, I love them all. You know, I, I would love to be able to take a chunk of sound and just (laughter), you know, put it in something that's--and it doesn't have to be two dimensional. You know, if I made a three dimensional form, you know, I'm, I'm--one of the things I'm working with right, right now, and it's still in the, in the imagination stage, but it's, it's, it's sort of cubic images that are not real cute. They're sort of virtual; you know, they're, they're--and, and not really a hologram. I'm not talking about--but I'm--you know, a cube that moves around and just how you, how you get the, how you get the projected image to take a certain form and then stop at an angle and, and just, know, how wonderful, how wonderful that would be and, but, but to have it in, in such way that if you stood in front of it and looked at it, you could see the thing and see your own reflection at the same time and just that, that whole, that whole, you know, just sort of blurring that line between what's virtual and what's tacitly real. And, and you know, I'd, I'd like to do, I would love to do work that, that contributed to critical thinkers, not just talking about color theory but really looking at tactility theory, which I think is something that's fundamental to a lot of the work that African American artists do. You know, peop- people often have asked me why the African Americans just love collage and what--I said because there's a, there's a, there's a tactility issue that is very important to us. And it, it would probably take longer than either of us have time for us to have the, the kind of conversation that really put that into the proper perspective. But it--you know, I'd, I'd like to think that something in something that I've done or will do will in, will sort of spurn that, that conversation in a meaningful, in a meaningful way and bring things back to, you know, the touch of the human hand and, and, and the, the sort of non-replicating quality that that brings to making an object where you, you know, you fully understand the technology of where we are today. And you're very open to the possibilities of where that technology can take us tomorrow, but at the same time, that, knowing that, that some print is a critical part of that process. That's, that's the kind of art I, I hope to make in, in the future. Story_ID: 323688 Speaker 1: Now we were, we left off, as far as the chronological order of your accomplishments, in 2001. And this is where you go to be the curator for-- Speaker 2: Paul Jones Collection [Paul R. Jones Collection of American Art] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the Paul Jones Collection-- Speaker 2: --at the University of Delaware [Newark, Delaware]. Speaker 1: And how long do you do that? Speaker 2: I was there until this fall, fall 2007, curating shows. I'm very proud of the work that was done there. I can honest say that I, I, I hope it's a better place, but I certainly can say that I, I know that because of the presence of that collection it is a different place. I think some bridges were built. I think the thinking of a number of professors has been enhanced. I, I think they have a, a--I, I'm, I'm convinced that there is a greater knowledge of the very presence of the creative art making of African Americans and how that, how that very much is a part of the evolution of an American art. I think the whole idea of, of, of art as, as a kind of visual prop in the classroom, that that idea is starting to break down, that, that professors in unlikely disciplines are sort of much more open. They're very much more open to the fact that because we're so much of a visual world, that this is something that they can take advantage of even if they are teaching psych, psychology, or sociology, or chemistry, or history, that, that tying that into a visual experience and showing how the visual even contributes to that, it's, it's, it's been a, it's been, I think it's been amazing what having that collection there and just making the effort to meet the objectives and the goals that were the mandate when the gift was made, that there's been a tremendous change. Story_ID: 323689 Speaker 1: I do know when I arrived at Delaware [University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware] in 2001, the first time I said HBCU [historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs)] everyone in the room said, "What is that?" Now they not only know that there are such institutions as historically black colleges and universities, they can name some. And there are official agreements between the University of Delaware and some of institutions. So, it's--even as we speak, there's about to be a wonderful conservation summit at Delaware that will involve about ten or twelve historically black colleges and universities whose photographic archives will be preserved because of this project. So, it's, it's not only been curating and teaching. It's been, being, being like an ambassador; it's being like what do you call--motivational speaker at time; it's, it's, it's being a teacher to the teachers because one thing I find is people who don't come out of the humanities are very threatened by images. They really don't know what to do with them. And I see it all as useful because the, the greater the understanding of how we operate and are affected by a visual world, the more that's imparted into professors, the more I think there is an appreciation and an understanding for art in general. I, I--one--you talk about going to places like Italy, and France, and, and even Africa, and one of the most outstanding differences you will see is the different treatment of the creative people in those other places. You know, an artist is respected in Italy. It's a, it's con- it's considered even to this day to be not only a profession but a noble profession. Artists are highly regarded in African societies. Artists hold very respectful positions in, in places like France, in various parts of South [South America] and Central America. In the United States, you know, it's very--you can be an artists, and, and you know, you're either crazy or a bum; you know, you're someone who doesn't have a real job. But I think we have an opportunity with, with this increasing awareness of the visual and how the visual affects us in every aspect of our lives. You know, when people really start to realize it, they walk into a store and they buy the red dress as opposed to the blue dress, not just because they think they look better in red, but they are partial to red. There's something about--that, that they're making these visual decisions. And when they do that, they don't realize they are partnering, in terms of their thinking, they're aligning themselves very much with creative people like visual artists. Story_ID: 323690 Speaker 1: When was your, your first showing of your artwork as an established artist, if, if there is a point (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A real art show (laughter). My first real, really, my first real exhibition, and, and particularly as a one, a one-woman show, was at Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia] in, I think it was--oh, gosh, let me get the date right--I think it was 1981. It was at Morris Brown College. Then I had, in 1995, I had an exhibition that I think really--now that, to me that was a transforming exhibition, and that was at the Houston Center for, for Photography [Houston Center for Photography, Houston, Texas] in 1995. That exhibit really got the attention of people from different regions of the United States. And then in 2004 I had a retrospective opened at the National Museum for Women in the Arts [sic. National Museum of Women in the Arts, Washington, D.C.]. That I think was my third critical and, and probably my most important exhibition. The, the response was amazing. I had a good, I had a wonderful time. I spent a lot of time with the museum staff physically at the museum during the run of that show. For a whole week I did a, a mentoring workshop for, with young girls. At the end of the week, everything that they made was presented in an exhibition on that Friday, so they got to have their first exhibitions as, as, as result of, of that, that program. Wonderful coverage, voice, went as far as Voice of America interviewing me the day of the opening, incredible review in, in The Washington Post, in The Philadelphia Inquirer, in the Chicago Sun-Times. And so that was, that, that exhibition at the National Museum for Women in the Arts has, has really been--I think it has, it has, it has carried me to another level. Story_ID: 323691 Speaker 1: Who were the collectors of your art? Who were some of them? Speaker 2: Some of them? Well, there, there are a few. The Museum of Fine Arts, Houston [Houston, Texas] probably is the institution with the, with the most artwork. And private collectors, are you think, thinking private or institutional? Okay, private collectors-- Speaker 1: Well, both. We can tell, you can tell me both. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, well, Museum of Fine Arts, Houston-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --is a, you know--I, I can--they're like a fan club (laughter). They, they, they're continually acquiring work; the High Museum [High Museum of Art] here in Atlanta [Georgia]. I'm trying to think some of the private collectors. They're probably gonna shoot me. Well, people like Victoria [Victoria Rowell]. Victoria is a very supportive, Victoria Rowell, very supportive collector; Anna Maria Horsford. I don't know if you know Anna Maria. She's a very supportive-- Speaker 1: She's an act- the actress, yea-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm, very supportive collector; [HistoryMaker] Paul Jones, very supportive collective; Spelman, Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], very supportive, extremely supportive; the--and I know I'm missing somebody who's, who's gonna remind me, if they ever hear this tape (laughter), that I did mention them. But, gosh, I'm trying to think of some of the other people who are-- Speaker 1: Well, is your, your artwork for the, for the average collector, I mean is it the type of artwork that, you know, people would just come and, and want to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, it does, it, it runs the gamut because I do, I have colleagues who I've worked with at various institutions who purchased the work. I've had people come and buy pieces on time, because they, they do have limited resources. And, and that's, that to me is, is incredible support. I have a lot of artist friends who, instead of swapping work, will actually purchase work from, from the gallery that represents me here. So it's a very-- Speaker 1: And which gallery is that? Speaker 2: Sandler Hudson Gallery here in Atlanta. Oh, and I knew I was gonna forget. One of my very important--two people who are extremely important, and in addition to Paul Jones, who bought my work very early on and continued to buy, and that would be Ann [Ann Johnson] and Ben Johnson [Ben F. Johnson, III]. And the second person is Lucinda Bunnen [Lucinda W. Bunnen]. And then, then, and that's a wonderful relationship too, because Ben Johnson is, I think he's still currently the chair of the board of trustees at Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia]. His father [Ben F. Johnson, Jr.] was the dean of the law school at Emory. Of course we didn't, we didn't, I didn't know this when we first became friends. And he's, he's still the, I think the senior law partner for Alston and Bird [Alston and Bird LLP, Atlanta, Georgia]. It's, it's, it's interesting 'cause a lot of law firms, you know, I'm trying to think of the other one that's here that they're gonna choke me if I don't think of (laughter)--oh, it'll come to me at 2:00 in the morning. But Lucinda and Lucinda Bunnen is another very--and she's interesting because she's, she's not only a very strong arts advocate in this area; she's an excellent photographer in her own right, and, and she doesn't just buy my photography. You know, she's, she's a very strong supporter and collector. Lucinda Bunnen is the person that the photography collection at the High is named after. So, she's, she's a very important supporter. Story_ID: 323692 Speaker 1: What's next for you in your life? Speaker 2: Well, in addition to--I think I will be teaching a little while longer. I'll teach--think I'll be doing--I'm currently at the University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa [Alabama] as a professor. I know there's probably a little curating in my future there but primarily as a professor. The next cycle I, I have some books that I would like to, that I would like to write. Some of them are academic books, but some of them, some of them are not. I'm, I'm working with some friends right now on a, a book of fantasies. I'm, I'm collecting women's fantasies. And, and I said they don't have to all be about men (laughter), just so, just so they get the picture. They said, "Well, what else is there to fantasize about." But that, that's a fun project; that's something just to--that's the equivalent of sitting on the deck with a pitcher of lemonade and just watching the sun go down, that's, that's what that project is about, so. Speaker 1: And you have a book with your photographs in, in, I mean with your-- Speaker 2: With the artwork, yes. Speaker 1: --artwork in it. And what's the name of that book? Speaker 2: That's 'Boxes, Buttons, and the Blues' ['Amalia Amaki: Boxes, Buttons, and the Blues,' Amalia Amaki and Andrea D. Barnwell]. Speaker 1: And what year was it published? Speaker 2: That's, that came out in 2004 [sic. 2005]. And it was the support text to the retrospective that opened at the National Museum for Women in the Arts [sic. National Museum of Women in the Arts, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not spoken about that you would like to say? Speaker 2: Let's (laughter)--well, I think we touched on, I think we touched on everything. But I, I just can re- reiterate how important I think from this phase on it is going to be to do books, and some of those books will be artist books, books about, books about water, books about--I'm, I'm, I'm using fantasies as a way to really get in, get into a deeper discussion about, about love. I'd love to write a book about love that's not about mush, but it's really about stories that really talk about how people feel about other people, some, some of whom they don't even know. Like I had--one of my professors, for example, at Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] was the son of a, of a, of a minister. And he lost his father because his father was on a ship that was sinking. And when the lifeboats were filling up, he had already made it to the lifeboat. He saw a pregnant woman still on the ship, and he got off so that she could have her spot. And the woman says when he gave her the spot, she said you know, "I thank you, and my baby thanks you." And he said to her, "And I love you." And she never forget that, so she made certain that she found his family, even though they, they were living in another country, and said you know, he, he didn't just teach it; he knew it. Those are the kinds of--you know, and, and to even--I mean I would have felt pretty proud of myself if I had done that. I don't think I would have thought to say I love you and, and, and mean it. And so that's the kind of--you know, just it's, it's not about--you know, it's, it's a, it's a, it's an insatiable, you know, undeniable thing that you, that you do. And I do feel that when I do my art because I, I don't believe I will ever be among the greatest artists who ever lived, but I can honestly say that every time I sit down to make art I do it because I have to. Speaker 1: And that's a good thing. Story_ID: 323693 Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, what one thing stands out in your mind? Speaker 2: I would say I faced my fears. I never want to be dominated, or controlled, or limited by fear, and I faced my fears. Speaker 1: When you think of legacy, and we know you're very young, but what do you want (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I thank you-- Speaker 1: --your legacy-- Speaker 2: --for that (laughter). Speaker 1: --what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: You know, I don't, I'm not sure if I want the--you know, I hope some of the art survives. But in addition to some of the art surviving, I hope somewhere in there, there is the understanding that as a, as a teacher, you know, as a, as a professor, as a curator, as an art maker, as a writer that somewhere in there all of that came about because I really was struggling to find that ultimate, that perfect way that I could serve, service. That's what--and I, and I hope a little integrity is in there too, but, but service, you know, I hope, I hope that comes across that, that that was the thing that was really the foundation for everything that I do. Story_ID: 323694 Speaker 1: What are your concerns about the African American community even as it relates to art? Speaker 2: I, being a professor, I have a lot of concerns about younger people. And I guess every previous generation has concerns about younger people, but I hope that there is a return soon to a strong sense of family, a strong sense of, and I'm, and I want to be very careful here, but self-respect, to chase, you know, to really pursue those things that are true to your calling, true to your destiny, and not a sort of blind pursuit of money, but the family thing is, is it, to really return to that. Respect your grandmother; respect your mother; respect your sister, you know. Speaker 1: Well, I want to thank you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's it. (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: If that's all, we thank you from The HistoryMakers. Speaker 2: Oh, thank you, thank you. Story_ID: 323324 Speaker 1: That's my 1971 graduation picture from Georgia State University [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: That's me in my bedroom (laughter) in 1970 while I was a student at Georgia State, holding my sorority paddle. Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's me in 1969, and I'm actually, I'm, I'm at home, and I think I had just--there had just been a news story about [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis. That's why I'm looking at, I'm actually looking at the television, staring at the television. But that's me. Speaker 2: Okay, that's--I'm not sure about the date. I think that's '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 2: That's 1967, and that's me on the right. I'm seated next to my younger sister, Betty [Betty Elizabeth Peek], and my older sister's [Deborah Peek Crockett] husband. That's my brother-in-law, Curtis Crockett. And that's, that's, that's, that's in the living room of my mother's [Mary Hill Peek]--where we, we're at home. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, that's me in 1990 at, on the campus of Hollins College [Hollins University] in Roanoke, Virginia. I was there for my niece, Mary's [ph.], graduation. Speaker 1: That's me, I think that's 19--I think we just, we figured out that's 1995. And that's, that's a Christmas. That's at my sister, Vicki's [Vicki Peek Robinson], house, my older sister, Vicki. I'm on the right with the, with the gold hat, gold baseball cap. And we're actually playing a 'Golden Girls' gag gift game. Speaker 2: That's me in, that's 1992, and I'm at the Albany Museum [Albany Museum of Art] in Albany, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, that's me in 1992. That's a, actually that's at my sister, older sister, Vicki's, house. That's fourth--uh oh it fell--but that's the Fourth of July. That was during the Fourth of July dinner. That's me on the far left, my niece, Mary, in the center, and my nephew, Christopher [ph.], on the right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's me at the Albany Museum again. That's me and my sister, Gwen [Gwendolyn Peek White], on the right, my older sister. Speaker 2: And that's me in 1990, holding my nephew, Christopher, who's not yet--Christmas--he's a, he was a big baby, but he was about, he's about six or eight months old in that photograph. He was a whopper. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is a fan that I did in 2001, and it's, it's really in homage of my visit to Georgia O'Keeffe. That's Georgia O'Keeffe in the--it's a cutout of Georgia O'Keeffe that I superimposed on a Christmas card. And the first button making up the handle of the fan, that's my, that's a photograph of myself that she took with my little Kodak camera when I went to visit Georgia O'Keeffe, and that was 1979. Speaker 1: Okay, that's nuts and chews from 2001. And those are, those photographs are actually the, the, the photograph in the oval is a photograph that was purchased at a flea market. The photographs underneath it on either side are the sisters of collector [HistoryMaker] Paul Jones, and that, those were their pictures. I think they were--I'm trying to remember the ages he told me. They were eight and eleven, eight and nine, eight and nine when those pictures were taken...