 Story_ID: 309893 Speaker 1: This is a photo that was given to me by the young lady in the middle, whose name I don't recall, because this picture was taken in 1971, and she didn't give that to me until 2001. Anyway, that's me in a rather cavalier pose with my little Maggie [Maggie Brown]. She was about ten years old. Speaker 2: Is Maggie your granddaughter? Speaker 1: No, no, Maggie is my daughter. Speaker 2: Your daughter, oh, okay, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, with whom I now sing. Speaker 2: Oh, you do? Speaker 1: Uh-huh, we perform together now. She's grown up and has children of her own. Speaker 2: What about this one? Speaker 1: This is a recent picture of my wife, Jean Pace Brown. It's taken at a reunion that we held at the Inner City Cultural Center [Los Angeles, California] involving young people with whom we had worked thirty-five years ago in a show called 'Opportunity, Please Knock.' Some of them can be seen in the background. They are now in their fifties, but still interested in using music to address some of the social problems of young people. Speaker 2: Fantastic. Could you spell your wife's name for us? Speaker 1: J-E-A-N, P-A-C-E, Brown. Speaker 2: Thank you, okay, go ahead with this one. Speaker 1: I look like I'm about two years old in this picture, maybe three. And it was just a kind of formal picture, your parents would take you down to have a shot at one of the department stores, The Fair [The Fair Store] or Goldblatt's or somewhere like that. Speaker 2: Great shot. Speaker 1: He's a cute little fellow, kind of hippy with that beret, but-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: It brings out the artistic qualities. Speaker 2: Yeah. Okay, we're ready on this one whenever you are. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is, of course, a picture shot in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] of Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and me. I guess that would have been in the mid-'60s [1960s], the late '60s [1960s], I'm not sure. It was on the occasion of an Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] boule in a two-day affair that they had in Philadelphia. He spoke on Friday night, and I sang on Saturday, but I flew in early so I could hear his speech and get a chance to chat with him. Later on I introduced Dr. King to my wife, we met in a restaurant. I said, "Jean Pace, this is Dr. Martin Luther King." She says, "Who?" (Laughter) It tickled all of us. Speaker 2: How do you spell, for our captioners, how do, how's, the correct way to spell boule. Speaker 1: Hey, that's a French word. You'll have to find something (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) B-O-U-L-E-T [sic.]? Speaker 1: B-O-U-L-E-T, I imagine. I don't know whether there's one or two L's in it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But it's not a--the only time I ever used it was to describe that event. Speaker 2: Is that boule, is that--it's supposed to be the council of, well, there's a organization called the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] which is the council of Greek, black Greek organizations. Speaker 1: Go ahead with this one, Mr. Brown [HistoryMaker Oscar Brown, Jr.]. Speaker 2: Although I should know the names of the two people who are flanking me, I don't. However, the folk on the end, on the left, is Philip T. Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran], who is one of the finest artists that Chicago [Illinois] has developed, musician extraordinaire, orchestra leader and performer himself. And on the other end is Abena Joan Brown [HistoryMaker Abena Joan P. Brown], who heads eta [eta Creative Arts Foundation], one of its founders and a lifelong friend. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This picture was taken, I guess, in about 1966 or seven [1967]. Speaker 1: Great, next, please. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead now. Speaker 2: That appears to be a picture that was taken at Roberts Show Club [Chicago, Illinois], back in around, oh, I guess, 1962. Slappy White is on my right. Steve Rossi, the comedian is the tall, white dude in the middle, and J. J. Johnson is the name given the gentleman in the cap, although he certainly doesn't look like J. J. Johnson, the trombonist, although I'm not sure he's not. Speaker 1: It might be another J. J. Johnson. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure there must be two J. J. Johnsons. Speaker 1: Okay, anytime you're ready. Speaker 2: Oh, that's a, that's a glamor picture. It must have been taken early on, got my wedding ring in it there. So, you know, that's always a discouragement to the--anyway (laughter). Speaker 1: Early glamor picture, and year not known? Speaker 2: Yeah, year not known, but it's quite early. It has to be around 1961 or two [1962], when I was just getting into the business. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Bless his heart. Speaker 1: Good deal, next. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Now, this is the company of a show I did called 'Summer in the City.' I composed most of the songs, some in collaboration with Luiz Henrique, who was my partner at the time in composition. Jean and I rehearsed this, directed it primarily. We held citywide auditions and found young talent from all over Chicago of all races and put together this show. Gavin Christopher, who's seated in the middle, on whom you're focused, he was later to become a hit songwriter and singer himself, when he grew--as he grew up. Gloria Lewis is on Gavin's left, and, oh, what is this girl's name on the right. She had a gorgeous voice. And on the end there in that first row is Janie Steele, who is also a professional singer. She, like Gavin, lives now in California. I hope I remember this other young lady's name. She, it's a shame to forget her. Speaker 2: You said that was, I mean, I don't mean to interrupt. This is 'Summer in the City,' isn't this 'Big-Time Bud White' because it has Ali in there? Speaker 1: No, no, this is 'Summer in the City.' This is a cast picture that was taken on the stage at the Harper Theater [Chicago, Illinois] where we performed at. That's in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. And standing in the middle is Muhammad Ali, with whom we used to associate. He'd hang around our productions. Where he's standing, I should have been, 'cause he really wasn't in the show. He was just a friend of the show. Speaker 2: He was the heavyweight champion though. Speaker 1: But then, you know, yeah, the heavyweight champion, and you say, "Hey, man, take my place (laughter)." Story_ID: 309894 Speaker 1: This is a shot of me done in London [England], back in 1963. I had gone there to do a show called 'Wham, Bam, Thank You, Ma'am,' which was a dismal flop and never got off, out of Brighton [England]. We previewed in Oxford [England] and Brighton and never got out of there. But I had this picture taken, and shortly thereafter, I was presented there in London in a one-man show called 'Oscar Brown, Jr. Entertains,' which was quite successful. Speaker 2: Okay, what have we got here? Speaker 1: Well, you have is, one of the instruments played by the leader of the band who is to the left there, Philip T. Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran]. He is also a trumpeter and plays a phone--an instrument he invented from the African thumb piano called a Frankiphone. It's a, was very successfil. Phil is in a picture that we had earlier in which Abena Joan Brown [HistoryMaker Abena Joan P. Brown] also appears. It was from our meeting that he began to do a show called 'Lyrics of Sunshine and Shadow.' Phil had come down to the Happy Medium [Chicago, Illinois] to audition his group, the Artistic Heritage Ensemble, which included some really fine musicians. That's Master Henry Gibson on the percussion, on drums and L.E. Satterfield [Louis Satterfield], who went over--later went on with Earth, Wind & Fire, was playing bass and trombone in this aggregation. And it was really a fine group. We did this show that came out of Phil's composition of music to Paul Laurence Dunbar poetry, a show called 'Lyrics of Sunshine and Shadow,' which we performed in the public schools and then took to the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois]. The photograph here is of the Artistic Heritage Ensemble, appearing on the stage at the Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois], which was located at 41st Street and Drexel Boulevard, and which was the center of a great deal of controversy, later turned into a headquarters by one of the notorious drug gangs, called the El Rukns, before it was finally demolished. Speaker 2: Good history on that. Okay, next photo. Speaker 1: This is me on stage in, at Philips-Huset in Stockholm, Sweden in 1962. In the background there on drums is Bootsy Schlugend [ph.] who was a Swedish musician with whom we performed there. This was a special show that was--I don't know who exactly sponsored it, but I had gone there to play Berns Salonger [Stockholm, Sweden], which was a big twelve hundred-seat night club. This is not Burnts. This is Philips-Huset where we did this little television special. Monica Zetterlund, who was a fine jazz singer also, appeared with me on that bill. (Laughter) And I recall she wanted, she was a singing a song I called 'Dat Dere,' about talking to a little boy, a daddy talking to a--a parent talking to a child. And she had done this in Swedish. And she wanted to appear on the program and carry me in, in her arms as the little boy (laughter). But that didn't have quite as much dignity as I wanted (laughter). Speaker 2: Mr. Brown [HistoryMaker Oscar Brown, Jr.], did you say the year? Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-two [1962] I think. Speaker 2: Okay, I think you said it. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I did. Speaker 2: Do you know how to spell the drummer's name? Speaker 1: Bootsy Schlugend, I don't know. That's all Swedish to me, you know. You'd have to--Bootsy is a pretty, pretty common name. There are several cats I met over there named Bootsy. Not too many Schlugends. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Let me see, that's a picture, that is 'Joy.' Jean [Jean Pace Brown] and me in a show that we did at, oh, several places. It started in San Francisco [California] at the On Broadway Theater and moved into the New Theater in New York City [New York, New York] where we ran for about three months. And then we transferred to the Happy Medium, another four hundred-seat house in Chicago. That reflects the whole tone of that time in that show. Speaker 2: And you all made 'The Tonight Show' too. Were there excerpts on 'The Tonight Show'? Speaker 1: Actually, no, I went up there to interview with them, but I got insulted and left. They (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, one of those shows you were on. I don't know if it was Tonight or something like that. Speaker 1: I did 'The Today Show'-- Speaker 2: 'Today,' okay. Speaker 1: --when Dave Garroway was on there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That looks like another shot of the show in Stockholm at Philips-Huset. Speaker 2: All right, and any other comments you want to add? Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm probably performing, 'But I Was Cool.' I contort my face pretty much like that when I sing that song. Speaker 2: Okay, next photo? It might be the last one, right? No, a couple more. Speaker 1: I imagine that's California, 1967. It looks about that period of time, although, no, it might have been earlier than that because by '67 [1967], I had grown a beard. Speaker 2: You really have some good photographers. You knew how to get good cover, it's great. Speaker 1: I don't know who took that. Can you see--turn that over on the back there and see who did that. Speaker 2: It doesn't say. Speaker 1: It doesn't say, okay. It looked like it might be Bernard Sussman, actually, a friend of mine, who was an amateur photographer, but a very good photographer, whether he got paid or not. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, great, next photo. Speaker 1: This looks like an early photograph of me writing in the sun parlor of my home at 5141 Drexel Boulevard in Chicago. This is before I began singing. I had thought I'd just simply be a writer and leave the singing to someone else. However, the ham in me took over. Speaker 2: Okay, I love that shot. Speaker 1: Amen for the ham. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Hum, now where in the hell is this? That looks like a-- Speaker 2: Nothing on back. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Give us your best shot. If you don't-- Speaker 1: I would say that's in the early '60s [1960s], even before, you know, we got off into the hippy stuff, although it has to be after I came back from London because that's when I started wearing my hair long. So I'd place this picture at around 1963, '64 [1964] on, in concert on some stage. It could have been at Newport [Newport Jazz Festival, Newport, Rhode Island]. I did that once or twice. Speaker 2: Okay, great, next. It looks like the same location. Speaker 1: Yeah, same location, different song. This too could be 'But I Was Cool.' I was still wearing ties. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay, any time you're ready. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. This is a shot from that same outdoor concert in which you saw me without the jacket, doing 'But I Was Cool' and something else. The pianist if Floyd Morris and he was a classmate of mine at Englewood High School [Englewood Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and my first accompanist. And I spent some of the most beautiful, enjoyable moments of my life performing with this man. We went on the road. We went to Europe and Stockholm, particularly, and we went from coast to coast repeatedly. We would generally just be the two of us, but sometime we would be able to organize a whole trio. So this time, I think we had a drummer who played with us a long time. His name is Curtis Boyd. Curtis Boyd is now playing with Freddy Cole who is Nat King Cole's brother. And he and I were together last November on a jazz cruise that we took in the Caribbean. He's still fat and sassy, looks as young, fifty years later (laughter) as he does then. Speaker 1: I heard him in Dayton [Ohio], of all the places. Speaker 2: You mean Freddy. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I was talking about the drummer with whom I played. These other musicians are probably the band that was playing on this set, but not with me cause I never had enough arrangements for that many musicians, except in the studio, a couple of albums. Story_ID: 4153 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food. I don't have any more favorite foods because I lost so many teeth (laughter), the things that were really delicious, I have to forego those. So I'm eating hashes and, you know, stuff that you can mash pretty good. And none of that really stand out. Through the years I just liked soul food for the most part, though, you know. I've been a fatback and greens person. Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination? Sorry, I was (laughter)--. Speaker 2: Favorite--vacation destination. I've never taken a vacation. I took a vacation. I went to Cuba, but it, so it wasn't exactly--it was an investigation more than a vacation. I don't take vacations. I have too many lay-offs to take vacations, you see. Speaker 1: So that's a nice life. Okay, favorite time of year? Speaker 2: October, I like that, but I like it all. You know, it depends on what part of the world you're in. Los Angeles [California], it doesn't make difference. It's always nice, you know. It's just another damn gorgeous day, every day. Here, I like the fall. I like the, the fall of the leaves, the colors, even better when you get over like in what they call Rip Van Winkle country up there in New York State. Oh, boy, it's just gorgeous, Washington, D.C., they have a lot of color when--Rock Creek Park, and I remember one time I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I love, I love the fall. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Brown (laughter). Speaker 1: Brown, okay (laughter). Speaker 2: No brainer. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite phrase or saying? My goodness, these are interesting questions. What, I don't have--I can't recall, I can't think of anything. I talk so much that, and I'm so enamored of so much that I say, it would be hard (laughter) for me to distinguish one gem from the other (laughter). Story_ID: 4154 Speaker 1: I'd like to have your mother and father's name? Speaker 2: My father is Oscar Brown, Sr., of course, Oscar Cicero Brown, Sr., and my mother was Helen Clark Lawrence. He came from Edwards, Mississippi, was born in Arkansas, but grew up in Edwards, Mississippi. And my mother was born and raised in Norfolk, Virginia, and they met at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: So now, your father's middle name, I didn't hear that? Speaker 2: Cicero. Speaker 1: Oh, Cicero, okay, all right, Cicero. Okay, I mean Oscar--. Speaker 2: Oscar Cicero, yeah. I've avoided that most of my life, and I rarely tell it, but now it's gotten to the point where I don't care. Speaker 1: Now, was that a family name? Speaker 2: No, I think my grandfather read Greek. But he was a strange man. He lived down in Mississippi, and he read Latin and he read Greek and he taught school, and he was a minister, Sterling Price Brown. I met him, but I was very small when he passed. Speaker 1: Do you know much about him on your, you know, your father's side? Did your father talk much about him? Speaker 2: No, he was a school teacher who had to live away from home because the school where he taught was a long way off. He was a teacher of, in the family. They used to have the university of the front porch. But they were pretty much, they were pretty poor in Mississippi. And I saw a letter that the school board wrote to my grandfather, "Dear Brown", no mister, just--I don't know how he got away with marrying my grandmother because she looked like she was a white woman now. But they, they were in Mississippi, they had several children, five boys and a couple of girls. And one passed, the others survived. Speaker 1: And do you know anything else about him or who was it in Mississippi? Speaker 2: Who, my grandfather? Speaker 1: Your grandfather. Speaker 2: No, no. I don't. Speaker 1: Did your father talk about growing up in Mississippi and what it was like? Speaker 2: Yes, he wrote a book called 'By a Thread', that was pretty much a, an account of his life and, of course, included his youth. And so I knew a, a good bit about that. I heard a lot about that, about his picking cotton, about the time he fell off the cotton gin, about how they used to meet the trains and sell fruit to the people who were passing by, about how difficult it was to be a black boy in Mississippi, to stay in his place when he didn't ever know exactly where that was. Speaker 1: And describe your father? Describe what kind of man he was and how, you know, I mean just describe him? Speaker 2: Well, in size and all, he was pretty much--I look like him. (Laughter) And I remember several years ago, I looked in the mirror, and I said, there's my father's face, you know. I had, I had taken on his look. But we were about the same size. He was a little--maybe an inch or shorter. He was always more stout than I've ever been. He was an attorney. He was a vigorous man. He had been a soldier. He'd been in World War I. And he always carried himself as a sort of, military bearings, straight. And he had been a--he had worked his way through college. He had--somebody came from Edwards, Mississippi and told him about this new school for young Negroes that was opening in Washington. And his--. Speaker 1: Hold on a second, your hand is on the microphone. Speaker 2: Oh, excuse me. I'm sorry. His old, his oldest brother, Jimmy, got an excursion ticket and went first. And then the next brother, Sidney, got an excursion ticket. My father was the third brother, and he went up there. And he got a job waiting tables in the dining room. And he was quite a student. He, he--so when he came from Edwards, he was really dumb. He did not like school. His father used to have to whip him to school every day. He just detested it. But after he got to, (laughter) he got to Howard, he told me he was, he was a, he was a lion among asses and an ass among lions, and (laughter) that he better straighten up. He thought he was such a much, and this sort of whipped him into shape, you know. And he became a very conscientious individual, all--he was always, you know. When he was in the Army, boy, he was sharp. He had everything they sold. He became a second lieutenant, and went to Des Moines [Iowa], Fort Des Moines and became an--an officer. And eventually, by the time he got out, I think he was like a major in the Reserve, in the Army Reserve. And his war stories were always fascinating to me when I was a little boy. Speaker 1: Now, how did he end up in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, he and his brothers were looking, they were looking to find opportunity. They had came from Mississippi. They weren't going back there. They had been to school in Washington, and I think at first they decided to try Indianapolis, Indiana. And things weren't as good--then, this is, would have been in the nineteen, early 1920s, '24 [1924], '23 [1923], '24 [1924]. Things weren't as good there, so they came here. And my father got a job at the Binga Bank working for Jesse Binga. And they were going to law school. And finally they opened their law offices. They opened law offices at 47th [Street] and South Parkway [now Martin Luther King Jr. Drive], 417 East 47th Street in the South Center Building which was there at that corner. The Regal Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] was just down the street, and the Savoy Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois] was beyond that. And 47th and South Park was the hub of the universe as far as I was concerned. That's, everything was right there. I was supposed to--I had an office up there, had a desk, I mean. I was supposed to be a lawyer, become a lawyer, but that didn't work out. Speaker 1: Now, your mother, tell me, tell me about her? I mean--. Speaker 2: Well, she came from a, a fairly comfortable family in Norfolk. Her father had been a butcher, and he looked like he was white, although he played in the black band and, you know, he, he associated in the black community as if he was, couldn't pass. But sometimes the bus drivers would think he was sitting in the wrong place if he was sitting in the back of the bus. So he had a butcher stall down in the main market, downtown. And I remember him--she told me as a, as a girl, they had a surrey with a fringe on top and, you know, they'd go out riding, and they're all dressed and nurse maids and all that stuff. Then he seemed to have lost some money--although they never got poor. I mean he still was doing pretty well, and they were Virginians, Virginia society, you know, and very much that. And she had, had a sister and a brother. And her sister became a school teacher, stayed in Norfolk, and her brother moved to Baltimore [Maryland], where he passed years ago when I was a young man. Speaker 1: So what, did they describe, your parents describe any of their times at Howard? And did--you said they met at Howard. They didn't get married at Howard necessarily? Speaker 2: No, they got married shortly thereafter. Well, they got married in 1925. So that would have been, yeah, I mean several years after Howard. Yeah, they described their courtship, some of that kind of stuff. You know, how he used to sneak food to her out of the, out of the dining room special stuff. If they had pastries and treats, he would slip her stuff like that, and that they had their first kiss coming up the, from the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.], up the hill toward the campus. He told of the, the work he did, and of working his way up to be the head waiter and being, you know, hot stuff in that. He was on the debating team, and was quite good. My mother, I recall her having studied with Sterling Brown. My grandfather's name was Sterling Brown, but this is the other Sterling Brown who was a writer. And she was a student in his class. Of course, he would have had to been quite young at that point. My mother was born in 1900, and my father in nineteen--I mean 1896. Speaker 1: And so your grandfather--I mean the grandfathers, they weren't, they weren't really born in slavery either if they--were they? Speaker 2: No--. Speaker 1: Or maybe right after. Speaker 2: Well, wait a minute, let's see. Yeah, my father, yeah, they would have been. See, my--. Speaker 1: People are having kids younger then too. Speaker 2: --my grandfather, Sterling Price Brown, was born in 1860 in Hinds County, Mississippi, so he had to have been a slave. I don't know where Walter Lawrence was born. There was a thing--I came from one of those families where they didn't--we don't have family reunions. Everybody got the hell out of Mississippi, and they did not reach back and try and stay there in any way. They had a sort of 'Pygmalion' attitude that if you could speak the King's English properly, then you could escape from Mississippi. So we were never allowed to split an infinitive. If anybody in the family knew, my aunts, my uncles, everybody spoke good English. And when they discussed the, the old days or the family ties, they'd send the kids out of the room because there was a whole lot of what they call miscegenation that was involved. And it was not considered fair for the children at that time. Story_ID: 4155 Speaker 1: I have a sister. My sister was named Helen [Brown]. And she was three years younger than I. She just passed this year, in the early part of nineteen--of 2000. She was a school teacher. She pretty well--the way my parents raised us, took on her. It didn't exactly take on me. I mean she was pretty much the middle-class lady that she was brought up to be and carried herself that way. She was a fine woman. But, you know, in a, in a very, sort of straight-life way, the way my parents lived, the way everybody in the crowd had. Mine, I turned out to be a gypsy, mine, it just was different. Speaker 2: So that's what I want to understand. So you were the oldest? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And you were the only son. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And I want to ask you, you were born in what year? Speaker 1: '26, 1926, 10th of October. Story_ID: 4156 Speaker 1: Will you share some of your earliest memories that you have? Speaker 2: Well, some of my earliest recollections are, my mother [Helen Lawrence Brown] got quite ill when I was a child, when I was a little boy. She got ill when [sister] Helen [Brown] was born and had to stay in the hospital for about fourteen months and have several operations. And I remember our going to the hospital when she first went there. I remember that being, you know, concerned as a little boy. Then we went down to Norfolk [Virginia], my sister and I, while she was there. And my aunt and my grandparents raised us for that year. And (laughter) I remember the, the expression "breaking up housekeeping". They broke up housekeeping during that year, and my father [Oscar Brown, Sr.] lived with some friends and my mother was in the hospital. And we were down--Helen and I were down in Virginia. I remember that fondly, actually. It was very pleasant. We'd go to the beach. I can remember the fiddler craps scaring me to death, and I can remember Reverend Harris, Reverend Harris, who later became a bishop, teaching me to swim at Buckroe Beach [Hampton, Virginia], which was the only beach I think where the black folks could go at that time. And I remember my aunt having a boyfriend named Humpty. Humpty had a, a car with a rumble seat, and I used to love to ride in the rumble seat. I remember my grandfather's shoes squeaking, and he played a horn in the band. And I could never get a sound out of that horn. It just tasted bitter and I'd puff my cheeks, and I could never get any noise out of it, or very little. And I remember walking to the market with him in the mornings, and pleasant mornings, with the dew--it would be early in the morning. And his squeak--shoes would be going squeak. I remember they lived on Cumberland Street. And down the street was lawyer Land's (ph.) house. That was a big mansion, and next to that was Dr. Byrd's house, and that was an even bigger mansion. And these were some big, a black lawyer and a black doctor in Norfolk, Virginia in those days was, must have been getting over like a fat rat. And then my grandparents' house, it was a nice house. It wasn't anything like the size of these two big places that had verandas and steps all up and downstairs. There was a basement that was, you know, as big as most of the rest of the houses, and they would--and then you could look down Fox Lane, down from my grandparents' front porch. It was this sort of Soweto type section with tin, accordion tin roofs, and the houses were dug out with dirt floors and kerosene lamps, and there were a whole bunch of poor folks living down there, including Illinois Malone who worked for my grandpa--grandparents with her daughter, whose name was Lettie, Lettie Malone. And they stayed with my aunt until, you know, Illinois finally went into the nursing home, you know. Those are my early recollections of there. Then Chicago [Illinois], of course, we lived on 51st Street. We lived about four different places around 51st Street, between Champlain [Avenue] and Evans [Avenue] and back over on, on 50th Place. And I went to Willard High, Willard Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois]. And I lived right across the street from Washington Park. And so the park was pretty much our playground. In those days, they had bushes in the, in the park, bushes lined the street. And so you could play cops and robbers and cowboys and Indians, and climb the trees. And then there were sections in there where they had baseball diamonds, softball diamonds, and we could play there. And as we got a little bigger, you could go over in another section of the park where they had hardball diamonds. And you could play--they had space for you to play football. So I kind of grew up between Cottage Grove [Avenue] and South Park [now Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] on 51st Street in Washington Park playing and, and in the alley behind there. The alley was very important to me. I started hearing songs when I was a kid that I--I started to hearing street cries, like (singing) "Ho, ho, get your watermelon here, watermelon man, watermelon man". So this guy would come through, you know, all the time. And I made a song out of that. (Singing) "A wagon and a horse in the summer sun, watermelon". And the rag man would come through, (singing) "Rags and ole iron, rags and ole". And it turned out, he was saying "rags and old iron" cause he was buying the rubbish and the refuse from people's lives. So I made a song like that (singing) "I heard an old rag man out making his rounds, coming right down my alley with sorrowful sounds, crying rags old irons, and pulling his cart; I asked him how much he give me for my broken heart." So that was, those early recollections from the alley actually became songs. The, see, and the kids selling the 'Chicago Defender', (singing)"'Chicago Defender', 'Chicago Defender paper'". And so I made a song out of that. (singing) "Paperboys in Chicago, Illinois used to serenade the neighbors as they peddled their papers." And that was out there, every Friday afternoon. So that, I have a lot of recollections of that. I can recall in the fifth grade--whenever there was a contest on public speaking, I'd win that, you know, 'cause there would actually be no competition. I was hot for that. And I can remember the teacher in the fifth grade, she'd let me tell the kids a story every Friday afternoon around twenty minutes. And I'd make up something. And I remember it had a lot of ale oops, splash out, anything that got a laugh, I would, you know, incorporate that and be sure I said the next week as well. So I was always a ham for that stuff. And the rest of it was just, you know, playing baseball, playing cops and robbers, shooting off firecrackers and the Fourth of July, playing kick the can in the alley. After a while, chasing girls, you know. Story_ID: 4157 Speaker 1: I want to know what the young Oscar Brown--what type of person were you? Some people are, you know, they're quiet and shy, some people are more extroverted. Some people are dreaming, some people--I mean what type of person was the young--? Speaker 2: Well, I was an extrovert, but I was dreamy too. I used to like to draw and to sketch. I took little art courses at the Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois], and I had a little book that I would draw pictures of football games, baseball games, a lot of action stuff that I would draw or cowboys and Indians, cops and robbers, all that kind of stuff. And this is as a youngster. So I would spend some time alone. My mother [Helen Lawrence Brown] used to insist that I read. Before I could go out in the summertime, I'd have to read a chapter of 'Ivanhoe' or of 'Robin Hood' or something, 'Up from Slavery'. I remember at one point she had me read, but she, I would have had to have--read that kind of stuff. But for the most of the time, I was out cussing with the people in the, playing in the park, you know, playing in the alley and, you know, trying to stop myself from saying bad words, but I couldn't stop myself. So I was somewhat of a foul mouth, little loud mouth. I--when I was about five years old, and I figured out that Santa Claus was absolutely too fat to get down the chimney, and not only my chimney, but any of the chimneys of anybody in the crowd. And I went around and, and that--it just didn't make sense. So I went around and I told my friends, anybody with a grain of sense would know that that fat man could not get down this chimney. And so the parents--their parents wanted to know what, how I found out. They were mad at me for having pulled the, you know, the covers off of Santa Claus like that. But I had figured out that one out myself, and had even gone around and said, well, if there's no Santa Claus, then the toys must be here. So I searched the house, and I found them, hidden in a closet. And I put on my cowboy suit when my mother wasn't there. And it was the biggest disappointment Christmas Day cause now there was no Santa Claus (laughter), and I'd seen all my toys. And Christmas was never the same (laughter). So--. Speaker 1: And this was at five? Speaker 2: Yeah, about five or six years--I was a little guy, 'cause everybody was, I remember the mothers were, were mad at me. Well, who told you? (laughter). And I had convinced the children. I, I'd blown it for everybody in our little crowd there. Speaker 1: So were you--you were pretty precocious then? Speaker 2: Yeah, kind of, you know. If I would go to the ballgame, I would have--with my father [Oscar Brown, Sr.] and my uncles, I'd always have something to say. I would be out there mouthing off, wise cracking and always--I was always like that. Yeah, precocious would be a good word. Story_ID: 4158 Speaker 1: So who are you, who are you most like, your mother [Helen Lawrence Brown] or your father [Oscar Brown, Sr.]? Speaker 2: Well, bless their hearts, neither of them. (Laughter) You can't--I told my father, you, you're clear, in the clear. They can't blame you (laughter), God knows you did your best (laughter). I mean my--I can't--in the sense of social consciousness, I'm much, very much like my father. My father was always a race man. My first recollections of him were at the 49th state. He wanted to have a forty-ninth state when they had forty-eight so that Negroes could have the--and that's when we were Negroes, could have their own hegemony, their economy, their own whole thing 'cause they could see this welfare thing coming. And they dreaded that these young men that he was with in the '30s [1930s]. This is around 1936 and all. And then he was always involved with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. He became the president of the Chicago [Illinois] branch, and increased the membership from like 2,000 to about 18,000, primarily around the issue of restrictive covenants, which were pacts that were gotten together by homeowners to--white homeowners to avoid selling to blacks. He was very active with that. He was, helped found the Chicago Negro Chamber of Commerce, and sustained Negro enterprise, building business. He came from a generation of men who--it's amazing to me what, how--I was looking at, for example, a, a book of, I guess, Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity. He was a big Alpha Phi Alpha man and edited the 'Sphinx' at one point while he was in college. And his brother wrote the Alpha creed. I mean they were big, but--and those were all serious men, a generation from slavery, had aspirations for business and--. How did the Crips and the Bloods come out of that? How did the Blackstone Rangers and the Disciples come out of that? What happened? This was a whole very serious generation of men who took life seriously and were concerned about their families, and--I don't know what happened. Something seemed to have gone awry from that group of people. There was a great deal that I admired about my parents. There was--they, I never heard them say a cross word between them, and they were married from 1925 till they died in 1990. And there's a nobility and a tenderness and dignity that's just missing--it's sad, that they had. I can't say (laughing and crying) that I was as dignified as they are, you know, or as noble. But on the other hand, I've always tried to do--carry myself in a way that would make them proud of me. I wasn't doing what they wanted me to do, but I wanted the end result to be something of which they'd be proud. I always wanted--I didn't want to say anything on stage that I didn't want my mother to hear. Story_ID: 4159 Speaker 1: Can you describe some of your home life? I'm trying to figure--I know you said, I wasn't like any of my parents, but what was your home life like? Speaker 2: Oh, it was pretty, Dick and Jane type of thing, you know (laughs). It was like, I mean there were four of us. There was Big Oscar [Brown, Sr.] and Big Helen [Lawrence Brown], and Little Oscar and Little Helen [Brown], and ice cream, we had Sunday evenings, and maybe go to the Alpha [Phi Alpha] house for, for dinner on Sundays, cause you could get a six course meal for about seventy-five cents during the Depression then, in those days. And it was, well, by the time we got over to where we owned a house on 31st [Street, Chicago, Illinois] and Lake Park [Avenue], it was taking care of the furnace, you know, clean out the clinkers. And it was always clean your closet and go out, and scrub the kitchen and the bathroom before you can go to the show on Saturday. It was, my mother was the kind of person who would tell stories to the children in the, in the summertime and have lemonade and invite the, the kids in (laughs). She would be doing it with the wholesome thing (laughs), and I was always trying to invite the little girls in to get them to take off their dresses for some game or other (laughs) we would be playing. (laughs) I was, I wasn't exactly a, a womanizer, but I was girlizer (laughs). I can remember, and my mother's program was so much more wholesome than me, although I wasn't really old enough to be really dirty. I had, I actually got talked into sex at eighteen by my peers. I was prepared to be pure (laughs) and save myself for marriage. But the cats talked me out of that (laughs). They just really killed that idea all the way. But I, my home life was, as I recall it was just, you know, just pleasant. It was, there was nothing out--unusual. After my mother got well, you know, and we went back to, again, we were living on 51st Street. At one point, during the Depression, we were all jammed together, a couple of uncles and my grandmother and my parents and I and my--and my aunt and uncle. So there were about eight of us in there at 704 East 51st Street, but as times got better, jobs opened up, somebody got a job here, got a job there. And then everything opened up so we moved to a nicer little place by ourselves, and wound up over at 662 East 51st Street in a building that was owned by a man named Jim Knight. Jim Knight was a policy wheel owner and the first mayor of Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois], and he owned the Palm Tavern. He was a sporting life kind of cat; had the meanest wife in the world as far as us kids were concerned. She didn't want you on her flower beds. You couldn't play in her yard at all, and she (growling). But Mr. Knight he, he--it was a nice building. It was a spiffy kind of building compared to the others. By that time, we were on the up. And then my father went out of practicing law and became a, a building, a housing manager. He got a job with the Chicago Housing Authority, managing Ida B. Wells [Homes, Chicago, Illinois], which was built in 1938 or '9 [1939, sic, 1940], and it was the first federally-funded public housing in the country. And he became its manager, and he did such a fabulous job there that, then they built Altgeld Gardens [Chicago, Illinois], way out south, and he managed that. And they had a smaller project called West Chesterfield Homes around 95th Street. And those homes were designed to be absorbed into the community, and they were. You don't even know if you pass by there now, you wouldn't hardly know that that, at one time, was public housing, and that, in fact, the bourgeois Negroes out there threatened my father with bodily harm about advocating putting poor people out there. There was, you know, animosity, and they didn't want, they didn't want--the people on South Park [now Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] didn't want the Ida B. Wells, but by the time he got through with it, my dad, shoot they were pleased because he had set up a health clinic in there. He had organized the thing. He, his slogan was more than shelter; a way of life. You just don't take people out of the slums and, with, they still got slum health and slum jobs and just slum attitudes. So his attitude was, I mean his program was to change all that by organizing the men at Wells town, the women of Wells town, the Wells town council, the youth of Wells town. I remember Adolph Slaughter who later became a fine newspaper man was the first young kid, you know, elected mayor of Wells town. He had--the people were scrubbing their windows with Bon Ami and planting trees and being in there, there was a, a pride that people had. It was the projects now. I'm not trying to make it like it was luxury or anything. He couldn't make wine out of water, but on the other hand, he made the water pure, and he did a very fine job of that. He got as far as he could in the housing authority. And then he went off into private business. He became the comptroller for a school, Midway Television Institute [Chicago, Illinois], after World War II when the G.I. Bill went in, and there were a whole lot of young men coming back from the war going into trade schools. They were teaching television and radio and refrigeration repair over, off Indiana [Avenue] and 49th [Street]. And, well, it started on Forty--on 47th [Street] and Cottage [Grove Avenue]. And, see he, he worked with that, and they branched off. He was very enterprising. And they branched off, and he particularly went into the real estate business after the school--after a while the school began to wane, the big rush that had followed World War II was over. And most of the guys who were eligible for the G.I. Bill had been serviced by that. And he went into the real estate business, Oscar C. Brown Real Estate Corporation and managed a lot of property. Black folks at that time weren't able to get mortgages that much. And you couldn't join the real estate board that operated for the whole city. That's--so he, he organized the real estaters and you couldn't call yourself the Chicago Real Estate Board, so he called himself real estate--he came up with some rouse around that. He was always a very enterprising man. The, not in the sense of making a lot of money. He was too much a race man. He was too much the good guy. He was, both sides would want him to represent him (laughs). I mean, you know, he'd have to cool it sometimes because he'd be getting into a conflict of interest cause the seller and the buyer would want his services. He went out there where they were losing the Parkway Gardens, which is a big development out on South Parkway at, from sixty, about 64th [Street] out to 67th [Street]. I don't remember how many unions--units are in there, but several hundred. And they were in default with the federal housing authority and all. And he went in there and rescued that place cause he was a very good administrator, very, very straight-laced man. He could--he knew how to do shorthand and the slide rule and all those kinds of things. I was quite different, never was into that. Story_ID: 4160 Speaker 1: I was drawing, I was acting, I was reciting stuff in school. I was flunking out of school when I--by the time I got in college because I just never could get that hooked up. I would go with great enthusiasm, you know, and after a while my enthusiasm would wane, and I would be, I'd be looking at the--I would go in the library and read what I wanted to read. And I wanted to read [Rene] Descartes. I didn't know what the hell Descartes was talking about, but I was, you know, I was a college man, and I'd be--I got really interested in poetry. Countee Cullen, I discovered Langston Hughes and Vachel Lindsay, and, of course, I had always been hip to the white folks like [John] Keats and [Percy] Shelley. And I loved [William] Shakespeare a lot. When I was in college, Paul came, Robeson came to the University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconisn] in, in 'Othello'. And I was really impressed with that. But before that, you know, as a youngster, my mother [Helen Lawrence Brown] and I used to sing around the house. But nobody in the house was in show, in show business. There was no talk of that. And at that time, they didn't have high schools for the performing arts. If, if you you're a young black kid, you were, you know, if you could get into law or medicine or dentistry or, you know, the post office, even or run the road, as a Pullman porter, that would become, way before acting or doing anything like that. And it just didn't even come up. And Paul Robeson was doing it, but, yeah, but hey, you're no Paul Robeson, you know. However, I remember asking my father [Oscar Brown Sr.] for some money one time so I could go to study writing. I wanted to study radio writing, you know. And he was a little reluctant to come up with the scratch 'cause we were never, well, really rich. We'd make out pretty good often, but when the--during this period, it was, money was kind of tight. So I, I had the nerve to ask, I said, "What if, I bet you Shakespeare's daddy let him go" (laughs). My mother said, I was, you know, I was always like that. She then go, "Well, would you want to be the president of the United States?" I said, "Well, I wouldn't mind" (laughs) 'cause, and it's always the possibility there. And I mean I got raised like all the rest of the black folks, but I always, even as, as I got up, I remember some young people when we were 'Kicks and Company', they said, "Oscar thinks he's white." You know, 'cause I'd be rubbing some white boy's head (laughs), like, like, you know, I wasn't as respectful as the rest of the niggers. So it, a lot of that's my father's fault. I mean he, he's the race man. He put me out there. He was a big Joe Louis fan, big Sugar Ray Robinson fan, and though he was a, a fight--you know, I never saw him raise his hand to anybody. But we used to love to go see boxing, go see baseball, go see football. We'd go to some sports, we hung out. Had uncles, my Uncle Walker, he was a big one for taking you to see the Negro League. So I got to see, you know, the Birmingham Black Barons and the Kansas City Monarchs and then, the New York Giants. It was Chicago, Chicago American Giants. I don't remember what the New York team was. And this was during the time when the [Harlem] Globetrotters and the [Harlem] Renaissance and that was big excitement for, for us. Jesse Owens, Joe Louis, all that was extremely important. When Max Schmeling knocked Joe Louis, I sat on my father's lap and cried. I was about twelve years old. That just devastated me, you know, and then when he beat him again, whew. That was, you know, that vindicated everything. When I found out that there had been slave revolutions, when I found out about Denmark Vesey and Nat Turner, big turn on for me. At--that sort of sent me into the Communist Party. I joined the Communist Party when I was twenty and stayed in it until I was thirty. That was some of the most exciting period of my life. It was some cloak and dagger stuff. [Senator Joseph] McCarthy was happening, and we were ducking the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], and, you know, shaking them off your tail before you went to meet certain people. And I remember, recently I was in Denver [Colorado]--I'm going to Denver tomorrow--or did I do something wrong? Okay. I was in Denver, and to talk to some kids in high school. And they called me up, and--cause I had them I had been a communist. So they wanted to know, well, did you have a sense that you were betraying the country? I said, "Who, J. Edgar Hoover? Well, who you talking about? Strom Thurmond, who, your [Theodore] Bilbo, [John] Rankin, no, hell, no." I thought we were the good guys. And I never did have a sense that we--I knew we were unpopular as hell. And you had to be very careful about who you said anything to. And I never told my father that I was a communist. He was told I was by, I'm sure, a whole bunch of people, but I never--it was on a need-to-know basis, (laughs) and he didn't actually need to know that as far as I was concerned. And so I got, you know, in his politics, I got way to the left of him. That's why he, he was the one who insisted I start using junior cause I started saying stuff, he didn't want to be (laughs) have associated with him 'cause he wasn't saying that. That was not his opinion, but I was on out there. And I got further and further out. I got over on, with Paul Robeson, you know, and I--by the time I got to be a, a young man, when the war, the Second World War was over, and the post-war world that had been promised us, evaporated into a whole mess of the same old stuff, Jim Crow and everything was still going on. Well, then that radicalized me, and at the same time, I began to meet radical people. I got a job when I was in college in a--I had flunked out of the University of Wisconsin and they'd sent me to DePauw [University, Greencastle, Indiana]. I flunked out of DePauw, and so they sent me back to Wisconsin. I flunked out of Wisconsin so they decided girls was the problem. So they sent me to Lincoln [University, Pennsylvania] where there were no girls. But that wasn't the problem cause you could still go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and Washington [D.C.]. And I, as I say, I wasn't--it was just that I really wasn't that much on girls. I mean, yeah, I was, but that wasn't what broke me down from college. It was just that I didn't understand what the hell it was about. I wasn't interested in that, and they weren't interested in me. What I had a talent for doing, they didn't particularly care about. I could write a, when, if they asked for a hundred-word theme, I'd write a poem. And I just dazzled my English composition teacher, but everybody else, I flunked. And she said, it was a shame, she talked to her, you know, heard this in her interview that they gave with my mother and father. My mother said, she said it was a shame because I showed promise, but, of course, I hadn't done, I had what they called flagrant neglect of classes. I hadn't done any of the other stuff. So I didn't know it at the time, you know. I felt badly myself. I felt like I was a failure. But, in fact, there was no college for a kid like me. I was a writer, I was an actor, I was into, into something that was quite different from anything that was being recommended or taught. They sent me to a psychologist named Dr. Beckham (ph.) Dr. Beckham said, you should conform to the norm. And all the other boys do it, you know, why can't you? I could, I didn't--it bored me. Speaker 2: Did your parents--was there any discussion about, I mean your father at this--I'm sure there were disappointments on their behalf. Were there any discussions or chiding you or expectations? Speaker 1: Was there anything else? (laughs) Yeah, they were very disappointed, you know. I would come home having flunked out of school, and everybody was unhappy. My father came up to our room--came up to Wisconsin and surprised us one time. And we had a sign on the, on the wall, calling it "hangover haven", and my father, I never saw his buns on a barstool. You know, he, he didn't drink at all, and here I was out, I was out there, you know, boozing it up like a college boy. When he went to college, he was working his way through school and hard, nose to the grindstone. When I went to college, I was wishing I had a sports car and a sports coat and, and a convertible 'cause I was going to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. And Howard was just like heaven for all these beautiful women that were on the campus there. So I was--my aspiration, I was just a--I know they were having some civil rights demonstrations there at Lincoln. I didn't want to participate in that sort of thing. I was really middle-class. I got turned around, oh, as I got in association with a man named Dick Durham, in particular. Dick Durham wrote a show, on which I started working called 'Destination Freedom'. Well, there had been a fifteen minute program called 'Democracy USA' on WBBM [Chicago, Illinois]. And then that was expanded to a whole half hour program on WMAQ [Chicago, Illinois], the NBC outlet. And Dick would write a half hour drama every week, based on the life of famous Negroes. Now, you've been in show business. You know how--they would take, they'd take a team of writers to do what he did. We didn't know it was impossible, so he did it every week, and won prizes. I mean this wasn't schlock work. This was prize-winning work. He won the Wendell Wilkie One World Award and several others and everything that it was eligible for. And it went on for a long time. I'm about to return to Denver now for the third time to do a, a broadcast that we did way back in the 1940s, a 'Destination Freedom'. This one is going to be the life of Gwendolyn Brooks and Studs Terkel and Fred Pinkard who were originally in the, in the shows back in the '40s [1940s]. They're gonna go be in Denver at the same time, and so that ought to be very nice. Story_ID: 4161 Speaker 1: You went to Willard Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois]? Where did, junior high school? Speaker 2: Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois], Englewood. There was no junior high schools during those times. Speaker 1: That's right, so you went to Englewood, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Everyone seemed to go to Englewood or DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois] or--? Speaker 2: Yeah, Du--or Wendell Phillips [High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Wendell Phillips. Speaker 2: But they, my parents, you know, in their little bourgeois way, they thought DuSable and Phillips were too rough, and they wanted me to go over here to Englewood. So we faked my address as, to be 5918 Indiana [Avenue], where my cousin lived. And so I was in the Englewood district. And I went there the whole four years. Story_ID: 4162 Speaker 1: University of Wisconsin [Madison], who chose that as the, as a place to go and why? That seems like a--your father [Oscar Brown Sr.] being a race man, I'm sort of surprised at that, that--? Speaker 2: Hey, there was my mother [Helen Lawrence Brown]. She wasn't a race man (laughs). My, my, (laughs), you know, they were--at first they wanted me to go to Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts]. And I went to, up to Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] to take the entrance exam to go into Amherst. And I, at Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois], they didn't even teach the stuff that they were asking on this examination. So I, I couldn't even feel bad, I mean because 'cause I didn't have a prayer. I didn't know what, they were asking you to conjugate (unclear) verbs and stuff that I hadn't--we had never got that far in, at Englewood. So I didn't get to Amherst. I wonder what my life would have been if I had gone--I'd probably been a drunk. Anyway, I guess--I don't know. I wasn't really consulted that much, you know. It could have been the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign]. At that time, though, I don't think it cost that much to go to Wisconsin, something like four hundred and fifty dollars. And I had, when I was a junior in high school, there was a program called Destin--called 'Secret City' that was on in the afternoons. They used to have programs like 'Orphan Annie' and 'Don Winslow' and 'Jack Armstrong' and 'Tarzan', these would be fifteen minute programs that would start around 3:30 or 4:00 after school. And they'd go on 'til about dinnertime, 6:00, 6:30 was the last of them. 'Secret City' was that kind of fifteen-minute program, and I was hired to--as an actor for six weeks, and I think it got extended for a couple of weeks, make sixty four dollars and sixty cents a week at a time when grown men were working for forty. And I, that just turned me on. Plus, I, you know, was good at it. And then I went on to college, and flunked out and flunked out and flunked out and finally, they sent me to study radio. I had been a play at, at Lincoln [University, Pennsylvania], and I--that had absorbed me. So they said, well, this is what he seems to be interested in. So they sent me to Columbia College [Chicago, Illinois] here to study radio acting and radio announcing and that sort of thing, and I did, and wound up getting a job in radio. And then my father suggested that I--there should be a Negro news broadcasts. And so I wound up doing a broadcast called 'Negro News Front' with Vernon Jarrett doing the news writing for this. Have you talked to him? Speaker 1: I have and he's--. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, I'm sure. So Jarrett was my writer cause he was, he had worked at the ['Chicago] Defender'. He was from Tennessee and he hadn't been here too long. And Dick Durham recommended him 'cause Dick Durham had been at the, at the 'Defender'. That's how he got the job writing 'Destination Freedom'. And so--I mean so 'Negro News Front' came on. And that was quite an education because that really put me into paying attention to what was going on in the community, in the world, South Africa, you know, was--we'd have a hard time calling the news. Jarrett was the writer for about a year, and then he moved to Kansas City [Missouri], and I--instead of hiring somebody else, I took over the writing of the show. And as I say, that was an absorbing job. I'd be covering news. Sometimes I'd try and be a, a reporter for myself. I'd go out to a fire where somebody had been burned up or out to where Roscoe Johnson moved in Park Manor [Chicago, Illinois], and the mob threw rocks and stuff in his window and doing--Harvey Clark moved out to Cicero [Illinois], and they threw all his furniture out and made a bonfire out of it. And I had Harvey Clark and his wife on my program that day. So that was an exciting time. And it put a certain focus on my eyes. And so I always had come right out of my father being a race man, but I really put the focus on that. And at the same time, I was involved with the left, and I was involved in struggle. I was a really radical--my newscast was considered radical, so I used to get kicked off the air. The--well, the first station WJJD [Chicago, Illinois], they were just gonna ease me on off. That was early in the morning, and so I asked my listeners to send cards to show that I had an audience. And I got--the station told me, don't do that. You're gonna embarrass yourself. I got so many cards and letters every day, my bin and other bins would just be stuffed with all these cards and stuff. So I had a whole bushel basket full of 'em, and write--a lot of them were written by people who couldn't write, people who would scrawl "keep on, keeping on", you know, and, and, and encouragement. So when somebody who can't write, writes you, you're getting over. So anyway I got enough of those to go to the Baldwin Ice Cream Company, and I dumped them all on Mr. [Kit] Baldwin's desk, and said, "Pick a card, any card." And he started reading these cards and sponsored me, you know. And we, we stayed on the air. But I used to get kicked off. Al Benson was a disc jockey who was quite popular, and who brokered time. And I was able to broker time, and after I got kicked off at WJJD, I was able to broker time with Al Benson. But even there I had big problems because Dr. Dyer and his, his station manager was a man named Herb Rudolph. I remember him as just being a, really a redneck, I mean his neck was red. And he--I used to infuriate him. And they would make me--after a while, I, I did something, I attacked the DuPont Chemical Company, and they kicked me off the air for that. And so I had to have a big turmoil. I had to go to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the Urban League and the unions and everybody to get myself put back on the air again. That, that happened several time. I'd start a community row and it would get me replaced. And Al Benson would stand up for me. He would, he was pretty good, and the people thought he was an Uncle Tom, but he was not. Anyway, that was a--and that went on for about five years. Speaker 1: You know, I have a question. I had forgotten about Vernon Jarrett. But I remember him talking about that, and that's where talked about the 'Destination' program. He also talked about that. But what--you know, because I think of you as an entertainer, and this is more of a time when, you know, news pro--you--this was actually a news program? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 4163 Speaker 1: What else was going on in your life at that point? Were you active--? Speaker 2: Well, I had joined the Communist Party when I was twenty. And I was very much active in all kinds of social activity. I had run--I--when the Progressive Party, in 1948, I ran for the [Illinois] state legislature on the Progressive Party ticket. I was, the first time I voted, I voted for me. And I was twenty-two. And so I was pretty much a political activist. I was on the air. People would ask, ask me to come speak, you know, to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Waukegan [Illinois] or some group out in South--in Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois] or something. And I would show up, and I looked like, I looked a high school kid, you know. They would be looking for somebody much older than I was. But by this time, I was pretty, pretty radical, and pretty outspoken. I was standing against the Korean War. I was attacking the DuPont Chemical Company and getting attacked back. And that continued until finally I got kicked off the air, and I stayed in the party, even after that because when I left broadcasting, Dick Durham had a gotten a job with the trade union, the United Packinghouse Workers of America, first to, to write some leaflets and do some propaganda around a strike they were having in Kansas City [Missouri]. But he was so effective, Dick Durham was a towering genius. He worked his way into a whole department, the program department to coordinate political action and women's rights and civil rights, all that stuff that the union would go to convention and vote programs that never got implemented. And they voted again the next year. So he talked them into this program department, and I was the district program di--coordinator in Chicago area, which was the biggest area in the union. And the big Armour [Meats] plants, Swift [and Company], Wilson [Meats], these were places that employed four thousand people during the hog run, starting like now, in October. And that was a very fascinating industrial union, trying to stay in the CIO [Congress of Industrial Organizations], but being very left wing, and we were always on the verge of getting kicked out, trying to get merged with the Amalgamated Meat Cutters and Booker--Butcher Workmen of America at one point. And that proved our undoing, our meaning Dick's and mine because Dick was the first person I ever heard talk about a black caucus. He organized a black caucus in the international union and got black people elected to office in a new merged union that was being formed, except that just at the moment where the merger was to take place, the whole deal fell apart. And there we were back with the same situation we had been in. Story_ID: 4164 Speaker 1: You were saying that you started at fifteen--? Speaker 2: Writing songs. A girl would break my heart, I'd write a heartbroken song. 'I Don't Care', and 'Oh, How I Envy Him', these are some. And then I'd start singing around, you know, at gatherings, and the fact that I'd--I wasn't that good a singer, but the fact that I was a songwriter, that got me over. And I continued to do it. I'd write some little parodies on, you know, little funny things that were too. And I, I, I started getting interested in, I mean serious about it when I was in my late teens and early twenties, but then as I got into the labor movement thing, as I got in--well, I also was wanting to be a playwright. I was writing songs, but I also wanted to be a playwright. I was writing short stories. I was doing the newscast. I had a job with a newspaper briefly. I was writing and trying to find my level at, you know, what I was as a writer. I knew I wanted--I was good with words. So I got, I got involved in the song writing, but it was, it was later. I mean I had, I had been the labor movement. And then I, I, I was--I know which point I wanted to make, I had written a play called 'The Scab'. I got a job for the farm equipment, with the farm equipment workers. And they were having a, a strike against International Harvester. And there was a murder of one of the scabs, and one of the union functionaries was charged with it. And I wrote a play, a one-act play about that whole incident. And we were able to play that in union halls. We would take it around and play it. Bea Stow (ph.), who is now a professional actor, I just saw her in a movie with some, somebody big just the other day, and Fred Pinkard who is, was--we would go around to union halls--there were only four people in the cast, and put it on, and take up a collection. And we went all over. We played it in Milwaukee [Wisconscin] and we went to Cleveland [Ohio] with the Chicago--with the National Negro Labor Council. Coleman Young was the executive secretary of that, and I was a sort of speech writer. I wrote a speech for Coleman Young during that period; had him quoting [William] Shakespeare. He didn't really care for that. But we were, we, we had a--during the period that, that I was on the air, we also had to the DuBois Theater Guild. We were actors. We were all trying to be actors. We were trying to get into, to acting somehow. And so we got to, we had our own little theater company. And there were two or three other theater companies in town, the Sky Loft Players and the Center Aisle Players, but they were doing stuff like the importance of being earnest and, you know, 'Lady Windermere's Fan', which looked ridiculous for their folks to be doing that, English drawing room comedy, ah. So we were doing, 'Waiting for Lefty' and, by Clifford Odets, and we'd put on 'The Lonesome Train', and we did 'Of Mice and Men'. We, we had a much more working-class proletarian approach to the thing. And I think we had some better actors too. We had a lady who looks very much like you, Evelyn Terry. She later married Sid McCoy, and, and she, she was one of my first sweethearts. And I was so flattered when she started going with me. I was, oh, how did that happen? (laughs) Story_ID: 4165 Speaker 1: You were in the labor movement how long? Speaker 2: About five years. And that would have been from--? Speaker 1: That's it? Speaker 2: Hum? Speaker 1: From what years to what? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, let's see. Gosh, I have to do this again cause I'm kind of dotty, you know. I guess I was out of that in about forty--I started the labor movement in the early '50s [1950s], in the early '50s [1950s] and was in then, I was in, in '55 [1955] I got drafted. I was twenty-eight years old, but they wanted to mess me up. They put me in the Army so they could kick me out of the Army for being a Communist, and they knew that in the first place. I mean, I took the Fifth Amendment, and I didn't want to go. I was trying not to go. And it was such a raunchy deal that the Supreme Court later made them rescind that. I mean they made them give me an honorable discharge, all, where they had originally given me an undesirable. But as I say, I was twenty-eight years old. By this time, I had four kids, and it was really a big inconvenience (laughter) to go to the Army, and something that I really didn't want to have to do. But I was in there for eleven months and twenty-eight days, before they finally gave me this undesirable discharge, which later had to be overturned as I said, because they had entrapped me. They brought me. I didn't want to go, and they insisted that I go in, and then kicked me out for being in. And that was a kind of traumatic period, although I made the most of that 'cause then I started with a--I met a young white kid named Al Goletta in the barracks. And he and I started singing around the barracks. And then we decided we were good enough to sing in the service club, and then we thought we were good enough to be in special services. Well, we had a ball for a little while there doing that. And by the time I got kicked out of the Army, I was now, I had had a little stage experience as a singer, and I was now serious. I had started writing songs. I started writing a play in the Army, just to keep from going nuts. And so by the time I came out of the Army, I was looking for somebody to write my songs down for me because I couldn't read music. And I went around to various people. I couldn't find anybody black who would be interested in that at all. I did find a young classically trained white guy named Norman Curtis, and-- Speaker 1: Hold on for a second. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Yeah, just don't rub the mic that way. Speaker 2: And he took--. Speaker 1: What's his name again? Speaker 2: Norman Curtis was, was his name. And Norman, he, he--as I say, he was classically trained. I think he might have gone to the--I don't remember what school he attended. Speaker 1: Orchestral music, [The] Juilliard [School, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Some of that--we even lived in the man's, in the man's place. He said, there's--it's right down off, on Michigan Avenue at around 12th Street--oh, how can I not remember it, cause we used to say he was haunting the house. We bought his house at 3146 Lake Park, and we said Mr. whatever his name was, was haunting the joint. But anyway, Norman studied at that school [Sherwood Conservatory of Music, Chicago, Illinois]. And he helped me a great deal, you know, to put down the stuff and at the point where you're, you're first starting. And I had begun writing, putting lyrics to some jazz stuff. And I was beginning to take this seriously. I was going down to see Harry Belafonte when he performed at the Black Orchid [Chicago, Illinois]. And I went down to see Abbey Lincoln and Maya Angelou when they were performing. Maya was at the, at the London--was at Mr. Kelly's, and Abbey was at the Black Orchid with O. C. Smith. And a dear friend of mine named Anne Henry who was a great dancer wanted me to see some of the great talent that there was around. So she took me, and I was introduced to them. But I was always hitting on. I was going to see Ramsey Lewis and them when they were playing little joints, you know. I was trying always to get singers to sing my songs. I didn't expect to become a singer 'cause the life was too--and I was a homebody; I was a family man, and I didn't want to get into the temptations of dancing girls and all the stuff I knew I was weak for. But I did anyway. Speaker 1: And how, you were, who--were you married at that point in time? Or were--you had four kids. Speaker 2: I think, after, after a while, yeah, well, it sounds--it felt like I was born married. But, yeah, I was married in 1948, and Napoleon was the first, you know. And then--. Speaker 1: But that wasn't Jean Pace though? Speaker 2: No, no, no. I had, no, Jean Pace was not even thought of, much later. No, this was, Irene Hebert (ph.) was her name. And she's living in New York now. We were married--it was during this stormy period of politics, the Rosenbergs [Ethel and Julius Rosenberg] got electrocuted and that scared the hell out of Irene 'cause she was a fellow traveler, but she was no Red. I was a zealot, but she wasn't. So that put quite a strain on our marriage. And we wound up breaking up after about five years. And I remarried. I married Maxine Fleming, and she had a little girl. And then we had three ourselves. And so I had two by Irene and then four with Maxine, including her--Joannie. And then Africa was born. That was the one I had by Jean, but I started going with Jean, I wasn't married to Jean, I was going--our granddaughter was at the wedding by the time we got married. We'd been going together for thirty years. Story_ID: 4166 Speaker 1: What were the, some of the people that you met or had respect for or, you know, during that time or were influential on your thinking at that time [1950s]? Speaker 2: Well, I was highly impressed by William L. Patterson, who headed the Civil Rights Congress. He was a fine, you know, in-instructive man. I got leadership from Claude Lightfoot and Ishmael Flory, people like that. But the stars would have been people like Paul Robeson, the biggest star of it all. And Paul was very kind to us. He would have little soires where he would talk to the young intellectuals, the young actors and writers and encourage us to employ our talent to the benefit of our people and for peace and not to just aggrandize ourselves. And he turned me out very much so. I was very much encouraged to follow in his footsteps. I'd say my father and then Paul Robeson, you know, they, they put me out as far as militancy was concerned. Dick Durham had a strong influence on my life, but he was more a mentor, and these other--and Paul was like a father figure 'cause he was--he and my father had waited table together as boys in college. Speaker 1: Now, this--did you become a disenchanted at all with the labor movement or was it just sort of a natural progression out? Speaker 2: Oh, I got kicked out of the [Communist] Party for being too black. You know, I was, I was called, what they called a Negro Nationalist because I began analyzing Uncle Toms and some of the party leadership thought I was talking about them. I hadn't been, even considered them until they brought it up, and then it turned out, yeah, they, they, you know, "fo shits" (laughter), there it is. So I remember that happened, and I became sort of persona non grata. And it got to a point--where I was in the labor movement, in that particular union, the problems that occurred in the party could spill over into the union hall and problems that occurred in the union hall would spill over into the, into the party. So it was kind of a mix there. And so as I got in, in a hassle with the whole thing--it was really about black rights, about Negro rights. And, as I say, Dick Durham was a, was a militant. He, he was really somebody who provided a leadership Negroes don't know about, but, boy, he was hot stuff. He, he was, he was under there. He had a lot to do--he was with Harold Washington, and Harold said he was writing, but I'm sure Dick was throwing in some ideas because Dick was too full of 'em to keep them. And he was a concerned individual. So that, those, those men turned me, me on. And then, of course, I was involved with a whole--well, you asked me who did I meet in the labor movement. Sam Parks, Charlie [Charles] Hayes who be--later became a congressman. Well, when we, when I was running for office, the Dawson machine had some goons out there trying to take our leaflets. So we had to get some goons to come out. And Charlie was one of the goons. He came out of the plant. He was a big dude at the time, young and all. And that's when I first remember seeing him. And then as I later got into the labor movement, working in that local, well, he was one of the people we were trying to bring out of the, out of the plant into full-time leadership. And that happened. He became a field representative and ultimately, he was elected district director. He was a part of that attempt to bring that leadership that Dick Durham and me kicked out of the union, ultimately. And some of the guys we had helped didn't really come to our, you know, when the going went down. Dick had made himself persona non grata, but the guys on whose behalf he had made himself persona non-gratis did not support him. And so he left that, and went to work for the Muslims writing the 'Muhammad Speaks'. He became the editor of 'Muhammad Speaks' and ultimately did 'The Greatest' with [Muhammad] Ali. And so he, you know, he wound up doing well, and driving a Cadillac and, and being pretty well to do, but during that period, we were struggling, and--. Speaker 1: 'The Greatest', you're talking about the movie, right? Speaker 2: Well, it was a book first. Speaker 1: And then it became a movie. Speaker 2: Yeah, movie, yeah. Speaker 1: I just saw that the other night on TV. Now, so you're saying, nineteen--what is this? You leave the party in nineteen or you get--? Speaker 2: Oh, let me see, I got, I got kicked out of the party about 1957, '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: Okay, but at this time--. Speaker 2: Probably yeah, yeah, about '57 [1957], '57 [1957]. Story_ID: 4167 Speaker 1: At this time you are, though you've been, you know, you've been performing cause you've been performing around. And you've been sing--you had also been singing also. So what, I'm just wondering now. What is this next, what's this next tran--next transition? Speaker 2: Well, I was always, after I got in the army, I started writing song seriously in the army. And when I came out of the army, that's when I met Norman Curtis, and I was seriously becoming--trying to become a songwriter. I was supposed to be in the real estate business. So when I lost my job with the packing house workers, I went to, to the real estate business, but I was really lousy in the real estate business. I didn't want to be in the real estate business, and I was up there trying to write a play. By this time I decided I was gonna combine my playwriting aspiration and my music writing aspiration and become the writer of a musical. And the musical, I didn't know at the time, it was not a play with music. And it's not an opera. It's a genre onto itself. And so I had to learn that. And Dick Durham said, "Well, if you want to write plays, read plays." So I started reading plays. I was reading 'My Fair Lady' and I was reading 'West Side Story' and 'Oklahoma' and all that stuff to try and learn how to write a play. And then I, I noticed that those plays were derived from other works like 'My Fair Lady' came from 'Pygmalion' or 'Oklahoma' was from, for a book called 'Green Grow the Lilacs', and 'South Pacific' was from [James] Michener's 'Tales of the South Pacific'. So they had a story. I couldn't find anything in black literature. This is before 'Raisin in the Sun'. There was no literature in particular from which you could derive anything. So I had to come up with a story, and I took my story out of the sit-in movement and out of something that I'd heard Norman Curtis say, that all the--see, he lived in a house where there were a whole bunch of young, white students, sort of stuck in a black community. I don't know how they, what the demographics of that, how that happened. But he said everybody in that building was for kicks. And so the idea of living for kicks tickled me, and I met this character, Mr. Kicks, and he took over my life and wound up being the centerpiece of a four hundred thousand dollar musical that put me on out there. Speaker 1: Did you know when you did that that you were gonna be--did you feel very good about that musical? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: You knew? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you see I wrote it, and I, I was just up there in the loft of the real estate office by myself, but then I went to New York, and I carried it with me. And I sang, I sang some of it to Lorraine Hansberry's husband, Bobby Nemiroff and his partner, Burt D'Lugoff. Bob Nemiroff worked for Phil Rose, and Phil Rose was a producer who had produced 'A Raisin in the Sun'. So now he--and Phil Rose also had a music publishing company for which Bobby worked. So here was a chance to get songs in the publishing company with a Broadway producer, the best of all possible deals, it seemed to me. It didn't work out quite that way because Phil Rose wound up out of the picture and Bobby Nemiroff and his partner, Burt D'Lugoff produced 'Kicks and Company', which was a four hundred thousand dollar musical, as--at a time when four hundred thousand dollars was real money, you know. Had I thought, as I was sitting in the real estate office that it was gonna cost that, I would imagine I would have talked myself out of it. But it was a case of fools rushing in where angels feared to tread. I just didn't know. So I went ahead with it. Story_ID: 4168 Speaker 1: Where did it [his first play, 'Kicks and Company'] first premiere? Speaker 2: It premiered at McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Before that, though, I had been singing it. I--once we started into, to raising the funds, I became the one who was going around singing it in backer's auditions. And these backer's auditions started out in people's, wealthy people's homes, and then they started getting in bigger and bigger places till we were doing them at the Johns Hopkins Club and then we were doing it at the Bird House when we got here, and five hundred people were there. I mean it got to be big stuff. Meanwhile, as I was trying to raise this money for 'Kicks and Company', I was also making my first album on, on Columbia [Records] because Bob Nemiroff had taken my songs around to various record companies, and a man named Al Ham at Columbia, not only liked the material, but he liked the way I presented it. And he sent me a contract. The contract, I told him--I wrote him back that it looked like a clever circumvention of the Thirteen Amendment to me and that I wasn't that interested in being a singer anyway. And, you know, I--what were they gonna do for me as a writer? And so Mitch Miller, who was head of A&R [artists and repertory] at the, at Columbia at the time said, oh, who--saw that letter and he said, who needs him, you know. So they let me cool my heels for about a year, and they, Al Ham called me up, he said, you know, you know, "I know it's a lousy contract, but it's our standard contract. Why don't you just sign it, and if you get a hit, they'll rewrite that." So it was the best game in town, you know. Doris Day was on that label and Frank Sinatra, I mean that was a hot stuff label. So I signed, and went to New York to make this first album. I went in the summer, in the late summer to make, start working on this. And I took the portion of the play that I had completed with me, and I interested Bobby in that, and next we know, I'd signed a basic con--minimum basic production contract with them. And we were into raising the money. And I was performing around, and--oh, as I said, at the same time, my record came out. I'd made this record 'Sin and Soul', and the record company was now talking to me, well, you know, they're talking about performing. They wanted me to perform, and I wasn't all that eager to do that. But Al Ham, who was my producer at the company got fired. In fact, Mitch Miller, that whole regime got kicked out. And I asked Al to become my personal manager, and he got me a gig at the Village Vanguard [New York, New York]. Miriam Makeba had just been there, and this was a showcase place for new acts. And I was a sensation. I got down there, and all--I got great reviews and then all the agents and all came, the new act, to sign me up. And one of them, Joe Glazer, with ABC, and that was a big agency, had a lot of jazz acts. And he got me on the 'Today' program with Dave Garroway. And I sang three songs, and they got more cards and letters for that than they had ever gotten in the whole nine years they'd been on the, on the air. And I think it was on the day where the news, continued the news of the girls getting bombed in, in Birmingham [Alabama] or something of that. And so I sang 'Brown Baby', which is a lullaby and Garroway was weeping on camera, and I mean it just, you know, it scintillated everybody. And that next day or so, he came to the Vanguard to see my act. And right there in the Vanguard, he opened, offered to turn over the whole 'Today' show for a two-hour backers' audition to raise money to put 'Kicks and Company' on 'cause I had done 'Mr. Kicks' and 'Hazel's Hips' and so, it was hot stuff from that show. So I wound up on, on the 'Today' show raising the rest of the money on national television, which was such a sensational thing to do that. My understanding from Woodie King, Jr. is that the New York State legislature passed a 'Kicks and Company' law to make sure that never happened again because they don't want a populist support of the arts. They would rather have an elitist support of the arts. That way, what comes on is what the rich people want, and not what, just everybody. 'Kicks and Company' had more investors than, than probably anybody in the history of show business up to that time because, like schoolmates, friends of mine, they formed a piddling investment company and put five hundred and two hundred and three hundred so they could buy a part of a share. Johnny [John H.] Johnson of 'Ebony' bought up eight thousand dollars, one whole share, and the whole thing flopped inside of a week here in Chicago. But it wasn't entirely the play's fault. I mean the play was pretty much ahead of its time. And it had internal difficulties. It started out with Vinette Carroll as the director, and she got fired. And Lorraine Hansberry was brought in to direct. And Lorraine Hansberry was arrogant enough to take a job that she really shouldn't have taken 'cause she was not a musical person. And then, you know, she'd had a play on Broadway [New York], but when you're directing a, a major musical with a four hundred thousand dollars budget, you have to be like a gourmet chef. You have to know when to put the potatoes on so they come out with the meat. And she didn't have that rhythm. And a lot of the stuff that I thought was charming, she squeezed out of it. But the public didn't get to see that anyway because it closed. We tried to get it revived. We took it to New York, and stood it up without costume in an afternoon. And it just turned out, the audience which was the gypsies, all the people who were employed on Broadway, we put it on, on a Monday so they could see it, and they just loved it. But we couldn't raise any more money. Speaker 1: Now, what, you know, what--I heard that she was pretty egotistical in some respects? Is that true, Lorraine Hansberry? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: She was a talent though. She could--. Speaker 2: Well, she wrote a couple of plays, you know. And she was like, yeah, she was a talent. I mean she was, but she was, she was a bitch, you know. She didn't like--I heard she--when we were in trouble, I brought Frank Silvara. You ever hear of Frank Silvera? Frank Silvera was a fine actor. He was General Worth in 'Viva Zapata!', and he was the Polynesian king in 'Mutiny on the Bounty'. He did a lot of stuff with [Marlon] Brando, and then he, but he did a lot of work, a very talented actor. He was on Broadway in 'A Hat Full of Rain', and all. So when the play got in trouble, they were talking about a play doctor, so at my expense, I brought Frank in. It just so happened that Frank was going with Michelle Nichols who was the star anyway. And so he was glad to come. And he was helping me. We sat up all night and rewrote and made changes, you know, and we were trying to present these to Lorraine. And she was really running sort of roughshod over my rights. You know, I remember she--her telling Frank at one time, "Frank, I am of the theater", you know. And come on, you know. You--I thought that was a low of a blow. Speaker 1: And I don't think of her as a director either. Speaker 2: Hell, no. No, and but her husband [Bob Nemiroff] was the producer, you see. And I brought lawyers in. I had 'em in court. I was trying to stop this, but it would have died in the court. So I said, we might as well on the boards as to die in the, you know, in a courtroom 'cause while you--if you got an injunction, the payroll was still going on, and they're gonna run out of budget. And they were already running low 'cause they had greedily wanted to come and open here in Chicago at the new McCormick Place with five thousand seats which would have enabled them to make the budget before they even opened in New York. And this really was tempting because there was a show called 'Camelot' that had had a success in Toronto [Ontario, Canada] at a five-thousand seat--the O'Keefe Theatre, and so they thought they could replicate that. But McCormick Place wasn't even ready. The acoustics weren't ready. They didn't have a wooden floor down. You had to rent someplace else for the actors to, for the dancers to rehearse. And they just ran out of money flying the whole company to Chicago and putting 'em up in the hotel ran through all the money. Before they opened, they were broke and asking me to call Dave Garroway and see if he could come up with some more money. Dave Garroway couldn't help us because he had put us on the air, and that would have been a conflict of interest. He'd have been, you know, in hot water himself if that would have been possible. So the whole thing died there. But it had some very good songs. It was a good show. And it could have been a good--it'll still be good one day. Speaker 1: What was one of your favorite songs out of that show? Speaker 2: Well, 'Mr. Kicks' was, you know, from, from the standpoint of what, something that I've did, 'Mr. Kicks' and 'Hazel's Hips' were some--and 'World Full of Gray', those were songs that I put into my repertoire, were part of my act. Barbara Streisand and who else--Cindy Crawford--Randy Crawford, they've, they've done one of the song, 'Like a Newborn Child'. That's been recorded, I think [Billy] Eckstein did 'Mr. Kicks', and, but as far as my favorite, again, you know, that's kind of hard, you know. If you're talking about something that's funny and the audience loved it, if you do that, then 'Hazel's Hips'. If you're talking about something that's dramatic, then 'World Full of Gray'. If you're talking about something that hipped and swinging, 'Mr. Kicks'. So it's--and people ask me that kind of question all the time, what is your favorite? If you--how, that's like asking well, which is, which of your children do you love the most? I love them all, you know, for different reasons, they're different people. Story_ID: 4169 Speaker 1: Devastating, you said--well, because, yeah, it had taken years in the first place to write it [his play 'Kicks and Company]. It'd taken several months to raise the money. And I'd been on, in 'Time' magazine and 'Life' magazine, big pictures and stuff. And I was, you know--I remember I was playing Roberts Show Club [Chicago, Illinois] and the M.C. was saying, "Here now, ladies and gentleman, this young man who has written a play, which even before it opens on Broadway is guaranteed to be a hit." I used to stand back there and say, "I shouldn't let him say that." But it sounded so good (laughter). I let him do it. Anyway, it was, you know, it was a big disappointment. However, I was proud of the way I came out of that 'cause I had known some people, some people who had taken blows that weren't as hard as that, and it had crushed them, knocked them right out of the box. And I didn't let it do that to me. I just--I had been in the show business nine months. I just started a come back cause the money--after 'Kicks and Company', nobody wanted to know I was a has been. My show had, all this ballyhoo and now nothing. And so I just started working again. I started working with Miles [Davis] and Diz [Dizzy Gillespie] and whoever, you know, playing gigs with Nancy Wilson, went to London [England, United Kingdom]. And by this time, show business had begun to catch on to me. See, when Dave Garroway put me on, gave me the 'Today' show, he turned me over to some writers because we couldn't just do the play. We had to doctor it up so that it would fit their format. And so the writer said, "Did Dave read this play?" And I said, "No." He said, "Well, I didn't think so." You know, Dave had been taken with the songs and with my performance. I had charmed him. But like where 'Raisin in the Sun' was about integration and about upward mobility in to the white community, my play was saying, we don't want to get integrated into a burning house; that this whole system is messed up, and that we want, we're not demonstrating just to have a bigger pie--slice of the same ole pie. I mean that's how it turned out, but in my play, the aspiration was different. And when they saw that, it was a little radical--that was sort of shocking. And then just the, the general stuff. I had--'Brown Baby' was considered controversial by some people, you know. It wasn't to me, I was just holding him in my arms. He was a little baby. And I was singing my heart, and what I was hoping for. And I wasn't thinking politics particularly. But I was, I was--'cause I always was, but not--and it was art. And, and it was just a daddy, just talking, talking to his baby. Shoot, they considered that controversial. You know, they said, well, they didn't want me on the 'Ed Sullivan Show' because I was too "message-y". That was the word that I got. And the William Morris Agency said I wasn't commercial. Well, I was getting rave reviews everywhere I went. I was getting 'em from London and Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] and New York, everywhere. But the nature of the material was such that show business didn't really want that to happen. And so I found myself having a difficult time getting employment like a college concert tour or a record contract with a big company or any--you know, I would see people--like Bill Cosby's first gig was opening for me. You know, I'd kind of see them go up high. I remember taking Bob Dylan's songs to Columbia Records before anybody at Columbia Records had heard of him. I see Bob Dylan go. And I was still playing the little coffee houses getting door gigs. So I, we, you know, I was frustrated and all that behind that. But at the same time, I was getting what I deserved 'cause I was attacking the system. I was trying--I was using the art different. I mean I was not trying to just make a hit. I didn't even--I would have loved to have made a big hit, you know. But I couldn't even ever get myself to that. I was always, and there would be something to it that would give it a meaning or give it a message that the system just didn't want. And at first I was a big sensation, and then after a while, you know, they accustomed to that, and just put a damper on that. So it became necessary to find other ways of making a living. And I began working in, as an artist in residence like at Chicago State University [Illinois] and Malcolm X College [Chicago, Illinois] and Hunter College in New York. This would be when gigs were sort of hard to come by. But the something else would happen. Story_ID: 4170 Speaker 1: Well, we were working here in Chicago [Illinois]--let's see, I was working in New York. And then we got--lost that gig, and I'd, I had met a Brazilian named Luis Enrique. And he had taught me a lot of songs. So I brought him back to Chicago, and we worked on songs. And we got a whole bunch of stuff together, got him a record contract, and got a gig at the Troubadour in, in Los Angeles [California]. By this time, I had this girlfriend on the side, Jean [Pace], and she was a singer. And so I was trying to introduce her into show business, and making her the opening act. And by the time we got to the Troubadour, we got a little light musical revue going there with us. I mean instead of her being the opening act, and him singing by himself, we all sort of integrated the whole thing. And I was so pleased with it, I called George Marienthal who had three clubs here, the Happy Medium and the London House and Mr. Kelly's. And he flew out, and we made a deal and brought the show, 'Joy 66', we called it, back to Chicago. It ran at the Happy Medium, and it was hot stuff. We were sensational for a while there. And George said, "Well, let's open another, let's do another show." So we auditioned and I found a whole bunch of people, all races and everything. We did a show called 'Summer in the City'. And when it came time to put that on, George didn't want to go out to the Harper Theater [Chicago, Illinois]. And I--but he didn't have a better theater. And I, I couldn't renege on all these actors cause I'd have 'em in, work for six weeks, so we scraped together the money, and we were over there at the Harper Theater. And it was beaut-beautiful show. It was a musical revue called 'Summer in the City'. And at the same time, while I was auditioning to set up 'Summer in the City', I met Phil Corhan. He came with his band. Have you--do you know that name? Speaker 2: I don't know Phil Corhan. Speaker 1: Oh, put that down. Phil Corhan, ooh, he definitely should be--talk about a HistoryMaker. Speaker 2: Is he here? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Is he here in Chicago or is he--? Speaker 1: He's in Chicago. He's in Chicago, yes. In fact, we have the same grandchild, you know. His, his daughter and my son, Bobo and, and Areega (ph.). But Phil came with this band. I was so impressed with it. He had Master Henry Gibson and, oh, Ealee Satterfield, all really good guys. And I, I couldn't, I couldn't use his band, but I told him about Paul Laurence Dunbar. He hadn't heard of Dunbar, and I got him a book, and, and commissioned him and gave him money so he could just sit down. And he came back with just dynamite stuff. So we wound up putting this on in the, in the schools for about twelve weeks. And it was so successful--they never did that again. They fired the guy who hired us at the Board of Education for doing that cause the principals and the students and the teachers just loved it. And it was a very effective show about Dunbar's poetry. Jean had costumed it beautifully, and it just was a very colorful thing the kids loved. Story_ID: 4171 Speaker 1: At the same time, the Blackstone Rangers were happening. When I was doing the show 'Somewhere in the City', one of the problems that I had with [George] Marienthal, he didn't want to put any money into this neighborhood because the, there were gangs out here. And so I went to see the gang. And I told them ultimately, when I finally got to them--that took some doing, that they were stepping on my hustle, you know, and I would like to, you know, address whatever the hell it was that they were--their problem was cause I'm trying to make a living out. And they're making it very difficult. So they began to describe the problems that they were having as poor, black, permanent black underclass in Chicago [Illinois]. And, of course, I was kind of familiar with that, and I wound up telling 'em, well, the only thing I could do for you, I could put on shows. We put on shows. So we could put on a show, say at the church, where they have the big thousand-seat church, we could put on a show for--then you sell the tickets, and you'll be into something else. And if you do that good, maybe Mahalia [Jackson] or Ramsey [Lewis] or some of the other Chicago acts will let you do it, and you all in this, whole 'nother thing. So they were dragging their feet at first on this idea. They had said they wanted to do it. But I said, "So, well, are you interested really?" And so they said, "Well, some of us got talent. Can we be in the show?" So I said, "Oh, Lord, a bunch of amateur doo wops is the last thing I wanted to present." But these were the Blackstone Rangers. So you had to--they did not take rejection all that easy. So, and you had to be very careful how you talked to them. So I said, "Well, let me see how you got--what you got?" And they had so much talent in their ranks that the idea of doing the show for them was replaced by the idea of doing the show with them, of them. And so 'Opportunity, Please Knock', was the name of that show. And it was just a musical revue that involved the young people themselves. It was material that they had taken off the radio or stuff that they had written, some original things and some of my stuff sprinkled in. And it was just vibrant. But again, you couldn't get any support. I didn't know that this was subversive. The police don't want you do that. The police don't like the gang. The police get money for being gangbusters. They get overtime if there's a real--lot of work. And they get a chance to beat up on people they don't like anyway. They didn't like them niggers, and so this, this, this is where they want them. And you coming in here and trying to make some kind of cultural movement with political overtones because we were always talking the, cut off your process and, you know, quit kowtowing to white folks and be, you know, be your own man. And when the lady see, when she gets off the bus and sees you, she should feel secure, not threatened. You know, what the hell are you doing. So this was our whole--we were having this kind of battle. Meanwhile, we would have to have a, make a truce, establish a truce with the, the other gangs. And the police would let some gang member out who was, was not part of that, and he'd come and do some atrocious act, and we'd have that all to do again. And so I discovered that, that, one, the University of Chicago had instituted this group and was mentoring them, having sessions with them at the university, with the gang members to--and giving them money to, so, and if they beat up your kid today and got put in jail, they'd be out tomorrow and back at school. And you'd move. You'd have to get your kid out of there because now, who--the guy who beat him up, and you had jailed is back. And so that was going on. They were sicced on the bourgeois kids in the neighborhood in order to drive those homeowners out of there because the University of Chicago did not want East Woodlawn to remain black as long as West Woodlawn has because it's still in fairly good shape. It's been there for a long time. It's kind of getting seedy now. But they could anticipate that as Negroes began to move east of Cottage Grove [Avenue], all the way over to Stony Island [Avenue], that that whole area would have been black, and right adjacent to the University of Chicago. So the University of Chicago controls everything within, I'm sure, a fifteen, twenty-mile radius. I mean literally and physically controls all that stuff. So nothing culturally or, or business wise much happens in the community that they don't want to see, see to have happen. So you get an institution like the Museum of Science [and Industry, Chicago, Illinois]--of African--. Speaker 2: DuSable [Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah, DuSable, yeah. Well, that's run by people who work for corporate America. And so when the African festival comes, they bar their doors and put up a fence so there can be--what, if you were interested in black, why would that--they have more people for the African festival than they have in the museum all year. This would be a chance for them to really shine and, and bring people in and introduce this thing. But they are not interested in that. Chicago and most cities have, for some reason a policy, a public policy that is just racist. And this is, is I believe developed in the universities. It's developed at the highest level of thought. And I can imagine why. If I was one of the fifty richest people in the world, I would be in the conspiracy with the other forty-nine to make sure that we stayed there. And we would employ all this enormous money that we had to hire the best minds everywhere to come up with the best possible schemes that they could to deal with us. And that's what going on now. So that--but it, but it doesn't seem to make sense except maybe somebody understands something that I, that, that, that we don't know. Story_ID: 4172 Speaker 1: It is so apparent that black people are talents. It is so apparent that there has been no dance invented by the white people in America since there's been an America, none that are popular, widely popular. There's been no musical style, like jazz or bebop or anything. White people are hung up--anything that has a beat, they don't even consider it classical. If it has a, any kind of tempo, 'cause they don't have the tempo, they don't have the rhythm, they don't have that going for them. And it's apparent that we do. It's apparent when you look at the National Basketball Association. It's apparent when you look at the National Football League. It's apparent when you look at gold metal in, in racing and sprints and all that stuff. It's apparent when you look at boxing. Say, now, why, what's the problem? Why wouldn't you bring this in? Why do you insist on keeping this down? Why wouldn't this benefit you? Why wouldn't you go partners with this? Why do you have the, the John Hancock [Center, Chicago, Illinois] building looking down here on Cabrini-Green [Chicago, Illinois] as if it's away somewhere, as if it's a, a third-world country. And it's right here. You have to have poverty in order to feel enjoyment with your wealth? Is that what it is? You're mad. There's something really wrong, sick wrong, with the whole concept of that because it doesn't make--it's not cost effective. Why, if it only cost this amount of money to educate somebody, and it cost that amount of money to incarcerate them, would you vote for incarceration? Where is the sense in that? And these are the people who are at the highest levels, who are setting public policy at the universities and who discuss what is gonna happen with the presidents and the senators and all these people who make laws and policy. How can this be? I got into a very interesting study. I was at the Chicago State University as an artist in residence. So somebody appointed me and made a big mistake and commissioned me to write a paper on black music, paid me money. So I took it very seriously, and took as my premise, 'It Don't Mean a Thing (If It Ain't Got that Swing)', as an essential explanation of what black music is. So I went to the library, and I looked up "swing", cause this is supposed to be a scholarly paper, and as it turned out, "swing" is harmonic motion. And so I said, hum, and that--it's an energetic function that is so efficient that all energy moves in harmonic motions from wave--in waves from crest to crest, and trough to trough; light waves, sound waves, water waves, microwaves, everything moves in harmonic motion. And every molecule of matter is in harmonic motion. And I, who had really been bored to tears with physics, I was really fascinated suddenly. And I started conjecturing. I could see what the harmonic motion of the sun's rays does to the harmonic motion of the epidermis. It's a dramatic change. So it would stand to reason that the harmonic motion of sound waves would impact just as dramatically on some unseen molecular structure in the human organism. And that because they had danced and song to the drums from millennia, that African people would be as drum burned as they were sunburned, and would have a with--a proclivity to rhythm and dance that other people didn't have, simply because of the repetition of that practice for so many granddaddies, for so many generations. And that this would account for why we take over the skill positions in football, why we win the gold medals in the sprints and all, and these things. And why we jump double dutch? And I really got fascinated by double dutch because jumping double dutch which is two ropes, rotated in opposition, that seems to me to be the most sophisticated response to temporal stimulus. Girls who could jump two ropes at the same time, and then some times abstract that and, and then turn somersaults within and do all kinds of stuff. That--I can't even imagine a machine, a computer, nothing that could--because there's a random factor to all of that, you know, this, these are not machines. It's not hitting the--. So, how, what is that about? How could they do it? So I was investigating that for a little while and trying to do--I was gonna do computer mock-ups so that we could see what muscles, what sinews, what tissues, did this, that. But then I was talking to her about this early this year, and this girl I was talking to, the woman, she started doing like this, you know, going back and forth bobbing. I said, "What are you doing?" She said, "I'm going to jump in." I said, "What do you mean?" She said, "When there's an end of rotation, there's a spot in which you have to jump in. You can't just enter. And you have to sense that." So now, this was really fascinating 'cause where--what you have here, this one rope turning is one dimension. Another rope turning by itself is another dimension, but when you combine them, you create a dimension that is neither one or the other, and that only exists in the combination. You drop one rope, and it's not there. And in order to enter that, you have to find a point that I call a beam of equity, a point in that rotation that allows you in or out. And having accomplished the entry, you then immediately have to square that movement in order to remain there. And if you do what they call "popping up", then you have to square the square so that you're up to the, the sixteenth of that dual dimension while you're--by the time you're in there. What is that? What does science call that? How do you measure that, you know? And who can do it? Why can some people do it and oth-other people can't do it? Because just wanting to, doesn't happen. If you go in the black community, you'll see little girls doing that just as recreation. There are some white kids and Asian kids who can do it, but they accomplish it more or less like a, an athletic event, not just a natural, fun thing that you're doing in the hood. So there's some clock ticking in Africa's children that does not tick in the physiology's of other people. So I said, wow, now. In the physics of other people. So what is that? Where does that come from? Well--equilibrium comes from, from balance. And that's in your inner ear. So there's something in the inner ear of the African people that, that gives them this balance. And you can see it in their movement. You can see in their ability to dance. You can see it in the way they carry themselves. You can see it in their skin. There's a buoyancy that has come into black people that enables them to deal with gravity in a more profound way than anybody else. And this is demonstrable, you know. Now, when you talk about gravity, now this, this is really fascinating. But gravity and jumping rope--somebody told me there's a string theory, that now they, they think that there's superstrings in physics, and that everything in the universe is hooked up with these superstrings. So I got the book on superstring theory, elegant, 'The Elegant Universe', by--in there, they start to say, "Well, now, we understand the universe. The universe is made up of four elements. There's the electromagnetic. There's the strong force, the weak force and gravity. We understand everything about electromagnetic force and we know what the strong force and the weak force are. But we don't understand gravity. However, this is how the universe works." I said, well, wait a minute, hold it. You can't describe a four-legged chair if you don't understand one of the legs. They know what gravity does, but they don't know what gravity is. So I started from the conjecture of this double dutch thing. The fact is now, these ropes are rotating, and it's sending out messages, you know. The girl gets a message from the ropes as to when to jump in. Having jumped in, she knows when she can jump, she can pop up. She knows, and these--this information is delivered faster than the speed of light, 'cause she can't look at the rope and get in. She has to sense it. And so I'm saying that this balance information comes by implication that takes no time at all, whereas in light, travel at the speed of a hundred and eighty six thousand miles a second, balance information comes in no time. It doesn't go through time and space. And that the only thing that mitigates with, with, with gravity is balance, that if you walk in a dark room and you fall down, and you open your eyes, that's not gonna stop you from falling. Shouting is not gonna break your fall. Nothing--you got to have balance, and that information has to come to you without any delay. You got to get that right away. So that really has fascinated me that the reason--so, 'cause I, you know, further into conjecture, by the point where you jump up, or say a, an athlete is springing, there's a point at which the upward thrust stops, just before gravity takes over. In other words, there's a point of equilibrium, a balance point. Michael Jordan had the equilibrium to stay on that point longer because of his African root and his personal talent. And I believe that that is the thing that contributes to our excellence in doing things that challenge gravity in rhythmic way. We have that going for us. And that, when you look at what gravity is, gravity is God in disguise, operating right before your eyes, coming with a tote to tug on any load you lug, any way you carry weight, gravity will aggravate. And it's, if gravity is God, hiding out, although always around and about, with no need to appear to make known its presence here. Gravity is the serene evidence of things unseen. And it permeates everything you do in life. The reason that you have to have energy is so you can lift yourself from where gravity holds you. That means you have to fuel your engine. That means you have to take a life because something's got to die every day for you to live. Something, you got to get something fresh, whether it's vegetable or animal, you got to get it. And if you don't, you have no choice in the matter. And gravity requires that we do this because gravity holds us here. But in order to deal with gravity, in order to take a step, in order to run, in order to walk, in order to do anything, in order to work to get the very fuel that you need to continue working, you have to deal with gravity. And it permeates the whole thing. And we act like, see, it's, it's not here. If you fall, you don't blame gravity. You don't say, damn it, gravity. You blame yourself for being clumsy or the, whoever left the skate or if the baby falls out of the window, you don't, you don't blame gravity. You blame whoever left the window open or whoever let the baby at it. But gravity determines everything. There's no prayer that any party with any faith can say to any deity that's going to change any of the laws of gravity at all. I don't care who you pray to, you cannot walk out the window. You better go down the stairs, you know. And you can't go without sleep. You got to get your rest. Gravity demands that you revitalize the engine for at least six or eight hours every day. Otherwise, you can't function. Gravity will take you down, and you will fall asleep. Speaker 2: So, this is what I asked, Mr. Brown. So you--? Speaker 1: What did you ask me that, that set me off on that (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, because it was, well, you were telling the story about Chicago State and how someone commissioned you--. Speaker 1: Yeah, to do this story. Speaker 2: To do this--. Speaker 1: Paper. Speaker 2: This paper, and that--out of that came this. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And so let me, let me--I have a couple questions. Well, these seem almost irrelevant (laughter). Well, let me ask you about that. So this, this is--how long--when was this study commissioned? Speaker 1: When was the study commissioned? Oh, you mean the paper? Speaker 2: The paper, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Oh, that was, about 1983, 1982. Story_ID: 4173 Speaker 1: Balance is to gravity as light is to dark. By that I mean light does not destroy darkness. It just offsets it. You remove the light, darkness is right there. Balance does not off--does not destroy gravity. It just offsets it. You take away the balance, gravity takes over. Now, if, as a result of their African experience, black people have a balance that is superior--we're talking about something that relates to a profound physical force that permeates everybody's life at all times, in all kinds of ways, you know. (Laughter) I've used the example of, you can't get a woody without fighting gravity. That is an assault on gravity. You have to, the, the thought, the, the physic thought has to create a physical reaction. And that, you know, it happens in others. You can angry because you hear something or you feel mellow because you hear something. You, these--but, but it causes a, a reaction. So I'm saying that gravity is important and that balance is the only thing that really, that mediates with balance. And that the most balanced people are evidently, demonstrably when it comes to music and when it comes to sports and those activities that really give people a thrill, that we're the ones who lead the way in--with that. And that if we would but realize that, if we recognized what it is, what a powerful gift this is, we're talking about something that relates to the cosmos because when you look out into the universe, you see all these planetary bodies, all these astro bodies movies in, in rotation, in perfect agreement with each other, with equilibrium determining their movement and their distance from each other. And without that, there's chaos. If there's an imbalance, nature immediately rushes to solve that imbalance. And so I believe that as the people with the most exquisite balance, that is up to us to become aware of who we are and what we are and to cool it. If you've got balance, when dealing with a person who is awkward, don't be awkward; don't emulate the clumsy. If you've got finesse, work the finesse. And this is what we have. In dealing with the problems that we have in the world, I believe that the, the weapons that are being used are the wrong weapons; that if you are fighting ugliness, then you use beauty. If you are fighting lies, then you use truth. If you're, if you're--if you're trying to create harmony, then you don't use discord. You don't come--and you don't think that you're gonna bring peace by violence, because violence creates victims who have survivors who want revenge and that just keeps on going and going and going. There's no end. I just was in Cuba, and, you know, you saved the people forty-one years ago. When do you put down the guns? When can the people go, be free to go? When can everything just be cool? Yeah, I was, I was for socialism. I was, I was a communist. I was glad when [Fidel] Castro came on. But when I looked at that, Jesus, what is the plan here? What is the program? Why are you keeping 'El Duque' [Orlando Hernandez] from pitching with [New York] Yankees? I mean you ain't got nothing for him. And why don't you cut--negotiate the contract and take some of the money and help some of the poor people you got here in Cuba? I don't understand that dog-ass attitude you taking about this. They got cops here on the corner, you know. Why is the reefer higher than it is in Chicago [Illinois]? You live in the tropics. What are you doing? Why are, you know, if it wasn't for the rumba, I don't know what they'd be doing over there. The rumba really seems to be saving the people. You know, it, it, they got that spirit. They got that buoyancy in their lives that is kind of unbelievable. The Russians needed the rumba more than they ever needed anything they got from Russia. They ought to be on satellite selling the rumba to everybody. They didn't need to build that coun--that, that island up as a gambling den, and have skanks out there on the street. They didn't have to have that. That never was a good idea, not for Cuba. I saw the sun come up out of the ocean one morning and go back down in the ocean in the same place. I'm on the same island. I've seen it go up and come out and never in the same place. You know, same ocean. That's gorgeous. I would sell that to everybody. I'd say, here's a chance to see sun up and sun down right around, around, around the corner. And here's a chance to live in urban--in cabanas that are built out of our natural stuff. And here's a chance to see nature. And I don't understand what it is--you know, when you're young, you think you know. Ah, yes, if we just had the socialist revolution; if we just overthrow the ruling class; if we just--but the older you get, some of that seems still to some appeal, but then on the other hand, you can see, man, I don't know how this is ever gonna be solved. I mean they're so mixed up here. And it's certainly worth trying something different. Let's try, let's try and have a revolution of the human heart. Let's have a revolutionary revolution, where we try and change the way people think about each other, the way they--because if they would emulate the cosmos, then they would be looking for balance. If, and if you start looking for balance in your life, you don't need a leader. See, you can start that personally. And you can make progress personally. And you can find yourself with more balanced crowd than the one that you might be with. And the more balanced the crowd you're with, the more balanced your life is gonna be. And I think it is just, you know, we have to--there's no quick solution. There's no quick fix. All these things took eons to, and, you know, and generations to get messed up. And the solution isn't going to be easy or overnight. But we need to look in a different direction, we got to look in a different direction. Black people, first of all, need to get back on rhythm, their own rhythm. They used to have a rhythm that talked to the gods. That's why they were drumming. That's why they were chanting. And they were getting results. There was a reciprocal, there was a response from that, that encouraged them to keep doing that for thousands of years. And that didn't--they didn't abandon that. That got overthrown with slavery and colonialism. But the communication, the lines of communication are still there. They never got shot down. The gods are still there. The forces are still there. And the ways to reach them are still there if we get back on, on the tempo that is us, instead of just a, a thud that is just benumbing our children without harmony, without tonality and with bellicose, you know, narcissistic, profane messages. A deliberate effort is being made to deprave the children. And they'll start with the black children, but after a while, I look around, and all the little white girls are doing the doggy-style on--I, Jesus Christ, do you see what you're doing? Where is the nobility? Let's get back to my parents' generation. Where is the, the tenderness? Where is the dignity? How do you, why do you want to look like a man? Why do you want to want to talk like a man? You're a woman. And that was one, you know, I, there are, I'm sure there're great adjustments that needed to be made. But don't throw out the baby with the bath water. Don't throw out--don't abandon femininity, my Lord. Why would you do that? That's what I really dig. And I would imagine that a woman, you know, digs masculinity. Why would she want to be masculine when she's a woman? So there's a, a screwiness to the thing, which at seventy-three, you know, I could have, well shoot, I got out of it, you know. These--my life has been cool, and it's damn near over, and now everything--but I got all these grandchildren. And I just don't want to see the rats win. I mean by the rats, I mean these crazy people. Here is George [W.] Bush, signed a bill so you can carry a gun in church and in the nursing home. Well, what is that George? What do you think about him? Who is he gonna shoot? Jesus, Mary? The acolytes? The choir? I mean why are we are carrying guns in church? Why, what are you doing? I've, you know, if I had the answers, hell, I wouldn't be sitting here talking to you. So I, I--obviously, I don't know the, how this--but I think--and what I want to do, I've written hundreds of songs. And I've always tried to have them be good songs. I mean I never threw a--a potboiler, and I'll just give them away. I can't spend all the money. I'm not after collecting all the money. Everybody tell you, well, you know, you got to make money. I made it. I got all these companies. I didn't have to pay anybody for 'em. I didn't have to--and I own them. I can give them to the world. And I would rather create a currency that is gonna change the way people think rather than the currency that our kids are hooked on now. You've got to come up with some--a better tone with a better thought. And it's working that way. I mean there, there are things against us, but there are things for us. The whole communications thing, you know. Bob Johnson can't last always. We gonna get by that. And we gonna have good cable. He doesn't, you know, that, what he's doing. Now, I was gonna say, he should be incarcerated, if not shot for just selling out his people like that. And, but the, there's so much of that goes on. There's so--there's so much devoted to the fashion show and to the, you know, to the nonsense. I got my own nonsense, you know. I guess people who don't like football would tell me I'm wasting my time at the tube watching the [Chicago] Bears or watching baseball. And everybody's got their, their desires, but it seems to me that, that the thing, the direction in which entertainment is going, the, the stuff they lay on the children, they're deliberately trying to deprave them. There's a line in Shakespeare where Antony discovers Caesar's body, and he says, "A curse will light upon the limbs of men; domestic fury and fierce civil strife shall cumber all the parts of Italy; death and destruction shall be so in use and dreadful objects so familiar that mothers will but smile to see their infants quartered by the hands of war, all pity choked with custom of felled deeds". And our society is being choked with custom--pity is choked as we are being made accustomed to blood and violence and viciousness and all that stuff. And I'd say, let's fight 'em, let's fight 'em. Let's get, let's mount some attack. Let's bring up--where they're using intimidation, let's come with joy, you know. Where they come--where they're using ugliness, come with beauty. Where they're using disharmony, let's come with harmony. Where they're using the harsh tone, let's come with the mellow tones. Let's this thing, be actively attacking it, and see what it is you have going for you. And you are the people of the, of the rhythm, of the drum, of the time, of the--and that works with gravity. And gravity is God. Story_ID: 4174 Speaker 1: What are your hopes for our community? Speaker 2: Our community? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you now, and this is getting kind of personal. I would very--taken with the space you have downstairs, I'd like to have a comparable space like that. I don't want to be a club owner. I do not want to be concerned with the club owner. I want to be an artist in a club, in a place. But I would love to be able to take someplace like that and begin to put on shows. I begin--I believe the character of the shows that I have, if I were able to run, that they would explode out here, that people will come, with the word-of-mouth and everything, and that it would be possible to involve others into an activity. My aspiration would--I'd like to sock it to Chicago [Illinois], sonny. I mean, really would. I'm seventy-three years old. I've been batting around here for a long time. And I've made some enemies, but I've made some damn good friends. And there're a lot of people, I think, would assist this. There are a lot of people, sick of the sickness; sick and tired of being sick and tired. And I think that there's something should be done. And while I can have energy, I, look toward deep old age, I don't see anything all that attractive to me. So I'd just as soon go on out, you know, while I'm still, have the vigor and die in the, in the struggle. And the struggle, as I say, I'm not, I'm not--we came from kings and queens, but them kings and queens had some subjects and those subjects had something going for them. That's where the power came from, the root of the whole African race. And, hey, that is what we need to--because if we're the most balanced people, it's up for us to help the less balanced people. You are not gonna be able to have a situation in here where you're gonna leave these crazies and, and go sail off to some ivory tower. They'll come get you. They came and got you in the first place. That's how come you're here. You didn't come here by invitation. You didn't come here in order to find anything. So that means you're gonna have to cool out the bellicose people. You're gonna have to disarm the people who have the guns and want to kill everybody. And that's not gonna happen overnight 'cause it didn't start overnight. But let's go in that direction. Let's not go in the other direction because you can't have a dog-eat-dog society. That might have been cool at one point, but when you got nuclear weapons and chemicals and, you know, all these mass rocket, see and stuff, you can't act like that. You gonna, you gonna knock yourself off soon. And if it means anything to have been human, to have this experience, to have children, to have grandchildren and want to be on--see the thing go on, hell, let's, let's take on the crazies, actively take on the crazies. Let's address the--first of all, we got to get our children back in harmony. We got to get them back on rhythm. They got to get on time, you know. And they got to understand who they are, and what it is they're doing. They're--they have not just survived. They have taken over. They are--in those things that give people their most enjoyment, their concerned that the Olympics might upstage the presidential election because there's more interest in those kinds of things. And those things that give people their most joy, athletic competition, dance, music, singing, we are hot stuff in that. We have not only survived, we have led. We have become leaders. Why are we acting like losers? Let's wake up. Let's wake our children up. Let's start, wherever you are, with whatever you can do to start waking this stuff up. And I see all kinds of possibilities, Julieanna, I do--all over the city. There's places out here where they're--somebody's got a community--the Wyatts, they got a 500-seat house [Wyatt House, Chicago, Illinois]. Now, let's put a play on out there, you know. And let's put something on in this place. Let's put something on over here in this church that's across the street, the Eighth Church of Christ, Scientist [Chicago, Illinois], that don't have no people in it anymore. You know, 'cause they don't even have a choir stall, so you know they ain't gonna get over in a black neighborhood, with a church that ain't got no singing. So let's put something in there. Let's do something a little different. Story_ID: 4175 Speaker 1: How is Oscar Brown the person and the artist different from--how has that person sort of grown and changed? Speaker 2: Well, stuff hurts (laughter) that didn't used to hurt (laughter). Hurt, aches and pain come into it, you know. I don't run up the steps anymore, as I used to. Actually, I have become more radical, I believe. I used to think, you know, and most of the people I came up with got better as far as society was concerned, and they made their peace and their money. And then everything was cool. I have never been quite able to do that. So when I look at my whole thing, as a career, it's lousy. As a mission, that's something else. What was my mission? To do art, about the reality of where I was, you know, and to do it honestly and to, and to help the children, and find the talent that they have, and bring it out, extol beauty and instead of kissing God's ass all the time, do a little work on his behalf, you know. I'm--praise is kind--fine, but on the other, what have you done? So I believe that everybody has their concept of good and evil. I have mine, and, as I say, so long as I have the strength, I want to just pursue that. I've had a good time. I haven't made a lot of money now, you know, but I didn't ever tell anybody or promise anybody I'd make money. I just said I was gonna have a good time trying. And God knows, I have had a good time trying. I've done some marvelous things. I've been on Broadway with Muhammad Ali. They don't even want to talk about that. We had the fashion--the talent show that discovered the Jackson Five. You don't hear anything about that stuff, you know. I walked with [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] on one of his marches; done a whole bunch of things, knew these guys, sat down and talked to 'em. I had conversations with Malcolm [X] and had dinner with him on a couple of occasions, just him and talking. And so it's, I've had a wonderful life. Had I been the success that some of the people have come around me have been, then I might not have done some of what I did. I would have been too busy attending the awards banquets to go in there with the Blackstone Rangers. I'd have been too rich. I would have been scared that I, you know, couldn't talk, take my wealth among these young people. But the fact that I didn't have any wealth meant that I was able to go in there and do something of which I feel very proud. I think that, actually--this is gonna sound braggadocios, like a big dog, but I've accomplished every--so much in my life that it's lucky that I don't, that the people don't know about it cause I'd be having a whole big problem with just people on you, you know. When you--fame and fortune brings a very funky class of people into your life. And they're well dressed and well spoken, but they really will take you to court, you know, and they try to hurt you. And I found that going broke is a laxative for getting shitty people out of your life. When you look around and see who's with you when you're broke, that's who's with you. And that way, you can have a certain comfort with your surroundings, and get busy, get, and, and get to work. See, there's a lot of--I got, I've got some plays. I took 'Oedipus Rex' and rewrote that into Reconstruction times. And I've got musicals, book musicals, revues, a whole ton of stuff nobody's ever seen. I get praised for stuff people tell me, (clapping) what a fine job--you ain't seen half of it. You've only seen the tip of the iceberg 'cause most of it, I couldn't even figure out how to get it out there. I can't figure out anybody that would do stuff in the black community. Who's the producer? I know directors, I know the choreographers, I know musicals, I know actors and dancers and everybody--who's gonna take care of the business? Who's gonna have the, the acumen, the integrity to go before the people and say, you know, give me the money, and I'll take care of it. I'll put up the show, and you'll make your money. Who's gonna do that? Who does it in New York? You know, you got Spike Lee now, and some of these young guys coming along, you know. That's a, that's new. That's over there in the movies, and I'm not even--I'm--I started out in the theater, and I never did get too tough into the movies. There--I have hope, I have hope. I have, I have hope and I have energy. And I've seen things developing, hey, the way the mp3 and Napster. And they're putting music out--people are hitting on my music more than porno, hey. And I knew, I knew. Free the music, and the music will free us because no other species of, of life makes music, that I can think of. I mean they might make sounds, but when you consider what, what music does, how it can move you, how it can take you off, you know, all forms of it; what Charlie Parker did and Ludwig van Beethoven did, I mean all--these, these cats. And where did it come from? Where is it? It's out there. It's out in the cosmos. They're able, somehow, to send out a signal, and bring the music, put it in a horn and give it to you and no time passes. That's--if we got that talent, let's develop that. Let's look into that. Let's look, investigate it. I'd love to have a research grant so we could do double dutch research, so we could see how the rotation of those ropes matches with the rotation of the moon and the sun and the earth; how they overlap, and whether they're back points, as those balance beams and can--whether or not we might be able to send messages by implication without any passage of time. There's all kinds of things to be looked at. And--. Speaker 1: Let me ask, what--do you consider yourself an artist, an entertainer or a musician? Speaker 2: Well, what's the difference? Speaker 1: Well, I'm asking. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm--. Speaker 1: Some people distinguish between them. We [The HistoryMakers] even have categories, MusicMaker, EntertainmentMaker, ArtMaker, and as I'm talking to you, you know, there are overlaps, but some people would clearly say they fit in one category versus the other one. Speaker 2: Well, I don't. I mean I have--I write to give the singer, the actor something to do. And I direct because I want to see it come out the way I want to see it come out. And I, I love performing. I love, I'm hooked on standing ovations, and I love to just, to work an audience. I love to go and--I just have a good time doing all that. I don't know of any one aspect that--people ask that, kind of all the time, but it all flows one into the other thing. It's like, you know, it--there's no difference. I see myself as an artist who is a writer, who is a singer, who directs, and is involved politically in, in life and is a poet and a philosopher. And that's just, that's one guy, which is kind of a pain in the ass in some respects because if I'd been one thing, I'd have pursued that, perhaps, and just, you know, been a real success at that. But I'd be doing this and doing that and doing this and doing that. And it, you know, sometimes confused myself. Story_ID: 4176 Speaker 1: You've spent time in a lot of different places, though Chicago [Illinois] is your home, and I, and I've been struck a lot of times by, you know, interviews that I've done, that I feel that Chicago was way more vibrant than in the '60s [1960s], in the time, during the period from that point. There was a lot of talent coming out of here, and a lot of things happening out of here. And, you know, a lot of times, you know, when I first moved here people were, you know, I mean it was real--people even wanted to go to New York or--. Speaker 2: When was that? Speaker 1: I moved here twenty years ago. Speaker 2: '80 [1980]. Speaker 1: And I wonder, you know, what, what your thoughts, you know, are--I mean, one, did New York have any influence on you, you know, that Chicago hadn't? And did L.A. [Los Angeles, California]? And--. Speaker 2: When I first went to New York, I used to resent New York. I had that second city attitude, you know. And I was from Chicago, and why was New York getting it? Man, after a while, I just, hey, give it up, buddy. New York is now, you know. Everything that's sort of trying to happen in other places, is happening in New York as far as music was concerned and the theater was concerned. That's where you had to go for the area that I was interested in life. So I've always thought New York was hipped. Chicago has the advantage of being home, so I know where more buries--bodies are buried here. And I know what, you know, how it, how this works. Los Angeles is pretty cool, and I know my way around the streets of a whole bunch of places 'cause I've spent some time in San Francisco [California], and I can walk around in Washington, D.C. and not get lost and, you know, any more than I would in Chicago 'cause I can get lost here now. And it, it's changing so fast, you know. But I don't have any particular city. People--I'll tell you another question they ask you, "What audiences do you prefer? Do you find Chicago audiences different from New York?" Hey, audiences are audiences. It depends on how they, how old they are for the most part. Race has something to do with it. Black audience at the Apollo Theater [Harlem, New York] would be hippest audience you can find. They are spoiled. They've heard a lot of stuff. I don't know why they come up with nothing but the amateur hour at the Apollo. That's utterly ridiculous to me 'cause you got a well of talent there that you could draw from. And, and we have allowed ourselves to get off into just some little, I mean, Katherine Dunham, you know, look, how elegant her stuff was. I mean that was hot stuff. You know, that was nothing tacky about that. It was sexy and, and enjoyable. But, you know, that was hot stuff. Paul Robeson, the, the magnitude of his art. It was so enormous; Marian Anderson, those people, you know, Duke Ellington, Count Basie, the way they carried themselves, you know. And they were so marvelous. There's much more of that out there. Let's reach for it. Let's get it. Let's liberate ourselves and help the world because music kind of talks to people like nothing else does. Music, music moves you, moves your spirit. You can hear something today and, and twenty years from now, it'll bring that moment right back, something that you heard a long time--you remember what you were dressing and who you were with, and how you felt about it. Story_ID: 4177 Speaker 1: I wanted to talk to you about your relationship with Jean Pace because that was a long relationship, and a significant one. It was your longest, I think, but I, you know, in many ways, it was a partnership. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I met Jean on the night of the Cuban Missile Crisis when the Russian ships were coming and the American ships were waiting. And I thought that it was--people in California, and I was in California, they were running into the hills with canned goods. They thought it was gonna the end of the world. And Redd Foxx called me up and invited me that afternoon to his, his party. He was having a twenty-fifth anniversary in show business party. And at, at the club where he was playing, but I was playing myself. So I said, you know, "I don't get off till 2:00 either." So he said, "Well, then, after work, it's at my house." So I was sitting there at the house, and I was really depressed about the war. I was thinking, maybe I ought to just go on home, because, you know, what are you gonna do? Sit in the kitchen with the baby when the bomb goes off and what--so, my friends came by and said, "Well, let's go to that party that Redd Foxx invited you to." So I went there, and I was standing there eating chicken, and I turned around and saw Jean. And so that was--that changed everything. I was really taken with her. And I had, at that point, actually, I had been going through a sort of celibacy thing 'cause I was feeling guilt-ridden about, you know, fooling with chicks on the road. And I had been going through--but then, now, here it's gonna be the end of the world. What the hell am I, you know, what am I saving it for? You know, you might as well enjoy what little life there is 'cause you definitely don't have any control over this bull. So I started hitting on her, and pretty soon, she started kind of going out on the road with me, which was really good because, while I had a wife at home with the children, she couldn't be on the road. I mean if she came on the road for a week, she'd be nervous and antsy to get back to the kids. And on the other hand, if I was out there on the road by myself, I would go from being the star of the show to being the only person in the room in about forty-five minutes. So that was a drag, 'cause you up, and you've just kill them. And now they all gone home with they old ladies and shit, and you, and, and you can call up yours and run up the phone bill. But in those days television used to go off, around midnight, they'd start playing the 'Star Spangled Banner'. And so it would be a, kind--something of a drag on the road. The alternative was to hit on these ladies who would be available to you, but then you could get into some situations there that were really--you know, tenable. And I'd see--cats used to wind up making it with girls who if they hadn't been cats, they wouldn't even shake his hand. (Laughter) But they, you know, you'd be out there, and the whole rush for that bull. But Jean, in the first place, was gorgeous. And, you know, and with me and was, had good taste and everything and warded off all the groupies. I mean she was very strong on that. She did not allow any women. So that was good. I mean I had a woman on the road, and I had a woman at home, and I was fine. The only problem is, I couldn't keep that going because of friends and relatives. And all the women have friends and relatives. And, you know, "Girl, I wouldn't let that nigger do this." "Ooh, honey, I'd have him in court so fast." You know, and they would all be talking that stuff. And you'd be trying to get the thing together, and at certain, you could get everybody perfectly satisfied. Then it'd all go to hell again, and you'd be called upon to come to a decision. You can't have us both, you got to have one. So I wound up with Jean, of course, because I was working with Jean. And I was, by this time, we were putting on shows together, and we were--she was the star. I mean she had, she had come to being a star, and equal billing with me. And I didn't feel I was always giving her anything. She was, you know, when she came on the stage, everybody was knocked out. She was selling plenty tickets and she was very, very talented; good voice, danced, moved well, and had a great flair for costume and stuff. When it came to directing, she would be like the foul line. I mean she--I would be doing the hands-on work, but she'd be sitting out there telling me when I was messing up and, you know, what worked and what didn't work. So she was a great person to have for that. She had style. Her style was color. She really brought a color revolution to America. I mean up to that point, grandmas were wearing little gray, with little flowers on it. Then all of a sudden, plow! And we used to go to Fishman's [Fabrics] and other fabric stores and just buy the most lavish stuff that would, that you could get. So at the Blackstone Rangers show, that was just--there was just a festival of color. And she had nice flair for bell bottoms and stuff and all kinds of, the nice cuts and things. So I remember these little girls, these little sisters from the ghetto coming down in their costumes and looked like a beauty pageant. They were dolled up, and the fellows were standing, and jaws dropped on them because they looked so gorgeous. And she'd gotten--we'd talked them into letting us put colors on them cause they were wearing black berets and black jackets and dark sunglasses and scowling, you know. I asked a guy, one, one of the Blackstone Rangers, I said, "What are they thinking about?" We passed through a room of about a dozen of 'em, I said, "What are they thinking about when they looking at you like that?" He said, "Thinking about offing you." I said, "What?" He said, "Thinking about offing you." I said, "For what?" "Just thinking about offing you." I said, "Well, shit, they got to get something else on their mind 'cause it, you know, (laughter), they, they don't know what to think." So that was a, a problem with them. But, boy, we got them into colors, and we talked to them about cutting off the process, talked to 'em about the whole--well, I, at that point in, in, in time, I was for back to Africa. Story_ID: 4178 Speaker 1: I was on a back to Africa kick cause I didn't see how we were gonna--it didn't seem like they were ever gonna do us right here. And I said, "We might as well get the hell on out of here and go somewhere else." However, I came to conclusion that there was no point in going back to Africa broke, 'cause they sure got enough broke black folks over there now. So if we didn't go back with something, something, then there's no point in going back. And by the time you got something to go back home with, you could stay wherever you wanted to (laughter) cause you would have won, one hell of a political battle, and that you would have changed things. So I abandoned that go back to Africa thing. But it, they started to become--they became the Black P Stone Nation. They began, began to take a little political there--their thing was don't vote, 'cause I was, you know, forget electoral policies. And I'm still like that. See, I'll tell you another aspect of the thing. I haven't filed federal income tax since 1965. When I started working with the Stones [Blackstone Rangers], I went broke. And while--by the time, we finished that, when income tax time came, forget it. I ain't got no money, and I'm sick of the government. I'm sick of the country, I'm sick of the way the whole thing operates, and I am not interested. So then the next year, I was still in the same shape. So, by the third year or so, it started getting good to me. So I still didn't file any income tax. But I was scared. I was nervous. I'd pass by the Internal Revenue [Service, IRS] office, and I was scared they'd be out there, "There that nigger is". So, I--finally, in '77 [1977] Harold Washington ran for mayor. And I had a deal going with the city where I was doing a children's show, and the city was gonna pay me money. But when I went over there with Harold's campaign, they stopped answering my calls. And Harold lost so badly in 1977, I said to myself, well, man, you're messing yourself up. You think you so politically slick and everything, and with your vanguard of the working-class background and shit, but you are really costing yourself money. And you'd better figure out what the game is. So just about that time, a copy of the United States Constitution fell in my hands. And I started reading the Constitution. And I was amazed. First of all, the Constitution is not that thick a document. I've had William Morris contracts that were thicker than the, than the, and the Constitution. And I noticed I didn't see my name in there anywhere. I wasn't designated as anything. So now, if you don't have a name, you don't have a political identity, why, how--and this is the rule book. I thought three fifths of all other persons, but other than that, there's no reference. They talk about the Indians, and they talked about everybody, but they didn't talk about us. And so then I started really getting interested. I happened to go to Washington [D.C.] at that time, and I was near the Library of Congress. So I used to go up there and, and read a lot. I was particularly interested in the debate that had been around the Thirteen and Fourteenth amendments because somebody told me that [Abraham] Lincoln had had a plan for the slaves. But there was no evidence of that. I used to go up in the--what they called the Congressional Globe. You'd have to climb a ladder up there and these old books would be all yellowed from the 1830 and the Congress of 1867 and '68 [1868]. So I was reading that stuff, and I came to the conclusion that there was no way for me to be a citizen of the United States. If I read the Dred Scott Decision correctly, he said, you know, how did they, in the Fourteen amendment, decide all persons born or naturalized in the United States are subject to the jurisdiction thereof are citizens of the United States? How did that apply to Sterling Price Brown? He was born in 1860. He was a thing. He wasn't a person. He didn't have--he wasn't under the subject of the jurisdiction of the United States. When Dred Scott went to the court, they said, no. You can't petition us 'cause you don't exist as a petitioner. So how do I, all of a sudden now, to suit the political whim of the white folks, become a person whose political lot is cast, without question, with him. That's nonsense. I'd say, that's like a woman marrying her rapist. Why would I even want to do that? You can't discuss marriage counseling in that context. You all messed up in the first place. How did I get here? Why did I get here? Why do I want to be with you? Why do I have to listen to what your opinion is? Why are your enemies my enemies? Why am I giving you any portion of my money after my ancestors slaved all this time to make your country rich, and you're holding it against me. I can't take that. So I'm not gonna give you any more money. [The] IRS came over. I talked to 'em, you know. "I don't owe you." Said, "Well, you know, come to our office with your lawyer and your records." I say, "I don't talk to people I don't owe about money I don't owe 'em. So if you want to talk to me, you'd better bring the marshal and some handcuffs 'cause I ain't coming. And I'm not ever gonna give you any money of, of my volition." And so they haven't wanted to talk to me about that because--whoa, what happened. One time I got word that they were holding a, a warrant for my arrest, that they were holding up delivering it as a courtesy to give me a chance to clear this matter up. So I said, "I ain't never heard of the police being courteous." I mean if they can bust a loud mouth like me, they would just jump in here and have me, and I don't have any money to satisfy what they want anyway. So, let's see how courteous they're prepared to be. So they were courteous so damned long, I realized they don't have a case 'cause I had made no effort to meet their demands. And yet, they haven't made good their threat. They haven't come and busted me. So I started calling them up. I started, "Oscar Brown Jr. isn't paying taxes. I think it's a damn shame. Why don't you do something about it," and said, "Nah, I don't want the, the reward. Just get him." They've never called me. I didn't ever get anybody. One time Jane Byrne, you know, the girl, she gave me two hundred thousand dollars to put on a show, fifty thousand dollar warrants, four of 'em. So that rang a bell to the IRS office. They came out, and sent a lady over there to see me about that. She's talking about, "How much money did you make last year?" I said, "What has that got to do with you?" I said, "Whatever, it wasn't enough, but I didn't try to keep track of it so I could give you any of it because I just don't see how black people owe white people money. Who told you I was gonna give you any money? Who did you ask? And what did you do with the last money I gave you?" I said, "I know what you did with it. You hired somebody to tell me to make sure I didn't get out from under this bullshit, and I am not gonna pay for his lunch money anymore. I'm not gonna give you his cleaning. He's gonna have--you all have to take--I can understand what you're doing, but you gonna have to take care of that yourself, 'cause I am not gonna cooperate with you in oppressing me. In fact, you already owe me so much money and so aren't willing to pay it, that for me to hand--give you another nickel just adds to your problem. It aggravates your problem, and you--cause it's already out of control. You don't want to pay me anything." Speaker 2: So, you're saying you haven't paid that then? Speaker 1: 1960--19--1965. Speaker 2: My God, that's amazing. Speaker 1: It is, isn't it. Speaker 2: That is pretty amazing. Speaker 1: Now, why? You know, my father [Oscar Brown Sr.] and I used to discuss that, you know--. Speaker 2: Why? Speaker 1: Well, I'd say because I, I'm right. I'm asking them, take me to court. Prove to me that you made Sterling Price Brown a citizen of this--this country without his having any voice in it at all, from being a person--a non-person. How did you do that? Do I read this right? Is it what it says here, is that what [Judge Roger] Taney, in, in that opinion, is that what he meant? Well, how in the hell can I, how you talk to me about being a citizen of the organization that is responsible for my kidnap? Story_ID: 4179 Speaker 1: You had mentioned earlier your love affair with hats. Speaker 2: Oh, did I, did I finish answering about Jean [Pace]? Speaker 1: No, you didn't finish answering about her. Speaker 2: Oh, all right, well, Jean, I just told you about some of the stuff, and what she did. So we just, you know, we stayed together, and we put on shows. We put on 'Joy 66', and while we were doing that, we got involved with the Blackstone Rangers and 'Opportunity, Please Knock', 'The Lyrics of Sunshine and Shadows', 'The Dunbar One', and 'Summer in the City'. She costumed that stuff, and we were really going strong. She got sick in 1974, and she wasn't the singer after that, that she had been. She still likes to sing some--I mean she likes to do it, but she lost timing and she began not to remember lyrics, and her performance just was not as strong as it had been. And I'm pretty high bound about that, I mean it's got to be up here and I can't, I can't make allowances for anybody. I can't make allowances for myself when it come to the arts. You, you got to be sober and you got to be rested and you got to be ready to do what you're supposed to do. And so she, she just sort of lost it. But in the same time, you know, we were together. We would be together and back. We were back and forth. And sometimes she'd be living somewhere else; sometimes I'd be living somewhere else. But we had a little girl, and that hung us together, Africa [Brown]. And we're still in the same ball of confusion we always were. She was over today, and Africa and the babies, and we're still in there. It's an unusual life, but let me tell you, walking through, walking down Broadway [New York, New York] with Jean Pace in the '60s [1960s] was an adventure, boy. The cats would, ooh, she was turning heads. And she was a sensational woman. And I've known a few sensational women, Abbey Lincoln out there. I've always been a great admirer of Abbey Lincoln. And there's a lady here named Rose Simpson, a Chicago [Illinois] lady, and powerful, in the packing house worker, and activists, just excellent--I like women. It's changed now, you know, as I get older, I'm not the Romeo I was. But I still, I, I really like--I used to, when I was a kid, I used to say, I don't have any women friends because the conversation would always be the man, woman conversation. If it wasn't, why, what are we talking about? You know, I couldn't talk to her about things I talk to the cats about. And so, but now, as I've gotten older, I find there's something in the, in the outlook, you know, now that you're mellow. You've seen life, and she's seen it, but just another way, and it's the combination of it that makes, ah, wow, what a picture. So it's, it's pretty cool, and Jean and I are all right. We're still good friends. Speaker 1: Did you say you got married after thirty years? Speaker 2: Yeah, we got married in 1992. Speaker 1: Okay, did it last very long? Speaker 2: Well, we ain't divorced yet. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). I always wonder, you know, when people have been together a long time, and they get married, and then it doesn't last. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--. Speaker 1: I find that--. Speaker 2: --we didn't--we, we could have gotten married earlier, and it would have ended like that. But, and I mean by the time we got married, that wasn't happening either. And, but, you, you're right. And the people who'll be pressuring you to get marry, really want you to get married so you can get divorced. What they really want to see is your break up (laughter). That's, I've found out--like people will rush to help you when you're dead, who would be of no assistance while you were alive to succeed, before their very eyes. It's--it would hurt them. So I'm counting on, on death to really get me over, without having to sign a whole lot of autographs and have people shaking my hands while I'm trying to eat dinner. Story_ID: 4180 Speaker 1: What have hats represented to you? Speaker 2: Hats. Speaker 1: Why did you like hats or you have so many hats? Speaker 2: Grew up, your style, just as a style. When I was coming up, certain kind of hats, you, you just felt like--I mean that was the, in Chicago [Illinois]--when you get out to California, the cats don't wear hats like that. But in Chicago, for the first place, it was cold a large part of the year. But there was this, a whole style thing of the, of the rhythm of it. When I started performing, I used to get Dobbs, a certain kind of hat that would slick on stage, and then I could pull it down and, and mess with it, and you would recover. I might have had some pictures on, on a couple of those hats. But I used to--it was just a, a style thing. I still like 'em. I still don't feel all that dressed without a hat, some kind of hat, you know. I even got one now.. It's around here somewhere, in my pocket here. It's, yeah, just in case something happens, and I have to--. Story_ID: 4181 Speaker 1: What do you want, what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Well, I want my work out. I want the songs out. I want people to hear the songs. And I want, I want them to have the impact that they were designed for. I mean I had some that's supposed to be funny, and I had some supposed to be thoughtful, and I have some sad. And, it's various, the whole--some that just describe aspects of life. I have, basically, that's what a songwriter, it seems to me, wants, get heard--get your songs out there. And with me it's never been make a whole lot of money. I've always, I mean I enjoy making money, and I can squander with the best of them, but, as I say, that really tends to bring a bunch of confusion into your life, and to the point where, whether I don't have money, I don't just, you know, hanker for that. I don't have to have that. And the amounts of money that are discussed, it wasn't gonna--let's, let's talk about some millions. Let's talk about billions. I mean let's talk about the money that's running things. Let's not talk about the chump change. I'd love to be able to have a studio, enough money for making movies and have stage plays and develop kids and find new talent, and whew, I'd rather do that, but who knows. I think it would happen, but I just might not be around to personally be involved in it. But I would hope when they find out what I've done, that people will be glad of me, and will make use of it, and that I will have been a very profound, effective artist, and that have succeeded as a man, and be the guy I think I am (laughter), which is pretty hot stuff. Story_ID: 4182 Speaker 1: Can you sing 'Brown Baby'? Speaker 2: Can I sing it? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Sure. (Singing) "Brown baby, brown baby, as you grow up, I want you to drink from the plenty cup. I want you to stand up tall and proud. I want you to speak up clear and loud, brown baby. Brown baby, brown baby, as the years roll by, I want you to go with your head held high. I want you to live by the justice code. I want you to walk down the freedom road. Brown baby, now, lie away, lie away sleeping, lie away here in my arms, while your daddy and your mama protect you and keep you safe from harm, oh, you little brown baby. Brown baby, it makes me glad that you will have things I have never had. When out of men's hearts, all the hate is hurled, you're going to live in a better world. Brown baby. "..