 Story_ID: 290378 Speaker 1: We're gonna begin with me slating the tape by saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer. Scott Stearns is the videographer. This interview is taking place on Tuesday, March 1, 2005, in McLean, Virginia, and if you would, please for the record, tell us your full name including your middle name and spell it? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Maxine Beatrice Baker, that's M-A-X-I-N-E, Beatrice, B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, Baker, B-A-K-E-R. Speaker 1: And would you please tell us the date and location of your birth? Speaker 2: I was born on February 29, leap year, 1952, in Homestead, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm the president and CEO of the Freddie Mac Foundation and vice president of community relations for Freddie Mac [Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation]. Story_ID: 290379 Speaker 1: The next couple of questions are just some People magazine-ish type questions, just to help us get to know you a little bit better and help us get familiar with the process. So, I ask you to give me short answers to these questions. Would you please share with us your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite type of food is Mexican. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is purple. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination would be the beach. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Ooh, I like all the times, I think I like the fall the best. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying. Do you have one? Speaker 2: Oh gosh, there's so many, I, I like to use in my speeches a lot, I--you've been paid for. Story_ID: 290380 Speaker 1: Let's begin now talking about your mother, starting with your mother's name and where your mother was born and where she grew up as a girl and that kind of thing. Speaker 2: Well my mother's birth name is Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker, Reynolds is her maiden name and she was born in Greensboro, North Carolina, on October 14, 1914, and she's still living, she's ninety years old. Speaker 1: And did your mother ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her as a girl growing up in Greensboro? Speaker 2: Well, she only lived in Greensboro, she, she was born in '14 [1914], and her next sibling, she was one of five, was born in '17 [1917], and then I think right after that, certainly before the next child came in '19 [1919], I think, they had moved to Washington [D.C.]. So, I know she lived across the street from Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina] and didn't--not a lot of stories about Greensboro, but-- Speaker 1: What about Washington? Just her, is any stories about what life was like for her as a girl growing up. Speaker 2: Oh, I think life was, she had a great set of friends and all lived in the community. She lived I believe at 11th [Street] and V Street near U Street, and went to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]. Was it? I think, I know she went to Garnet-Patterson [School; Shaw Middle School at Garnet-Patterson, Washington, D.C.] junior high school, that's what they called it then. And I forgot the name of her, her elementary school, but her, a good group of friends that have been her lifelong friends. So, she would talk about roller skating down the hill behind [Francis L.] Cardozo High School [Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.], that huge hill down 13th Street and they would roller skate or hold on to the back of cars as they went down the hill, which, you know, is, unbelievable. I do remember as a child, then there used to be a horse trough down at the bottom of the hill and she of course told me one time that they came down so fast they ran into the horse trough. But, good stories about what Washington, was like for African Americans at that time, so I guess that would have been the late '20s [1920s], early '30s [1930s], go--good set of friends and lots of good memories. Speaker 1: And how did she say Washington was like during that time period? Speaker 2: Well, it was segregated, certainly and she, you know, would talk about there were certain stores downtown that she couldn't go into. But, I think they had a full life on U Street, and I think there were shops on 14th Street, and so it, it was never her stories were never about being deprived of anything. Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother? Speaker 2: Oh, my mother was smart, very attractive, very, you know, I would describe her as being very strong, she wouldn't describe herself as being strong, she was most, most of my life, a single mother and while she lived with her, her mother [Beatrice Jones Reynolds], you know, she, then back in the early '50s [1950s], you didn't see that many single parents at that time. And she was hard working and went to church and really invested a lot into me and my development. Story_ID: 290381 Speaker 1: Let's talk now about your father, starting with his name and where he was born and where he grew up as a boy? Speaker 2: My father's name, it was Evan Po--Evan Posey Baker, Sr., and he was born in Homestead, Pennsylvania, in a house which is still in the family, and stayed in that area most, all of his life. Went to Duquesne University [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and my parents were introduced by some mutual friends, down here, he was down here visiting and he had been married before and had two children and they got married in September of 1945. My mother [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] moved to Homestead, Pennsylvania, which is right outside of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and it was a coal town then, and she talked about how, what an adjustment it was to go from, you know, this cultural city to a coal town and, and, I remember her telling stories about having to wash the curtains or the drapes like every week and having to take the rugs out and beat them because the, the, I guess the soot from the mills would get into everything. She said, she remem- I remember her telling a story, they would go down to this area where, where I guess had restaurants and she'd never seen anyone eat ketchup on French fries before, she thought it was the weirdest thing. So, I, I don't know, I guess that wasn't done back then, but it certainly seems like it caught on. And they got married in '45 [1945], she moved there and I was born in '52 [1952], 1952. Speaker 1: And how would you describe your father? Speaker 2: Well it's interesting, Racine [Tucker-Hamilton], they broke up when I was about two and a half or three years old and she came back here and I saw my father I think around four or five, I have a memory of him coming down here and buying me a bubble machine. But I was not in relationship with him throughout my childhood, it wasn't until I went away to college that I called him and t--th--the time that, that period that I was in school, we would communicate by letter or by phone and then when I graduated college [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts], I met him, I was twenty and he died when I was about forty-five years old. So, I had twenty-five good years knowing him and being in a relationship with him so, I-he--so my experience of him was as an adult. Story_ID: 290382 Speaker 1: What kind of work did your mother [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] do growing up, when you were growing up? Speaker 2: My mother was college educated, she has a degree from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in home economics, but in the beginning when she came back to Washington [D.C.], she worked for the, at the Pentagon and decided very quickly not to continue in government service because she wanted to have her work life parallel to my school life, so, she went and became a teacher. Then she, she was certified when she graduated from Howard, but I mean, she went into the teaching profession. And so she was a middle school or what we used to call junior high school teacher until she retired. Speaker 1: Le--let's talk a little bit now about your grandparents. And let's start with your paternal grandparents, your mother's parents, now, did you know your, I'm sorry let's start with your maternal grandparents, your mother's parents, did you know your grandfather? Speaker 2: I did not. He died about a year after I was born-- Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: --so I, you know, they say I met him or he met me, he met me, but I have no recollection of, of him, although I would have liked to have met him, I understood he, he was very kind and loving and giving and a lot of fun so, you know, I, I would have enjoyed him. Speaker 1: And what was his name? Speaker 2: Walter Raleigh Reynolds, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: My mother's mothers name was Beatrice Jones Reynolds. Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit about her. Speaker 2: Well, when my mother and father [Evan Baker, Sr.] broke up, she ca- my mother came back to Washington to live with her mother, so it was the three of us in a house. She was, I, in many regards she, she was my mother figure, that's not to say that my mother abdicated her responsibilities, but I guess any time a, a woman moves back home with her mother, especially old school mothers, you know, she certainly took the role of the teacher. She was stern, she was, but we had a lot of fun. She was very loving to me, taught me a lot of things that, gee I wish I could have remembered to teach my kids, like how to cut out paper dolls and I would, she would, I had a business, my grandfather and she had a business before he died and then she kept, it was a dry cleaning and she was a beautiful seamstress and sewed just unbelievably well. We would, I remember as a kid, we would go to like Lord & Taylors, and see a dress and both she and my mother would walk around the dress, you know it would be, you know, sort of raised on some sort of platform, I, you know and guess they had very elaborate displays back then and they would come back and make the dress to the tee. It was just incredible, they'd make the pattern, I practically grew up at the old G Street remnant store [G Street Remnants] downtown on G Street. She just was an incredible creator and she, she was, she was stern, she was as, as Jamie Foxx said the other night when he was talking about his grandmother, you know, she'd say, "Sit up and act right." It was very clear what the rules were, but she was loving and kind and, and giving and helpful and taught me a lot of things about life. Story_ID: 290383 Speaker 1: What was life like for you, not having your father [Evan Baker, Sr.] in your life, during the early childhood years, did it make a difference or what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think it made a-- Speaker 1: --was that like for you? Speaker 2: --I think it made a difference. I, you know, it's interesting, I didn't feel less than, but I knew something was different. I knew I was different than everyone else. I don't think I knew anyone else who came from a broken home. I don't even think you called a broken home then. And so, I think my mother [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] and grandmother [Beatrice Jones Reynolds] did an awful lot to compensate for it so, so that I never felt deprived. I, I, as I think back on my childhood, it, th- the theme that sort of runs through that for me is that they were constantly exposing me to situations and opportunities and I, I don't know if it was because that's how they had been or I don't know if they thought, well, because I didn't have those parents that needed to do this. But we had certain rituals that we would do every, every year, I di- and I'm not quite sure why we do it. We went down to Potomac River on the Wilson Line to Mount Vernon [Virginia] every year. We walked down the Washington Monument [Washington, D.C.] all eight hundred and somethin' feet or steps or whatever it is every year. I'm not sure why we did it, but I remember we'd take the elevator up and I'd say, well why do we have to walk down? Well, it's just something we do. (Laughter) We went to the, every year I would go to the White House [Washington, D.C.] lawn for Easter Monday-- Speaker 1: The Easter Egg Roll? Speaker 2: The Easter Egg Roll. And I went to church every Sunday and it was, it was a lot, we went on vacation every year. Speaker 1: Did you all have a particular vacation spot where you'd go, or different places? Speaker 2: It seems to me that much of the time we would go to Atlantic City [New Jersey], the old Atlantic City, or to Cape May [New Jersey] or some place in New Jersey, I, I, but I don't know why, I think there was a lot of different entertainment on the Steel Pier [Atlantic City, New Jersey] and, you know, Atlantic City, was very different then, but, seems like we went there and, and Cape Wildwood [Wildwood, New Jersey] and Cape May and-- Speaker 1: What was Atlantic City like when you would go and vaca- when you would spend time there? Speaker 2: It, it, it was my first recollection of the have and the have nots, that's the first time I remember and, you know, maybe it's not the first time but it clearly, I remember, I, I think that there was a lot of Jewish population at the beach and I remember there were these sellies [ph.] that, is that what they call them? The, those little bike ride people would sit down and somebody would ride the bike behind them, these little carts and I kept saying well what, cou- "Can we get one?" And you'd sort of get that look. Why can't we do some of the things that I saw other people doing and you would sort of get this look about something was different, something, you know, and, you know, I think it's the fi--my first memory of well, everything isn't the same for everyone. Story_ID: 290384 Speaker 1: Tell me what is your earliest memory? Speaker 2: I seem to remember being on an airplane with my mother [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] in an electrical storm, and she says that that was, when we flew back from Homestead [Pennsylvania], back to Washington [D.C.], to live, so that's two and a half or three years I do remember this plane that sort of looks like out of one those old movies and a storm around but, that seems to be the earliest. I can remember back to four and five. Story_ID: 290385 Speaker 1: I kind of jumped a little bit, so I do want to go back. We were talking about your maternal grandmother [Beatrice Jones Reynolds], now I know you didn't have much contact with your father [Evan Baker, Sr.] during the early years, what about your grandparents, your paternal grandparents [Beatrice Posey Baker and Evan Baker]? Speaker 2: Well, when we lived in Homestead [Pennsylvania], we lived right down the street from them and I do remember, I do remember their house, I remember my grandmother's stature, she was a large woman, I remember my grandfather, we called him Pops and they had, a, a Scottish terrier, I don't remember the name of the dog but I do remember, I do remember that. And I remember him, a--again being very kind and loving and jolly and my grandmother being stern and sort of a large-- Story_ID: 290386 Speaker 1: Could you tell us their names? Do you remember their names? Speaker 2: Oh absolutely. Beatrice. (Laughter) Both of my grandmothers were named Beatrice so, hence that's why I got Beatrice as a middle name. I'm thankful it wasn't my first name because I guess that could have happened but, Beatrice Baker and Beatrice Posey Baker and my grandfather on my father's [Evan Baker, Sr.] side was Evan Edward Baker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Everybody, every male on my father's side, his name is Evan. That'll be a theme throughout the whole thing. Speaker 1: Now, let's talk a little bit about your great-grandfather, your great, your paternal great-grandfather who was Cumberland, Sr. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, let's talk a little bit about him, he was a boat builder, an engineer, th- can you tell us a little bit about him? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that much about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well just what you-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --what you know through history and through stories in the family. Speaker 2: --Certainly. Again, begin because we left Homestead [Pennsylvania], you know, I wasn't really entrenched in the story although I knew that we had a history. And I knew, yeah, I, I knew much like my grandmother [Beatrice Jones Reynolds] on my mother's [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] side, my grandmother on my father's side carried herself as if there was a story to be told. So, her father Cumberland Willis Posey, Sr. was an engineer, I think the first African American engineer in the United States and boat builder for [Andrew] Carnegie, and, you know, I've read it certainly articles that say he's quite wealthy and quite a man in the c- standing in the community, but I didn't see any of that (laughter). So, but I'm, I'm sure he contributed to the commerce and that whole, you know, three river area. Speaker 1: And once you did reestablish your relationship with your father, did he ever talk about him at all? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. Story_ID: 290387 Speaker 1: Now let's talk a little bit about Cumberland [Willis Posey] Jr. who was your uncle [sic. great uncle], who owned the Homestead Grays. Speaker 2: Right, so Cumberland [Willis] Posey [Sr.] and his wife Anna [Stevens] Posey, and she was the first African American to graduate from Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And also the first to teach there as well, right? Speaker 2: --and the first to teach there as well. So, they lived in a house and my grandmother [Beatrice Posey Baker] and my grandfather [Evan Baker] lived in a house that was attached and th- those houses are still in the family now, my brother [Evan Baker, Jr.] and his family still live in the main house. So, my grandfather, well, my great-grandfather and his wife had three children, my grandmother, Cumberland Jr., and Seward ["See" Posey] and Cumberland Jr. ended up owning the Homestead Grays. Speaker 1: And did you know much about him or how it was that he became about to owning? Speaker 2: No just, you know, of course again, what I've read, I mean, I know that he went to Penn State [Pennsylvania State College; Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania] to study chemistry, but he ended up having a love for sports and played for the team and then purchased the team. I, I do like to read the stories that he talks about, that he was a wonderful manager and a wonderful owner, that he was very generous to his players and if all the players weren't treated the same as far as accommodations and cities where they would play, then he wouldn't, wouldn't have any of them stay at the hotel. So, he seemed like fairness was important and being generous and being, looking out for his whole team was very important. So, I liked to read the stories and hoped that some of that were passed down through the genes. Speaker 1: And did your father [Evan Baker, Sr.] ever talk about him at all? Speaker 2: No, not, not much now, when, when I reestablished my relationship with my father, I think shortly thereafter, Cumberland was, what is the term that's used to, a--inaugurated is not the right word but went into the hall of fame, baseball hall of fame, inducted, right, inducted into the baseball hall of fame and I, and I know, where you're gonna s- a lot of the family went and participated in that, I did not but I, and I knew that there is a, a section and of course, I was very excited when they were talking about bringing the baseball team here back to Washington [D.C.] because the mayor wanted to name the team the Washington Grays because the Grays did, Homestead Grays did play here in Washington for a period of time. Speaker 1: Do you? Was your father a big baseball (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --fan? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't remember him being a sports person. Story_ID: 290388 Speaker 1: What else do you remember or know through your reading of your history, your ancestry, that kind of thing? Speaker 2: Other than c- Cumberland [Willis Posey] Sr. and Cumberland [Willis Posey] Jr., not much more. Speaker 1: Now, Cumberland Sr. was the son of a slave, correct (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: And were there any stories told at all that you remember-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: No. Okay. What about on your maternal side? How far back can you trace your history on your maternal side? Speaker 2: Not a lot. Grandparents [Beatrice Jones Reynolds and Walter Reynolds]. That's about, that's about it. Speaker 1: And were there? Did your mother [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] ever share any stories about why the family moved from North Carolina to Washington, D.C.? Speaker 2: Oh I think it was clearly for a better life. Washington afforded at that time and probably still to some extent African Americans an opportunity that, my grandfather owned his own business and-- Speaker 1: What kind of business did he have? Speaker 2: He had a dry cleaning establishment and then as I mentioned earlier, my grandmother was a tailor, a seamstress and so, they had that business. Speaker 1: And do you remember just growing up, how your grandmother ran the business and excuse me, like the, the ends and outs of that? Did you do the day to day operation? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, the business was what? In the 1800 block of Florida Avenue, I, I remember that I could go there in a half a second. I went to elementary school around the corner, well, I went to nursery school [The Garden of Children, Washington, D.C.] around another corner, so everything was centered about where the st- the shop was. And I, there was a moving company right across the street and had one of those big soda coolers, it must have been, I don't know, it seemed like it was six or eight feet as a kid, it was probably much smaller than that, maybe two feet long and they would put the blocks of ice in there and sodas were just floating around and so if you wanted a grape soda, you had to sorta go down and fish for it and it would be so cold, you know, and it was like the best soda in the whole wide world, I think they were Nehi grape sodas, you know? But fishing for those sodas you'd get your arm all the way down, almost fall into this big thing and there was a beauty shop on the r--right, Mrs. Worthy's [ph.] beauty shop and I would go in there and just watch the ladies come and get their hair done all day long and so, this, there was another business on the other side but I have no idea, I don't remember what that was at all. But th- these, this, this little hub of Florida Avenue, before the Washington Hilton [Hotel, Washington, D.C.] was bu- built. So, it was a, you know, it's a very thriving neighborhood now. Columbia Road and I remember there on Columbia, no, on 18th Street there was doll hospital and we had beautiful dolls back then, they were made of porcelain and there was this hospital that, this lady would fix dolls, she had a business, you know, and the bodies and their faces and repaint their, you know, lips or their eyebrows or do their hair, so it was quite remarkable but things you just don't see anymore. Speaker 1: What was the name of your grandparents' dry cleaning business? Speaker 2: I think Reynolds Dry Cleaners (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Very original. Speaker 1: Were you ever in there with your grandmother and just like to see the day to day (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --operation? Can you kind of describe it for us a little bit? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: People would come in, or would, would they go pick up dry cleaning? Speaker 2: No, so I would co--I would, my mother would drop me there in the morning. Speaker 1: What customers, did--would customers-- Speaker 2: --Right. Speaker 1: --have their dry cleaning picked up or would they bring it in? Speaker 2: They would drop it off, isn't, it was not a plant, so the dry cleaning was picked up and taken to another plant, so you know, it was tagged and bagged and then picked up and then the customers would come and either have alterations done or, or as I said, my grandmother would make clothes so there was her sewing machine in the window and there were huge counter, two counters. But you know? I don't remember a lot about where seeing cash being it cou- it may , I remember there was a cash box, you know, I don't know if she did things on account or, I don't remember a lot of cash transactions. I mean, I'm sure they wer- they, there were. And then I remember every night shutting down the shop and what we'd do to that to, to, to, for that. Speaker 1: And would you ever help tag and bag and that kind of thing? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Was it? Speaker 2: And sweep up at night because after sch- when I was in elementary school there at John Quincy Adams Elementary School [Washington, D.C.] for a couple of years, after school, I'd go right to the shop and stay and, and help her close it down and then my mother would pick us up from there. Story_ID: 290389 Speaker 1: We talked a little bit about some of your--your earliest memory. Can you just kind of describe for us what life was like in your house? So, you'd wake up in the morning, on a typical day and then what? Speaker 2: Well, have a break--we'd have breakfast, a pretty full breakfast if I remember and then my mother [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] would either, I had to go back to nursery school. She would drop me off at nur- she'd drop my [maternal] grandmother [Beatrice Jones Baker] at the shop and then take me to nursery school which was around the corner at 18th [Street] and S [Street], so right around the corner. Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of your nursery school? Speaker 2: Absolutely, The Garden of Children [Washington, D.C.]. It was a nursery school th- the first private nursery school for children of color and it was run by a woman by the name of Dorothy [Waring] Howard and it was pretty rigorous (laughter) for a nursery school. Speaker 1: For nursery school. Speaker 2: It was when, you know a lot of lessons, a lot of lessons to this day I still remember. She, Mrs. Howard said, "A book is always your friend," and I will not throw a book in the trash. Speaker 1: What other things do you remember that she taught you? Speaker 2: I remember a fr- you know, a, a friend's li- life, your lifelong friends, you'll have lifelong friends, I--we had different classes or sections like I remember I was a bumble bee for one year and you'd move up and I left her school and then went over to the elementary school [John Quincy Adams Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] and I was reading at the age of three. So, when I went to elementary school, I didn't--I went straight into second grade, I skipped kindergarten and first grade. Speaker 1: So you?-- Speaker 2: So I got a good pep- preparation there at The Garden of Children. Story_ID: 290390 Speaker 1: When we ended we were talking a little bit about growing up and what other memories do you have? Like of holidays, I know earlier when we were talking you said birthdays were-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --just very extravagant. Can you tell us a little bit about that? Speaker 2: Oh certainly. (Laughter) Well, of course being born on the 29th of February, we didn't celebrate my off year birthday, so it's very strange when I talk to people and they say they have a birthday party for their kids every year because I didn't grow up like that. So, I mean we would have some recognition after dinner, I guess cake and ice cream, but, on the leap year, I'm not quite sure what happened on the fourth, but I do know eight, twelve, sixteen, vividly. My mother [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] would design an invitation. I'm sure there were fifty to seventy-five children invited, the presents were on display at the house for a couple of days, it was almost like a, you know, how people used to do weddings, you know? It's like the gifts were on display. There were lots of fun and lot--lots of, you how now you go to parties and people have different stations? Well, she was at, ahead of her time, there would be an artist who would do a caricature and there would be the balloon person and there would be different food stations and, it--there were quite, let's see one year it was at the Kappa House [Washington, D.C.] and one year it was at the Q [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] house and, I, you know, so there were quite the party and of course I got to have some fabulous outfit that they designed and made. And, you know, it was like queen for a day. I had, the hardest part of not being a grown up is that, no party has ever matched some of those earlier parties, but, y- you know, it--it's very strange being born on the 29th of February. I, I wouldn't trade it for the world, it, and it is a wonderful conversation piece. But, you know, everybody when they get a calendar the first of the, first of the year, they flip to their birthday to see what day their birthday's gonna be on and, it's weird not having your own day all the time. Speaker 1: What day do you celebrate your birthday on, in off years? Speaker 2: The 28th of February. My mom said well I was born in February so, as a matter of fact, when she got home the birth certificate said March the first and, if you look at my, you know, real birth certificate, you can see where, I don't know if they, you know, it was all done in ink, but you can see like, someone took Clorox you know, and whited out the March and came over it Febru- and did February 29th. Story_ID: 290391 Speaker 1: What other memories do you have of growing up? What were holidays like in your house? Were they very festive times too? Speaker 2: Well, every Thanksgiving we celebrated with an aunt, I think she was my, she was my [maternal] grandfather's [Walter Reynolds, Sr.] first cousin, her name was Beulah Burke. And she was one of the founders of the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and she lived on, on Sherman Avenue. So, every Thanksgiving we would go to Aunt Beulah's house, she was never married, never had children and she would have this table that went all the way through the dining room, all the way to the living room and there would probably be twenty people and they were strangers just, you know, just people that weren't relatives so, so they'd sort of would be relatives and then there would be other people, people who didn't have families and I do remember as a child, that really making an impact on me about, well why would you have people you don't know at your Thanksgiving table? And Aunt Beulah would say, "Well they don't have any place else to go." I remember her having this contraption, a machine that you would make cranberry minced cranberries with, so that was my job. It would hook onto the counter and, you know, with this vice, I got to mince the cranberries and it, it was quite a production, a very nice meal, but they weren't all our relatives, you know? And so, I remember being taught very early about, we need to extend ourselves to others. I think, I think that's, I'm--something ha--that has resonated with me. There's always room at the table. So that, that's one of those lessons that I remember from, from holidays. My mother's [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] family, there were five of them and I think we, I mean we would get together for Christmas and a ritual which I don't know who's, like I'm pretty sure my Aunt Doris [ph.] started it, we never give one present to a person (background noise), and to this day, it's always multiple presents and that's a hard one to ke- (laughter) that's a hard ritual to keep up. Story_ID: 290392 Speaker 1: You were talking a little bit about Christmas, I think, you never give just one gift, you give multiple gifts? Speaker 2: Yep, that's a ritual (laughter). Speaker 1: And, and is this something that you still do today? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) I do. Not one card, several cards. Speaker 1: What about Easter? I know you talked a little bit about the Easter Egg Roll at the White House [Washington, D.C.], was that something that you all did every year? Speaker 2: Every year. I don't even know how they got tickets. I don't know, I don't know? An Easter Monday in Washington [D.C.] was a big, it was a holiday and it was a big to do. You would go to the zoo [National Zoological Park; Smithsonian's National Zoo & Conservation Biology Institute, Washington, D.C.], well we'd-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --go to the White House in the morning and you had to get dressed up, every time you went to the White House, you'd have to get dressed up and w- any time you went anywhere, you'd get dressed up and I, I still have my Easter basket and, you know, you'd roll these eggs down with a spoon. I, I'm not sure what the point was, but you'd just do that and you would get a, a plastic egg or something like that and it was just a big ritual that you did every year. Speaker 1: And for many African Americans that would go to the zoo on Easter Monday, and that's something that your family would do as well? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Story_ID: 290393 Speaker 1: Any other memories of growing up that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh I had,-- Speaker 1: --come to mind? Speaker 2: We used to, and when I was good, we would go up on 14th Street, there were lots of stores on 14th Street and so, the first nine years that I lived in Washington [D.C.] or up until I was ten, we lived at 11th [Street] and Lamont [Street], so we would go over to 14th Street and shop, or down to U Street and shop and if I was good, I was promised a hot dog on Saturday and of course Ben's Chili Bowl [Washington, D.C.] was the place to go to get a hot dog on Saturday or there was a five and dime store up on, on 14th Street and to this day, if I need to reward myself, you know, if I'm out shopping or something, I, I have to get a hot dog, I mean it just it, and I know it's so bad for you, (laughter) but it just makes me feel better, you know? 'Cause it's like it's been instilled in my brain, or if I'm in town at an event after an event and I'm feeling particularly good, I will go by Ben's Chili Bowl and get a hot dog. Speaker 1: You've talked a little bit about the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Even in an evening gown, (laughter), I walk into Ben's Chili Bowl to get a hot dog, sorry. Speaker 1: That's okay. You talked a little bit about you described the business community where your [maternal] grandmother's [Beatrice Jones Reynolds] business [Reynolds Dry Cleaners, Washington, D.C.] was located. Can you kind of describe your neighborhood community for us and tell us a little bit about your neighborhood? Speaker 2: The, the street on which we lived? We lived on 11th and Lamont so there are houses on one side of the street what, what are called like brownstone now, three stories, three story brownstones and across the street there was some commercial, there was a little restaurant down at the corner and there weren't houses directly across the street and so it was a busy street, we had streetcars then and some stores up towards Park Road going north, so there's a grocery store and a gas station there. Now this neighborhood was the neighborhood in which my mother [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] grew up so, again, a lot of people in the neighborhood who had known the family for a long time, some friends my age, where I didn't go to school in, in the neighborhood in which we lived so I, I didn't have that connection. But we played, you know, on the weekends on the street, roller skating, ah gosh, I was like the roller skating queen, you know and bicycling and of course you could go anywhere by yourself, you know, it wasn't like it is today, within certain perimeters nut I think we could go five or six blocks down 11th street and over to 14th Street and four or five blocks up on your bike or roller skating. And then we moved from 11th Street over to northeast Washington when I was about ten, ten years old. Speaker 1: And y-- Speaker 2: Over by [The] Catholic University [of America, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And what was that neighborhood like? Speaker 2: That was quite, I--again I didn't go to school in that neighborhood either. No, that's not true, I went to elementary school, I went to fourth, fifth and sixth grade at Bunker Hill Elementary School [Brookland Education Campus at Bunker Hill, Washington, D.C.], it was a long walk. I know I sound like a grandparent now, oh it was a long walk to, to school. So, it, it was a r- nice residential area, again, you know, you come after school and play kick ball in the alley and ride your bike and go roller skating, it was integrated, there were still Caucasian families in the neighborhood when we moved there, but over time that, that changed. Speaker 1: And did everybody, did all the kids play together? Speaker 2: They did, we did. Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your friends? Speaker 2: I do. I can't for some reason the names aren't coming to me. I know the Kellys [ph.] behind and Mary Ellen [ph.] was one of the kids there and the, there was an Italian family next to them and Paul [ph.] was the son there and the next one, yeah we knew every--we, we knew the whole, the Cook [ph.] family up the street-- Story_ID: 290394 Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school you attended? Speaker 2: I went to two. Speaker 1: The first elementary school you attended? Speaker 2: John Quincy Adams Elementary School [Washington, D.C.], it was called the Americanization school and it sits right behind the Washington Hilton [Hotel, Washington, D.C.] and as I said before, the Washington Hilton hadn't been buil- built yet. So, I went there, I went to first grade for two weeks and then I went to second grade. I was there second grade and third grade and then I went to Bunker Hill Elementary School [Brookland Education Campus at Bunker Hill, Washington, D.C.] on Michigan Avenue and I went there fourth, fifth and sixth grade. Speaker 1: So let's talk a little bit about second grade, so were you five in second grade? Speaker 2: No, I think I was probably six. Speaker 1: Were--did you ne- did you notice that the kids were older than you? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or, no? Wasn't a problem, you integrated well with the older kids and that kind of thing? Do you remember your teacher in second grade? Speaker 2: I do. My second grade was Mrs. Kelly [ph.], third grade was Mrs. [Lois] Broadus because thir- oh no that's not right, I think second grade was Mrs. Broadus and third grade was some other lady, Mrs. Vale [ph.]. Mrs. Vale had the longest red fingernails and back then, you know, they could hit you with the ruler, I had the worst penmanship in the world, the worst penmanship and she would hit me with the ruler. You had to draw this margins on the paper, you have a one inch margin on the left and a half of inch margin on the right and I'd get to the margin and I'd keep on writing and she'd come over and she'd hit me. Okay, so I start over, you know, I need another, I needed just a little space to make another letter, and I thought, ooh she's mean with those long red fingernails. And she would hit me, and maybe I must have done,--m--Mrs. Broadus, I know, I know Lois Broadus was--taught me cursive writing because I would sit for hours and do L, B, L, B and if, If I'm doodling at my desk, I'll still doodle L, B, and I have very nice penmanship, but, I, I can sit and do your initials in cursive for hours, she just would say, you have to stick to it, you have to--because, oh I had the, it were like chicken scratch, you know? And, but now it's very flowing and, you know? More--the more formalized penmanship. Speaker 1: And what kind of student were you in elementary school? Speaker 2: I was a good student. Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite subjects? Speaker 2: I probably reading. I was a big reader. So, English, I'm sure, I don't remember math particularly being my favorite but English. Speaker 1: And w-- Speaker 2: Social studies. Speaker 1: And did you have like a favorite book or what were some of the things that you really enjoyed reading? Speaker 2: You know, I'm not sure I can remember. Story_ID: 290395 Speaker 1: What type of child were you during the elementary school years? Speaker 2: Well, this is what I think. I think I lived in a very narrow band. I think I was very, raised by rules and very rule based. So, I don't think I stepped over the line very much at all, I was afraid to. I think I'd shared with you, I had a very stern [maternal] grandmother [Beatrice Jones Reynolds] and, at, my recollection of that, of my childhood wasn't, that it was structured and stern and, and it was very clear, although a lot of words weren't said about what would be acceptable and what wouldn't be acceptable. So lessons about y- you will go to college. I, I don't know when that started but that was never an option about doing anything else. You will excel in school, you will do the best that you can, were just engrained, very early. Speaker 1: And what were some of the things that you enjoyed doing during your spare time? Speaker 2: I was a roller sq- roller skate queen. I'd roller skate anywhere. So, I could just, I loved to skate, I loved to play kick ball, I like, I liked to just, some athletics, although I wasn't athletic, but, you know? By the time you got home you were sent outside, it wasn't watch television and of course we didn't have video games or anything like that so it was get out and do something, ride your bike, or-- Speaker 1: And so, did you spend most afternoons, did you go from school to the dry cleaners [Reynolds Dry Cleaners, Washington, D.C.] and then you all went home from there or did, or did, or how did that work, or did, as you got older, you went straight home? Speaker 2: My recollection is that, when I was at John Quincy Adams [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], they still had the shop. I believe my grandmother retired when we moved to Northeast [Washington, D.C.]. Maybe a year or two, she still kept the shop, but certainly by the time I was, I think it was sixth grade, fifth or si- fifth or sixth grade [at Bunker Hill Elementary School; Brookland Education Campus at Bunker Hill, Washington, D.C.], oh I remember. My mother's [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] youngest sister had moved down to Washington [D.C.] and she lived on the other side of the elementary school and she, I would go there, I think those couple years that my grandmother still had the business. Story_ID: 290396 Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up and remind you of your childhood? Speaker 2: Well that's a great question. I, I know the smell and that's gingerbread. My [maternal] grandmother [Beatrice Jones Reynolds] made the most incredible gingerbread that I have never tasted, I don't have the recipe for it. It was, you know, so moist and she would 'em in those little tins and I don't know, like, Wednesday or Thursday, every Wednesday or Thursday there would be gingerbread, I remember that vividly. Sights I would say, the [National] Mall [Washington, D.C.] downtown. We always were going to the museum or to the White House [Washington, D.C.] or to the monuments, every year we would do 'em over and over and over again, you know? And I, it, I wasn't quite sure why we were doing them but we did them, we would always have to get dressed up to go and many, many, years later, when I, my older daughter [Morgan Stokes], I had got some passes to the White House, someone called that morning and had passes and I had said to my older daughter, "Would you like to go?" And she said, "Sure." I said "Well you have to dress up." "Well why do I have to dress up?" "Well that's just what we do, you know? You have to dress up to go to the White House." And we went on the tour and we, you know, I had on this skirt suit and she had on a dress and, I'm telling you, when we got there, everybody was like in cutoffs and torn T-shirts and, and caps backwards and when we walked in, I think she was about nine years old, when we walked out at the backside of the White House, I said, "Well what did you think?" And she says, "I think we're always overdressed." And I thought, that's what I thought to--that's what I thought too but, that's just how we do it. You know? So-- Speaker 1: What sounds? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know what sounds, my mother [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] played the piano. We had a piano in the house and, and s- and I had, did study piano for many, many, many, many, many years, maybe the piano would be a sound that--I don't remember a lot of music, I mean we had this big LPs I think they were called, or I don't re- thirty-three and a third, wh- but I don't remember playing a l- them playing a lot of music. But my mother could sit down and I think she was probably, her ears trained, you know, she could just sit down and play something. Story_ID: 290397 Speaker 1: Any other memories of growing up that you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The-- Speaker 1: --come to mind? Speaker 2: --the elementary years? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Church. Speaker 1: What were your, what was the name of the church, your family attended? Speaker 2: Berean Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.], and it was down on 11th Street, 11th and V [Street] and I remember I got to the point that--church, Sunday was all day, you know, church was all day. But I'd gotten to the point where I could get on the streetcar and go to Sunday school, Sunday school was first, so I could, I think it was a dime. I could get on the streetcar and go to Sunday school and then church service was like eleven to one or two, and then you'd come back and have dinner which was either fried chicken or roast beef--like three of the Sundays there'd be fried chicken and roast beef one, one Sunday. But Sundays were long 'cause, it was no television, no radio playing, no games, no going outside so it was a, a day of rest. Speaker 1: What were your experiences like in church? What do you remember about church? Speaker 2: Oh, I remember baptism, I, I've always enjoyed baptism, I remember the choir, the--music ministry is just something that I love about church. We didn't have a lot of music at our church then, it was a pretty conservative church, but I, you know, I do remember the, the choir and they would only sing about three or four songs and they were pretty standard. I remember the church was full, lots of people, I got to sit with different people and rest my head in their laps or eat lifesavers or sort of doodle and on Communion Sunday it was my job to go and pick up the, the communion glasses so, afterwards so that was very cool. Story_ID: 290398 Speaker 1: What was the name of the junior high school you attended? Speaker 2: I went to Jefferson Junior High School in southwest Washington [D.C.]. So, I commuted to, course [Washington] D.C. doesn't have buses, so I commuted from northeast Washington near Providence Hospital over to Southwest, Washington and at that time, so let's see, I graduated junior high school in '66 [1966], so in that time there was a program called the Amidon Jefferson Western Academic Program. So, it was a, w- we had a track system back then, and it was a track and I didn't go to Amidon Elementary [School; Amidon-Bowen Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], but I did go to Jefferson Junior High School. So, it was a accelerated academic program. Speaker 1: And what were some of your favorite subjects in junior high school? Speaker 2: Oh I loved, I loved English, we had to read, we had to read something like twelve or fifteen books every semester, I mean it was a rigorous reading s- schedule and all the classics, you know, Rudyard Kipling and '[The] Red Badge of Courage' [Stephen Crane] and just tons of classics that we had to study. I, it was by far th- the most successful academic period of--and, and when I mean successful, I, that infusion in my mind, we took chemistry, biology, that they taught at the high school, there, it was pretty intense, but-- Speaker 1: And what was happening around you at this particular time? It's kind of like the height of the Civil Rights Movement. Were your mother [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] and your [maternal] grandmother [Beatrice Jones Reynolds] involved in civil rights issues at all? Speaker 2: --I don't think so. I remember, I mean the one thing I sort of remember is being on the cusp of things, you know, I, I am not sure if it was in junior high school or high school [Western High School; Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.] but, I had very long hair and, and I guess it was high school when the afros started to come in so, you know this, this straight long hair that I had now was, you know, at, at, at one point had been, you know, quite enviable and was now something that, in college [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts], I'll tell you that story later, when I had to, to get rid of it. So, I remember things changing, you know, c- certainly being fair skinned, t- there were certain opportunities that were clear that were afforded to me that kids that I went to school who were browner skin weren't afforded. Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: Oh, I mean, I never, I never had to sit in the balcony of the movie theater, I think early on, we could go into the department stores and I remember sort of being shushed about, you know, don't, don't do a lot of tal- don't do a lot of talking, we'll just go and take care of our business. I, y--you know this, this, there was this look that just sort of let you know, we're doing, we're doing something that everybody doesn't get to do, you know, so just come along with the program and. But, but it, but I went to integrated schools, I mean and, and all the schools in Washington, you kn- you know, had, well particularly because I was in school in southwest Washington and pulling from all around the sch- the city, you know, there were lots of different people from lots of different neighborhoods, you know. I mean, it was, it was clear to me that there were differences. But I don't think they were involved vocally in, in the movement. Speaker 1: What do you remember about what was happening around you, was, was there any talk at school? Like were there kids at school whose parents were very involved, therefore they were, and they'd come and they'd talk about it? Like what do you remember happening around you during that period? Speaker 2: I remember when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was inaugurated and then that was gonna be great hope and I do remember that-- Speaker 1: Did you know why it was gonna be great hope? Did you understand that? Speaker 2: He was young, he was from--he was liberal, he was Catholic, he was different, you know? So, you know, that it seemed like the door was open for different, I'm not sure, let's see in 1960, I was eig- but he got elected in '60 [1960], right, '61 [1961], I was eight or nine-- Speaker 1: Eight or nine. Speaker 2: --so, I, I'm not sure I was that enlightened, but I just knew it was a great hope and then I do remember the--of course, when he was assassinated and I remember we had to go and pay our respects. So, I remember it was pretty cold that November, and getting dressed (laughter) and going down to the [U.S.] Capitol [Washington, D.C.] and standing in line because, you would pay your respects to the president. Speaker 1: What was that like? Can you kind of describe it for us? Do you, do you? Speaker 2: It was cold, and I didn't understand wh- what, no I didn't really understand wh- why did we have to do some of these things, you know? Can we just watch it on TV, 'cause now TV was coming, you know, and you could watch all that on television. No, it was just sort of that look that, this is what we do and you go and you, get dressed, and we, we would dress warmly but, you know, we had on our good clothes, and our, to go and pay respects to the president. Story_ID: 290399 Speaker 1: During the junior high school years [at Jefferson Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] at this particular period, what type of young lady were you starting to develop into? What type of young lady were you starting to become? Speaker 2: I think still a continuation of the elementary school. I lived in a very narrow band, didn't step over too far. Speaker 1: Even during (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't-- Speaker 1: --those-- Speaker 2: --Even think I-- Speaker 1: --Tween years, no? Speaker 2: No. That, I didn't even think to step over, the, the margins were drawn very clearly, what to dress, what to wear, how to act, how to talk, w- who you hung out with, what you did, it was very, very narrow. And so my recollection now, it would be interesting as my mother [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] but, my recollection is that I didn't step, in, in junior high, I didn't step over the margin. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers who had a particular influence on you? Speaker 2: I had this teacher, this, Mr. Geiger [ph.], I had him for biology, I remember all my teachers, but Mr. Geiger, I could not tolerate him, I couldn't stand him, he, he and I just did not get along and of course when I brought this home to my mother and my [maternal] grandmother [Beatrice Jones Reynolds] about well, we don't get along, it, they clearly explained to me, that's your issue, you need to get along with him. And so my grandmother sat down with me and she says, you must find something about Mr. Geiger that you like. And he had a little patch of, of, of white in his hair and so I would sit in, in his classes, and I'd think, aww that's such a pretty patch of white in his hair and you know he would be barking and fussing or whatever and I'd just focus on that and I will tell you to this day, when I'm in a situation where, I'm not feeling it, I'll find something and I'll just zero in. So, some of those life lessons still, you know, stay with me now. I, I did excel in science, I, back then we used to have these city wide science fairs and it was, I guess my--I don't know if it was in my seventh grade, no, it must have been my eight grade project was number one in the city. Speaker 1: What was the project? Speaker 2: It was hamsters. I had hamsters. One set of hamsters I fed water and one set of hamsters I fed milk and, and food, but, you know, whether the water was better, I don't know, remember it was something with some hamsters. So that was interesting. That, the--my recollection is the milk hamsters didn't do well. Speaker 1: Oh (laughter). Speaker 2: And then the next year I did one on radioactive isotopes, whether clay, dirt, or sand absorbed radioactive isotopes. And I won the big award from the National Radiology Association or something, but I got a lot of f- recognition and one of those bowls and I, you know, but science never was something I pursued afterwards, maybe I should have been a doctor. Story_ID: 290400 Speaker 1: Just in terms of growing up, would you say that you grew up in a privileged environment? Would you consider it a privileged environment? Speaker 2: Yes, in retrospect. I'm not so sure I knew it at the time, no we weren't wealthy, but there certainly was an attitude of, of affluence and, you know, there was an attitude of affluence. Speaker 1: And, but at that particular time in your life as a child, d- did it seem different from other kids or what were your thoughts on that? Speaker 2: Well I remember it didn't make sense to me, it didn't add up like, well what do you mean, again it was sort of this, this attitude and when I would look at myself, I would say, well but I don't have a father, you know, so how could we be all that and then some? And I know I'm different, my family in structure looks different than others, again, as I think I've said, it wasn't as though my [maternal] grandmother [Beatrice Jones Reynolds] and my mother [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] made me feel less than or matter of fact, I was always, I--I was always taught that I was fine, or even better than fine, than the way I was. So, here I sort of had a negative in my life, but, w- we did not, or they did not dwell there, they did not do that. So the privilege thing was around being fair, about this family image or who you were, but, I didn't know who we were. Speaker 1: And do, you talk a little bit about some of the benefits of being fair. Are there any other memories that come to mind of, you know, benefits of being fair? Speaker 2: Well, there is, as I, as I think I may have mentioned, yeah, I remember there were like, it was beneficial, you know that I had straight hair and that I think--it seemed like there was an awful lot of, of worth given to that. Speaker 1: What did you think about that? Speaker 2: I didn't know what to think about it. I--You know, I didn't do anything to make this hair straight, you know I, you know, I, I certainly, I didn't get it, it didn't make sense, it was my hair, you know, when--and, and, and maybe because I had straight hair, I didn't know what the deal was about not having straight hair. I don't know. But it didn't make sense to me and of course as I, I remember kids used to have long braids and we had ink wells in the desk, see how long ago that was, and kids pu- sticking stuff in my hair. I remember riding the bus home from junior high school [Jefferson Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] and my hair was out and this kid by the name of Billy Prather [ph.], I remember him to this day, took a wad of gum and stuck it in the back of my hair, it had to be cut out. So this, this, this worthiness of this hair thing, it really seemed to be n--not something that I fully understood and so people sort of did something to it. I mean certainly, I understand it now as I got older and understood about, you know the cultural worth put on straight hair and, but I, I didn't--don't understand it at the time. Speaker 1: And did you have friends who were darker skin (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --and had, didn't, had a different grain of hair? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That kind of thing? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I did. Speaker 1: And, and they accepted you just fine? You accepted them just fine? Speaker 2: That's my recollection, yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Now what were their like economic, or what was their like economic background? Were they more on the same economic level that you were? Speaker 2: Well see again, I don't think the privilege was around money. I, you know, I certainly knew people whose parents were doctors or lawyers or, you know, high up in the armed services, had, lived up on the Gold Coast [Washington, D.C.], you know, I lived over in northeast Washington [D.C.], you know, there, there seemed to be a lot of different messages that were out there but sort of understated and not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us-- Speaker 2: --called out-- Speaker 1: --what the-- Speaker 2: --that they were-- Speaker 1: --the Gold Coast is in relation to, in, in reference to Washington, D.C., where is the Gold Coast and why is it called the Gold Coast? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'm not quite sure w- you know, why? But certainly, Gold Coast would be, well of course there's the Platinum Coast in Washington too. So, as far as metals are worth, you know, gold certainly would be over silver or copper, it was upper 16th street, and it would be on the west side? The west side of 16th street. Yeah. That would be the Gold Coast, and all my friends lived over there. It was very interesting going to school in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.], I went to high school [Western High School; Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.] in Georgetown. Story_ID: 290401 Speaker 1: What high school did you go to? Speaker 2: Western High School which is now, Duke Ellington School for Performing Arts [Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.]. But, that--that's where I went to high school. Speaker 1: And, what were your experiences like in high school? Was there a particular teacher who had a particular influence over you in high school? Speaker 2: You know, what's interesting, there were three teachers, Donald Lease, [ph.] who is a performing artist here in the Washington [D.C.] communities, a musician. Donald Lease, a, a teacher by the name of Michael Holden [ph.] and a teacher by the name of Charlie Weeks [ph.], who were three young men, male teachers who came in, I don't know, maybe my tenth grade year? It might have been my ninth grade, ninth, no the ten, eleven, twelfth grades. And, and they were young, they had just finished college, it was like their first job and I remember they used to look like the mod squad came in, you know, and it was pretty neat knowing younger teachers, many of the other teachers were older and, so it was sort of--now we're at the mid '60s [1960s], towards the--I graduated out of high school in 1969, so, you know, your, your consciousness is being raised at this time, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], has been killed. Speaker 1: Do you remember when Martin Luther King (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I do. Speaker 1: --was assassinated? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: Like where were you and-- Speaker 2: I was at school. What happened? Did they make an announcement over?-- Speaker 1: Right. To go home, we were to leave the school and go directly home, the, the city was under siege and the looting and the fires had started. We were not to go downtown, many of us had to take buses from Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] to downtown to make our transfers to go wherever, you know, get, a lot of people came from around the city to that school. We were not to go downtown. Speaker 2: How did you get home? Speaker 1: Well, my mother [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] was a teacher and she taught at the junior high school across from the high school, so I went over to her school and we went uptown to go across to Northeast [Washington, D.C.], but that was scary. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: That was really very scary and I guess school was closed a couple of days, I'm sure, but all of that, 14th Street corridor, all that U Street corridor that I grew up on was, was gone. And that was sad, you know? It was, it was sad that the city that I grew up in, the times were changing, you know? It, it the world was changing, lots of things happened, President [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy had died, Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], Martin Luther King, my [maternal] grandmother [Beatrice Jones Reynolds] passed and, you know, here I was, you know, a sixteen year old, the world was changing. The Black Panther Party was becoming more and more evident. Songs like, gosh, that James Brown-- Speaker 2: 'Say It Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud' (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'I'm Black and I'm Proud.' You know, it was, it was changing. Story_ID: 290402 Speaker 1: How were you coping with the change? Were you changing too (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--Yes, I was changing too. Yeah, I love to tell the story about it was time to go to college and it was assumed that we would all go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and I knew I didn't, I did not want to go to Howard, I wanted to, yeah, my whole experience in Washington [D.C.] had been from an African American experience. The church [Berean Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.] was black, the schools, my, well I went to integrated schools, you know, most of my friends were African American, my neighborhood was African American, so I didn't wanna go to Howard, you know? My mother [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] and all of her siblings had gone to Howard, I wanted a different, different experience and I was a National Merit [Scholarship] Finalist and-- Speaker 1: Wait, you were a merit scholarship-- Speaker 2: And at that time they had something called Black National Merit Finalist. So I was getting accepted to, well I'm jumping the story a little bit. I, I had decided that I wanted to become a speech pathologist. Two years at, while I was in high school [Western High School; Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.], I had an internship at Georgetown University Hospital [MedStar Georgetown University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] in the physical therapy department, so I was exposed to speech therapy, occupational therapy, and physical therapy, and so I decided I wanted to be a speech pathologist and I had researched some schools and had applied to Emerson College in Boston, Massachusetts, and I don't remember when I made an application but, after I made an application I was named Black National Merit Finalist and all of a sudden, I started getting accepted to schools I never even applied to, with full scholarships. I mean there were these letters were just coming in, you know, here's your ticket, you know, ta, da, and I remembered on my birthday. It was February 28th or 29th, I got my acceptance letter to Emerson, but I knew I had been accepted with them not knowing that I was a Merit Finalist and so, I, you know, you know sometimes you look back on your life you think, God, that was really stupid to say I said to my mother, I'm going to go to Emerson because they accepted me for you I am and not this, you know, this award that I've gotten or this designation I've gotten. And she said to me, "It's four thousand dollars a year." "Yep, I understand." She says, "I'm a single parent, I can do the first year, but you have got to figure out how you're going to contribute for the rest of it. I can, I have the first year taken care of." And that's where I decided to go to school. Story_ID: 290403 Speaker 1: Let's back up just a little bit. What kinds of activities were you involved in in high school [Western High School; Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: I, mostly academic, I, I was not, I was not, I was not, I--I was in the, the clique, the social clique, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The cool-- Speaker 2: --the in, you know-- Speaker 1: --kids clique? Speaker 2: --I was in the, and I was-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: They had a sorority, you know, they had different sororities and I was in the cool sorority. But I was not a cheerleader, you know, most of my friends were cheerleaders or they were, I don't know, in acting or whatever, and-- Speaker 1: What about student government? Were you involved in student government at all? Speaker 2: No, but I was the president of the science club, is that dorky or what? (Laughter) I was president of the science--and, and one, one of my great high school stories is, as president of the, the court for the king and queen of the homecoming? The different clubs got to elect, you know, someone to go on the court and I got elected from the science club and I was so delighted because my good friend Linda [ph.] and my good friend Donna [ph.] they were cheerleaders and, and some other thing, they were on the court and, you know, all the popular cute little girls were all on, and I was coming from the science club and, so, the night before the dance, at the game, you had to be escorted onto the field and I got the head of the cadet corps to be my escort, I got the number one guy so I was tickled about that and I went and got this outfit and I remember this outfit to this day. It was this, you know, suit and sweater and jacket, and then I had this scarf and these pilgrim shoes, with a pilgrim buckle, buckles, they were just, they were too bad, you know, shoes have always been my thing. And I came out and I had on the colors of the other school. I did, I did. It was unbelievable that I didn't even know that you were supposed to wear the c- you know, your co- your school colors, our school colors were red and white and we were playing [Alexander Graham] Bell Vocational School [Washington, D.C.] and theirs were orange and black, and I had on this gorgeous orange and black suit. And that sort of summed up that experience. Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: A little out of kilter (laughter) with the rest of the world. Story_ID: 290404 Speaker 1: You decided to go to Emerson? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, what were your experiences like there? Speaker 2: Well I got to Emerson College in Boston, Massachusetts, my mother [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] drove me up and my recollection, she dropped me off on the curb and her last thing she said to me was, "Make sure you're getting a minor in education in case you ever have to fall back on it." And so that mentality of, of a woman getting a degree, but always have something to fall back on in case your husband and you split up, you know it was very important. When I went to school I had very long hair, it, the movement was really between the Vietnam War movement and the Black Power movement, I think about two or three weeks later, I cut all my hair off, I went to this black salon in, in Boston, I had an afro created. Now my hair is pretty, pretty dead straight, so I got this permanent and every night I would put a 125 perm rods in and then I could roll 'em real fast, you know, I'd get 'em all in and I'd get up in the morning and take 'em out and I'd pick my hair out, pick, pick, pick, pick, pick, pick, pick, it'd take a while to pick it out and I'd take a can of hairspray and I'd spray my hair and then I'd put this scarf on it, I'd hold the scarf and sort of do it, you know, and it big like [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis, you know, and of course when I walked, you know, it would sort of like--it would sort of move-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --like this, you know? It, it definitely moved with me and I was finding myself. Changed my name. Speaker 1: What did you change your name too? Speaker 2: My name was Amanata [ph.]. My friend, my good friend from high school [Western High School; Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.], Linda [ph.], with whom I'm still friends with named me Amanata. It had a, it had a meaning but to this day we can't remember, I should probably look it up. Never told my family that I had changed my name and changed my persona and that Thanksgiving when I came home, I came off of the airplane, I had my head wrapped in a gele, and my mother was standing at the gate when I got off and she saw this very tall head wrapped, I had on a gorgeous navy blue suede coat with zippers all over. And I caught that eye of hers and walked over to her and she says, "I'll meet you out front," and she scurried on away and I said, "Well what about my bags?" She was gone. And I come out with my bags and I get them in the, in the car and we're riding home and she says, "Well what is, what is this rag on your head?" And I said, "It's a gele and I say it's an African head dress." And she says, "Well Maxine, what, what's going on here?" "Don't call me Maxine anymore, I've changed my name, that's my slave name and I'd prefer if you'd call me Amanata." We got home, I had a date that evening with my boyfriend, I went upstairs, 'cause I had the perm rods underneath the gele, okay? So I took the gele, and got the, got the afro positioned and I told her I was going out about eight o'clock, and about a quarter to eight, or seven thirty, eight o'clock she called me downstairs, I came downstairs, through the living room and dining room, turned into the kitchen and she took a pot of water and threw it on me and she said, "Let me be real clear about this, as long as I'm supporting you, I'm sending you to school, you're living in my house, your name is [HistoryMaker] Maxine Beatrice Baker and blow that hair out and no more Amanata." Speaker 1: What happened to Amanata after that? Speaker 2: It was almost like a reverse baptism, or, or in that scene in 'The Wizard of Oz,' when the Wicked Witch just sort of, she sort of left. Speaker 1: Amanata just kind of faded away? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 290405 Speaker 1: One of the things we didn't talk about in high school [Western High School; Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.] was your social life. Was it, did you date a lot and did you have a boyfriend? Speaker 2: I did have a boyfriend. I didn't date a lot, I think, I, I had a couple boyfriends. A pretty steady one, eleventh and twelfth grade and through freshman year of, of college. Still talk to him now. Speaker 1: And what year did you graduate from Emerson [College, Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I graduated in, in 1973? I was twenty years old when I graduated college. Speaker 1: And what did you get your degree in? Speaker 2: Well, I decided speech pathology wasn't really what I wanted to do so I, I have my degree in speech communications, Bachelors of Science in speech communications and have a minor in education, in case I have to fall back on it (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laugher). Speaker 2: And when you were in college, did, did you join any sororities or were you active in any organizations? Speaker 1: No, no. I was counter culture at that point, I was rejecting. So, as I've explained to you, I lived in this narrow band. Most of my recollection of elementary school [John Quincy Adams Elementary School and Bunker Hill Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], junior high school [Jefferson Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] and most of high school, I've stepped over the bands in, in college. It was an opportunity, having been the only child living in a very female dominated household, here I was in school, you know, eight hours away, back then that was forever far, you know? I, it was a school predominately Jewish kids from New York and New Jersey. I think when I went to Emerson there might have be--probably about two thousand students, there were probably twenty African American students. And so, I wasn't affiliating, well we didn't have sorority, well we had sororities on campus but they were white sororities, I didn't join any sororities, they didn't at most of the Greek organizations had city wide chapters in Boston [Massachusetts], and so I would go to parties sometimes but, I did not pledge. Speaker 2: What were your impressions of Boston? Speaker 1: Ooh. Great place to go to school, I wouldn't wanna live there. Very segregated, I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Were you surprised by the segregation? Speaker 1: --shocked. I was shocked-- Speaker 2: --Yeah. Speaker 1: Absolutely, I was shocked, because my life wasn't like that and so I, my school wasn't located near downtown in the Back Bay area, but I could go downtown and never see anyone black. I just was shocked. I could go weeks without seeing African Americans, that was, you know, unbelievable to me and so, it, it was a time of exploration, questioning. I, I remember getting into a big argument with a--I was very active in student government at school, I had positions of leadership on campus and I remember getting into a huge argument with a Caucasian guy, who is a very dear friend, who said to me, "Why don't you just pass for white? You know? It would be so much easier for you if you just go on and pass for white." And I said, "Why would I want to be something I'm not, that's not who I am." So, all these messages from earlier and you know, my, my people said, you know, we're proud of who we are, you know, we, we don't, why would we wanna pass for white? All of my family, the, the, my mother's [Thelma Maxine Reynolds Baker] siblings who had excelled in, in their careers and their opportunities, whatever they were, I mean whatever their world was, you know, they had, they had done well and so that was never an option for me and again of course you were getting bombarded with the Black Power movement, the Vietnam War, you know, questioning the government, you're questioning everything, well, why would I want to do something, you know? So college was a great time for me to explore about who I was, who did I, what did I want to take from the lessons I heard? What were the things I decided I wasn't going to carry further and what were the things that I was gonna pick up to be? You know? What was important for me as a woman and an African American woman to take forward? I loved college. It was a great experience. Story_ID: 290406 Speaker 1: So when you graduated from college [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts] in '73 [1973], what did you do next? Speaker 2: I came back to Washington [D.C.], because I wasn't gonna stay in Boston [Massachusetts], and I worked for, about a year or so. Did I work for about a year? Yeah. I worked for about a year and then went to graduate school, the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Where did you work? Speaker 2: I worked for the Air Transport Association [of America; Airlines for America, Washington, D.C.]. It is the trade association for the airlines. Speaker 1: What did you do there? Speaker 2: A secretary. I had worked there one summer while I was in college and they offered me a job making $5,200 a year, boy that was all the money in the world, I even though about quitting college to take that job and I had this wonderful boss, Edward Robinson [ph.], who said to me, "You're crazy, go back to college, there'll be a job here, you know, you can always come--I want you to have your degree because this is just a stepping stone for you." And, you know, when came, got out of college I, I'd graduated in February, bef- I should have graduated that June, but I came out early, I thought well I'll go back and work there. I knew the people and I think I was making eight thousand dollars then, you know, and I got free tickets on the airlines, you know, we had perks and stuff so. Speaker 1: So, when did you get your graduate degree? Speaker 2: I didn't. I went to graduate school, and didn't finish. Went to two graduate schools and didn't finish. Speaker 1: Where else did you go to graduate school? Speaker 2: I went to Southeastern University [Lakeland, Florida]. This past June I was honored with a honorary doctorate from Southeastern. Speaker 1: So what did you do after you decided not to pursue your graduate studies? Speaker 2: Worked. I worked the whole time. Speaker 1: Where did you--where did you work? Speaker 2: I worked for Air Transport Association and one of the guys that I worked for went off and started his own company and I went with him to start his company. Speaker 1: What was the name of that company? Speaker 2: Beauvais, B-E-A-U-V-A-I-S, Roberts and Kurth K-U-R-T-H [Beauvais, Robert, and Kurth], and I worked for Kurth, he had the Washington office here and the other two guys and were in California and there was around aviation economics and so it's still the airline industry work. Speaker 1: What did you do there? Speaker 2: I was his office manager. Speaker 1: And how long did you stay there? Speaker 2: I guess I stayed maybe two or three years. Speaker 1: And what did you do? I, so there had to, was there another job before you came to Fannie Mae, Fannie Mack, Freddie Mac [Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation], I'm sorry. Speaker 2: There was I worked at the Urban Institute [Washington, D.C.]. For a couple of, well no, wait a minute, after I left, after I left Beauvais, Roberts and Kurth, I went to Southeastern full time. I did that for about a year and I was working on a M.B.A. and then I went to an organization called Pacific Consultants, where I had my first professional job. I was an assistant vice president of administration and human resources for them, it was a ca- at a consulting firm. It was a really good experience I got to meet lots of people, we did a lot of work with [U.S.] Agency for International Development [USAID] and worked there for a couple of years, then ended up at the Urban Institute and then Freddie Mac in 1982. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-two [1982], you came to Freddie Mac. Story_ID: 290407 Speaker 1: And what was your first job here at Freddie Mac [Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation]? Speaker 2: Oh, I was hired, well when I, when I came to Freddie Mac, there were only four hundred employees and I was hired as the budget administrator for a department called administration, and, I think there were eight or ten people in that department. I ended up becoming the vice president of that department with 175 people, a few years later. Speaker 1: And what was Freddie Mac like when you first came to the organization in the early '80s [1980s]? What was the climate like here? Speaker 2: It was very smart people, small, you had lots of opportunity to grow and try different things. I remember my first day here, I asked to see the personnel policy manual and the last policy in the book, which only probably had five or six policies, was an adoption policy. And it, I read it and I thought gee, this is a very interesting place, I've never worked anyplace that had an adoption policy, I wonder what that's about? So I got up and went and asked someone, can you tell me about this? And they said an employee in our information systems areas next door neighbor's house burned down and left twelve or thirteen children orphaned and the man came to work and told the human resources department he wanted to adopt them and they wrote a policy to pay for the expenses, you know? And I thought my goodness this is an interesting place that would be that sensitive to their employees or, and that young, you know, to be that responsive, you know? Many times my experience would be well, you know, we can't help you. Now that told me a lot about Freddie Mac and I had lots of opportunities to try, I've been here twenty-three years but I've had numerous careers here, lots of different experiences. Story_ID: 290408 Speaker 1: We were talking about when you first came to Freddie Mac [Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation] and, let's talk about your personal experience with adoption. You had, you know, talked about your co-workers experience but what about your personal experience with adoption? Speaker 2: Well, of course when I came to Freddie Mac and I read that policy I didn't think I was going to need to use it. I, I had been married about two years and, I guess, I guess shortly thereafter we decided to have a family and it's really the first time in my life that I was told I couldn't have something I wanted. And, I remember being in Chicago [Illinois] on business and coming back on a plane and really grappling about do I want a kid or d- you know, was I just gonna be a career woman and could I live with that? And I was sitting in the back of the plane, I was a smoker at the time and you could smoke on airplanes and this woman was coming down the aisle, you know with a kid on her hip and fifteen bags and there's a center seat and I'm like, oh no, this woman's gonna come sit next to me and lo and behold she did and she said, could you hold the baby (laughter) and she was like five months old. Well, I ended up holding this baby and falling in love with this little girl on the plane and when my husband [Ronald L. Stokes, Sr.] picked me up at the airport that day, I said, "We have to do something." So, we, he had a son, a little boy who, I guess was about seven at the time and so we explored adoption and in 1987, our first daughter came, Morgan [Stokes], she was about three and a half months old when she came home in one of those horrendous snow storms in Washington [D.C.], we had like thirty inches of snow on the ground, but we went and got her and brought her home and, it was an amazing experience. She's a freshman in college now so, she sent me a birthday card yesterday and said, it was a cute little card, Internet card, about, you know, you still look young or whatever and I hope as a child I didn't, you know, put too many age lines on you, and she said, I hope I wasn't that kind of kid and I sent her an email back and I said, "You have been such a joy and a blessing in my life that--and with a little time and space, i- it doesn't seem like you were ever a problem." I miss her a lot, and then three years later our second daughter, Jillian-Taylor [Stokes] came, about two weeks before Christmas, the first time in my life I had--was not prepared for Christmas and she came on the 18th of December of that year and she too was three months old. So, we were blessed with two little girls, about three years apart and my life hasn't been the same since. Speaker 1: And can you just briefly tell us a little bit about what the adoption process was like for you? Was it pretty quick once you and your husband made the decision to adopt, that you, you know, got your first daughter or what was the process like (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I--I-- Speaker 1: Back in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Yeah right. We--and it's a different process now. Both of my daughter's adoptions were closed adoptions, you know, now most adoptions, the birth parents and the adopted parents meet one another, but both of these were closed adoptions and it went pretty fast. I remember the adoption agency said, "Once you are clear, it could be a couple of weeks." I said, "You must be kidding?" (Laughter) You must be kidding, so it took me a long time to do the paperwork and as I, I had bought into the sort of the media perception that it would take five or six years, but that's pretty much for Caucasian infants and so it, Morgan, from the time we finished the paperwork was less than nine months and Jill was probably six, seven months. It was fast (laughter). Story_ID: 290409 Speaker 1: In the beginning how were you handling the pressures of being a working mother? How were you balancing and, and at the same time you were climbing the career ladder as well, making some news career wise? Speaker 2: Yeah it was funny. Morgan [Stokes] came in January, I was on maternity leave or I was on leave, actually it was vacation leave I had to take at that time. We didn't have an adoption leave policy at that time, we have one now but, I was home and my boss [David Robinson] called me in for my review in February and, he was talking about some of the criteria that was used in evaluating, and that I was on track and I was doing well and he thought, his colleagues had rated me high on being officer potential and I said, "Well that's interesting but I'm, I'm really not interested in becoming an officer, I got a new baby," and at that time Freddie Mac [Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation] was located in Washington, D.C. and I lived in Washington, D.C., so you know, life was manageable. She came in January and we had this conversation in February, in May I was promoted to officer and that December, we moved out to Reston, Virginia, so it was very stressful being, so far, I lived right off 16th Street, upper 16th Street and-- Speaker 1: Finally got to the Gold Coast [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: I, it was, I didn't get on the right side, I was still one block off it. That's okay. I liked where I was, but that commute from Reston to upper northwest, one night took me two and half hours, so, we made the decision to move out here to northern Virginia, closer to the office. I was, we were very fortunate. I had live in help, one of the things that was important to us was to have the girls stay at home because they were adopted, that, that they get grounded in their own house and, and I think that was a good decision. It looked to me like too much transition, birth parent, foster care parent, biological parent, day care I just thought would be too disruptive, so I wanted them to be grounded in their own home. Story_ID: 290410 Speaker 1: When did Freddie Mac [Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation] establish the Freddie Mac Foundation? Speaker 2: The foundation was started in 1991, and this boss [David Robinson] that I was talking to you about, was the founding officer of, of the organization, our chairman at that time was the creator but, this gentleman who had, given me this feedback. And I remember him getting the job and I thought, God, that has got to be the best job in the whole wide world, now meanwhile, I have the second best job in the whole wide world, I was vice president of administration and corporate properties. I was responsible for building the campus in our McLean [Virginia] headquarters, the three buildings on Jones Branch Drive on the tollbooth side I had responsibility for. So, it was an amazing task and opportunity to create something that would be lasting, but I was involved in the community on a couple of boards and so I knew after I had finished this, that this would be my next place to go and so in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The foundation? Speaker 2: The foundation. Speaker 1: Meaning, the foundation? Actually, you know, one thing I didn't ask you that I should have is, can you just briefly describe what Freddie Mac is and what kind of organization it is? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What it does? Speaker 2: It is in the secondary mortgage market. And what that means is, when Freddie Mac was created in, in the '70s [1970s], we bought mortgages from savings and loan organizations and, the way that Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] and Freddie Mac work is, we keep the money in the pipeline so we buy mortgages from mortgage bankers or banks and pull those and sell them as securities so that money is always available for new homebuyers. Speaker 1: And how has it made a difference do you think, in terms of African American homebuyers and homeowners? Speaker 2: Well, our entities keep the cost of financing down and of course w- we all benefit by keeping the cost down, it becomes more affordable for us to acquire homes and to keep those homes. Speaker 1: And when did you come to the foundation? Speaker 2: In September of '97 [1997]. Speaker 1: And what is the Freddie Mac Foundation? Speaker 2: Well, the foundation is a separate entity from Freddie Mac. It is a 501(c)(3) designated charitable organization, it is a corporate foundation and our mission is around children, helping children who are vulnerable to poor outcomes, have productive lives. And principally we give in the areas around child abuse prevention, adoption and foster care, doesn't that come full circle? And youth development, we got involved in adoption and foster care very early and then we realized that most of the children who are in the foster care system had been abused and neglected by their families, so that's how we got involved into child abuse prevention (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And-- Story_ID: 290411 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your work personally with 'Wednesday's Child,' and tell me what 'Wednesday's Child' is? Please describe it for us. Speaker 2: Well, 'Wednesday's Child' is a televised adoption program that Barbara Harrison here in Washington [D.C.], had started and when the anchors develop a program like that, many times they can't hold the program to a certain day or certain time, so, an entity like the Freddie Mac Foundation invest in buying that time. I'm working very closely with the station and a, and a third party non-profit organization to bring the children, find sites, and get the children ready to, to show on the program. The children who are shown on this program are children who are the most at risk to not being placed. Many times they're older children, most of the times they are children of color, many times they are a sibling group and for many of these children, the courts have deemed the last chance for these kids is to be shown on television, for someone to see their story. Many of our kids have some sort of disability, whether physical or mental, or, and or just from suffering from abuse and neglect. Speaker 1: And the, the program 'Wednesday's Child' has expanded (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --under your leadership to other cities? Can you tell us why you felt the need? Speaker 2: Sure. I--It was a successful model. One of the things that we've tried to do is find models, either ones that we've helped create or ones that someone else has and replicate them. So, this model, and it was so successful here in Washington, and we've been doing it for twelve, thirteen years here in [Washington] D.C., we've taken it to New York [New York], Chicago [Illinois], Atlanta [Georgia], Dallas [Texas] and Los Angeles [California] and we've had tremendous, tremendous stories, families are made, lives of children are changed, and, and what's even more important to remember is, not only the lives of this child is changed but their children so it's generational. Story_ID: 290412 Speaker 1: What are some of the changes that you've noticed throughout the organization? How has Freddie Mac [Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation] changed during the, or what are some of the biggest changes that you've seen during the more than two decades that you've been with the organization? Speaker 2: Size. We certainly have grown from four hundred employees to about five thousand employees. We were a sleepy little organization and, and now we are now nationally recognized not only for our programs on the corporate side but our philanthropic work. We're known as a good corporate citizen, we're an employee of choice, we have an extensive employee involvement program. We're involved in this community like, I would say, no one else is, we really do very deep type of grant making, we get very involved with the community, we get very involved with, the organizations that we work with. Story_ID: 290413 Speaker 1: Why is philanthropic work important? Speaker 2: Well, I think it's the, the essence of what the company's [Freddie Mac, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation] about. Our company is about financing homes, our foundation [Freddie Mac Foundation] is about making homes a safe, sound, healthy, happy places for children. We know that if children are stabilized, families are stabilized, if families are stabilized, communities are stabilized, so, you know it all goes together about making a better place, better place than what we found. We understand that to whom much is given, much is required, and so we, we take our philanthropic work, as like any other business, we want to be effective, efficient. Speaker 1: And do you think that, what are some of your thoughts on African Americans and philanthropic work? Often times, it, it's usually not the face that you see when you hear of philanthropy and that kind of thing, what are some of your thoughts? Speaker 2: You know, I think it depends on how you define philanthropy. I many times our traditional model is someone who is wealthy, and is investing money and putting their names on, you know, different buildings or programs. I would suggest that I think the African c- American community has always been philanthropic, I think we're taught very early on to take care of our own, to support our family and, you know, the, the neighborhood, you don't have to just give dollars, you can give time and we certainly know that our ancestors, those that we know and those that we, that were here before us, have made this place a better place for us to live in. That's what I think philanthropy is about. I love when Dr. Angelou [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] talks about we've been paid for, we've been paid for by the generation that came before us, by their giving back to the community to make sure that which they came to is better. And that's what I think philanthropy is all about. So, while we may not have big names, other than the Cosbys or that are giving at, at, you know, to may institutions, or Oprah [Winfrey] or whatever, I think we have a history, a rich history of giving back and taking care of others. I--it reminds me of Aunt Beulah's [Beulah Burke] table (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Speaker 2: You know it's, Aunt Beulah taught me early on, it doesn't matter if they're related, they have a right to be here at this table and if as long as we have something to offer, and to share, then that's what we will do. Story_ID: 290414 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about one of your personal struggles. In 2001, I believe you were diagnosed with breast cancer? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about that? Speaker 2: Oh sure. I--w- had a co-worker, very good friend of mine whose wife had been diagnosed a couple months before and she was the epitome of perfect health and as he would tell me about the experience, I, I was just saddened that she was going this and one night I was getting ready for bed and I just rubbed right here and I felt a lump and I, it was on a Tuesday, that next day I went to see my physician and she said that she was a little concerned but not overly concerned, let's go and get a mammogram, that Friday I went and had a mammogram. You know, I had had one within the year, I went and had the mammogram on Friday, nothing showed up, and you could feel t- the lump and nothing showed up. So they took me into the ultrasound room and the ultrasound doctor said, "I'm concerned of its shape and something." That next Monday I was at the surgeon and it all went very fast, I had needle aspiration that day and the next day, that following Tuesday, so now it's a f- you know, one week. It was diagnosed to be a malignancy, so I was operated the following Tuesday, a very small tumor, again, found from self-examination. So I am a strong proponent of women and men, as we know, breast cancer can hit men too, have got to know their bodies, I was operated on very small tumor, but I had twenty-one lymph nodes removed, twenty of which were malignant. It was a very advanced case, a very aggressive type of cancer and we, from that moment on it was just a whirlwind, I was operated on the 13th of February, I went into six months of chemotherapy and-- Speaker 1: Six months? Speaker 2: Six months. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And then six weeks of radiation, so 2001, from January t- the last week in January to the last week, or middle of November was the year that, you know, I fought for my life and won that battle. Speaker 1: And cancer free? Speaker 2: I am cancer free. I wouldn't wish it on anybody but it really changed my life, it is a real perspective adjustment on life and, you know, my issue now is to continue to stay focused on what I know is important. I remember when they called and told me I had cancer, there wasn't one report sitting on my desk that was that important. It was about my family, my children, and taking care of myself. I did, you know, very well during chemo, I did a lot of visualization, I got back to church, and I had really moved away from my spiritual development because I was too busy so, it was a--I'll show you, you're not busy about anything and for that I'm very thankful. I am very clear about how, how I wanna spend my life and what I wanna do and I, I know that my life was saved for me to continue to do what I needed to do. And I'm very thankful for that. Story_ID: 290415 Speaker 1: Do you consider yourself a role model for, for women and particularly, African American women? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. I think it's somewhat thrusted on me? I don't, I remember people coming up to me when I was sick. Many times, I wouldn't wear a wig or I'd start out with a wig and it was awful hot and I'd take it off and, how many women came up to me and said, gee that they had gone through a health situation and that they wished that they had been as courageous as I to be as open as I was. I, I wasn't trying to be courageous, I wasn't trying to be a role model, I've tried to live my life, true to myself, and do what's right and in that, I think, you know, because of my position in the company [Freddie Mac, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation] and the community, you know, I've become a role model. Story_ID: 290416 Speaker 1: And when you look back at your life, what stands out the most too you and why? Speaker 2: Resiliency. I think that's what I would say, you know? A child who in the '50s [1950s], came from a broken home. Okay, well, fine. A child who, you know, had different life experiences, but continued to, you know, flourish and learn and adapt and le- you know, continue to refine and defi- redefine herself. You know, certainly with illness and certainly with the management issue that happened a couple years ago. They're life lessons, and it would be Cinderella-ish to say, well these things don't happen, they do happen, so. Story_ID: 290417 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community? Speaker 2: Oh, I think at large, yeah, you know, I'm very concerned about our young people on many fronts, you know. T- the, the images that they see, their experiences, you know, when, when I think back, one of the things I've tried to bring to my work is trying to give positive exposures, you know, I finally got why we did all of those tours down at, you know, to the different monuments, it was to exposed, see, to experience. You know, some of my greatest joy has been with some of the children in the district [Washington, D.C.] who send them to camp, when I know that they're not gonna have that experience or send them away to camp for two weeks or too allow [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou to come in and read poetry to them or, [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes to perform music for them, you know, it--y- you, you, when you are exposed, your eyes open to a world out there. A world of possibility. Story_ID: 290418 Speaker 1: Do you think you would have ever chosen a different career path? If so, what do you think would have been?--I mean do you ever regret not becoming a speech pathologist? Speaker 2: No. No, no, no. I don't have any regrets. I don't have any regrets about my career choices at all, I've had a phenomenal experience. I have had opportunities that I didn't even know existed. This guy I keep talking about, David Robinson, when, he called me and, many years ago and asked me did I know how to read a blueprint and I was like no, but it's like a puzzle, how difficult could it be? I'll, I'll go and talk to some architects and learn and three years later I had the largest construction project in the Commonwealth of Virginia under my belt. I mean, it doesn't get better than that, you know? So, I've tried to always stay open to learn, I learn from mistakes, continue to position myself and evolve and it seems to have paid off. Story_ID: 290419 Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: A good mother, a loving daughter, and a good friend. Speaker 1: What do you think your legacy will be? Speaker 2: A good mother, great kids, you know, the, the work will be picked up by someone else. I think I've given that good foundation and, and I see, I, I, I'm not really bound by what can't be, but what can, what can we do. I'm very creative and I think I've brought creativity to this work, to think out of the box and try some different things. So I think that'll be my legacy, and of course having these three buildings sitting here [McLean, Virginia], (laughter), I--it's, it's pretty neat when you drive down the toll road and your kid says, "Oh my mom was responsible for building those buildings. Oh, that's my mom's building." Story_ID: 290420 Speaker 1: This is a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the photo. Speaker 1: --picture of Dr. Dorothy Height [HistoryMaker Dorothy Height], President William [Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton and me at Doctor Heights' office, January 10th, '01 [2001]. Speaker 2: About what year was that one taken? Speaker 1: Two thousand one [2001]. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry, you said '01 [2001], I beg your pardon. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Next. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry did you get it Scott [Stearns]? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): No, I got it, yeah, I got it. Speaker 2: This must be the graduating class of-- Speaker 1: And if you look back, Maxine [HistoryMaker Maxine Beatrice Baker] you can see it right there in the monitor, just in case. Speaker 2: --oh, of nursery school, The Garden of Children [Washington, D.C.], there I am on the second row, third from the left with all of my classmates. Speaker 1: Okay and you're second row, thi-- Speaker 2: Third from the left, with the big pretty bow. Speaker 1: Right here? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Same face. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Oh you look so sweet. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Hold that one for a moment. Speaker 1: I'm sorry Scott? Speaker 2: Hold it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Hold it for a minute. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Go ahead, next. Speaker 2: Okay, I think I may have to hold this one, 'cause it's kinda curvy. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Sure. Speaker 2: And I don't wanna--are my pins too much in the shot? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Mo--yeah, move as far, well, you know, you got that curl at the top, let's move it, there you go. Yeah, you're (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh and Maxine if they're upside down or we flip 'em in post-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --production. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my mother, d- down at the monuments on her bicycle, I'm not sure what year, she looks like she's eighteen years old so that's probably the early '30s [1930s]? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Hold it please? Next please. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's 1937. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Go ahead. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my mother, [Thelma] Maxine Reynolds Baker in 1937, sitting and posing on a car out by Howard University [Washington, D.C.] campus. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): That's fine. Speaker 2: Okay, actually we'll just get one of those, that's fine. Speaker 1: Well, that's me, Maxine Beatrice Baker, probably about a year old, that's 1953, sitting on a big hassock. Speaker 2: All righty. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Good next. Speaker 2: It's a picture of my mother's mother, Beatrice Jones Reynolds and her father, Walter Raleigh Reynolds, Sr. and I'm not sure when that was taken, it looks they're two separate pictures put together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay next. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my parents' wedding day, September 20, 1945. Maxine Reynolds Baker and Evan Posey Baker, Sr. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Um-hm. Good, next. Speaker 2: This a picture of my older daughter on the right, Morgan Noelle Stokes and my younger daughter Jillian-Taylor Reynolds Stokes on the left. Speaker 1: About what year? Speaker 2: This was last year, 2004. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Good. Speaker 1: Here's a picture of my daughters Morgan Noelle Stokes on the right and Jillian-Taylor Reynolds Stokes on the left, 1990, about three and a half and six, seven months old. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Next. That one you're gonna have to-- Speaker 1: Have to hold? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my grandmother on the left, Beatrice Jones Reynolds and her youngest daughter Lillian Reynolds Denning, looking at the new baby, Maxine Beatrice Baker. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-two [1952]? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-two [1952]. Speaker 1: Fine. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay. Speaker 1: Can I see that picture? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me, Maxine Beatrice Baker at the back of my father's house and, looks like its Easter, probably of 1954. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Next. Speaker 1: Aren't I sharp? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: T- this is a picture of my father, Evan Posey Baker, Sr. and my mother, Maxine Reynolds Baker, Sr. holding me as a young child, probably, 1952. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Hold please. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Ok, next. Speaker 1: Now this says 1944, Maxine. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Go ahead. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my grandfather, on my mother's side, Walter Raleigh Reynolds in 1944. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Next. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father's parents, Beatrice Posey Baker and Evan Edward Baker, probably in 1958. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Hold one moment, next. Speaker 2: This is my father, Evan Posey Baker, Sr., probably 1944. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay, next. Speaker 2: A picture of my mother, Maxine Reynolds Baker, 1944. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Next. Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959] on this one. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me at Christmas, 1959. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Hold it. Speaker 1: Forty-five [1945]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay next. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother, Maxine Reynolds Baker, 1945. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay, next. Speaker 1: Okay, now these are all in the album so? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Um-hm. Speaker 1: Baker and her brother, Walter Raleigh Reynolds, Sr. [sic. Walter Raleigh Reynolds, Jr.], probably taken in 1920, 1921. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Repeat the beginning of that again. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother, Maxine Reynolds Baker and-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Great, that's enough, we got the rest. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay, next. Speaker 2: Okay. Now this one right here it's got, oh darn it, I'll get that Maxine. Speaker 1: Which one? Speaker 2: This one with your grandfather. The two ch- the man and the two children. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay, go head. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my gra- mother's father, Walter Raleigh Reynolds, Sr., my mother Maxine Reynolds Baker and her older brother Walter Raleigh Reynolds, Jr., probably 1920. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay next. Speaker 1: That was it 'cause we didn't know the others in-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): All right. Speaker 1: That's a baby picture of my mother, Maxine Reynolds Baker, 1914. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay next. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Go ahead. Speaker 1: Oh gee, wait a minute, I have to think, what year, let's make up a year. What year were they in office? Speaker 2: The--was this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): (Simultaneous) Ninety [1990]-- Speaker 2: --the first or-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): --ninety-two [1992] or the-- Speaker 2: --the second-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Ninety [1990], to-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Two thousand [2000]? Speaker 1: We'll make it '90 [1990]. Speaker 2: Let's see, let me look at Hillary's [Hillary Rodham Clinton] hair, sometimes--that was the second term. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): (Unclear) really? Speaker 2: Yeah, well she had short hair-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay-- Speaker 2: --'cause remember first term she had-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay-- Speaker 2: --longer hair, more poufy. Speaker 1: Okay, so let's make up, just make up a year. Speaker 2: So, why don't we say mid-'90s [1990s]? Speaker 1: Okay. This is a picture of me, Maxine Beatrice Baker with first lady, Hillary Rodham Clinton in the mid-'90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Next, all right. Speaker 1: A picture of Oprah Winfrey and me at Doctor Height's ninetieth birthday party that would be 2001...