 Story_ID: 192756 Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gimes, and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you state your name and spell it for me, please? Speaker 2: I'd be happy to. My Gwendolyn Elizabeth Boyd. It's G-W-E-N-D-O-L-Y-N, Elizabeth, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, Boyd, B-O-Y-D. Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth? Speaker 2: December 27, 1955. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Montgomery, Alabama. Speaker 1: Your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an engineer. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: The location of this interview is Ebenezer African Methodist Episcopal Church in Fort Washington, Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is Wednesday, April 25, 2007. Speaker 1: Alright. Story_ID: 192757 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you what I call "People Magazine-ish" type questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I think it's apparent, but my favorite color is red. Speaker 1: And what do you like to eat? What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is actually fried chicken and collard greens. That's a part of my Southern roots (laughter). Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: I know it's not good for me, but I love to eat it anyway (laughter). Speaker 1: What about seasons? What is the favorite--your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I say my favorite time of year is fall because it's not too hot. It's not too cold. The transition, especially in this part of the country of the leaves on the trees and it's just a beautiful time of year. Things are settling after a long hot summer, and coming back to--it's sort of like preparing for a rebirth again. So I love the fall. Speaker 1: Okay, when you go on vacation, do you have a favorite place to go? Speaker 2: I wish I could say I went on vacations (laughter). I need to go on vacations. But if I have an opportunity to travel on my own, I love to go to South Africa. I love that part of the world. It combines all of the best parts of everywhere you want to be. You have the ocean on one side. You have the mountains. You have just luscious grass and all of that. And then you have the wonderful people of South Africa who are just so warm and welcoming. And so I just love going to South Africa to vacation. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I would say from the bible, "The Lord is my light and my salvation. Whom shall I fear?" And it's an inspiration to me every day that no matter what I'm going to face that day, that God is with me. He's leading me, guiding me and directing me, and I have nothing to fear. You know, enemies will come and they will go, but God is my protection, and He will provide the light and the way, and show me the path. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 192758 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother, okay. What was her name, spell it for me, please? Speaker 2: Her name was Dora, D-O-R-A. And McClain, M-C-C-L-A-I-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother was a wonderful lady. She was sick most of my childhood. She died when I was 13 from colon cancer. But I always, always knew, no matter whether she was in the hospital or out of the hospital or bedridden, able to talk or not able to talk, I always knew she loved me. She was a single parent, and she would give everything for me, pay her last quarter, nickel, dime to make sure that I had what I needed. I remember so vividly when I was very young, I wanted to play the piano 'cause I was marking up the furniture, by just, you know, how you mimic you're playing the piano. And so she found a way to put money together so that I could take piano lessons, understanding also--she was a domestic worker and had not actually finished high school. So she made a living by cleaning other people's homes as we say in the vernacular. She would bring me clothes from people, you know, they would give her clothes, hand-me-down's or things that they were giving away. And so early in my life I learned how much she loved me in terms of sacrificing for me because with the meager resources that we had, living in the projects in Montgomery, Alabama, she found money for me to take piano lessons which was highly unusual for any black person living in the projects. I mean just having food and shelter were the main things, but taking piano lessons was just something that was not heard of. But she did find a way to do that. I have to take my lessons at 6:00 o'clock in the morning on Monday, Wednesday and Friday. So before I would go to school, I would go to piano lessons at 6:00 a.m. It provided for me a set of, a discipline. And I loved playing the piano. I played from when I was six years old, up until now. I actually don't play very much now, but I started playing when I was six years old. Some mornings she was able to walk me to my lessons and some mornings because of her sickness, I had to walk on my own. But she would always send me out of the door with a prayer and so I knew she was there in spirit, even if she wasn't walking with me physically. And then I would leave my piano lessons and walk to school. In my generation, you walked everywhere. You know, we didn't have cars. If you had a car, you were extremely rich and many in my neighborhood were not rich. So we walked everywhere. So I walked to my piano lessons, and then I would walk to school, to elementary school, junior high, and then by the time I got to high school, we were bussed. Speaker 1: Where did your mother grow up? Speaker 2: She grew up in Montgomery [Alabama]. And the, again, because of her illness, she was always in and out of the hospital an awful lot. I remember when I was in the second grade actually, and they had to rush her to the hospital and not really understanding what was going on, I, at a young age became very familiar with this place called the hospital because that's where my mother spent most of her time. Story_ID: 192759 Speaker 1: My godmother who was like a grandmother--she was not my mother's [Dora McClain] mother, but had helped to actually raise her as well because my mother's biological mother had died very young as well. So I never knew her. But my--her godmother who became my godmother would always take me in and she would come and get me from school if my mother had been taken to the hospital, and I wasn't to go home. So she was the one who actually raised me. Speaker 2: What was her name? Speaker 1: Her name was Emzella Mapson, E-M-Z-E-L-L-A, M-A-P-S-O-N. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so between the two of them, lots of love, lots of support. Whatever it is you want to do--she finished the eighth grade but had so much wisdom that you couldn't put it in any number of books in the library. So I like to--when I do presentations for people or give speeches, to say that she was the wisest woman I knew because she taught me common sense. As she said, book learning is good, but you have to have common sense to go along with it. And so she taught me all of the common sense things like how to live, how to treat people, that "please" and "thank you" will take you a long way in the world. You may be pretty, and you may have all the education in the world, but if you don't know how to treat people, then you will still be shut out from a lot in this world. She taught me humility, that you have to be able to accept where you are as you're going and growing in life, until you get there. But never look down on anybody if you have a few more dollars than they have. Honor people for who they are and where they are. Honor people as you're going up the ladder because you never know if you have to fall back down who you're going to meet on the way. Honor people for where God has placed them in this world because everybody that you meet, God has ordained them to be a part of your life, to help you get where you're going or for you to help them to get where they're going. But always to walk in humility, to honor God, to fear God in everything and it's not a fear of a shaking kind of fear, but to know that there is a God who has a plan for your life, who has ordained you to be here, and you need to listen to God wherever you want to go in life. So she taught me common sense, she took me to church every Sunday, and helped me to know God very early in my life because I was trying to reconcile why my mother was always sick and not understanding that. But she said, you know, God has a plan. God has ordained it so don't question God. Just walk in it, and know that everything is going to be alright. She had--the church where I attended, I started playing for the church, and as I said, I started playing when I was six. So I started playing for the Sunday school and then worked my way up to playing for the choirs and I played every Sunday at my little church in Montgomery [Alabama], Hilliard Chapel AME Zion Church. I played all of my life. Story_ID: 192760 Speaker 1: But also as I was growing up, my mother [Dora McClain]--as I said, my mother died when I was 13, and I just know that God had told her the day she was going to die because as I was preparing to get ready--I was in junior high, preparing to get ready to go to class, to go to school that day. And my morning routine with her was to fix her breakfast, bring it to her because at that point, she was bedridden, bring her her breakfast, make sure she was all set for the day, she had everything that she needed. And before I would leave, I would let the neighbor know when I was leaving. But as I was giving her her breakfast, she said, sit down. And I said, well, I have to go. I have to go to school. She said, sit down. I need to talk to you. And she said to me that morning, and I'll never forget it as long as I live, I want you to grow up. I want you to continue to get good grades in school, and I want you to be somebody. And, you know, I'm 13. Okay, I'm gonna be somebody. She said, "No, listen to me, I want you to grow up, make something out of yourself, and I want you to be somebody that I will be proud of." And I said, you know, I've been making all A's since I was in the second grade, aren't you proud of me now? She says, "Yes, I am, but I want to continue to be proud of you. And I want you to continue to be a good girl and do good things and make a difference in the world. Promise me." That's what she said. And I said, I promise, I promise. By the time I walked to school, she was gone. And they called the school because I hadn't actually arrived because the school was a long way, and they called me into the office and told me she had died. So I--they took me home at that point. But I just know that God told her that that was gonna be the last time she was gonna be able to say something to me. And I've lived with that in my head every day of my life, that everything that I do and say, and everywhere I go, I wanna make my mother proud of me. And I wanna honor God in everything that I do. Story_ID: 192761 Speaker 1: Did you know your father at all? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: Do you know his name? Speaker 2: Not really. You know, in the deep South, which is where I'm from, I think part of my mother's [Dora McClain] life was living as an unwed mother. And she did not really want me to be scarred. Again, in 2007, these kinds of things, you know, people could care less. But in the '50's [1950s], it was a sign of shame that you had a child and you weren't married. So I think to more, protect me, than anything else, he was just not talked about. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 192762 Speaker 1: Besides your mother's [Dora McClain] death, what is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory? Well, as I said, I spent a lot of time in church (laughter). Church was the place to go and be and do. It was the freedom there. As, I could be creative in my music and singing, participating in the Sunday School. I was the Sunday School secretary, and, you know, treasurer, and I'd count the quarters and nickels and dimes on the--and give the report at the end of Sunday school, beyond that, I became a Sunday School teacher as I was growing older and still working with the choirs. I grew--my elementary school was segregated. Again, you're talking early '60's [1960s]. And my junior high school, I integrated. There were actually five of us, five black students who integrated my junior high school. So I went from a very, very warm and loving environment, all black elementary school where my teachers encouraged me and supported me and pushed me, and, you know, did everything to provide a warm and loving environment to junior high school where I was spit on, and called names and told that I was not welcome and should not be there, and your kind are not welcome here. Speaker 1: Talk more about your elementary school. What was the name of the elementary school that you attended? Speaker 2: My elementary school was McDavid, M-C-D-A-V-I-D Elementary School which no longer exists (laughter), but the building is still there. It became a trade school. So the actually physical structure is still there, but it has a different name now. Speaker 1: And you entered school in kindergarten? Speaker 2: I started kindergarten and did so well, they skipped the first--I skipped the first grade. So I went from kindergarten to second grade. And-- Speaker 1: Tell me about your teachers there. Speaker 2: My teachers -- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --were again, in Montgomery [Alabama], you know, Montgomery's a small town. It's famous because of everything that happened there with Dr. King [Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and many years later. But Montgomery's a very small town, and everybody kind of knows everybody. So my teachers were people who were highly respected in the community. You took all of your classes together, you know, so in the second grade, you know, you were in one room all day long, and you just switched from one subject to the other. Right, now, we're, you know, we're gonna do English, and then we'd do Math and that sort of thing. But I, all of my teachers, Mrs. Odessa Wilson was my second grade teacher. And she was just such a warm, wonderful lady. And all of my teachers at McDavid were just wonderful. When you were moving towards--I remember we had in the fifth grade, and I--now, I've lost her name, but I think it was Mrs. Wright. And she put the fear of God in everybody and she was my math teacher, and because I loved math, I didn't really fear her as much as all the other students did because I--there was, I just had a natural inclination for math. And so she would be very hard on many of the other students who didn't do well in math. But I think she appreciated my love of math and really pushed me to do well. In the, I think in the sixth grade, I had Mrs. Worthy as my--no, I'm sorry. In the sixth grade, Ms. Worthy was my Biology teacher. Mr. Bivens was my math teacher. And he, again, was just very, very supportive, saying, you're gonna go far in math. You're gonna do well. But all of my teachers, as I said, I made all A's all throughout elementary school, and they just saw in me something that needed to be encouraged, something that needed to be pushed. They also knew of my home situation and that many days I came to school without having breakfast. I remember one specific incident, probably--I think it was fourth grade, and I had come to school without breakfast. And I was, and just literally passed out in first grade--I mean in first period. So they made sure that they got me a banana, you know. Some of my classmates, you know, they passed me crackers, you know, and made sure that I had water and so forth. And, you know, just everybody kind of looked after me, you know, even those who were part of my class work. And, you know, from that point on, every day it was like, "Did you have breakfast? Okay, here's an apple, here's a banana, here's a pear" or, you know, just something to make sure that I had something in my stomach. But, again, learning so very early in life that whatever, wherever you are and whatever you have, you still have to keep pushing. You have to keep going. So even if I didn't have breakfast, I still had to go to school, and I still had to give my best, and I still had to do my best. And that at some point, things would balance out and at some point I would get something to eat--because we did have the school lunch programs at that time. So I knew I was going to have lunch. So I would just have to hold on until lunch, you know, and then I knew I would have something to eat, and I could make it through the rest of the day. Story_ID: 192763 Speaker 1: Describe your neighborhood. You said you lived in the projects. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Take a walk around the block and tell me what you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, well, in the, the neighborhood was truly the "hood". You would go from where I was to two doors down, the lady who sold things, as-- Speaker 1: What was the name of the--was there a name of the community? Speaker 2: It was Victor Tulane Courts. That's what it was called, Tulane Courts. And the lady two doors down, as I said, sold things, and, you know, children weren't supposed to know what she was selling, but, you know, people were in and out all day long. And, you knew, you know, I mean, of course, later on in life we found out, you know, she was actually selling alcohol. But, again, in the '50's [1950s] and the '60's [1960s], that, you know, was just a no-no, you know, you didn't do those things. And then a couple of other doors down, you know, there were women who sold themselves. But, and a few more doors down, there was a lady who was a seamstress who taught me how to sew. So in, you know, within walking distance, you had people with, from every part of life or every veneer of life, from the good to the bad. But no one ever bothered me. Again, being in the project, you were protected from the quote "outsiders". So if anybody outside the project came in to hurt anybody inside, you knew you were protected. But sometimes we didn't protect ourselves within the project because you could see somebody get shot. And then they'd come and take the body away and life would go on. And I knew, you know, there had to be something better than this, in terms of life, but again, you learned life's lessons very, very early. You learned who to stay away from. You learned who you could approach. You learned how to approach dangerous people or people who were quote "mean" in just dealing with them and living in the community. But, again, I also learned how to sew from the lady at the end. And she taught me everything about, you know, being a seamstress, being, you know, making my own clothes and when I was able to buy a sewing machine, a used one, I learned how to sew, and up until--actually, about 10 years ago, I made everything that I wore. And, again, knowing how to take the talent that's in your hand and make use of that, to make a living. So when others were going to the stores, to the department stores, to get new dresses for Easter and all of those kinds of special events, I was making mine, which turned out later in life to be a wonderful thing because I would make clothes for other people which turned into revenue (laughter) for me. But who would have known back in the projects when I was sitting under her feet and she was showing me how to sew on one of those machines, where you twist-- Speaker 1: With pedals. Speaker 2: --with the pedal, that later in life, that would turn out to be a wonderful thing. I made choir, dresses for our choirs, and, you know, all of those kinds of things from this one woman in the project who lived down the street or down the walkway from the prostitutes and those who sold alcohol. Story_ID: 192764 Speaker 1: Who were your friends? Speaker 2: Who, at that point at in my life? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I didn't have a lot of friends. Verdell Means lived around the corner. She was a friend. Elizabeth Johnson, another friend who lived around the corner. But, again, because of my mother's illness, I had to be at home a lot. So I didn't have a lot of time to play outdoors because a part of the routine was, as soon as I came home, I had to make sure that she was taken care of, that she had dinner and that, you know, that she was washed up and so forth. So I did have friends, but my friends also knew my responsibilities very early in life, that I had to grow up fast and to take care of her in reversing the role sort of. But they were still good friends and to this day. Speaker 1: Did you spend a lot of time reading or, I know you were an excellent student. Did you do a lot of reading? Speaker 2: I did a little reading. I did the reading that was required for homework and would read books every now and then. But I just loved math, and so I would take my math books and go all the way to the end of the book with the, my assignments because that's just something I loved to do. I just loved solving problems and putting things together and doing things. And I think that's also why I loved the piano because there is a mathematical dimension to learning to play the piano and putting tone--bringing tones together and learning the structure of notes and so I would do a lot of practicing my piano lessons because I'd have to get ready for the next piano lesson I had the next day, and doing my math assignments. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 192765 Speaker 1: Tell me more about the community in which you lived? Actually, let me ask you, think about a sound, a sight and a smell to your community at that time? Speaker 2: A sound, a sight and a smell. Well, the smell would be people cooking. I mean in the neighborhood, you know, everybody cooked, and, you know, kitchens were off the back. And you could go from door to door and, you know, people would offer you a biscuit or something like that. So the smell would definitely be food cooking. The sight would be brick, not one of healthy grass and trees growing but just brick on top of brick, sidewalks. There was an area, a playground but it was, it was, you know, covered with dirt. There was one monkey bar in the center, but it was where people gathered. And, you know, so you would make up games. You had to use your imagination because a lot of us did not have toys. So we had to make up games. We, you know, we played hop scotch and on, you know, "Ring Around the Rosie", or, you know, we actually played outside, physical games outside with each other. But not a lot of green trees or anything like that, but just a lot of bricks and sight, smell, sound. Sound would be probably sirens, whether from ambulance, ambulances or the police. But sirens because the hospital, one of the hospitals in the city was not very far. It was about five blocks away, so you had to come through the neighborhood or somewhere near the neighborhood so you were hearing sirens a lot. Story_ID: 192766 Speaker 1: The other families, were there many single-family homes or-- Speaker 2: Just about, I would say just about every home was a single-parent home. Mother, father parent arrangement was truly not the norm in my neighborhood. And when leaving the neighborhood and seeing that kind of arrangement, it was wonderful to see it. And, you know, you sort of wished or wondered what that family was like, you know, and what that household was like. But, again, because my godmother and my mother helped me understand that God had me where he wanted me to be, that I wasn't--it wasn't a jealousy of not having, but knowing that this is where I was supposed to be. And this is the environment I was supposed to be in and understanding and accepting that and growing through it. I think it made me stronger because I had to be resilient very early. I had to be strong very early. I had to be dependent on myself to get things done, very, very early in life, and so it put that strength in my back that you don't need to wait for somebody to do something for you. If you want something, pray about it, and God will give you the strength to do it yourself, whereas a lot of people that I grew up, and were at the school with, I'll say, who did come from, you know, dual-parent home in a very nice neighborhood, when they hit their first crisis in life, crumbled because they didn't know how to handle it because they'd been sheltered and protected and didn't know quite how to, you know, when you hit that brick wall and know how to bounce back. And so I thank God for every brick wall that I had to face very early on because when I had to face brick walls later, I knew how to handle 'em because I first went to him in prayer to say, "Okay, God, here's a wall. How are we gonna handle this?" And he would give me the word to bring me through. Story_ID: 192767 Speaker 1: So you were a great student in elementary school and--[voices in background] Speaker 2: Uh-uh. Speaker 1: And then you talk about the fact that you leave a loving environment to go to junior high school. Tell me about that transition. What was the name of the junior high school that you attended? Speaker 2: I knew you were gonna ask me that, and I--it just went out of my head (laughter). Speaker 1: Just (unclear) (simultaneous) Okay, that's fine. You might remember later on. Speaker 2: Okay, hope it'll come back to me. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: The, again, the elementary school that I went to, all black, all black teachers, very knowledgeable in all of their subject matter, and they were able to effectively transfer all of that knowledge into us. So I felt absolutely prepared to go to junior high school. It was the time of the, you know, integration, but again, we all know of the things that happened during the South and the whites were not accepting of blacks coming into their schools, but because my teachers had given me such a strong foundation, even if I was the only black student in my class, I was still the most--able to do well in most, in all of my classes, which perturbed my teachers to no end because I knew the information. I would raise my hand. They would ignore me, but they couldn't ignore the tests which I excelled on always. I wanted to do something in math, and my teachers would tell me, oh, you don't need to--you need to find something else to do because, you know, black girls don't do math. So you need to think about something else that you want as a career. But I knew I loved math, and I did well, and so, you know, in my mind, I remembered what my mother said to me, that I could do anything I put my mind to. So I didn't listen to them as they told me I couldn't do math, and I continued to do math and continued to do well. But each class was, each day was a struggle, especially, you know, the first six months for all five of us who were there. I remember in physical--in PE, physical education, which was a requirement back then. I know they've taken the Arts and PE out of a lot schools now. But it was a requirement. But the girls didn't want to change in the room with me. And in PE, when you start to sweat, they would run away from me saying, you know, we don't want any of that black to rub off on us, thinking that, you know, when, I guess when I sweat, that the black was gonna rub off of me onto them; but very, very hurtful things like that, that would be said to you. But again, with resilience in my spine, I didn't receive any of that into my spirit and just continued to do what I needed to do. Story_ID: 192768 Speaker 1: Again, getting all the way through junior high and then also coming into high school. And, again, remember, that's only three years hence, and things are very tense still, even in high school. And I, instead of going to Booker T. Washington High School, which was in the neighborhood, they bussed all of us to Jefferson Davis High School, which was a significant distance away from our neighborhood, and, to make sure, they closed Booker T. Washington. So it was just shut down. So all of us had to go to Jefferson Davis, which was very, very tense. I remember the first six months there, there were fights, every day, every day there was a fight. I, in the lunch, in the cafeteria, lunchroom, going into the school, coming from school, in classrooms. There was just a fight every day because neither group wanted to be there. The black students were angry that they closed Booker T. Washington because many had lived and dreamed of graduating from Booker T. and now had to go to Jefferson Davis, and, you know, think about graduating from Jefferson Davis, you know, first president of the Confederacy. And then the white students didn't want us there, and, you know, we were infiltrating their territory and coming into their school. So there were just fights every day. But by the grace of God, I was allowed at one point to talk to one of the assistant principals, about forming an interracial council. And he accepted the idea and took it to the principal. And so my first year there, I was a part of establishing the first interracial council at JD [Jefferson Davis], that's what we called it, JD. So we had a student, a black student and a white student from each of the grades, 10th, 11th and 12th. So I was the 10th grade black student, and the 11th grade black student was a young lady named Patrice Hargrove. And I've forgotten the young man who was the 12th grade black student. And then, of course, a white student from each of them. And we would sit down each week and say, what is it that we can do to help bring people together? We know everybody's angry. But we have to stop fighting because we're not learning, you know, when we have to spend all this time, you know, clearing out the cafeteria, you know, there's a brawl, and, you know, drawing lines and so forth. And so we were, we had a very angry--I remember the 12th grade young man, white young man--his name was Don and I've forgotten his last name, very, very angry all the time. And he would just say, you know, well, we don't want you here. Go back to where you came from. Well, if we could go back, we would. But they closed our school, so we're here to stay. We don't have anywhere to go. And so he helped (laughter) us understand a lot of the anger in a lot of the white students because he never held his tongue about, you know, the resentment for us being there. But because of the council, we were able to work through a lot of issues, to put a lot of things in place, to have some assemblies where we could bring students together to talk to say, you know, before you, you know, make that first blow, let's talk through or talk to your member of the council. So in the 10th grade, the students would talk to me, you know, 11th grade, 12th grade and so forth, so that we're, we can turn this environment into one where we're able to learn and to grow and come here and do what we need to do. There were very few black teachers, but we did lean and depend on them to also help us make sense out of the nonsense of all of the violence that was a part of integrating these schools. So I was happy to be a part of that reconciliation, that movement at JD [Jefferson Davis High School]. And we, again, worked through it. I graduated as Valedictorian from Jeff Davis, and again, went on to college from there. Story_ID: 192769 Speaker 1: Were there any other activities that you were a part of in high school? Speaker 2: I was in the Honor Society, I was in the Math Honor Society. Oh, gosh, Math Club (laughter). There's a trend going here (laughter). Speaker 1: Once the teachers realized that you were excellent in math, did their attitudes towards you change at all? Speaker 2: Not in high school. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, not in high school Speaker 1: Not in high school? Speaker 2: But I kept doing what I liked to do, and I kept doing what I was doing. I also sang in the choir, which also helped to--we helped to integrate the choir at Jeff Davis. And I remember very vividly, we--there were five of us in the choir, five black students in the choir. And we staged our own protest by not singing "Dixie" 'cause that was one of the songs in the repertoire that the choir had to sing. And we all agreed that when it came to that song, we would not stand, and we would not sing. And so, of course, the first time we did it, our choir director was very angry and said, "You will sing or you will be put out of the choir". And we said, well, we will stand the risk of being put out of the choir, but we will not sing "Dixie". And so I think at that point, when she heard us and we weren't loud or verbose or anything. We just said, we will sit here until you sing it, and then we will stand and sing the rest of the repertoire. And she took it out. And so we never had--the choir never had to sing it again. And we did not have to sing it either. So, again, learning from Dr. King's [Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] model, because this is Montgomery [Alabama], and this is what we were living and learning every day of our lives that sometimes, you know, honey can diffuse the enemy a lot more than throwing stones at them. Story_ID: 192770 Speaker 1: Tell me about the social climate in the area in Montgomery. What was going on? Speaker 2: Because of all of the protests that, you know, all of the marches, you know, Dexter Avenue Baptist Church was the hub, and everybody knew that, you know, when there was a meeting at Dexter Avenue, everybody was there. You know, and Dr. King was the focal point until he, you know, moved back to Atlanta. But still, there were many marches and still many movements, and still things going on in Montgomery, you know, even, you know, the activities when they moved to Birmingham or moved to Atlanta, Montgomery still remained a hub. So a lot of famous people came through Montgomery and you know, I just said, "came through" (laughter). They didn't stay, but they came through to help promote integration and the non-violent movement of Dr. King. Speaker 1: What about the bus boycott? Speaker 2: I wasn't born then, but-- Speaker 1: Oh , no, but did you Speaker 2: --but we heard a lot-- Speaker 1: Heard a lot about it. Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes. Speaker 1: And did that play in your mind for any of the things that you would do later on as you stood up in the choir and said, we're just not gonna do it? Were any of the things that happened before you were born, that you heard about, did they influence you in what you would do later on? Speaker 2: I think they did, certainly, watching the resilience and the fight, the determination that was still in the people in Montgomery because, you know, even though the massive marches were over, the bus boycott, in itself, was over, people were still talking about it and people were still determined to have a better way of life. And they were still determined to make sure that the next generation of young people knew about the struggle. So we talked about it a lot and preachers preached about it a lot. So you knew about those things, and you were told by my godmother and many, many others that, you know, you've gotta get a good education, and you have to make sure that you're excellent in everything you do. You don't wanna give anybody an excuse for not allowing you to be where God has ordained you to be. So don't come with any excuses why you can't do your homework, why you can't be excellent in school, why you can't walk, why, you know, why you can't do all the things that you're supposed to do. Don't give anybody an excuse to hold you back. So that resilience, that drive, that fortitude was just driven in us as young people, especially, again, going back to McDavid, going to an all-black elementary school, having all-black teachers, they just didn't give you any slack. You knew they loved you, but they didn't give you any slack whatsoever. So when they raised the bar and said, "You can do better than this, and I'm not going to accept this paper. I'm not going to accept this because I know you can do better", and you did better. You just did better because you knew they loved you. You knew they cared about you, and you knew they had your best interest at heart. And they would tell you about all the struggles they had to go through in order to be able to go to college, you know, and to get the education that they had to come back to teach in segregated schools. Story_ID: 192771 Speaker 1: Who helped you decide where you would go to college? Speaker 2: My teachers, as I said, there were a few black teachers at JD, and they said, there's no question that you must go to college. And many of them had attended Alabama State [University], and they helped me, you know, in the process of filling out an application and saying, you know, you will go to Alabama State because they were alumnus of Alabama State [University]. So, and it was right there. It was at home. It was comfortable. I'd never been away from home, so talking about or even thinking about going away to college was just not one of those things that was on my agenda. But I could go to Alabama State because, you know, it was down the street. Everybody went there for big events anyway, you know, when, big marches or, you know, big events were going to happen. Many of them started on the campus of Alabama State, so we were all familiar with the campus. So that was fun for me. Story_ID: 192772 Speaker 1: What was the transition like living with your godmother after your mother passed? Speaker 2: Well, because I'd been with her anyway, again, my mother was in and out of the hospital a lot, and when she would go, she would stay for long periods of time. So I had beds in both places. So it, the transition-- Speaker 1: Did she also live in the projects? Speaker 2: She lived in another part of the--she didn't live in Tulane Courts. She lived in another part of town. And I've forgotten what the name of it was. I apologize, but another segregated part of Montgomery. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about your first year in college? Speaker 2: It was exciting. It, being there and having actually met a lot of those who were professors, again, because Montgomery is a small town and now, facing them as professor, I was, I think I was ready. They knew me because I had participated in a lot of things in the community. I participated in the, what was called "Ms. Fashionetta". It was like, you know, you know, black people had their own (laughter) events. And I actually, in high school participated in the Junior Ms. Pageant. I was one of the first blacks to participate in the pageant. Of course, you know, I knew I wasn't going to win, but I just entered anyway and did make it to the finals, which were held in Mobile, Alabama. But because I was very active and very involved, I played for the church choir which also sang at a lot of other churches in the community. So people would see me as the pianist or organist for my church choir. I was a speaker a lot of times, the gift of oratory was found early. And so I would do speeches at schools and at churches, you know, and plays and so forth. And as I said, I participated in contests and did all those kinds of things. So a lot of people knew me. And so by the time I got to college, you know, everybody kind of knew me, and they knew my story. And so, again, Alabama State, HBCU, historically black college, back in that warm, loving, supportive environment again. So it was great. It was great. Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school? Speaker 2: In 1973. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 192773 Speaker 1: So did you know what you were going to become or what you would do? Speaker 2: I didn't know what I was going to become but whatever it was, I knew it had to involve math. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just knew it had to be something that involved math, that involved problem solving, that involved putting things together. Again, it goes back to my love of sewing, which is putting pieces of a puzzle together to make a garment, my love of music, which involved, you know, notes, which have, you know, mathematical connotations to them. So everything that I did, not knowing it then, but everything that God ordained for me had mathematical background in it. So I knew whatever career I wanted, it had to involve math. Alabama State [University] was traditionally and still is, traditionally known as a teachers' college. It was founded as a teachers' college. So just about everybody who came through there became a teacher. That's what, that's what you went there for. But somewhere in my spirit, the Lord said, no, I don't think you're gonna be a teacher, didn't know what, but I knew something that had to do with math. So as I matriculated I started taking Physics, and really loved Physics, which, you know, combined my love of math and problem solving to real-life situations. We did not have Physics, as a major. We had it as a minor at Alabama State. So I took all the courses that were available to me for, as a Physics minor. I was also a Music minor. Again, my love of music, but knowing in my mind or telling myself in my mind I did not have the talent that would take me to the Metropolitan Opera, and I wanted to eat every day. So I wanted to stick with something that would put food on the table. So I was a music minor. I had to do two recitals and all the other things that, you know, were a part of that discipline. But somewhere towards my junior, the latter part of my junior year, I started talking with my advisor and he said to me, "You need to start thinking about going to grad school". And I said, "To do what?", you know, and he said, well, just start looking at some things and start reading, you know, look at some ways you can use your talent and your skill. And I just started reading about engineering, never met an engineer in my life. No engineers were on our campus, so I had no point of reference as to what, you know, to talk with someone. But in reading about what engineers did, I said, this is what I want to do. I wanna be able to solve problems, using my math and using my physics and solve world-life problems. This is what I wanna do. And so as my senior year approached, I took the GRE and did well on that and then I started applying to graduate school. And my advisor said, you know, just apply to a broad number of schools and the --I said, well, I don't have any engineering as an undergraduate. What will happen if I apply, you know, for graduate school for engineering without an engineering undergraduate major? And he said, well, let's just try it and see, and so I did. And so I applied for grad school and had actually been accepted at the University of Illinois and had talked to the dean there and was, you know, ready, had my apartment all set, getting ready to graduate, and graduated top of my class at Alabama State. So, and then I got this phone call from Yale [University]. I have to be perfectly honest. I thought it was one of my friends playing a joke on me (laughter). They said, this is, you know, Dr. Aptful (ph.) from Yale University. And I said, yeah, right. Okay, and we understand that you're interested in pursuing graduate work in engineering. I said, yes. Well, we'd like to offer you a fellowship to come to Yale. And I said, okay, who is this? (Laughter). He says, no, this is actually, you know, I'm the associate professor, you know, here in the School of Engineering, and we'd like to talk to you about applying to Yale because, of course, I had not applied, applying and coming here as--and being a part of our graduate program. So without an application or anything, he said, if you're willing to come, yeah, if you have them send us your transcript, and we'll work through the details. And I was accepted into Yale's graduate school for engineering. Story_ID: 192774 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, truly divine intervention. I, to this day don't know how they got my name, my interest in engineering and who in the administration decided that I would receive a fellowship because all of those things were already in place when he made the phone call. And so it had to be God because I didn't know anybody in Yale [University]. I had no pedigree, obviously, coming from the projects of Montgomery, Alabama, and didn't know--yeah, I mean I heard of Yale, but didn't even, it didn't even cross my radar to apply there. So, I know it was by God's grace and mercy that, you know, He provided the information to someone, somewhere, and they made it possible for me to attend. And so I called the dean back at the University of Illinois and said, I have another offer (laughter). And he was, he was very kind, and he said, I understand, and you do what you have to do. Speaker 1: Who was the president at Alabama State while you were there? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Dr. Levi Watkins who was there, oh, my, over 30 years, as president of Alabama State. His son actually is at Johns Hopkins [University], where I am now, a very renowned surgeon. But, yes, Dr. Levi Watkins who had been there for many, many, many years and much beloved. Story_ID: 192775 Speaker 1: Alright, so you're going to now actually go away from home? Speaker 2: For the first time in my life, I am leaving Montgomery, Alabama and not just going down the street, but going miles and miles and miles away. Now, that transition I have to say was very nerve racking. Many people didn't think I would leave because, again, coming from the projects, you know, okay, you've gone to Alabama State. That's a good thing, but you're just gonna become a teacher in the local high school or so, and, you know, live there forever. And when I said I was going to Yale [University]--in fact, I was talking to one of my good friends, Patrice Hartgrove, who, again, I mentioned on the Interracial Council at JD [Jefferson Davis High School], and she said, I didn't really believe you would leave. But God gave me a peace about it, and she said, when I saw the U-Haul on the back of your yellow Camaro, I knew you were going, and I couldn't believe it. And I drove from Montgomery, Alabama to New Haven, Connecticut. They had already, they had made arrangements for an apartment for me, so I got there and, you know, got settled in. But you could not find a more drastic set of contradictions. Growing up in the projects in the South, coming from an HBCU, now mixing with people who have tremendous pedigree, major money, you know, come from multi-million dollar income homes, have never wanted for anything in their lives and try, and, you know, mixing with them was truly an interesting experience for your spirit. But I remembered what my grandmother--my godmother and my mother told me, "You are God's creation. You are good. You can do anything you want to do." The other contrast was in the weather. I grew up in Alabama, never seen snow. My first semester there, my first winter there, they had three feet of snow. They had never had a snowstorm like that in the last 90 years (laughter). So my first winter, my first time seeing snow, I saw three feet of it. And I panicked. I really panicked (laughter). I said, okay, God, I remember laying prostrate on the floor, saying, okay, God, you brought me. What is going on? What is going on? And He, just, you know, gave me a peace. I was listening to Tramaine Hawkins on the, on my little recorder. And it, you know, He said, it's gonna be alright. It's gonna be alright. So I just buckled down and did my work and settled in. I met some wonderful people. I joined a church, Varick AME Church, AME Zion Church, actually, in New Haven, which was about eight blocks from the campus. And that became my firm foundation. Once I found church, everything else was okay. And they were wonderful. They fed a starving graduate student (laughter). So I didn't have to worry about eating. And when my spirits were low, and I just needed somebody to fellowship and just to talk to, to, you know, get me through the next few days, you know, God just sent me those, the wonderful people at Varick to just be there for me, you know, financially, you know, if I needed a few dollars before my next stipend check, you know, because, you know, they gave me a stipend along with the scholarship. And they paid for the apartment. But if I needed a few more dollars before my next stipend check, they were there for me, whatever I needed. And I know that God sent them as angels in my life. And so, and many of them, I still keep in contact with today, although I haven't been back to New Haven [Connecticut] often, but I still keep in contact with them. Speaker 1: Talking about money, how did you pay for undergrad? Speaker 2: Scholarship. Speaker 1: Scholarship? Speaker 2: Scholarship, right. Speaker 1: Did you ever have a job? Speaker 2: Never had a, never had to work. The Lord provided that I had full scholarship, undergraduate and full fellowship for graduate school. So all I had do was go to school. Speaker 1: Wonderful. Story_ID: 192776 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about the people at Yale [University], your classmates. Who were some of your classmates? Speaker 2: I have to be perfectly honest. I didn't know their names. But to set the environment, each year they would accept 25 students into the school of engineering because they wanted to keep it small. So in my entering class of 25, needless to say, I was the only African American and I was the only female, and I was one of five from the United States. All the others were from foreign countries, primarily Taiwan, Japan, and other European nations. So, again, thrust in an environment, having to take simultaneously, undergraduate engineering courses and graduate courses at the same time, provided a tremendous level of stress (laughter). My--and because I was internalizing all of this and just trying to feel my way, you know, because, you know, my godmother told me, you know, don't open your mouth too soon, you know. Find out where you are first before, you know--engage your head before you engage your mouth. So I didn't talk a lot in class. I just did my work. And actually, by the second semester, so a classmate said, we actually thought you were from Africa and couldn't speak English because you never said anything (laughter) in class, and you know, until I started, you know, talking and then, you know, responding and saying things. But I was just trying to find you, God, why am I here, you know? This is, this is not something that's familiar, but I know that there's a plan, there's a destiny. So I'm willing to stick with it if You're gonna stay with me. But my classmates, you know, in graduate school, you have study groups. So study groups were formed primarily based on the affinity groups, you know. So, the Asian students studied together. The European students studied together and the white students studied together. So I studied with me, myself and I, which also sets you at a disadvantage because you don't have anybody to bounce ideas off of or to say, well, how would you handle this or how would you try to attack this problem. But God fixed it so that it was okay. It was okay. And I got everything that I needed even without being in a study group. Speaker 1: So you were there for two years? Speaker 2: Two years, and I got my Masters. Speaker 1: And you got, you received your Masters in? Speaker 2: Mechanical engineering. Speaker 1: Okay, and your undergrad was in? Speaker 2: Math, with a minor, a double minor in Physics and Music. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 192777 Speaker 1: So what happens next? Speaker 2: Well, I now have to get a job (laughter). And needless to say, having a degree from Yale opened a number of doors, doors that I didn't even know existed before, and companies were calling me and saying, we wanna, you know, we want you to California to work for such and such, and, you know, and I was flying all over the place. This was wonderful. I said, this is nice, you know, but you have to make a decision to go somewhere. And I started working with IBM in Kingston, New York, another shocking transition (laughter). Now, I've learned how to live in New Haven [Connecticut], which is, you know, Metropolitan kind of a city. Kingston, New York is in the Catskills. It's where, you know, people kind of go for meditative--there is nothing in Kingston except IBM. And I think even now they've closed the plant there. So, again, I'm in an environment where I am the only African American, female, and, you have a sense of, this is why they've hired me. But there was absolutely no fulfillment in the assignment that I was given. IBM is a wonderful company, and I don't want to disparage it in any way, but I, the assignment that I was given was not one that was very enlightening, encouraging, whatever word you wanna use for it. Speaker 1: What was the assignment? Speaker 2: Actually, nothing. I was to read through some manuals and comment on some pieces, but I wanted to do engineering, didn't really want to read manuals and give comments and so I became impatient and said, I don't think I'm going to be able to stay here. And so some of those people who I had flown on the planes with and, you know, done interviews with, before I decided to come with IBM, I called them back, and said, "Remember me?" (Laughter) And that's when my godmother's advice of "Don't burn your bridges and be careful how you treat people and how you talk to people". They said, oh, yes, yes, we remember you very well. And so, I said, I'm interested in coming back or, you know, at least talking with you again about an opportunity. And one of those opportunities was at Johns Hopkins at the Applied Physics Laboratory. And the gentleman who had interviewed you said, oh, we would just love to have you here. We can't offer you IBM money because that was another mistake that I made and which I tell young people all the time. I know that this, in this environment, in this society we live in, everybody goes for the money. But going for the money in that case was a mistake for me. I should have gone with the kind of assignment, the kind of work that I really wanted to do. So he said, we can't offer you IBM money, but we can offer you a great job and a great assignment. And so, in 1980, I came to Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory and I've been there ever since. Story_ID: 192778 Speaker 1: I had wonderful assignments all the years that that I've been there. My initial work was in the Systems Department, where I was able to work with the navigation group on nuclear submarines. And the submarine itself is divided into many compartments, and the groups that we had at the laboratory mimicked the divisions on the submarine. So I was in the navigation group. And all of our work was dealing with sonar radar and how the boat is being navigated and also the depth detection of other things that are in the ocean. And so I had to actually go to sub-school, with the guys, only--only black, only female. I don't even need to keep saying that over and over again, graduated from sub-school. Speaker 2: Well, tell me about sub school? Speaker 1: Sub school, it was engineering school all over again, but-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you're learning specifically how a submarine works-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and all of the pieces of it, and how, you know, the nuclear reactor works and how every--how it, you know, really comes together. So I finished sub-school, actually down in Dam Neck, Virginia and came back and then had to actually go out to sea. And, of course, that was an issue because submarines are designed for men only, put it that way. And, you know, the quarters where they bunk are wide open, just like a wide open room. So, of course, when, you know, I was careful to stay away from that part of the boat, but when we actually went out to sea, if we had to stay overnight, would either be given XO's quarters, 'cause it had a door. I had a sign that I would take with me, that said, "female" because, you know, guys would just open the bathroom door, you know, and, you know, it was called the "head", but anyway, on the boat (laughter). And they'd just open it and go in and, you know, close it. So I would have to hang a sign on the head when I went in so that they wouldn't just, out of reflex open the door. Speaker 2: The door. Speaker 1: So they made a few adjustments for me, but it was wonderful. I remember the very first time I went out, they thought I was in the wrong place and had been lost in a tour group (laughter) because a tour group had gone through. And I said, no, I'm going with you. I'm going with you, and so the guys, you know, started questioning, you know, asking me a lot of things about the sub and, you know, a lot of things about the equipment, trying to see what I knew. And, of course, I knew all the equipment because I'd already been to sub school, and, you know, we had, you know, training on all of that. And once I had significantly impressed them with my knowledge, then I was accepted as part of the team. And, of course, you know how word travels fast. By the time I did my next round, they were like, oh, you're the, you're the woman they were talking about, you know, because I'm a woman, I'm an African American, so it was easy to figure out, yeah, I'm the one, I'm the one. But by then, it became, oh, we're glad to see--and they told us, you're an expert in this, that and the other. And so, it was a very welcome environment to be onboard the subs. And so I road submarines for about 18 years. And then I had an opportunity to come into the front office. We had a new director, and I was working with a program called MASA, Math, Engineering Science Achievement program which Johns Hopkins is one of the sponsors for, and in doing that, had sort of come to the attention of some of the people in the front office as a good spokesperson for that program and for some of the things that the laboratory was engaged in, in the community because I was very, very involved with my sorority, which I had pledged as an undergraduate at Alabama State [University], Delta Sigma Theta. And so I was very active in the community and on a number of boards, United Way, and some other things. So people in the community knew my name and then so the people in the front office said, oh, we need your skills up here. And I took a job in the front office, which is where I am now, the Executive Assistant to the Chief of Staff, a bit of a change from engineering, but my math comes into play because now I handle budget (laughter). So I'm still dealing with numbers so I'm still happy in doing in the work that I am in the front office. Speaker 2: Besides--you said it was MASA? Speaker 1: MESA, M-E-C--M-E-S-A, I'm sorry, Math, Engineering, Science Achievement Speaker 2: Science Achievement. Okay Speaker 1: Um-hum, program. Story_ID: 192779 Speaker 1: What other organizations are you affiliated with? You wanna tell me about the Deltas? You said you pledged in undergrad school? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I did at Alabama State [University]. I pledged Beta Ata Chapter. And I was, as soon as I crossed, I became president of the chapter (laughter). Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: They made me president of the chapter. So I was president the very next year. Delta is an international sorority. We have over 200,000 members throughout the world. So it is a tremendous network of African American women, primarily, who are of like minds, spirit, values, etc., and wherever you go, there's a chapter somewhere. We have chapters all throughout the United States and in Hawaii and Alaska and in Europe, in Germany and in England and the Bahamas, Bermuda, all over the world. Wherever you go, there are Deltas. And so I, while I was in graduate school, I wasn't very active, but as soon as I moved to the Washington area, I became affiliated with the Washington, D.C. chapter. Again, just finding my way and doing work with the chapter, I became recording secretary and then went from recording secretary to vice president to president of the Washington, D.C. chapter. Many people saw my leadership skills there and said, you need to run for a higher office, and in 1989, I ran for regional director of the sorority, the East, for the Eastern region, which encompasses all of the chapters from D.C., all the way up through Maine and the chapters in Germany and St. Thomas and St. Croix [Caribbean]. And so I was regional director from 1989 till 1993. Again, with the motivation and push and encouragement of others, they said, you need to now think about a national office. And so in 1996, I ran for national first vice president and was elected and served in that office from '96' [1996] to 2000. And in 2000, I ran for national president, and was elected as the Millennial President and served from 2000 to 2004. Story_ID: 192780 Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the work that the Deltas perform? Speaker 2: Well, we have a five-point programmatic thrust of educational development, and that was one of those that I readily grabbed in terms of trying to make an impact. We do international awareness involvement, political awareness and involvement. We do a lot of work in the Arts. But most of the work that I did as national president, in the hallmark of my administration, I was called the technology president. And I ushered the sorority into using technology, not only at our national headquarters which is in Washington, D.C., for online registration and all of those kinds of things we--I said, before I went out of office, I was going to make us paperless and so I was able to successfully do all of that and to transition our operations to our membership to online, to getting a website and being able to transmit information online. But also I had a heart for children in Africa who were suffering from AIDS or who were AIDS orphans. And so connecting with Bishop Vashti McKenzie, we were able to build a group home for AIDS orphans in Swaziland. And we were just excited to be a part of the groundbreaking and then for the ribbon cutting and now to know that there are children who are living there who would otherwise be on the streets in South Africa because they have no other home because when their parents die, there is no system, you know, welfare system or social services to take care of them. And so these are children who would otherwise be on the street. We were very happy about that. We opened also in Lesotho, which is a small continent [sic, country] in Southern Africa, a Delta computer-training center, again, with my hallmark of computer technology, engineering, math. Speaking to the people there, they said, if we could learn how to use a computer, we could get better jobs because many of us are farmers and, you know, they knew about agriculture, but nowhere, they have an opportunity to learn how to use Microsoft and, you know, so that they could apply even for jobs and get, you know, better jobs in the city. So we opened a computer-training center with 10 computers that were donated by IBM (laughter), through our connections. And we were able to get that started. We also adopted the Adelaide Timble School for the Disabled, which is in Johannesburg [South Africa], right outside Soweto [South Africa], and it was wonderful to see the children there because for those who are--this is, those who are physically disabled, not mentally. But they're physically disabled. And they bring them all, you know, from--at every age, to that one school. But they said to us, we're not disabled. We're differently able. I mean how much it warms your heart because they have bright minds, wonderful young people, but they're just missing a leg or missing an arm or--so they're not disabled, as they said. They're just differently able, bright young people. And we were just very proud to adopt that school and provide them books and funding. And we also bought them a special bus because they have special needs, for those who are in wheelchairs and so forth. So the sorority was able to buy them a special needs bus to transport the students where they needed to go. We also bought mattresses for them because some of them actually live on campus there at the school, and the mattresses were just going, you know, literally through the floor. So we bought new mattresses for them to sleep on. And so we're just very, very happy about the work that we were able to do. One of the things that we also did in conjunction with those who are teachers, we provided teacher training courses. They know their coursework. They know their, the Math, the English. But they needed to know teaching techniques. So we engaged some who are Master teachers here in the States to go with us, to teach them how to teach, not the coursework, but how to teach better. And they were just extremely grateful. The minister of education actually closed school for that day so that all the teachers could come and participate in these workshops and training sessions. So we were just excited about all of the work we were able to do in South Africa and the work continues. Story_ID: 192781 Speaker 1: In the Arts, we were able to put together a book of recipes and remembrances which we called "Occasions to Savor". And we got stories that go along with recipes [clearing throat], excuse me, where we know there's a pound cake recipe that's been passed down from generation to generation, and there's a story with it. Well, we had the recipe in the book along with the story. And we interviewed some of our luminaries in the sorority like Dorothy Irene Height who was our 10th national president, and we have her story in there as well as many of the others, like Alexis Herman and Dr. Johnnetta Cole and so many others who are part of the sorority, but who have also done tremendous things throughout their life, Bishop McKenzie and many, many others. And so we have stories, we have recipes. So as you're cooking the recipe, you know where it comes from and the history behind it. And we were able to put that together as a beautiful, beautiful documentary on that. We also, in conjunction with our support of AIDS intervention, in the United States continue to speak out because black women were still--and still are, the highest number of new recipients of this dreadful disease. And so I just became one of the spokes persons for doing everything that we can to educate our community about the issue of AIDS and as a result, was inducted into the Black AIDS Institute Hall of Fame for the work that we were doing there. We also were, as a part of our 90th anniversary celebration, which occurred during my administration, we endowed and paid in full a million dollar scholarship to Howard University, which is where the sorority was founded in 1913 by 22 wonderful, courageous, young coeds. And so we presented to Howard University a million dollar check to be used--the interests to be used for scholarships forever and ever, amen, for young women who attend Howard University, as well as, during my administration we refurbished our national headquarters, again, which I said is in Washington, D.C. We gutted the building and refurbished it. And that was a $6.5 million effort, which we accomplished and paid in full before I went out of office. And so we were very, very happy about that because we did not leave the sorority in any debt, and, in fact, we left another million-dollar endowment as a consequence of the success of the National Conventions which we had had. So we left everything in good stead, and newly refurbished headquarters, a million-dollars to Howard University, a wonderful celebration, a cookbook that will be published from here on and probably added to in the future, a home for AIDS orphans in South Africa and those who are part of the teaching community, giving them stronger skill and also just being a part of the community effort that we continued with working with high school students in terms of their efforts. Story_ID: 192782 Speaker 1: So tell me once again about the SEE program? Speaker 2: Project SEE is a wonderful initiative. We received a $1.6 million grant from the National Science Foundation to institute the program. It's Science in Everyday Experiences, and where we're actually targeting middle-school girls to help them get interested in careers in math, science, engineering and technology. Part of the premise is to expose them to people who look like them, who are already working in that field, you know, contrary to my desire to be an engineer and having never met one. But we're exposing them. We're providing after-school programs so that they can get their grades lined up appropriately so that they can go to college and become engineers. And we provide opportunities for field trips so that they can see environments where they might work in future as an engineer, or as a technologist or as a scientist. So it's a wonderful, wonderful program. The sorority, in the sorority, we have over 950 chapters, and all of our chapters are engaged in doing that project in some form or fashion, whatever meets the needs in their community. But one of the other interesting facets of the program, of Project SEE, is that we also engage the parents because it's one thing to have the students interested in math, science, engineering and technology, but we need the parents to understand that their daughter is interested in this and what the parent can do to help them and to help them stay engaged in the process, to help them know all the tests that they have to take, the ACT, the SAT and, you know, all of these other things that they have to get ready for, how to get ready--to get them ready for college, how to fill out their applications, how to fill out their applications for financial aid if they don't get a scholarship or even how to apply for scholarships. So not only are we engaging the students, but we're also engaging the parents. So with the combination, they're able to kind of move forward and do great things for that young person. Story_ID: 192783 Speaker 1: One of the other things that I did on the, in the area of economic development as, when I was national president was the Delta homeownership initiative, which we started with GE [General Electric], which later became Genworth, where we had opportunities for people who were interested in buying a home, particularly, those in the African American community, knowing all of the pieces, all of the facets of homeownership. What do you have to do to get your credit right? What is your credit score? You know, where do you find out what your credit score is? How do you correct any anomalies in your credit? How do you get things ready, and then how do you get that down payment ready? If you don't have a down payment ready, how do you do what is necessary because we need to become homeowners in our own communities because there's a difference when you rent an apartment and when you own a home. You take better care of your community, you're watchful of the things that happen in the community, and you start earning that equity, which is so desperately needed in our community. So the home--Delta Homeownership Initiative for Financial Fortitude, which we called it, helped us understand the need in our community to transmit that information to our people. Story_ID: 192784 Speaker 1: And one of the other programs that General Electric underwrote for us was Leadership Delta. And that was for our college students, our students, our young women who were in college already, but to give them the leadership skills they would need to go out and be great in the world of work, especially in the corporate environment. So we would choose from a cadre of young women who would apply for the program. They would in turn have an internship with GE. They would have, be assigned a mentor. They would have an opportunity to see how the corporate environment worked in GE, and also come together as a group to have workshops, training sessions, leadership development, knowing how to write their resume appropriately, how to interview, how to shake hands, how to make eye contact, all of the things that somehow we've lost in this generation. So we were helping them get themselves ready to go out into the world of work and get ready for the world of work and then to be in that environment, how to dress for success, how--you know, which fork to eat with, when to put your napkin in your lap, all the, all the things that we learned, you know, earlier, because they were taught in many places. They were taught at home. They were taught at church. They were taught in the community environment. Well, somehow we, we've slacked off from that, and so Leadership Delta gave them those fundamental skills, but also taught them how to network, how to interact, how to present yourself to a stranger in a corporate environment, how to pass along your business card. And then, you know, how to move out into the world of work and to do that in an effective and an efficient way. So we were really excited about the funding from General Electric that provided the program Leadership Delta. We were excited about that as well. Story_ID: 192785 Speaker 1: Let's talk about faith. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I started to say religion, but let's talk about faith because you're a strong woman of faith-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --and tell me about the church that you attend and attended, and you talked about [HistoryMaker] Bishop Vashti McKenzie. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Tell me about your relationship with her. Speaker 2: Well, as I've said, I've been in church all my life, growing up in Montgomery, [Alabama] the church was the staple in the community. And it provided the opportunity for me to grow, gave my first speech in church, you know, played the piano for Sunday school in church, and I was able to grow and be supported in everything that I did in the church environment. And as I said, when I went to graduate school in New Haven [Connecticut], the first group of people I had an opportunity to meet outside of the class environment were those who were at the church that was near the campus. And then moving into this area, in Washington metropolitan area, I found a church immediately. I initially was a member of John Wesley AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion Church because I'd been AME Zion most of my life. And then I transitioned to Payne Memorial AME Church in Baltimore [Maryland] where she was then Reverend Vashti McKenzie was the pastor, having met her through the sorority actually, because her grandmother was one of the founders of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority. So I met her, you know, through the sorority, and then, of course, had an opportunity to join her at her church there. And, of course, an, a more outstanding woman of God, I don't think you can find anywhere, and so, of course, she was inspired and encouraged to run for Bishop, and as we know, became the first female elected and consecrated to the Office of Bishop in the AME church in the history of the church. But all the while I was at Payne with her, where I just observed her leadership skills and how she was able to move in an environment that was truly male dominated, never losing her femininity but always being effective in everything that she did, getting grants from the state to do welfare to work initiatives and working with the community and building--buying the homes and buying up buildings that surrounded the church that had been dilapidated and, you know, were disheveled and taking them with grants from HUD and other organizations and then building them into economic empowerment for the community where people could come in and have office space and then people in the community could get jobs. And so just watching her and she was just a powerful preacher of the word of God, you know, and that goes without saying, but also watching how she married the word of God to being an effective tool to change the environment in the community for the people of God, was just a tremendous, tremendous, had a tremendous impact on my life. And then we worked on her campaign for four years, and, you know, working with her and she had to travel across the country and actually around the world because the delegation from Africa is very important in terms of voting 'cause, you know, everybody who is a voting--part of the voting process. But just watching her, even as some still frowned upon the idea of a woman being a Bishop, not quite ready for that, but she just moved gingerly beyond them to say that God had called her to do that. So I truly admired her and the work that she did, and it just increased my faith to watch her and then after leaving Payne and coming to Ebenezer, acknowledging and accepting my own call to ministry, where I had been running from it--have to admit that, running from, from knowing that God had really called me to preach. I just wanted to continue to be a public speaker, and God kept telling me, no. And I kept saying, oh, you know, you know, you try to negotiate but God always has the final word. And so as I came to be a part of the Ebenezer church family in conference and prayer with my pastors here, acknowledged my call to ministry. And I have now been ordained as an itinerate deacon in the AME church and still, and in two weeks, will graduate from Howard University School of Divinity with my Masters in Divinity degree, just understanding that if it had not been for the Lord that was with me and on my side, moving with me and directing and ordering my steps, and just taking full control of my life, I don't know where I would be. Story_ID: 192786 Speaker 1: And so I know faith is the substance of things hoped for and the evidence of things not seen. I would not have seen a lot of things. I would not have experienced any of the things without faith in God and knowing that God had his hand on my life and was moving me and directing me, this girl from the project who grew up to be in the presence of great people, like, you know, [HistoryMaker] Bishop [Vashti] McKenzie and Dr. Height and Alexis Herman and Johnnetta Cole and Bishop Tutu and Andrew Young, and, you know, sitting in a room with great people and, you know, other bishops in the church and other great leaders in the church having met presidents, you know, Bill Clinton [President Bill Clinton] and met Hillary Clinton and, you know, great senators and receiving awards and none of that, none of that would have been possible had it not been for the grace of God. And so I just honor God in everything that I do and every day I get up knowing that God has a plan for my life, and I want to honor that plan. So I get up each morning asking God where am I to go now, what am I to do, you know, and, you know, He just says to me each day that He blesses me to be a blessing so that all the things that I have, all the people I've met, all the things that I've been able to experience and see, even all the awards that I've received throughout my life, they're not for me. But they're to be an inspiration for somebody else, and they're to be a blessing for somebody else who's struggling that says, can I do this? Will I, will it be beneficial if I move forward in this direction? And then I could give them my testimony of coming from the projects, but allowing God to work in my life and to see where he has placed me now. Speaker 2: That's wonderful. Story_ID: 192787 Speaker 1: You have other organizations that you have been a part of or that you are a part of. And you are a member, began as a member of the Leadership Washington. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Tell me about that? Speaker 2: Leadership Washington is, it's a connection of leaders within the Washington Metropolitan area, and actually, we've changed the name to Leadership Greater Washington, but these are organizations throughout the country that have leadership in front of their name and Leadership Atlanta, you know, Leadership Baltimore, Leadership--you know, you have that in front of it, Leadership San Antonio, where you bring together those who are part of the community, who have demonstrated leadership skills or they're leaders in either organizations, non-profits, on their jobs, they're CEO's, CFO's, you know, leaders in the community, bringing all of that talent into one place to make a difference in the community. And so I was truly honored to be selected because you do--you are selected to be a part of that group, and to bring the skills that I have to the table and connecting with other leaders who want to make a difference in the community, had an opportunity after the--you go through a year of training and working together before you officially become a part, and after that year, I was on the board of directors for three years. But it is truly an outstanding group of those who are leaders in their own right, and don't necessarily need to be, well, endorsed by anybody else because they're already leaders. But they're willing to come together because they know that collectively we can make a major impact, a bigger impact in the community. So I'm proud to continue my membership with Leadership Washington and Leadership Great Washington and to do all that I can to continue to make a positive difference in the life of the community. I've also been on the board of Children's National Medical Center, which is known as Children's Hospital here in the Washington area, a truly outstanding medical center that's internationally renowned for meeting the needs of children with internationally renowned surgeons and, you know, physicians who are there with--and they have such a heart of compassion for the children. They have the brain power. They're, you know, educated in some of the greatest schools and institutions in the world. But they, but in meeting them, these doctors and nurses and even those who are part of the administration, they have a heart for children. And I think that makes the difference in the service that they provide when children come who are, who come into the world at one pound and are not given a, you know, a chance. At Children's they just nurture them, and, you know, continue to work with them. And now they've grown up and, you know, come back, and then they want to give back and deposit back into Children's Hospital because it gave them life. You know, we've seen children with every form of disease, and, you know, there're those there who are working on cures for childhood, you know, diabetes, Juvenile Diabetes, Muscular Dystrophy and all of those that are unique to children. And so you have some of the greatest minds with some of the greatest hearts working on behalf of children, and so I was just truly honored to serve on that board for a number of years. And I also served on the board for United Way, and everybody's familiar with United Way and what they do across the country. And so, again, being a part of a collaborative group, coming from all backgrounds across the community but coming together to raise funds for nonprofit organizations who otherwise, would not have an opportunity to have a voice in a corporate environment to say, we need to raise money for this, this group, this nonprofit because they're feeding the homeless. They're feeding the hungry and providing opportunities for the homeless. They're providing jobs for those who can't get a job otherwise. They're making a difference, and so United Way, I think, again, allowed me an opportunity to be a blessing to somebody else. Some of the people I may have never known or seen and they may have never known or seen me, but the blessing was still being transferred in the work that was being done. Story_ID: 192788 Speaker 1: You also were, you were the founding chair of the National Partnership for Community Leadership? Speaker 2: Yes, Dr. Jeffrey Johnson and I worked together in forming NPCL, and it is a truly unique organization that works on behalf of fathers, and many say, well, why would you as a woman be working on behalf of fathers? But I think part of it, not having a father and knowing that many fathers want to be in the lives of their children, but don't know how. They're behind on child support and don't know how to get caught up. They need, young fathers who need mentors on fathering. They need an elder to teach them what it means to be a father or just working in the community to support and uplift the fathers in our community. And so I was truly honored to work with Dr. Johnson to bring together this organization which continues to celebrate fathers. We have a national fatherhood conference and for the last three years, it's actually been held on the campus of Morehouse College in Atlanta, Georgia, celebrating fathers, bringing together fathers who can talk about the, you know, the hardships of being a father and what they've been going through and also helping young fathers understand their responsibilities to their young children and that they cannot walk away from them. Yes, it's going to be hard, but you've got to--you brought this child into the world. Now, you need to do what is responsible fatherhood and take care of the child. So I'm honored to still be a part of that organization. Speaker 1: And one other organization that's very significant, the Links. Speaker 2: Um-hum. The Links, Incorporated is now 61 years old and founded in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. There're about 11,000 members of the Links, and I was truly honored to be selected to be one a number of years ago and it's been almost 20 years now that I'm thinking about it (laughter). And, again, another group of African American women who bring their talent and their skill together to make a difference in the community. The difference in the Links, with Delta Sigma Theta, you have to have a Bachelor's degree. You have to be college trained, and, you know, you can either join on a college campus or after you graduate. But with the Links, Incorporated, you are selected because of the gifts and talents that you can bring to bear in your community. You've been known for whatever it is that you're doing, for being someone who supports youth or who supports the arts or who supports international involvement, or just services in the community. And they ask you to become a part, bring those skills to the organization with other like-minded women who, again, want to change the world for the better and leave this world better than they found it. And so I've been honored to be a part. I've served in a number of ways, on numerous committees. I'm a member of the Capital City Chapter here in Washington, D.C., but I've also served on, in the Eastern area as Parliamentarian and on the national constitution and bylaws committee and still continue to serve. Story_ID: 192789 Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to add? Speaker 2: I can't think of anything. I've just been so tremendously blessed in my life and in spite of how things began, I count every day as a blessing from God, and I would not change anything in my journey because changing something would take away from my life experience. So I know that through the suffering and through all of that, I have a tremendous testimony, and I can look back and just see God's hand everywhere where I thought I would fall, where I thought I had just, you know, fallen on my face for the last time and just couldn't get up, that God was just there to say, this is only a test, and from that you now have a tremendous testimony. And so I wanted to continue to be able to do that as an engineer, as, you know, as I do my work at Johns Hopkins, as I do my work in the community through Delta Sigma Theta and through the Links, as I do my work in ministry, here at Ebenezer or any other church where I may be asked to bring a word, that that is why I'm here. You know, Jeremiah 29:11 says, "I know the plans I have for you", and as God continues to share that plan, I don't wanna get ahead of God. I just wanna be right where he wants me to be at that appointed time because I know that with that I will be in His divine grace, and divine intervention has been a part of every part of my life. There's no such thing as coincidence to me. It is God moving and saying, "Now, this is where I want you to be, now, this is what I want you to do." And even if it's for a short period of time, that's the time that I was supposed to be there, and I truly do pray that I'll continue to be an inspiration for others who may see themselves struggling through some things, but knowing, as my pastor says, "The best is truly yet to come." Speaker 1: What is in store now for you? Is there something that you have not done that you would like to do? Speaker 2: I can't think of anything that I haven't done. The Lord has allowed me to travel to places that I didn't even know existed (laughter). He's allowed me, as I said, to be in the presence of people that I had only read about, and for--to just sit at the feet and learn from great people, to be acknowledged in the--by those who, under other circumstances, would never even know my name. And so I know that that, that is for a reason. But God has blessed me in so many ways, I just, I don't even know where the next step is going to be, but I wanna be faithful, and I wanna be obedient so that when the call does come, that I'm gonna ready. And so when I went back, even going back to school, going back to Howard University to Divinity School and people would see me, and having seen me in a magazine or seen me in a newspaper, they would say, "You look just like, you know, that lady, you--", and I, yeah, that--and then someone would tell 'em, yeah, that's her, that is her, you know. But, just being obedient, to do what God has told me to do, I know that the blessing is not just for me, but it is also to pass on to others. So I don't, I don't know where God's taking me next. I have no idea. I don't even want to guess, but I wanna remain open, I wanna remain humble. I wanna remain obedient to His will for my life because wherever God takes me, I know that's where I'm ordained to be, and I know it's gonna a wonderful journey. And I know the journeys' gonna be wonderful, and I know when I get there, that it's going to be worth every moment. Story_ID: 192790 Speaker 1: Because this information, your story will be available for generations, years and years and years from now, what would you like, what message would you like to send to the future generations? Speaker 2: One of the first messages that I would say, "It's not where you start, but where you end up." Be willing to work hard for what you want. Know that nobody's going to give you anything. There is no entitlement plan, but if you're willing to work, people will help you through God because God will put the right people in your life at the right time. But you've gotta be willing to say, I'm ready to roll up my sleeve. I'm willing to get my hands dirty. I'm willing to get my feet dirty, God, for wherever you want to take me. You can't be lazy and successful at the same time. I would say, honor our ancestors, those who came before us on whose shoulders we stand, sacrificed a lot for us to be here. Those who came over on slave ships and didn't even know if they were going to make it, didn't even know where they were going. But they came, and they survived slavery, and they survived Jim Crowe and segregation and they survived humiliation so that we could have a better life. We need to honor their sacrifices by doing our best in our generation. Yes, times will change. Yes, things will change. Technology has changed our world in ways that we can't even imagine, and it will continue to do that, but nothing should change our values. Nothing should change our foundation. Nothing should change us so much that we don't honor those who came before us, the lives that were given, the lives that were sacrificed, the people who died so that we could be here today. So honor our ancestors, honor God in everything that you do. Know that God is the creator of everything and God has the final word. Story_ID: 192791 Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture at Bennett College as a part of the Bennett campaign instituted by Dr. Johnnetta Cole and our guest for the evening was Ms. Oprah Winfrey. And so we had an opportunity to be in her presence and take pictures with her in support of the campaign for Bennett. Speaker 2: This is the celebration at Payne Memorial AME Church in Baltimore, Maryland upon the election of [HistoryMaker] Vashti Murphy McKenzie as the first female Bishop. From left to right, myself, newly elected, Bishop McKinsey and Dr. Caroline Showell (ph.). Speaker 1: Good. Speaker 2: This is me at the beginning and my mom. Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: I don't remember (laughter). Speaker 1: Me with two of my sheroes, from left to right, myself, Dr. Dorothy Irene Height was the 10th national president of the Delta Sigma Theta Incorporated and president emeritus of the National Council of Negro Women and to the right, the Reverend Dr. Joann Browning, Co-pastor of Ebenezer African Methodist Episcopal Church in Fort Washington, Maryland, also an honorary member of Delta Sigma Theta. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: During the journey to South Africa, we adopted the Adelaide Timble School for the Disabled, and from right to left, the gentleman holding the check that we've just presented is the principal of the Adelaide Temple School. I'm standing next to him, and next to me is Dr. Adelaide Timble for whom the school is named. The others in the picture are teachers at the school. Speaker 2: (Off-Camera discussion). Good, got it. Speaker 1: During the 90th Anniversary celebration of Delta Sigma Theta [Inc., sorority], we had a banquet honoring outstanding community leaders, and my honorees for that evening from left to right, Jack Johnson, who is the Prince George's County executive, Dr. Johnnetta Cole, president of Bennett College for Women, Vernon Jordan and to my right, H. Patrick Swygert, President of Howard University. Speaker 2: Got it. Speaker 1: During my time in service on the United Way Board of Directors, I had an opportunity to serve as chair, and one of the chairs for the capital campaign was then Secretary of Transportation, Rodney Slater. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Upon my election as national president of Delta Sigma Theta, there was a celebratory held at the National Council of Negro Women, and pictured here, the, seated, from left to right, H. Elyse Austin who was the eighth national president of Delta Sigma Theta and next to her, Dr. Height, 10th national president. Standing, left to right, Karen Jones Herbert, who was then the president of the Washington, D.C. alumni chapter, myself and Linda Cropp, chair of the D.C. City Council, also a member of Delta Sigma Theta. Speaker 2: Got it. Speaker 1: It's always good to go home and this is a picture on the campus of Alabama State University with members of Delta Sigma Theta sorority who had gathered for a special event, and we took a picture at the Delta stone on campus. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: During one of my trips to St. Thomas, Virgin Island, to serve as a keynote speaker for a Delta event, we were joined by the representative to the U.S. House of Representatives, the Honorable Donna Christensen. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: As national president of Delta Sigma Theta, one of the accomplishments during my tenure was $6.5 million renovation of our national headquarters, and this is the lobby of our national headquarters building in Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: Good. Speaker 1: During my tenure as chair of United Way, one of the community campaigns we have engaged members, leaders in the community to serve with us, the Wilhelmina Rowlock (ph.) who was then the chair of the United Black Fund, Peter Norstrand who was president and is still president of Sun Trust Bank, myself and other members of the community. Speaker 2: Good, next. Speaker 1: It's always nice to be appreciated, and here I'm received an award from Lou Derden (ph.) for my public service activities and contributions to the United Way. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: Here I am receiving an honorary doctorate in Human Letters from Lincoln University in Pennsylvania. Speaker 2: Okay. (unclear) Speaker 1: Celebrating with another distinguished member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Elaine Jones. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: As a part of our community effort, we engaged young people to talk about the issue of HIV [Human Immunodeficiency Virus; causative agent] and AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome; disease], and this is one of the community events. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: During her trip to the United States, we were honored to be in the presence of Winnie Mandela who is in the center of the picture. Other members of Delta Sigma Theta flank her, and we made a presentation to her during the reception. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: It's always nice to graduate, a picture of my graduation from kindergarten. Speaker 2: In celebration of my becoming national president of Delta Sigma Theta, many community leaders came and other members of the Greek letter organization. Here Howard Tugman (ph.) who was then the president of Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity Incorporated is making a presentation of flowers to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sharing a moment with Artist Hampshire Cowen who is the secretary and vice president at Howard University during my participation at one of the convocations. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On the campus of Alabama State University at Beta Aita Chapter, I became a member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority Incorporated and here I am with my line sisters and big sisters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: During one of the celebrations that's held annually by the Black Women's Agenda, I had the honor of sharing the podium with, left to right [picture falls] Speaker 1: Sharing a moment of celebration, from left to right, Bishop Vashti Murphy McKenzie, the Honorable Kweisi Mfume, former member of Congress and former president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Carol Mosely Braun, former United States Senator and myself. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: Honored to share the stage with other past, national presidents of Delta Sigma Theta. From left to right, Dr. Thelma Thomas Daley, our 16th national president, myself--I served as 22nd national president, Dr. Dorothy Height, 10th national president, and Frankie Muse Freeman, our 14th national president. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: Formal, this is the formal photograph used for my presidency of Delta Sigma Theta. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: A moment of celebration with Billy Aaron, from left to right, Billy Aaron, wife of Hank Aaron, the Honorable Andy Young and his lovely wife, Carolyn and myself. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: During my presidency at Delta Sigma Theta, we were honored to give to Howard University, a $1 million scholarship. From left to right, helping me make the presentation, 14th national president, Frankie Freeman, Dr. Floretta Dukes McKinsey, then president, chair of the board of trustees of Howard University, H. Patrick Swygert, president of Howard University, myself and Leslie Foster, an anchor on Channel 9 here in Washington and also an alumnus of Howard University and a member of Delta Sigma Theta. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Another proud moment with one of my sheroes, Dr. Johnnetta Cole as I received an honorary doctorate in human letters from Bennett College for Women. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The cover of the book that we published during my administration, 'Meals, Menus and Memories, Occasions to Savor'. The foreword was written by one of our members, Dr. Camille Cosby, wife of Bill Cosby [actor]...