 Story_ID: 24290 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Wayne Darrell Bowen. W-A-Y-N-E, D-A-R-R-E-L-L, B-O-W-E-N. Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: November 11, 1952. I was born in Petersburg, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: I am a pharmacologist. I am Professor and Chair of the Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Physiology, and Biotechnology at Brown University. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is October 9, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in my home in Cumberland, Rhode Island. Story_ID: 24291 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm-up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, steak. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: It would have to be summertime. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Hawaii. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you." Story_ID: 24292 Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is June Eleanor Bowen. Her maiden name was Reese. And that would be J-U-N-E, E-L-E-A-N-O-R, B-O-W-E-N. And her maiden name is Reese, R-E-E-S-E. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Oh, boy. Her date of birth is, I believe, June, I'm going to say 21st. The year of birth, I'm not sure. The place of birth-- Speaker 1: Can you guess or anything? Speaker 2: I'm guessing-- Speaker 1: Would she have been born in the twenties, or-- Speaker 2: She, yes, she would have been born in the twenties. So, I'm going to say--let's see, she was one year--and then my father--I'm going to say '24' [1924]. Speaker 1: Okay, '24' [1924], alright. And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them, and, you know, what kind of occupations did they have? Speaker 2: So, my grandmother and grandfather on my mother's side lived in Disputanta, Virginia where my mother grew up. Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: D-I-S-P-U-T-A-N-T-A, Virginia. Speaker 1: D-I-S-P-U-T-A-N...? Speaker 2: T-A. T-A-N-T-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Virginia-- Speaker 2: Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think she spent most of her life there. Part of her life, I think she spent in Philadelphia where her grandparents were from. And my great-grandfather was a World War I veteran, I know that. I'm sorry, my grandfather was a World War I veteran. My grandmother worked at the cannery that was in Disputanta, Virginia. There was a food cannery there where they canned foods, so, I know she worked there. I don't know much about my great-grandparents on my mother's side. Their name was Corley, I think, the family name. But that's about as far back as I can go with her side of the family. Speaker 1: C-O-R... Speaker 2: C-O-R-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. And those are your-- Speaker 2: Those would be my great-grandparents. Speaker 1: Okay. On your grandfather's side or your grandmother's side? Speaker 2: Those, that would be on my grandmother's side. Speaker 1: Yeah, alright, on your grandmother's side. Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't know much about my greats on my grandfather's side, maternal grandfather's side. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories passed down in the family about your grandfather's activities during the war, or-- Speaker 2: No, we didn't talk much about that. We would spend some time down in Virginia as children, in that part of Virginia--Disputanta, Virginia. We spent more time with my grandparents on my paternal side. So, I know that he was in the war. I don't know where. I know that when he passed away, he had a military funeral. He's buried in Disputanta, Virginia. But that's about the extent of knowledge with him. He was, I think he was, he may have suffered from Alzheimer's disease. I don't know, because he was--I remember him as always being away from the family and sort of sitting quietly when we would visit. So, he wouldn't say much. We had more interaction with the rest of the family, my grandmother and my aunts. And, but I'm not sure about that. He just wasn't very talkative and didn't interact with the family very much, but he was always there when we went down there to visit. Speaker 1: There were a lot of hazards of World War I, you know, I think, from mustard gas to all kind of things. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Did he serve overseas? Speaker 2: I believe so. Speaker 1: In France? Speaker 2: I believe so, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now are there any stories on your mother's side of the family about the end of slavery or Reconstruction or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, no, not that I can remember. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, so your mother [June Eleanor Reese], she was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Did she grow up in Philadelphia? Speaker 2: I think she, I think she spent her early years in Philadelphia, but then moved, the family moved to Virginia. Most of my family is from Virginia. I don't know the story behind the move to Virginia, but I do know that they, that part of the family is from Philadelphia, and that they moved to Virginia. Speaker 1: So, they didn't have roots in Virginia in the beginning? Speaker 2: I don't believe so. Not on my mother's side of the family. I don't know about my grandfather. My grandmother, I know her family is from Philadelphia. I don't know where my grandfather's family is from. They may have had roots in Virginia, but I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 24293 Speaker 1: Now, your mother [June Eleanor Reese], did she have a chance to finish high school? Speaker 2: Yes. My mother finished college. She went to college at Saint Lawrence University. She was a school teacher. Speaker 1: Saint Lawrence University. Now where is that? Speaker 2: That is also in Virginia. I'm not exactly sure where it is. It's in Virginia, though, but I don't know. Speaker 1: Is that an Episcopal school? Speaker 2: You know, I don't-- Speaker 1: Saint Lawrence-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: I know Saint Augustine is. I'm trying to--okay. Alright, so she became a school teacher? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Alright. So, was that what she was aiming at? You know-- Speaker 2: I believe so. Yeah, she was a, she ended up teaching home economics in a junior high school in Baltimore [Maryland]. I think when she--she was doing--the way she met my father, she was doing student teaching in Hopewell [Virginia], and they met, they met there. And yeah, she was a teacher throughout her life. Story_ID: 24294 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name is Herbert Edward Bowen, Jr. H-E-R-B-E-R-T, E-D-W-A-R-D, B-O-W-E-N, Jr. Speaker 1: And what is date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born in Petersburg, Virginia, in fact, the same hospital that I was born in. He, his birthday is, I believe, October 25, 1925. Don't quote me on these birthdates, I'm horrible with birthdates. I always get the birthdates wrong, but that's approximately-- Speaker 1: --a year younger than your mother. But you estimated the year your mother was born. Is that about right? Speaker 2: That's about right, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. October 25, 1925 in Petersburg. Now, what are the stories about his side of the family? How back can you trace them? Speaker 2: So, I know a little bit more about his side of the family. His family roots are also in Virginia. My grandfather and grandmother are both from Virginia. I know that my great-grandfather on my father's side was part Cherokee, and my great-grandmother was full-blooded Cherokee. I believe he was from Danville, Virginia. My great-grandfather was from Danville, Virginia. And my grandfather had several brothers and a sister. I don't know, I know at least--I met at least two of his brothers. One of them lived in Baltimore [Maryland]. Uncle Howard was in Baltimore. And they moved to Hopewell, Virginia and built the house, built a house there. There was an original house that I never knew. It was, it was, it had been torn down by the time I was born, and they built a larger house in Hopewell. And that's the house that I remember visiting my grandparents in. So, that was Hopewell. Now, my grandmother's family is also from Hopewell, Richmond area. She had, in fact we lived, they lived, they had a family plot that, where there were three houses in a row. There were--like it was my grandmother's house. Her brother's house was next to it, and her sister's house was next to that. And each of them had, you know, their own families, but they were, the houses were lined up on the street, Arlington Road, there in Hopewell, Virginia. And we when would go, we would spend summers, a lot of summers down there in Hopewell. And so most--and so we spent, I don't know, just about every summer that I can remember as a young child, my parents would bring us down to the grandparents' house and we would go back and forth between Hopewell and Disputanta [Virginia]. But we spent most of our time in Hopewell with my paternal grandparents. Speaker 1: Okay. And your paternal grandfather's got the same name as your father? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what was your paternal grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Eliza. Mary Eliza Bowen. M-A-R-Y, E-L-I-Z-A, B-O-W-E-N. Her maiden name was Briggs, B-R-I-G-G-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 24295 Speaker 1: Now, what did your father [Herbert Edward Bowen, Jr.] say about growing up? Did he have a chance to finish school, too? Speaker 2: My father went to Virginia State College in Petersburg, Virginia. He, he was an Omega Psi Phi and pledged with that fraternity. He has stories of growing up in Hopewell [Virginia]. He grew up there and went to school there, elementary school there, and high school. He may have spent some time in the first house as a child. That house had been torn down by the time I was born. But they built the larger house, and he grew up in that house and spent his boyhood in Virginia there, in that area. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, what did he want to do? You know, did he share his aspirations with you, what he was thinking about doing? You know, we don't always reach where we want to go. Speaker 2: Right, right. I, he, I think he ended up doing what he wanted to do. His occupation was machinist, he was a machinist. He worked at, he spent most of his time at a plant called Coppers in Baltimore [Maryland] where they did, he worked as a metal leaf, I think. And they did contracts for the military. They made, he would sometimes tell me about some of the projects he was working on. They made things like gun barrels for battleships and things like that. So, he ran the metal leaf. And he was also a tailor. He did tailoring, taught tailoring for a while. I don't know why he didn't finish at Virginia State. I know when he was going to school he was working. He worked at Virginia Beach during the summer, at the resort there. Of course, it was segregated then. He was working back in the kitchen. And I think, I think he worked most of the time he was in college. I don't know why he didn't finish, but I think, you know, I don't think he ever regretted not finishing. He never, you know, tried to go back and, you know, take courses or anything like that. But I think he had a good time in school. So, both of my parents went to college and they sort of instilled that in me. Speaker 1: Okay. So, your father wasn't in World War II? Speaker 2: No, no, no. But he did spend some time in New York City as a tailor making military uniforms. In fact, I think that was where he was teaching tailoring for a short period in New York City. I think that may have been during wartime or just after wartime. Speaker 1: Now, did he have like, the reason why he didn't go, was it because he had a skill that they needed out here, or something? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't know the answer to that question. Speaker 1: They had a big draft in those days. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, yeah. Story_ID: 24296 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: Okay. The story that I know is that my mother [June Eleanor Reese] was student teaching in Hopewell [Virginia], and my grandmother ran a boarding house. So, the house that they built was part restaurant and part boarding house. She had a restaurant in front and, you know, had a few boarders in the house. And-- Speaker 1: Now, this is your father's [Herbert Edward Bowen, Jr.] mother? Speaker 2: My father's mother, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And apparently my mother had to walk past the house every day to go to school. I don't know why, but that's how they met. He would see her walking past the house and, you know, was wondering who this woman was, and got to talking. I guess that's how it all started. But that's the story that I remember of them telling about how they met. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, when did they get married? Speaker 2: Ah, let's see. So, I was born, I think I was born two years after they were married. So, I'm guessing '50' [1950]. Speaker 1: 1950? Speaker 2: 1950, somewhere around in there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they moved to Baltimore [Maryland] before I was born. They had moved to Baltimore before I was born, and I was thinking... I was born, they went back to Petersburg [Virginia], to Hopewell, I think. So, I ended up being born in Petersburg, but got transported back to Baltimore. They were already living there when I was born, but they had already migrated to Baltimore at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what brought them to Baltimore? Speaker 2: I think it was, I think it may have been the teaching job that my mother had. I'm not exactly sure, but I'm pretty sure that's--because she had been teaching at the same school for as long as I can remember from a small child. She always taught at the same place. So, I'm guessing that they moved to Baltimore for her teaching job, and then my father got a job there, you know, as a machinist and-- Speaker 1: I was almost thinking it was because of him being a machinist and that-- Speaker 2: That could have been, yeah, that could have been part of it, too. Baltimore was a big manufacturing--and you know, port city. So, it may have been a combination of both of those, both of those things. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 24297 Speaker 1: Now, when you consider your parents' personalities, their habits, their dispositions, their looks, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Boy, that's a tough question (laughter). I'm going to say, I'm going to say I have some attributes of my father [Herbert Edward Bowen, Jr.] was well. I think the, you know, the interest in the studying and all that, I think I took after my mother [June Eleanor Reese] for sure. And she was a very patient, very patient person. I think I'm a very patient person. My father wasn't all that patient. And I'm just trying to think of some of those, some of those personality traits. My mother was, I think she was more of an inwardly directed person like I am. I wouldn't say she's shy, but she was not extroverted like my father, who was very extroverted. My brother takes, I think, more after my father than I do. Yeah, I think that's where some of my personality traits come from. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mostly from my mother I think, a little bit from my father. Story_ID: 24298 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (laughter). Early childhood memory. Boy. I think my earliest memories were spending Christmas holidays at my grandparents' house, both grandparents, because we would go to Virginia for Christmas a lot. We would drive down there before Route 95 was built, drive down Route 301 and see all the Christmas decorations and what not, going down there. You know, I have some pictures of us when we were very young during the Christmas holidays down there. So, yeah, I have a lot of early memories. And when I think of my early childhood I think of--I don't really think of Baltimore [Maryland] for some reason. I think of my grandparents and being down there and spending summers down there and so forth. Yeah. Story_ID: 24299 Speaker 1: Now, did you live in a, well, I think I asked you before we started, what neighborhood you lived in, in Baltimore [Maryland]. You said Cherry Hill. Speaker 2: It was in Cherry Hill. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, did you live there the whole time in Baltimore? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, we lived in the same, I lived in the same house growing up. My, that was the second house in Cherry Hill for my parents. They had, when they first went to Baltimore they lived in a house still in Cherry Hill on Round Road. And then they moved to the house on Larue Square, which is a brick row-house like they have, that's common in Baltimore. And I still own that house. My stepmother still lives in that house. That's the family house. It's still there. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what was Cherry Hill like when you were growing up there? What was the housing like, and what was the neighborhood like? Speaker 2: Cherry Hill was an interesting place. It was, there were parts of Cherry Hill that were very bad. You didn't want to go there at night. You know, you couldn't catch a cab to Cherry Hill. You know, if it was night time, cab drivers would drop you off before they got to Cherry Hill. They had a, it had sort of a bad reputation. If you tell people you were from Cherry Hill, you know, they would, you know, they would have a certain vision that they would conjure up in their head. But then there were some parts of Cherry Hill that were, you know, they were very nice as far as I know. I mean, it was a, you know, a typical sort of urban neighborhood. But you know, the part of Cherry Hill that we lived in, I always thought was nice. I mean it was, you know, we had our moments, (laughter) but yeah, Cherry Hill was an interesting place. It's changed a lot since I grew up. I go back quite often, and you wouldn't--there are some parts of it that haven't changed and some parts that you wouldn't recognize now. Speaker 1: Did it change mostly for the better? Speaker 2: Mostly for the better, yeah. I'd say mostly for the better, but there are still some--you know, we had the projects there. Speaker 1: What was the name of the projects there? Speaker 2: I don't know the name of the--Cherry Hill Homes or something like that, I think they were called. Speaker 1: Is there a main, what's the main drag going through there? Speaker 2: The main drag going through Cherry Hill was Cherry Hill Road. It's, and it goes, there's a shopping center there that's still there that was, you know, back in the day it was the hangout place. We hung out at the shopping center. I think they still do that. There was a movie theater there I used to go to a lot. A grocery store, a clothing store where everybody would go and buy their duds, and... Cherry Hill was an interesting place, because it was right--when they did the inner harbor--it's right on the water, actually. It's right off of the, off of the inlet to the harbor. And there was always a--you had Cherry Hill here and you had a yacht club, you know, where people had boats, you know, the rich people had boats. And that was very, you know, right adjacent to Cherry Hill. And now it's, now it's sort of become prime property, because it's near the waterfront and, you know, people are offering to buy the property and people are saying, no, you know, we're not going to sell. So, it's changed, it's changed quite a bit, yeah, you know, right around my neighborhood. Story_ID: 24300 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Sights, sounds and smells. Well, I can tell you a little about the smells, because we, we were--near where I lived there was the incinerator where they would bring the garbage and burn the garbage. It was, the City dump was there, and you know, sometimes the smells would (laughter), you know, the smells, wouldn't be very nice. And they would burn, you know, they would burn garbage at night. And that was right near where we lived, and so, you know, some of those smells I remember. Then they tore that down and moved it all out, and that was, you know, a big improvement. And they actually moved the sanitation center to actually nearer to downtown now. That's where they, you know, they do the clean burning now, so you don't really smell anything. But we were near the river, the Patapsco River, so I remember, you know, fishing. We would fish a lot off the bridge that went over the river. We'd catch crabs as kids. There was a big football field there, a playing field where we would, you know, played sports. There was a swimming pool right there that's still there, actually, in that area. And, you know, the neighborhood kids would get together. We lived on a street that was in the shape of a half circle, a little square. And we would play, you know, touch football in the street and play out in the street with the neighborhood kids, and had a good time. Story_ID: 24301 Speaker 1: What did you like to do growing up? You know, what were you drawn to? Speaker 2: What age (laughter)? Speaker 1: Well, starting as a little kid. Speaker 2: Starting as a little kid. Well, I had asthma really bad when I was a little kid. And so, I wasn't, you know, I couldn't, I couldn't play a lot of sports because I would get, you know, winded or have an asthma attack. So, so, I was sort of a, more of a quiet kid. You know, I would sit back and watch a lot. And as I grew out of my asthma, I got more active in playing with the kids in sports and stuff. But I liked music, so I got, we started up a little band. And my brother was in the band. Speaker 1: So, how old were you when you started up the band? Speaker 2: The band we started, I had to be in high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was in high school. Speaker 1: Well, I didn't want to get you to high school yet. Speaker 2: Yeah, so-- Speaker 1: Did you start taking-- Speaker 2: I was always interested in music. I started with the trumpet, the cornet, in the sixth grade. And, but because of the asthma and the, you know--you got to have a lot of wind to play the trumpet. And so, that didn't work out so well. (laughter). So, I gave that up and picked up, you know, got interested in drums, percussion. And by seventh grade I was taking drum lessons in junior high school at the time. And that didn't last very long, because I got, I got very impatient with the--because they wouldn't let us play the real drum. We were playing the drum pads, the little rubber block, and there were the drums sitting over there, and I was like "Why can't we play the real drums?" So, I got sort of frustrated and sort of gave it up. And I ended up teaching myself how to play. Speaker 1: Did you get a trap set at home? Speaker 2: I got a, the first drum I had was a single snare drum that I got for, I got for Christmas. And I think that same, I think that same Christmas my brother got a bass guitar. And he wanted to play keyboards, and you know, but my parents couldn't afford to buy a keyboard, so they said, we'll get a bass guitar. I don't know what the rationale was for that, but he picked up the bass guitar and that's, he plays to this day. And he was--so I was in the, I think I was in the seventh grade then, and we sort of started just, you know, playing around. And I taught myself, and then eventually I bought a full drum set. I remember, you know, I wanted a drum set, but I just had this one drum. And I picked up an old bass drum pedal from somewhere, and I would put it up against the wall in the basement and hit the pedal against the wall. The wall was my bass drum, and I'd play on the snare and that's how I taught myself how to play the set. And yeah, we started a little group. I played all through college with the same group. Story_ID: 24302 Speaker 1: I think I saw in the outline somewhere where you got a chemistry set at some point? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Going way back. So, backing up a little bit, yeah, I had a chemistry set. I had a microscope. You probably can't even get chemistry sets nowadays, I don't know. They probably think the kids are going to poison themselves, or something like that. But yeah, I had a chemistry-- Speaker 1: The kind of things that--someone else we interviewed was talking about the Gilbert chemistry-- Speaker 2: Gilbert, yeah, there was a Gilbert chemistry set. Speaker 1: And the experiments that you could do with Gilbert, they now seem like they'd be outlawed. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they would definitely be outlawed. They wouldn't let kids anywhere near some of the chemicals that were in the chemistry set now. I don't even know if they let them take chemistry in high school anymore because of, you know, the dangers of chemicals and so forth. But yeah, I had a chemistry set. Before I had a chemistry set though, I always knew I was interested in science. And I got--so before I got my--the reason I got a chemistry set was I used to go up in the medicine cabinet and get stuff out of bottles in the medicine cabinet and mix it together. I wanted to see what would happen, you know. I would, I never ate anything or took anything, so, but, you know, this must have been before the childproof caps on medicine and what not. So, I would take, you know, aspirin tablets out the thing, crush them up, mix them up with water and put other things in these bottles. And I had all these little bottles of experiments going on. And I would put the bottles behind the, I would hide them behind a bookshelf in my bedroom, and everyday I'd check and take notes to see what was happening in the bottle (laughter). I had no idea of what I was doing. And my mother [June Eleanor Reese] was cleaning up one day and found all these bottles of, you know, this stuff in the, behind this bookshelf, and you know, "Boy, what is all this stuff here?" And I'd tell her what I was doing. So, they went and got me a chemistry set to keep me out of the medicine cabinet. And that's how I got my first chemistry set. Speaker 1: Now, where did you get the idea of--well, mixing them up, I can understand, I've seen kids do that. But, the idea of checking up on them and everything, was it to find out what they were doing? Speaker 2: I don't know. I was just curious to see-- Speaker 1: It sounds like the beginning (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The beginning of a science--so I had a little notebook, and, you know, taking notes and making my observations of what was happening in the bottles and, you know. So, I got a--so then I got my, after I got my chemistry set, then I did the experiments in a little book for a while. But then I wasn't happy with that, so I started mixing (laughter) stuff and mixing the chemicals together to see what would happen if I mixed things together that weren't in the book. I'm sure that's not recommended either, but yeah, I had fun with that chemistry set. And I got a microscope and I would, you know, look at molding bread and that sort of thing, under the microscope. And I had an erector set, you know, the little things--now they have the Legos, but now with the erector set, you actually had to screw things together and make motorized toys and things like that. So, yeah, I had all that, you know, all that stuff. And all that sort of fortified my interest in science. But I was always, I was always interested in science. Speaker 1: Now, did you, did your interest come from exposure through somebody actually that you knew who was a scientist, or from television-- Speaker 2: No. There were no other-- Speaker 1: --or magazines, or something? Speaker 2: There were no other scientists in my family that I know of. And, in fact, there're no other musicians in my family that I know of. So, I don't even know where that came from. But, no, I don't quite know where that interest came from. I was just always curious about how things worked and, you know, science was always my favorite subject in school. But, you know, it must have come from somewhere, but I just, as far back as I can remember I always wanted to do science. I wasn't always sure what type of science I wanted to do, but I knew that it was going to be some type of science. Story_ID: 24303 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [June Eleanor Reese] get you books about science? Speaker 2: Yep, yep, I had science books, and you know, I read books about scientists, you know, some biographies. One of my favorites was when I read the, I read the autobiography--but the biography of Enrico Fermi, who was the first to do atomic fission and Madame Curie. And for a while I thought I wanted to be a nuclear physicist. And just from reading about all that, I read about the, I read about the development of the atomic bomb and Hiroshima [Japan] and all that. And I was really sort of interested in that, and thought I wanted to do nuclear physics until I found out I wasn't as good in math as I needed to be, to be a nuclear physicist. (laughter). But my interest sort of changed over to chemistry somewhere along the line, and I got interested in, you know, stemming from that interest of mixing things together and seeing what happened, I just developed this interest in chemistry and sort of knew that that's what I wanted to--as my interest in science sort of developed, I knew that that was what I wanted to do. And I beefed up my math skills and got to the point where I was going to do that, and that's where I went. Speaker 1: Did you have friends that were interested in science, too? Speaker 2: No, no. Nobody. In fact, you know, my buddies--I was the only one on my block to go to college, of the group that I grew up with. You know, there were older kids that had gone to college. There were a couple of older guys on my block that had gone to Morgan [State University], a couple of them. But I really didn't hang out with them, you know. But the guys that I grew up with, none of them, none of them went to college. High school, and then they went and got jobs in factories or, you know, whatever. But I was the only kid on the block to, you know, go to college. And I lived at home the whole time I was at Morgan. And so I saw these guys, because I played in the band with some of these guys and, no, it was--so, I don't know where--both my parents had gone to college, so I knew what college was about. And, you know, they certainly instilled that interest in me. My brother also went to college. He didn't go all the way through. He went to Morgan as well. So, we had that instilled in us. But no, I didn't have any role models, any peer models, you know, around. Speaker 1: These were the days when science was focused on in the mainstream media largely because of the threat of nuclear war and the rockets, and then the space-- Speaker 2: Space program. Speaker 1: The space program was like, there seemed to be a veiled threat that if you could go to space, you could send a rocket to the U.S. from Russia or something. When the Russians sent up Sputnik, it was a big, you know, it set off a big alarm in the United States. It heightened, you know, stem education and then more scientists graduated or whatever. So, did you feel that? Were you kind of aware of that? Speaker 2: I was not, no, I didn't. No, I wasn't aware of that. I know that--I remember the space program. I remember, you know, I remember the, I remember watching in elementary school the first manned rocket launch-- Speaker 1: Alan Shepard. Speaker 2: Alan--he just went up and came back down, you know. Speaker 1: Alan Shepard. Speaker 2: And I remember watching that in school. They would sit us all in front of the television, and we watched that. So, they made us--we were aware of, you know, the space program and all that. But I can't say that there was any sort of, any sort of programs or anything like that like they have now, in stem education to keep kids interested in science. Then it was, it was mainly the, your science teacher at school or at elementary school when you got to the science part of the day. And that was my favorite, you know, part of the day. And, you know, we had, I think I had good science teachers that kept, you know, they kept you interested in science. But in general, there wasn't a lot of interest in science with my buddies and the people I hung out with. But, you know, I just had this interest in pursuing it. Story_ID: 24304 Speaker 1: Now, was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: We grew up in the church. We grew up Baptist and Methodist. I think my mother [June Eleanor Reese] went to the Methodist church. My father [Herbert Edward Bowen, Jr.] grew up Baptist, so we sort of went back and forth to, you know, between those two churches. It wasn't a big part of our lives. I distinctly remember not liking getting up on Sunday morning to go to church, (laughter), not liking dressing up in a suit to go to church. But we did that. You know, most Sundays, my mother would get us up and we'd go off to church. We went to a couple different churches. There was a First Baptist Church in Cherry Hill [Baltimore, Maryland], which I think is still there. The Methodist Church was also in Cherry Hill. We also went to a church called Mount Moriah Church, which was in Baltimore. I don't quite remember where it was, but I remember going there as a kid. But yeah, we went to church. Speaker 1: Okay. But it wasn't like, it wasn't really a dominant force? Speaker 2: No, no, no. it wasn't a, I can't say it was really a dominant force in growing up, but we did go. Story_ID: 24305 Speaker 1: Now where did you start school? Speaker 2: I started school at Carter G. Woodson Elementary in Cherry Hill [Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Carter G. Woodson. So this is, were you aware of who he was or anything? Speaker 2: Not at the time. (laughter). Not at the time. Later I learned, you know, who he was and what he did, and his importance. In fact, my father [Herbert Edward Bowen, Jr.] went to a school of the same name in Hopewell, Virginia when he was a kid. There was a Carter G. Woodson Elementary, or junior high, I think I was, or high school. I don't remember whether it was a junior high or high, but there was a Carter G. Woodson School there, too. I don't know if it was named Carter G. Woodson when he went, but it was certainly, they must have changed the name to Carter G. Woodson. Speaker 1: Now, who, so you liked science in school? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Now, did you have a, was there a particularly good teacher that you had in science? Speaker 2: I can't remember. I think, you know, in elementary school, the teachers sort of teach everything. I remember in, it must have been sixth grade, we had a teacher who would do, who would bring in, there were lots of terrariums and fishbowls and things like that in the classroom. And so, I think in terms of animals and, you know, things like that, that was sort of an emphasis when we saw them all around the classroom every day. I think that was sixth grade. I had some memorable teachers in high school. Junior high--I don't think there was--you know, we had science class but there wasn't a standout science teacher I can think of in junior high school. But in high school, I have some memories of some good science teachers. Because we actually took chemistry, actually, in high school. And the chemistry teacher was a young guy. He was actually also the lacrosse coach. And so, I liked taking the chemistry class. I think that's where my interest in chemistry developed even more. We had another teacher. I believe his name was Mr. Wright. The chemistry teacher's name who was the lacrosse coach was Mr. London. And he was, Mr. Wright was a real hard-nosed kind of guy, you know, really drilled down, and nobody liked him, but I kind of liked him because he was a pretty serious guy. (laughter). I remember in that class, you know, the guys were--this was Baldwin City College which was an all-male public school. And we would get, you know, go back in the back and fool around with chemicals and would throw sodium in the sink and that sort of stuff, which would have gotten us suspended or expelled if anybody knew we were doing that. But those, that was fun. So, again, playing around with chemicals--but that was, those were my most memorable science teachers I had in high school. Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your junior high school? Speaker 2: William H. Lemmel Junior High School. Speaker 1: William H.--and it's Lemmel? Speaker 2: L-E-M-M-E-L, I believe. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, nobody there either that really was-- Speaker 2: I had good teachers there. So, I can't, so I don't remember the science teacher there, so I wasn't all that impressed. It didn't make an impression on me in terms of the science there in junior high school. So, most of that came from high school, where I really sort of got the interest in chemistry instilled in me as well. Speaker 1: How were your grades in school? Speaker 2: My grades were always good. Yeah, you know, I mean I was a good student. I was probably an A-minus student maybe, B-plus or A-minus. Speaker 1: That was pretty good. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, yeah, school was enjoyable. Story_ID: 24306 Speaker 1: I didn't have a lot of friends. I had a few friends that I hung out with. In junior high I had a best friend who was killed, and that was sort of a tragic thing. Speaker 2: Was it an accident or-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, I think it was an accident. And the--yeah, this was a guy that I hung out with. It was eighth grade when it happened. And so, you know, because I wasn't, like I say, I wasn't really outgoing. I wasn't the type of guy that had a lot of friends around him or needed to be in a big crowd or anything like that. And the same in high school. I had a couple of, I had a couple of buddies in high school that--actually, one buddy in high school that I went out with. There were a couple of guys from the neighborhood that went to my high school that I knew, and I sort of hung out with him a bit. But-- Speaker 2: But, your friend who was killed. Was he in an accident or something? What happened? Speaker 1: Yes, it was an accident. Speaker 2: A car accident or-- Speaker 1: It was a, I think it was, somehow it was an accidental hanging. He sort of got--I don't know, they were playing and something happened, and he didn't, you know, he was hung. So-- Speaker 2: Well, that's still sort of murky in terms of what happened. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. I never found out what happened, but it was an accident. He was playing with some other kids or something like that. But I never got the story. But he was my best friend in junior high school, so we hung out together. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, did you, were you involved in, now you say you had asthma, so you weren't involved in sports that much. But did you get involved in any citywide science competitions, science fairs or anything like that? Speaker 1: Science fairs in--you know, though, not so much in high school. But I remember elementary school and junior high, they always had a science fair, especially in junior high, and I did science projects. I remember one year, one year I made a model of a torpedo, a paper and cardboard model, you know, the motor and the payload and all of that. I don't know how I got interested in torpedoes, but I got interested in torpedoes and I built one as a model, you know. It had all of the cutaway view, it had all of the pieces and all that. That was one science project I remember. I think another was one where I had, I did an experiment with an earthworm. If you take an earthworm and put it in an electric field, it'll align itself to the electric field. (laughter). I did that. I put the worm on a wet piece of paper with saltwater, you know. So, that was an experiment that I figured out somehow and presented that at the science fair one year. So, yeah, I did science fairs and that sort of thing. You know, I didn't, I never really did it to sort of win a prize or anything like that. It was just, it was just something to do interesting that I did. Story_ID: 24307 Speaker 1: So, when you were in high school, were you aiming for college? Did you know you were going to go to college? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I knew I was going to college. Speaker 1: And you were determined to be a scientist? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I knew I was going to go to college and be a scientist. And later on it turned out to be a chemist. I was a chemistry major at Morgan [State University], so I finally narrowed it down to chemistry. But I always, I was going to go to college and I always knew I wanted to be a scientist from very early on. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, where you involved in any--well, what kinds of activities were you involved in in high school? Did you run for class office, or did you join any clubs, or-- Speaker 2: I was in--so, I was in the computer club for a while, back in the days when you had the big computer that took up a whole room and you had the punch cards. I did that for a bit. But I ultimately got interested in photography. And I was a yearbook photographer for a couple years. So, and that was my major, that was my major activity. So, I would travel--me and another guy would travel with the sports teams and take, you know, take pictures. So, I was assigned basketball, soccer, lacrosse, wrestling, and football. And so we, you know, I traveled with the team on the bus--go to the games, and photograph the game, and we ended up choosing some of those pictures for the yearbook. Speaker 1: Now, did you get into the chemistry of developing your own film? Speaker 2: Yep, that was part of it. I think that was part of my interest in photography, was because of the chemistry aspect of it. So, mixing the chemicals together and, you know, developing the film. You know, I learned all about the whole chemical process for that. So, I think that was probably part of the driving force to get involved with photography, because it was all, it was all based on chemistry back then. No longer--everything's digital now. But back then it was all, it was all chemistry, so. Story_ID: 24308 Speaker 1: Did you participate in any science competitions in high school? Speaker 2: No, not that I can recall. I don't even recall--no, I don't think I did any science competitions while in was in high school. It was mainly just the photography, and that was it. That kept me pretty busy because it was all year round, all the sports, and following the team, so that was my extra-curricular activity. Speaker 1: Okay. And the band--now was the band going on? Speaker 2: The band was just beginning towards my--I think we started the band up when I was a junior. We were just beginning to hang out and play, so I was doing that. Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of the band? Speaker 2: So, the name of the band--I can't remember the first names we had, but the name that we had the longest was St. George's Gate. Speaker 1: St. George's Gate. Now, why St. George's Gate? Speaker 2: Well, the lead singer in the band had a sister who lived in a housing development called St. George's Gate, which was out in Glen Burnie, Maryland. But, the story behind that is, you know, St. George slayed the dragon at the gates of the city. So, we had, our logo was, you know, was St. George slaying the dragon. We just thought it was a cool name for some reason and, you know, if you're a rock band, you have to have an unusual name, so... (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, it was a rock band patterned off what type of band, would you say? Speaker 2: Oh, we played Jimi Hendricks, Rolling Stones, Led Zeppelin, Deep Purple, Humble Pie, James Gang--we played a lot of stuff. And we did, you know, we played at various concerts around the city. We were the only all-black rock band in the city, which made us unusual. The only other all-black rock band that I know of was Jimi Hendricks when he was playing with Buddy Miles, and so, yes, we were unique, but it was a lot of fun. We did a lot of outdoor concerts. We did some dances. We played at the, we had a manager who would get us some very odd gigs. One of our gigs was at the Baltimore, the Women's Division of the Baltimore City Jail. (laughter). We played on the roof of the jail. That was an experience. But yeah, it was a lot of fun. We would practice either in my basement of the house, or in the back, the lead singer's backyard. The whole neighborhood knew we were playing. (laughter). Yeah, it was a lot of fun. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: And my brother, my brother played bass guitar in the band, and he still plays in a band in Baltimore. He's played in several bands since those days. And I try to play whenever I can. I don't play that often, not often enough. In fact, there was a long period of time I didn't play at all. Story_ID: 24309 Speaker 1: When I went to, when I went to grad school I got into jazz and started playing in a jazz band, still with the trap set. But the leader of the jazz band also, we also sort of simultaneously had an Afro-Latin band where I played timbales. And we--this was in New York when I was at Cornell [University] in grad school--and we traveled around and did a couple of shows. I played--I'm jumping to grad school now, but I played in a musical. There was a musical, and it was a musical production that was a one-time performance at the Statler Auditorium. We rehearsed and, you know, I played, you know, it was a history of music, African American music, and it sort of started with slavery and went through the modern time. And there were actors and, you know, we had a script and we were down in the orchestra pit. That was a lot of fun. So, I've done that. (laughter). Speaker 2: What was the name of it? Speaker 1: The name of it was Time Brings About a Change. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was a musical production that was originally written by Erma Clanton. There was a woman at Cornell by the name of Angeles Echols, who had studied under her, and she gave her permission to put on the show at Cornell. So, she was the director and she directed us. Speaker 2: Yeah, Erma Clanton is from Memphis [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: She was a mentor of Isaac Hayes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: We interviewed her down there. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. You also, I think you've also interviewed Angeles Echols. Speaker 2: Out in California, I think. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Did she have a school? Speaker 1: I think-- Speaker 2: An after school program? Speaker 1: I think so, yeah. Speaker 2: A tall lady? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, I saw her write-up, and the actual name of the, I think the name of the show was An Evening of Soul. And, but the sub-title was Time Brings About a Change. And as we did it, we sort of focused in on this progression of music. It was a lot of fun doing that. It was a one-time show. We only did one performance, and the house was packed. (laughter). And since then, every time I go to a musical play, you know, like a Broadway or something like that, I remember those days and say "Yeah, I was down in that orchestra pit." (laughter). Yeah. And I didn't read music. I couldn't, you know, I didn't, I never learned how to read music. I can read a little drum music, but all the other guys I was playing with, they had their music there and they were following it. And I was playing the whole thing by ear, you know, so all the stops and the changes and everything, I had to remember, you know. But I had the words, you know, the lyrics to the songs that they were singing, but I wasn't reading any music. (laughter). So, it was a lot of fun. I still play the same way, I play by ear every time. Speaker 2: Okay. There's nothing wrong with that. Story_ID: 24310 Speaker 1: How did you choose Morgan State [University]? It doesn't seem mysterious. You were in Baltimore [Maryland], you know. But sometimes people choose other schools. So, how did that come about? Did you have good counseling or advice from someone? Speaker 2: You know, I looked into, I looked into schools in Maryland. I didn't think I wanted to go too far away from home. So, I looked at a number of schools around Maryland, mostly small schools. And I ended up liking Morgan when I went to interview. There were a couple of guys, like I said, a couple of older guys on my block that had gone to Morgan. And so I talked to them about, you know, what it was like there. And you know, they liked it. So I ended up going there and I had no regrets. Story_ID: 24311 Speaker 1: Was Baltimore City College High School associated with City College? Speaker 2: No, no. So, it was--it's very confusing. It's Baltimore City College, but it is a high school. So, Baltimore [Maryland] had at the time, at the time they had four--they had two public schools that were all-male, Baltimore City College and Polytechnic, and those were our football rivals. And associated with them were the two all-female high schools, Eastern High School and Western High School. So, Eastern was right across the street from City College. And this was located right across the street from the old Memorial Stadium in Baltimore. And Poly was downtown, near downtown, and Western was in a different place. Yeah, but those were the, you know, they were public high schools, but they were all-male, all female. And, you know, Eastern was right across the street. They would--you know, sometimes the girls would come over and take classes at City, and we'd act like we'd never seen a girl before, you know. (laughter). And yeah-- Speaker 1: So, now was Baltimore City College High School integrated? Speaker 2: Yes, it was integrated. It was about--I don't remember. I think it was about maybe 70 percent white, 30 percent black, something like that at the time. It's now gone co-ed. It's still there, but it's now co-ed. They tore down Eastern High School and combined it with City College. I still go past there sometimes when I go to Baltimore. It still looks the same. It looks like an old, it looks like a castle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The football team was the Black Knights, and we played every--so, the tradition was every Thanksgiving there was a City-Poly football game at Memorial Stadium. And that was a big, you know, that was a big deal. Everybody would turn out. I'd be down on the field taking, doing the photography and got lots of, you know, good shots, action shots, of the football players. And of course they wanted the pictures, so I made some money on the side (laughter) selling pictures, you know, to the football players. Yeah, it was fun. Those were some good days. Story_ID: 24312 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, you graduated from Baltimore City College High School in 1970, right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you graduate with any kind of honors or anything? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I graduated with honors. I graduated with honors and then went to Morgan [State University]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, was there anything significant about graduation, if you remember? Speaker 2: About graduation from high school? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I remember, I remember it being--our graduation was--it doesn't have a lot to do with graduation itself. It was at the Baltimore Civic Center, which was at the time where all the big concerts, big performers, acts, came and played, at the Civic Center. And I remember on the marquee--and I have a picture of this in the yearbook because I took a picture of it for the yearbook. They have you know, Jimi Hendricks you know, on the marquee and then right under is Baltimore City College Graduation. And I was going to go see, I wanted to go see that Jimi Hendricks concert, but I couldn't make it for some reason. And of course that was the last, you know, that was maybe a year before he died, and I never got to see him in concert. So, that was a big, big regret of mine that I didn't get to go to that Jimi Hendricks concert when he was at the Baltimore Civic Center. But for some reason that's the thing I remember about graduation the most, was that marquee sign with Jimi Hendricks and Baltimore City College Graduation on the same marquee. Story_ID: 24313 Speaker 1: Well tell us about Morgan [State University]. 1970, this is, the Vietnam War is still going on. Speaker 2: The Vietnam War is still going on. Speaker 1: A couple years after Dr. King [Martin Luther King Jr.] was assassinated. Speaker 2: Uh huh. There were still protests, you know, on campus. Yeah, that was, that was an interesting time. You know, I was a young kid, a freshman. I was trying to focus on my work, so I didn't get too involved in a lot of the stuff that was going on. But yeah, there was a lot happening on campus at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. A lot of political-- Speaker 2: A lot of political stuff, yeah. Speaker 1: Agitation and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Black Panthers. Yeah, there was a lot going on. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what about the chemistry department at Morgan State? Had you decided to major in chemistry at this point? Speaker 2: Yeah. I went there as a chemistry major. It was a, you know, we had a, the chemistry department was relatively small. We had some very good professors, and a lot of my mentors, three of my mentors that I name in my questionnaire are at Morgan State. There were three professors that I remember: Dr. Clara Adams, my physical chemistry teacher; Ernest Silversmith was my organic chemistry teacher; and Dr. John Brown was someone who I did some research with in the lab. And he was one of the ones that sort of nurtured my interest in research. And I remember those faculty members helping me along and working with me and keeping me interested. I could go to them and talk to them about, you know, what a career in chemistry was like. Because at the time, I was going to go to grad school for chemistry, but that changed later on and I didn't end up going for chemistry. But we had two tracks. We had chemistry for what we call full major, for people who were interested in, you know, maybe going to med school. And then we had a pre-professional track, which was for people who were headed for other type of careers. I think in my graduating class, I was the only one to go to graduate school. Everyone else went to medical school. And I did, I worked for a while in the chemistry department as a, I had a job, a work study job down in the chemistry stockroom ordering chemicals and putting things on shelves and making sure everything was in order. That was my work study. I did two research projects, summer research projects there. Speaker 1: At Morgan? Speaker 2: At Morgan, uh huh. And it was actually when I, when I bought my--so one of those summers I worked two jobs. I was at the, I worked at the chemistry lab during the day, and at night I worked at the telephone company as a janitor. And I took that money and bought my drum set with it. That's what I spent my earnings on. (laughter). And my parents weren't too happy with that, actually, because they wanted me to put it towards the tuition. But I said, no I want to get this drum set. (laughter). So, they eventually relented, and I bought my drum set, which I actually still own. That's the drum set that I still have, I still have that same drum set. Speaker 1: Well, did you explain to them you could make money off of it? Speaker 2: I tried, but they weren't buying it. (laughter). They weren't buying it. Story_ID: 24314 Speaker 1: So, your campus life at Morgan State [University] was, now did you join the Q's, too? Speaker 2: No, I didn't pledge any fraternities. I was--there was the Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society of--but I wasn't a member of any of the Greek fraternities. There was a National Honor Society, Beta Kappa Chi, which is a national scientific honor society, which I was the president of for one year while I was at Morgan. But no, I didn't pledge. I didn't have very many extra-curricular activities. The only thing I did, I was on the rifle team. I was on the rifle team, and we would have matches against different schools. And that was, you know, through the ROTC. We would travel down, go down to the armory and get the rifles and go down to the shooting range which was right down the road from Morgan, and we'd practice. So, I learned how to shoot there. But then they started to pressure me to join the ROTC. And I said, oh no, I don't think I want to go that route, so I didn't do that. But I continued to--and then I did archery. I learned archery. And so, I learned how to shoot, you know, targets with a bow and arrow, so I did that for a while. So, yeah, it was that. And my studies and the band kept me occupied. I didn't live on campus, I lived at home. So, I commuted to school everyday, first on the bus--I think my first two years--and then I got a car and I was able to drive to campus. But, so, by not living on campus, you're sort of not immersed in that sort of campus environment, but I still had a good time. Speaker 1: Do you think it was easier to live at home, in terms of your studies? Speaker 2: That was a little difficult. I mean, you know, I had to study. I would study mostly at school and then go home late. When I had to study at home, I would do it, but I don't remember studying a lot at home. I think most of my studying I did at the school, and when I did have to study, I would spread out on the dining room table there and study. It was okay. Story_ID: 24315 Speaker 1: What, can you give us an idea of what was going on in chemistry in those days? What was the breaking, the cutting edge of chemistry in the 1970's, between '70' [1970] and '74' [1974]? Speaker 2: Oh boy. Um, there was, well being an undergraduate, you know, and sort of just going to classes, we weren't aware of the big research areas that were out there in the universities, in the large universities. You know, Morgan [State University] is a small, it was teaching college, and so there wasn't a lot of high-powered research going on at Morgan. I got interested in--so, one of my projects was working with porphyrins, which is similar to heme in your blood. And the doctor I was working with, Dr. Brown, was interested in a certain type of spectroscopy called mole spars, but spectroscopy--and so we were trying to complex rare metals with these porphyrin rings. And that was a project that was going on. And I learned after I went to graduate school that there was a lot of interest in heme chemistry and heme biology around that time. But other than that, we weren't really all that aware of what was going on, you know, in the larger world of chemistry. Story_ID: 24316 Speaker 1: How did you choose graduate school? Speaker 2: So, graduate school got interesting, because I was going to go to graduate school to be a chemist. And I wanted to, I thought I wanted to study synthetic organic chemistry in graduate school. But I started looking at what people studied in chemistry in graduate schools. And we had gone through--I had had physical chemistry and analytical chemistry, and we got to study things like molecular orbital theory, a lot of esoteric topics. And my interest in chemistry started to wane at that point, because I was more, I was more interested in, I got more interested in biological chemistry. Because in the curriculum, the chemistry majors took biology in their junior year, if you were a full chemistry major. And we studied the creb cycle. And when we studied the creb cycle, I got interested in how molecules were built in biological systems. And because I was fascinated by, you know, after having been in a chemical lab making compounds and having to, you know, heat things at a 110 degrees for five hours, or, you know, boil something or--it was really harsh reaction conditions, and how some of those same chemical reactions were having in our bodies like, you know, like normal temperatures by these enzymes, that was fascinating to me. And so, I got interested in biochemistry through that, and started thinking that, well maybe I'll do biochemistry in graduate school. And around that time, there was a guy by the name of James Bernie, who was working at Smith, Kline & French Pharmaceutical Company in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And he was a Morgan [State University] alum, and he had gone to Cornell [University] for grad school. And in talking to him, he told me about Cornell, told me about biochemistry, and then he was a biochemist, and he sort of mentored me. And I ended up applying to Cornell as well as some other schools. But it was now--my interest had now shifted to applying for schools that had good biochemistry programs. And I went to Case Western [Reserve University], Ohio State [University], and various places where I went to interview. And I ended up going to Cornell. And-- Speaker 1: This was 1974? Speaker 2: 1974. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Jim Bernie had given me a book called The Hormone Quest, which I still have, and I read that book, and in that book it talked about Percy Julian. I learned about Percy Julian, who was an African-American chemist who was involved in synthesizing cortisone and the whole story of how cortisone, hydrocortisone, is manufactured and all the steroids that are used now stem from technology that he developed. And I learned about hormones and how hormones work, and I really got interested in biochemistry. And so, I went to, I got into Cornell [University], into their biochemistry program. Story_ID: 24317 Speaker 1: But the summer before I went to graduate school, I worked at Smith, Kline & French laboratories in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] as a medicinal chemist. And I was doing, you know, straight organic synthesis, which is what I wanted to do, which was where I was headed initially. And I was working in a lab with a bunch of other chemists who were all organic chemists, and they--most of the folks around me had no interest in biology at all. They were just, you know, given an assignment, given a compound to make, and make this. And I was put on a project developing asthma medications. So, they were looking for beta-adrenergic agonists that would be selected for the receptors in the lung. Now, I was told what that project meant, but I didn't know what any of that stuff meant, alright, because I was just a chemist. And I just had a couple of biology courses. So, I was put on this project in the chemistry lab and was assigned to make, I think, four compounds, which we eventually published. That was my first publication. And, you know, when you made the compound, whenever a compound was finished, someone would come and pick it up and take it away, over to be tested. And most of the folks I was working with didn't really care what happened after that, after they made the compound. But I was interested in what happened next. So, one day I was wandering around the building. There was the biologist-- the pharmacology piece was over in a different part of the building. And one lunch period, I decided I would wander over there and see what I could find out. And so, I was over there wandering around the halls one day, and someone saw me and asked me, you know, "Are you looking for something?" And I said, "Well, you know, I'm a chemist and I work over in the chemistry division, and I just came over here to see what you guys do with the compounds that we make." And he said--well, he asked me which project I was on. So I told him I was on the asthma project. He took me, he said, "Well, come with me," and took me over to, into the area where the pharmacologists were, where they were testing all the compounds in these biological systems. And he showed me, he showed me the dog tracheal system, which is a strip of trachea muscle. You put in a bath and they add the test compound to this bath and measure how the muscles contract, or dilate, which is what we actually wanted. We wanted the compound to dilate the muscle. And you know, it was, they showed me where they do the, you know, measure the receptor binding, and all this. And it was fascinating to me. This is all a whole new area. And so, at that point I saw how you can marry chemistry and biology in this field of medicinal chemistry and pharmacology. And so, that's what I decided I wanted to do. And so when I went to graduate school, there wasn't anyone working in the pharmacology area. So, I ended up working on a project that involved the synthesis of cholesterol. Story_ID: 24318 Speaker 1: Okay. So, Cornell University, 1974. Who were some of the teachers at Cornell that helped you? Speaker 2: So, my thesis advisor was a guy named James Gaylor, Dr. James Gaylor. He was a real mentor. I worked in his lab. That's where I got my Ph.D. So, I worked on a project where we were trying to figure out how cholesterol is synthesized in the liver. I was assigned one of the steps in this process. Speaker 1: Now, what is his, how do you spell his last name? Speaker 2: G-A-Y-L-O-R, Gaylor. Speaker 1: Gaylor. Speaker 2: So, I worked in his lab. He was a very good, a very good mentor. He was probably the most instrumental person in my career in graduate school. Your thesis advisor usually is because you spend most of your time--you spend, you know, you take courses, and then you go into a laboratory and do your research. There was one person there who was doing, who was doing work that was related to this pharmacology area I had just gotten into. But she wasn't taking any new graduate students. She was about to retire. But I did do some work in that laboratory. I worked in another laboratory under Dr. Wilson, who was interested in developing antibiotic drugs. So, again, it was sort of pharmacology related, so I did some work in that lab. These are short projects called rotation projects. And both of those rotation projects, the one in the pharmacology lab that we were looking at--one of the enzymes and neurotransmitter biosynthesis--and they were developing inhibitors of that enzyme. And then in Dr. Wilson's lab, we were looking at, we were looking at compounds that inhibit bacterial growth. So, I did those two, and ended up in the laboratory of Dr. Gaylor. And that's where I did my long-term research on this project that involved cholesterol biosynthesis. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, did you intend to just go straight through for your Ph.D. or did you--okay-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I went straight through to Ph.D. They have a, there's a point along the way where you get your master's degree, but it wasn't a real master's program. You don't stop. It's not a big deal made out of it. But after you pass your qualifying exam, you officially have your master's degree. But it was a Ph.D. program. People just keep running, like nothing happened. (laughter). Speaker 1: Most scientists do that, I found. There's really not much use being a master's in chemistry if you're not going through the whole thing. Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah. Story_ID: 24319 Speaker 1: Now what was your dissertation? Who was your advisor for your dissertation? Speaker 2: So, our advisor was Dr. James Gaylor. And the title of my dissertation was "Removal of the 14 alpha-Methyl Group from Lanosterol During Hepatic Cholesterol Biosynthesis." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the idea was that there is, there are a number of steps that have to be performed on the lanosterol, which was the first steroid molecule in the synthetic pathway. You start with squalene, which is synthesized from two carbon units. And then that is cycalized into lanosterol, which is a steroid. But that steroid is decorated with a number of menthyl groups and some double bonds that need to be moved around, and some of these menthyl groups need to be removed. And the lab at the time was working on this process of how this steroid, this steroidal precursor got to be, got to the end of the pathway, which is cholesterol. And in order for that to happen, three methyl groups have to be removed, and a double bond has to be insolubilized from one position to the next. And so, there was a whole series of enzymes that carry out these steps. And the laboratory was interested in purifying and characterizing the enzymes and describing the chemistry that was involved. So, this was a project that allowed me to use the chemistry that I knew, and also it was a biochemistry project. And these enzymes were all potential drug targets--and so, the drug targets for anti-cholesterol drugs. So, my project was to figure out how the first methyl group is removed, which is the 14 alpha position. There are two methyl groups in the fourth position of the molecule, and those that process had been just figured out by a couple of other graduate students of a post-doc that came before me. So, we knew something about the process and how to think about it, because we assumed, or hypothesized, that the 14 alpha group would be removed in much the same way, or by some similar mechanism. But it turned out to be a little bit different, because there's a different set of enzymes that are involved in removal of the 14 alpha methyl group that are distinct from those that are removed from the two methyl groups in the 4 position. But they're all in the family of enzymes called cytochrome P450's, which are in your liver, and there are two classes. There are those that are there to break down foreign substances, and then there are those that are involved in synthesizing, you know, bio-molecules. So, at the time, we didn't know. Now we know a lot more about this family of enzymes than back then. But back then, there were three forms of cytochrome P450's that were known. And we thought that there was, that one of these cytochrome P450 families was involved, and this was the form of cytochrome P450. These enzymes can be induced by certain chemicals. So, Phenobarbital will induce one class of cytochrome P450's. There's a drug called safrole, which is a component of root beer, actually, that induces another class of cytochrome P450's. And we thought that the safrole induced form of cytochrome P450 was the player. And so, I worked with a graduate student, another graduate student in the lab who was trying to purify that enzyme. Gary Fisher was his name. And we sort of worked together on that aspect of the project, and found that if you induce the cytochrome P450 with this particular compound, that there is an increase in the rate of 14 alpha of methyl removal. And my job was to try and figure out what the chemical intermediates were in that process. And we knew, all we knew was the methyl group was removed as formaldehyde. It gets converted to formaldehyde. Somehow it comes off, the two methyl groups in the 4 position come off as CO2 [carbon dioxide], so they get oxidized to one step further than the methyl group in the 14 position. Story_ID: 24320 Speaker 1: So, knowing that information, we started to look for oxygenated intermediates. We were using--I fed rats radial labeled Mevalonic acid, which is a precursor way down the--an early precursor for cholesterol biosynthesis, to get the pool of steroids labeled. And then we would take the livers out and isolate the compounds. So, this was a tedious task. And then we'd put a tube down the rat's throat to stomach feed. It didn't hurt the animal, but it wasn't comfortable for the animal. We put the compound into the animal's stomach and then waited for a certain period of time and sacrificed the animal, and take the liver and extract the sterols. So, that was one thing that we did--and isolate the intermediates, chemically characterize them, using a metaschromophy. And what we ended up finding--and the other thing I had to do, was we had to make, I had to develop an assay for the enzyme because there wasn't an assay for this enzyme. So, I had to develop one as part of my thesis. So, I synthesized a radial label form of lanosterol, and used that, and measured the removal of the loss of radial activity from the molecule. So, doing those things led to a proposal that the methyl group comes off, that there's a hydroxylation action of the methyl group, and that it ends up being, that methyl group ends up, that the hydroxylation group ends up being a steophyte, because we found all of these ester compounds, which are fatty acids that are attached to the compound. So, it gets oxidized to a point and then attached to a fatty acid. And somehow, that attachment was involved in the mechanism. So, now, we now know--so I got to the point where I isolated these chemical intermediates, predicted what their structures were. So, if you look at my thesis--there are all these mass specs in there--and trying to guess what the compounds are. But we now know that that actually does happen. There is a hydroxylation of that methyl group. It turns out not to be that isosypherol induces a family of cytochrome P450's, which we didn't know at the time. And it's one of those particular types of cytochrome P450 that carries out this reaction. But it is a cytochrome P450 stimulated reaction. So, my thesis stopped at the point of identifying these potential chemical intermediates, but we never really confirmed that they actually were there. It was all by inference of these extra compounds that we found. So, that was my thesis work in a nutshell. There's a lot more stuff that I did, you know, leading up to that point. But that was sort of the highlight, was the identification of these highly oxygenated intermediates that were trapped. So, I did some experiments where I put in inhibitors and tried to trap the intermediate so that it wouldn't get converted to the next step. So, we tried a bunch of experiments in that regard. So, I took the project up to a point, and then it was picked up by someone else. And they ended up identifying what the actual products were. Speaker 2: Okay. So, your work on--it was your dissertation? Speaker 1: That was my dissertation work. Speaker 2: Okay. And, I think, so science is like that, from what I've been told by the scientists we've interviewed, that you may not, you know, solve a problem from A to B, but you'll push it along. Speaker 1: Push it along. You do a piece of it, and then someone else comes along and picks up the ball, and you know, carries it further. But, you know, you're always generating more questions along the way. So, you may not come to the final answer, but you'll come to a point where you know how to kick off to go to the next step. That's how science is. Story_ID: 24321 Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So, this is 1981 that you finish your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Alright. And, I think--now you started working as a post-doctoral staff fellow at NIH [National Institute of Health] in '82' [1982]? Speaker 2: In 1980, actually. Speaker 1: '80' [1980], okay. So, you started in 1980. Speaker 2: So, because of the timing, and the fact that Cornell [University] only gives, you know, grants degrees once a year, I actually finished in 1980. But my degree was awarded in '81' [1981]. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So, well, tell us about your post-doctoral position at NIH, the Institute of Mental Health. Speaker 2: Okay. So, I had developed this interest in pharmacology, and decided that was what I was going to pursue as a post-doc. And I took a, while I was a graduate student, my major was biochemistry, but I took a minor in neurobiology with a focus on neuropharmacology. So, at Cornell, we had to take a major and a minor. And my minor was neurobiology, neuropharmacology. So, when I finished graduate school, I decided that--one of the aspects of our qualifying exam is we had to write, we had to write research proposals. And these research proposals had to be in the form of a research grant. And I wrote two research proposals, and both of them were related to pharmacology. One of them was to determine the mechanism of opioid receptors, which had just been discovered in '76' [1976], I think. And well, they had been discovered, demonstrated biochemically-- Speaker 1: These are the receptors of the brain? Speaker 2: Receptors in the brain for morphine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Alright. And so, I decided that I was going to do my--because one of my projects--I had done a lot of research to write this research proposal, and so I knew a lot of early work that had been in the area. So, I was familiar with a lot of the names. So, I just started writing letters to the people whose papers I had read, and wrote to Candice Pert, who was actually on the paper with Solomon Snyder. She was a graduate student working in his lab at Johns Hopkins [University], and they were one of the three labs that published, almost simultaneously, the discovery of opioid receptors as a biochemical entity, using receptor binding assays. And she had a job opening. She was looking for a biochemist at the NIH, and I went to her lab at the National Institute of Mental Health. And what I did there was we started working on the biochemical distinctions between the multiple sub-types of opioid receptors. There were three sub-types of opioid receptors at the time: mu, kappa and sigma. And none of them had been, I mean we had pharmacological evidence that they were sub-types, but none of them had been purified and biochemically characterized-- Story_ID: 24322 Speaker 1: So, my project was to try and purify the opioid receptor. We focused on the delta opioid receptor. And so, we were characterizing that, and made some interesting discoveries about the pharmacology, which suggested that the sub-types might not be separate entities, that they may inter-convert from one to the next, that the mu and the delta sub-type might be interconvertible forms of one another, based on some work that we had done when we were anatomically localizing these two receptor sub-types, which we could now radial label distinctly, and finding that they were sort of co-localized in certain areas in the brain. It was an area in the rostratum where both mu and delta opioid receptors seemed to be rich, and where you could change the labeling pattern based on the biochemical conditions under which you did the experiment. And what you put in the incubation soup could alter it from a mu-like profile to a delta-like profile. And we proposed that these two sub-types were actually inter-converted. In moving forward, that turned out to be sort of true, but it's not, we now know that they don't actually inter-convert, but that they're in a complex, that the mu and delta receptors have been proposed to be in a complex in that particular region of the brain. And that's why the pharmacological profile appears to be interchangeable, but they are distinct, they are distinct molecules. The genes were subsequently cloned, and it was shown to be the same molecules. But we, so we spent some time doing more honing of the pharmacology, learning something about the topography of the receptor. We showed that there was a critical sub-hydra group in the binding site that was in the delta receptor, that you could actually use a probe to attach ligands irreversibly and develop some compounds that did that. So, we made a lot of progress with characterizing the delta opioid receptor. We solubilized it, showed that we could solubilize it, that it remained active as a soluble entity, and did a lot of characterization of the soluble receptor--looked at how it was coupled to, it's coupling to G-proteins. All of this was sort of new at this time. We now know that all of the molecular biology has been done. The receptor sub-types have been cloned with the exception that we now know that sigma is not an opioid receptive. So, we now have mu, delta and kappa opioid receptors. And sigma is now, we now know that it's not an opioid receptor. And I didn't start working on the sigma receptor until I got to Brown [University] and had my own lab and starting working on the sigma receptors sort of by accident, actually. Story_ID: 24323 Speaker 1: You went to Brown [University] in '83' [1983], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And I have a note here that you founded the Macromolecular Biochemistry facility on campus. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a small core facility that I wrote--a grant, a joint grant, with some other faculty members, to set up a peptide synthesizing facility, actually. So, we bought a, we wrote an NIH [National Institutes of Health] grant together, a peptide, an automatic peptide synthesizer, because a lot of us were working with peptides at the time. There was a colleague in the psychology department that was working with a lot of neuropeptides. Other folks in the hospitals were working with neuropeptides. But there was no way--these peptides were extremely expensive to buy. And if you wanted to do any type of studies where you change the structure, it was very expensive. So, it was much easier if could make your own. So we bought this synthesizer, and we hired a technician to run it. Eventually, they brought the DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid] synthesizer to that facility, and so we set up this macro-molecular biochemistry facility that was making peptides and nuclear gases for various researchers around campus. So that's what that was. It was just a small operation to save money for the researchers. Story_ID: 24324 Speaker 1: You had just mentioned sigma receptors. What are sigma receptors? Speaker 2: So, the sigma receptor was first, was first proposed by Martin--William Martin was actually the first to suggest that there were multiple subtypes of opioid receptors, and this was long before any of the biochemistry was done. And what he did was he, he was using a dog model, chronic pain model in the dog, and examining the effects of classes of the known opioid compounds at the time that we used clinically. So, he was looking at morphine, he was looking at ketocyclazocine, which is a synthetic drug. And then another synthetic drug was N-allylnormetazocine, or SKF10047. And to make a long story short, basically what he found was that all of these compounds, to some extent, alleviated analgesia [pain reliever]. But they all had spectrums of side effects. If you look at the side effects of these different compounds, they all had different spectrums of side effects. He concluded that what that--and by side effects, I mean changes in physiology--blood pressure, body temperature, pupil dilation, those sorts of things. And he concluded that the three classes of compounds must be acting through different sub-forms of opioid receptors. And he proposed mu, kappa and sigma. The mu comes from morphine. The kappa comes from the K in ketocyclazocine, and the sigma comes from the S in SKF10047. The difference was that sigma was very different from the classes, in that the sigma drugs that he coined actually made the animals, instead of making them drowsy like ketocyclazocine and morphine did, the animals got very excited and ran around the cage. They barked, they had increases in blood pressure as opposed to decreases, and so forth. And the effects weren't readily blocked by giving an opioid receptor antagonist. So, he called this, these effects, he coined the phrase psychotomimetic effects, and presumed that the sigma receptor might be mediating this particular effect in addition to its ability to produce analgesia. So, moving now forward some years when people were beginning to look at, to look more closely at the mechanism of this effect, it was found that the drug PCP [phencyclidine], or angel dust, shared a binding site in the brain with this drug, SKF10047. And that that binding site was not, did not have the pharmacology as the opioid receptor. And when this, when the compound SKF10047 was eventually radial labeled, and you could do biochemical studies with it, it was found that this radial labeled compound binds to two different sites in the brain. It was complicated, because Martin had used a racemic mixture of this drug SKF10047. These drugs come often in two isomers, a plus size and a minus size isomer that are called enantiomers. He was using a receiving mixture of the drug. And what we now know was happening in his studies was that the minus isomer of SKF10047 was interacting with the kappa opioid receptors, and producing analgesia through a normal standard opioid type mechanism. The plus isomer was binding to the same receptor molecule in the brain that PCP binds to in causing the pharmacological effects of PCP, which are extreme exaltation and increases in blood pressure and so forth. So, we started to separate at that point the receptor systems. But there was still confusion, because SKF plus the isomer of SKF10047 was still binding to two sites, neither of which was an opioid receptor. And it turned out that one of the sites is the PCP receptor with the ion channel of the N and DA type glutamate receptor, and the other site is now what we call sigma 1. And it's the sigma 1 site that was being studied and called sigma before we knew that there were two sub-types. And the pharmacology was a completely unique beast. It wasn't related to any, it wasn't related to opioid receptors. Although it downed some of the opioid drugs, it didn't bind any of the normal, any of the naturally occurring opioid peptides: enkephalins, the endorphins, the dynorphins--none of these compounds to this receptor. These are the body's natural opioids that interact with the mu, kappa and delta sub-types of the receptor. This site was completely unique. What it did, what stood out about this unique sigma site was it has high affinity for a number of anti-psychotic drugs--so, haloperidol, and drugs of this nature bind to it, and there was a lot of interest initially in whether or not this receptor might be useful as a target for the development of any psychotic drugs. But that hypothesis sort of fell out of favor. It got disproven, and because it was assumed that the sites were, that the psychotum and medic effects of drugs were being mediated through this site, and they were not. And so, there was a lot of effort put into developing a sigma receptor targeting any psychotic drugs. It just didn't work out. Story_ID: 24325 Speaker 1: So, when I got to Brown [University]--some of what I just told you happened after I got to Brown, but when I got to Brown, the way we started working on Sigma receptors was really--so, backing up a few years, was really sort of by accident. Because we were studying, we were studying the kappa opioid receptor, and using a classic compound. It's called benzomorphan, and this drug SKF10047 (N-allylnormetazocine) is a benzomorphan type drug. And we were beginning to see some strange pharmacology in the characteristics of these benzomorphan type drugs, and picking up what looked like heterogeneity in the benzomorphan type drugs. And we later found that what we were looking at was a sigma receptor. And so, our lab and a number of other labs sort of converged on, coming from different angles, converged on the finding that this novel site is a new type of receptor. And as we continued to work on it, of course, the question became what does this receptor do? It's in the brain, what is it there for? And at that point, it was just an interesting pharmacological entity, an interesting binding site, and that's where the fun started, is trying to figure out what the receptor actually does, and does it have it's own effect, is there an endogenous linking for this effect? Because most of the receptors that are discovered in the brain, our body makes something that naturally binds to it. I mean, we're not, our brains are not made to bind these benzomorphan drugs which are synthesized in the laboratory. So, some people started looking at what the natural ligand might be. And it was determined by Somtin Soo's (sp) Lab in Baltimore [Maryland] that the steroids, some steroids bind to these receptors, steroids like progesterone and prednisone and hydro-epidosterol (sp), and these are called neurosteroids because it synthesizes the brain. These drugs have some affinity for sigma receptors. And it's thought that the dosgenous (sp) ligand for that, for the Sigma 14 we now are calling the Sigma 1 receptors, is a steroid. So, as we studied this receptor more and more as a molecular pharmacologist, we wanted to sort of look at whether or not we could determine whether there were any biochemical changes in cells when we add drugs to the system. And that's difficult to do in brain tissue, because you have so many different cell types. So, we started looking at cell lines. Cell lines are actually tumors. They're taken from tumors and put into culture. And they grow, they're immortalized, they just grow and grow and grow. And they're good model systems for studying biochemical effects of receptors, if you can find one that expresses the receptor that you're studying. In the opioid receptor field, it was found that there is a cell line called the NG10815 cell line that expresses the delta opioid receptor. And that finding was a big boost to the field, because you could then take a single cell type and study what biochemical changes occur in cells, and in that case it was in the psycho of the ANP system. So, we wanted to do the same thing with the sigma receptor system, so we started searching around for cell lines. And usually you have to look really hard to find a cell line that expresses the particular receptor that you want to study. And we were prepared to do that. But the very first cell line that we discovered, that we studied, we found had a ton of these sigma receptors labeled, that this drug created, plus SKF10047. But when we started to look at--well, at that time there were two radial labels, because at the same time that all of this was happening, medicinal chemists were hard at work synthesizing new molecules that would bind to this receptor. So, the other aspect of what we do is discovering new molecules that interact with this receptor system. So, we were collaborating with chemists. I was collaborating with Kenner Rice's Lab at NRH, making compounds that would target this receptor, and at the same time, using these compounds to see if we can understand how this receptor worked, because a problem in the field was this receptor binds compounds that also bind to a number of other different types of receptors. Story_ID: 24326 Speaker 1: So, I think I was telling you the story about the main source of confusion and why we had to work with these medicinal chemists. A: we didn't know what the endogenous ligand is. Usually when you're working with a receptor, you know what the chemical structure of the endogenous ligand is. So, if you're working with the average nerve receptor system, you know, it's adrenaline. And so, you can sort of design molecules off of adrenaline. We had no clue what the endogenous ligand was for the sigma receptor. But what we had were compounds from a number of different chemical classes that bind to a number of other receptors. So, there wasn't a clean compound that we had that we could use to study the function of the receptors. Because all the compounds we had, bind to two, three, four other different receptors--dopamine receptors, cyrtomium receptors, opioid receptors, and the A-glutamate receptors. So, we spent a lot of time working with the medicinal chemists, and at the same time developing compounds to see if we could study, come up with a selective, what we call a selective tool with which to study the receptor. So, at the time that was happening, we were working with cell lines, trying to get a system which we could use to work out what was happening biochemically with the cells. And so we started our search for a cell line and started with PC-12 cells of pheochromocytoma cell lines, and found that the cell line expressed, you know, receptors for, that they were labeled with tritiated SKF10047 (N-allylnormetazocine), and another compound called tritiated triple P. I won't give you the long chemical name, because this is the one of the compounds that the chemists had developed that we knew bound to this receptor. The problem was that the pharmacological profile in this cell line was different even yet from what we were calling the sigma 1, the sigma receptor at the time. Most people who were in the field that was studying sigma receptors were using the guinea pig brain as a source of tissue, because the guinea pig is a rich source of the receptors. Almost everybody in the field was using guinea pig brain. And the profile that we were finding in these PC-12 cells was very similar, but there was some stark differences in the profile. And the profile that we were finding in the PC-12 cells told us that plus sizes of opioids, that plus SKF10047, had very low affinity for this receptor, whereas all the other compounds that we were looking at had similar affinities. There's a thing called enantio selectivity, where a receptor will prefer to bind to one isomer of a drug over the other. And in the case of the sigma 1, in the case of the sigma 1 receptor in the guinea pig brain--I keep saying sigma 1, but we hadn't come to that point yet. In the case of the receptor that was in the guinea pig brain which we were calling sigma receptors, the plus isomer had higher affinity for this receptor than the minus isomer. And in the cell lines, the PC-12 cell lines, it was just the opposite. The minus isomer had higher affinity than the plus. And that helped throughout this whole class of benzomorphan drugs, whereas other drugs like haloperidol and some of the other synthetic drugs, didn't discriminate--the guinea pig brain versus the PC-12 cell. So, we eventually were able to biochemically characterize the receptor we were looking at in the PC-12 cell with a photo affinity probe. So, we were able to determine the molecular weight, and we found that the receptor that was in the PC-12 cell line was a 20 kilodalton protein. The receptor that's in the guinea pig brain is a 25 kilodalton protein, and was found by a group out in Oregon. And so, they were different molecules and they had very, very similar pharmacological profiles. But there were also some very stark differences. And so, we proposed at that time that we sub-divide the system into sigma 1 and sigma 2. And with the sigma 2 receptor--being a receptor that had all of the same binding profiles as the sigma receptor, with the exception that the plus isomers were not binding very well to this receptor. And that met some resistance in the field, but eventually as more and more people threw more and more drugs at these two binding sites, it became clear that they were similar, because there was so much overlap in the pharmacology, yet you could find, you know, one or two or three compounds that stood out as being able to discriminate the two receptors. And that's a hallmark of receptor sub-types, when you have sub-types of the same receptor system. Story_ID: 24327 Speaker 1: So, naturally the next thing is you have these cells--what other cell types also express these receptors? And what we found was that every cancer cell line that we started to look at expressed both receptor sub-types, and not only expressed both receptor sub-types, but were rich sources of the two sub-types. And so, we published a paper in Cancer Research where we did a survey of a number of tumor cell lines and found both receptors in neuroblastoma. It was lung cancer, prostate, breast, and others were found in liver and pancreatic. And so all, most, we haven't found a tumor cell line yet that doesn't express the receptors. We did find one that doesn't express the sigma 1 receptor. It was a breast tumor cell line. But all of them seem to express the sigma 2. And a lab down at Washington University in St. Louis [Missouri] found that when cells are rapidly proliferating, the sigma 2 receptors are expressing even higher levels. So, we started to think that the sigma receptors might be involved in regulating cell proliferation, so, survival of cell growth somehow. And that was backed up by the finding that if we put cells and culture with drugs that bind to sigma receptors, we can show that drugs that bind to the sigma 1 receptor turn on a cell death program called apoptosis, and that you eventually kill, you eventually start to kill the cells off. And so now what we're focusing on is whether or not we can target this receptor as a point of development for novel anti-cancer agents. And about that time, I moved back to the NIH [National Institutes of Health] and took up a position as a unit chief in the National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Because of my close collaboration with the chemists down there, we were able to, while I was down there, to develop a number of compounds that were selected... Speaker 2: I just want to get, just back-track a little bit here. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The point about the cancer cells. Is it that you were trying to figure out where you could actually keep them from growing by turning off the-- Speaker 1: Cell growth. Speaker 2: Cell growth. So this is-- Speaker 1: So, we started that work. I think we made that initial discovery while I was at Brown [University]. And then we, when I moved down to the NIH [National Institutes of Health], we continued to work on that and develop new compounds that would, you know, would do this. And we were starting to look at the mechanism of how this works, and at the same time--so now you have a therapeutic application and a potential model therapeutic target. Story_ID: 24328 Speaker 1: I also started, while I was at NIH [National Institutes of Health], collaboration with Dr. Christy John, who is a radial chemist at George Washington University in [Washington] D.C. And he was interested in whether or not you could use the sigma receptors as a way to visualize tumors, not invasively, as a diagnostic tool. Because the idea was if all these tumors have, if tumors highly express the sigma receptors and you could design a probe that would label the sigma receptor on the tumor, then you should be able to give a patient a probe and put them in an imager of a pet scanner or something of that nature, and then see where the tumors are in the body. And so, I started working with him to develop compounds that had the right type of radial isotopes that would maintain activity at the sigma receptors. And we were able to actually show in tumor-bearing animals--I think the first study we did was on a melanoma tumor. We implanted into a mouse and grew the tumor in the thigh, and then injected the compound and put the animal--and this was a type of imaging called spec imaging--put the animal in a spec scanner, and you could see the tumor. Now, when we first started working with Christy and he proposed this to me, I said this is not going to work, because the sigma receptors--I think I skipped over this. Eventually, we found that they're not just isolated to the brain and the nervous system. They're found in all of the organ systems in the body. So, they're in the liver, they're in the spleen, they're in the lungs, they're in the heart. They're everywhere. And the liver is actually an organ that highly expresses, probably most highly expresses the sigma receptors. And I told him, "Well, you're just going to light up everything. You're just going to see all the organs in the body and you're never going to be able to see the tumor." And so he said, "Oh, we'll try it. You never stop an experiment because of something like that. You always forge ahead and just see what you get." So he did it, and we put the, you know, you inject the probe. He made some analogues of compounds that were known to bind to dopamine receptors, which is one of the receptor families that crosses over with sigma. He made some selective compounds that only bind--that have preference with the sigma receptor--radial labeled them and injected them into these mice that were growing tumors. And if you put the animal in the imager immediately, you do see everything, everything lights up. You see the brain, you see the liver, you see most of the organs. But the amazing thing was that if you come back six hours later, you start to see less labeling in non-tumor tissues, and you start to see the contrast of the tumor. And if you come back 24 hours later, all you see is the tumor. So, the tumor by virtue of having such a high level of the sigma receptors, is probably, maybe is taking up the drugs and the compound and maintaining the label. So, you can actually visualize the tumors. And there was a group in, I think it was Germany that had done a similar experiment on a human, using a compound that we knew bound to sigma receptors. And they published a paper showing a patient that had metastatic melanoma, late stage melanoma with all the metastases. And you could see lit up all over this patient's body, all these tumor sites that were labeled by this drug. And they didn't understand at the time what they were labeling, but we think that what they were actually labeling was the sigma receptor. And there has been since, a small clinical trial of breast tumor patients in Belgium using this technology, and it seems to be working. So, we think that this is a buy. But now other groups have picked up the idea that you may be able to target sigma receptors diagnostically by using these radial labeled probes. We've sort of, we've collaborated with groups like that, but we've sort of stuck with our approach of targeting the sigma receptors for the development of drugs that will target tumors. Story_ID: 24329 Speaker 1: So, I went back to NIH [National Institutes of Health] in 1991. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. The director of-- Speaker 1: And became director, a unit chief down there, and stayed down there until 2004. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And during that whole time I was at NIH, we did, the work was completely focused on sigma receptors. And we published a number of papers showing that sigma receptors were present in an organ now called lipid rafts, and that that might influence their function. We discovered that the sigma receptors, when activated, produces a change of calcium levels in cells, which is a known second messenger that can change signaling and biochemistry in cells. We found that turning on the sigma receptor increases the levels of a lipid called ceramic, which is a toxic lipid that has a number of targets in cells, and can turn on the apoptotic process. And at the same time, we developed a whole series of compounds through our collaboration with a medicinal chemist. The main chemist that I collaborated with was Brian DeCosta, who was at the NIH then. There was another chemist called Craig, his name was Craig Bertha, who made some compounds that we, he made a compound that we're still using today, that's sort of a prototypic selective sigma 2 receptor agonist. We're always interested in--so, once we found that there were two sub-types of the receptor--so, we were first interested in designing compounds that were selected for the sigma receptor system. And we found a few of those. But now what we're trying to do is hone compounds to be selected for either the sigma 1 or the sigma 2 receptor. And we found a few of those, working with our medicinal chemist colleagues. So then in 2004 I moved back to Brown [University], and joined The Department of Molecular Pharmacology Physiology And Biotechnology, and continued to work on the sigma receptor system. And continuing now with more of a focus on what they're doing in tumor cells, how they are affecting cell growth and proliferation, with a main focus on the ability of the sigma 2 receptor to turn on the apoptosis. And the discovery there was that cells that are resistant--forms of cancer that are resistant to chemotherapy, like pancreatic cancer, is resistant to a number of chemotherapeutic approaches, are susceptible to the sigma receptor. So, we can kill--we looked at three different pancreatic cancer cell lines that are readily killed by activating the sigma 2 receptor when these cells are resistant to other types of chemotherapeutic agents. So, the signaling mechanisms that are turned on by the sigma 2 receptor apparently go in directions that bypass a number of the molecules that are mutated in cancer. Cancer is a problem of unrestricted cell growth, so proliferation. And the way cancer cells do that, is they, there are mutations and molecules that are normally designed to turn on the cell death process. So, cells have a, all the cells in your body, with the exception of your neurons, have a time clock in them, and they'll divide for a certain number of times. And then that cell will turn on an apoptotic program, and basically commit suicide. Speaker 2: This is the process of replenishing-- Speaker 1: The process of replenishing cells. And in cancer cells, that process is sabotaged, it's hijacked, because the biochemistry that's used to turn on that cell death process is altered in tumor cells. So, these cells escape this apoptotic process. And what we're trying to do with these chemotherapeutic agents is turn that process back on. And apparently, what the sigma 2 receptor does is turn on the programs that sort of bypass these roadblocks in the apoptotic pathway, so that if you have a cell that is resistant to chemotherapy, turning on the sigma 2 receptor opens up another pathway, because there are multiple ways to kill a cell. And the tumor cells haven't figured out yet all of those ways. So we try, so the sigma 2 receptor finds a way to exploit a system that's not yet been altered, and that's a very, that will be a very valuable tool. Because if all tumor cell types, or most tumor cell types, express these receptors, then you have sort of a broad spectrum of tools to attack a number of different types of tumors. So, since coming back to Brown [University], we've focused on that. I've had a couple of post-docs that have worked on this project. Shee Wong worked on looking at the mechanism of how the cells are able to use the mitochondrial pathway to turn on cell deaths. This is a relatively novel discovery, that the mitochondria in cells can be involved in committing this type of cell suicide. Story_ID: 24330 Speaker 1: One of the interesting things that we discovered is that in addition to these sort of cell death signals that are turned on, there are also signals that are turned on that are usually associated with increasing cell survival. So, there's a lipid called sphingophosphoril choline that is increased when you activate sigma 2 receptors. We see a transient calcium signal in cells which usually can be associated with increases with cell proliferation. And my graduate, Dio Gracia, was involved, his thesis project was to look at this pathway and how it bifurcates into two different pathways, one that apparently is headed, leading the cell toward cell death. And there's one other pathway that we initially hypothesized was leading to cell proliferation and survival, but it may not be cell proliferation and survival. Well, it may be some other physiological process that the cell uses, but it doesn't kill the cell. So, somehow the pathway, these two connections to two different signaling pathways--and we've been interested in ferreting those two out and seeing what, is there a positive thing that the sigma 2 receptor does for the cell? One of the mysteries is that, as I mentioned earlier, that when these cancer cells are rapidly proliferating, they want to grow. They up regulate the sigma 2 receptor. So, you wonder why would the cell up regulate a receptor that is, that when activated is going to kill the cell, stop it from proliferating if that's what it wants to do. Cancer cells are known to up regulate growth factors because they want to receive more growth signals. So, one hypothesis is that the sigma 2 receptor is really a receptor that is there to receive growth signals for the cell. And when we highjack the receptor with these synthetic compounds, or for these, you know, we expose the cells for long periods of time to these synthetic compounds, we turn on a pathway that the cell normally would not use. And that is really this calcium signaling, or the signaling with this single phosphate coding molecule that is linked to cell growth and survival of some physiological component that the cell uses, you know, to stay alive as opposed to cell death. But we haven't quite figured that out yet. The sigma 1 receptor, we've started to do some work with the sigma 1 receptor. The sigma 1 receptor does seem to be associated with cell proliferation and survival. We have done an experiment where we take a breast cell line that does not express sigma 1 receptor. I had a post-doc, Zee Ping Wu, who transfected these cells permanently, permanently transfected the cells, so that they over-express the sigma 1 receptor. And when we do that, what we find is that the cells proliferate much more rapidly. They will survive withdrawal of serum, which the cells need, growth factors, and we feed them, and if we take that away, the cells will usually just stop growing. But these cells continue to continue to grow. And they change their morphology, their shapes, and they look like they may be more progressive. So, we think that the sigma 1 receptor may be associated with transforming cells to a more aggressive type, and so we have some projects that are testing that hypothesis right now. We've done some structural studies with the sigma 1 receptor whose gene is cloned. We know the gene for the sigma 1 receptor. We don't know the gene yet for the sigma 2 receptor. But, because we know the gene for the sigma 1 receptor, we can do some manipulations. And we've chopped the molecule and shown that the C terminal, that there's a portion of the molecule that's the active form of a molecule, and if you just express that form of the molecule in cells, you'll get the same effect as if you had the whole molecule. So, we're narrowing in on that and trying to see how we can exploit that as a potential therapeutic tool in cancer. So, that's where our research is going these days. Story_ID: 24331 Speaker 1: In 2001 you were the president of the National Institute, the NIH [National Institutes of Health] Black Scientists Association. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that? Speaker 2: So, the NIH Black Scientists Association is an association that was started at NIH. It started out as sort of a loose conglomeration of post-docs and senior scientists at the NIH. But the problem with the NIH is that there are very few minority scientists there, African-American scientists there, or minorities of any type. And the organization was designed to promote and recruit more minorities to the NIH. And we have a seminar series that we did every year that was called the John Diggs Seminar Series, that was named in honor of John Diggs, who was the former deputy director of the NIH, an African-American deputy director. And basically we were there to help with recruiting, mentoring. We had a scholarship fund that we ran that was named in honor of a fellow post-doc of mine who was killed in a car accident, Sheryl Torrence Campbell. And so we, every year we would award the Sheryl Torrence Campbell Scholarship to a Washington area high school student who's going to college, and we'd give two of these every year. That was one of one the things that the NIH Black Scientists Association did. Outside of the NIH, mainly it was a program within the intramural NIH to increase diversity within the NIH and try to get--because one of the things we learned about the NIH is in order--the easiest way to advance at the NIH intramural program is to come in as a post-doc, come in as a post-doc for a fellow and sort of work your way up. And so, the idea was to help with recruiting. And the way recruitment was done at the NIH, it is all sort of who you know. And so, if you're a lab that has a post-doctoral opening, you will call up one of your buddies and say look I've got a post-doctoral opening, can you send me your top graduate student that's graduating. And if you're not in the, if you're not in the club, you're disadvantaged. And minorities tend to be disadvantaged that way. So, what we would do, we would collect names and say look, here's a bright post-doctorate fellow, a potentially post-doctoral fellow. We'd go find these people and sort of direct them to NIH, direct them to which labs we knew they would get good training, and that was what that organization is doing. They still exist. I don't think they exist in as formal a state as they were when I was there, but Roland Owens, who was very much involved in the Black Scientists Association, now actually holds every week a dinner where people come together and talk about mentoring, talk about careers--not every week, I think it's every month-- Speaker 1: I was going to ask you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's every month. I think it's once a month. And, you know, we talk about--because, you know, NIH is a big place. Intramurally, NIH is a big place, and if you're a minority, you can easily get lost there. So, it's a place that people can gather and mentor, and that seems to help a lot. And I think we've done a good job. There are still very few minorities there, but the ones that are still there are folks that we've mentored along. And so, that was a good--and the year that I was president, I was able to get David Satcher to come as a speaker. That was a fortuitous encounter, when my wife and I were at the Wolf Trap, at a show, and I saw David Satcher and his wife there. And I sort of came up to him and introduced myself, and I think we were actually in the men's room at the time (laughter). And, you know, asked him if he'd be interested in giving a talk at the NIH in the seminar series. And he said, "I've never been invited to give a talk at the NIH. I've been at the NIH many times. In fact, I lived on the campus at the NIH. But, yeah, I'd be happy to do it." So he came and gave a talk on his Healthy People-2000 Series that we had going, and it was great. Story_ID: 24332 Speaker 1: Okay, now in 2007, you're at Brown [University]. You became the Chair of the Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Physiology and Biotechnology, right? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And the Upjohn Professor of Pharmacology. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Now, what does it mean to be the Upjohn Professor? Speaker 2: So, the Upjohn professorship is a chaired professorship that is given to whoever is chair of the department at the time. So, it goes along with the chairmanship, and came from, has it's origins in the Upjohn Pharmaceutical Company that years ago gave a donation to Brown. So, it's one of these endowment type funds. And I became chair in 2007, and it wasn't something that I had planned to do or had aspired to do. The chair, the former chair of the department, Edward Hart, who had been chair of the department since it's inception in '95', I think, when the department first formed, stepped up to be, they created an associate dean's position. And he stepped up to be the associate dean of biology and was serving as, doubling as a chair for a while and then decided that he wanted to step down as chair and just do the associate dean's job. And the dean of medicine, a biologist at the time, Elliott Ashi, said "Well, we're not going to do an external search for chair, we'll see if we can find a chair from within the department." So, he brought each of the faculty members in individually, and then talked to them about who they think within the department would make a good chair. And I was on vacation at the time, so I didn't get a chance to talk to them until after I got back. But, he went through the whole faculty and they met with him. And when I got back from vacation, I got a call from him, you know, saying he wanted to see me immediately. And I thought it was just to get my opinion. And I was going to tell him what we should really do, that we should really do an external search for a chair, and bring somebody in new. And so, I said that. He listened to me, and then he looked at me and said, "Well, it turns out that almost everybody in your department thinks that you would make a good chair." (laughter). So, I sat there with my jaw hanging open for a couple of minutes and I said, "Well, let me go think about it." And I thought about it and decided I'd do it. So, that's how I became chair. I didn't, you know, it wasn't, I didn't come back to Brown to be chair or anything like that. But I had to think about it, because it's a lot of work and, you know, it's a lot of responsibility. But I think I've enjoyed being chair so far. (laughter) Story_ID: 24333 Speaker 1: But also now, you're a person that loves research. Does it [being chair] take away from your research? Speaker 2: It does, it does. Yeah, everyone in my lab can tell you that I don't get up to the lab as much as I used to, or would like to. You know, there's always some fire that you have to put out. We just went through an external review process where we had to do a huge self-study and examine our goals and look at our grant income, and all that sort of that thing, faculty productivity, whatever. Curriculum is like--so, I had to write a self-study that took a lot of time. This happened a couple of weeks ago when we had our external site visit. You know, there are people who come up for promotion and faculty who get job offers and you have to put together a retention package. You know, one of the things that I've succeeded in doing is increasing our infrastructure in structural biology, which was woefully behind most of the universities. And, you know, got commitments from the provost and the dean to buy new instrumentation and get that up and running. But, yeah, it has, it is a lot of work and has impacted the productivity to some extent. Speaker 1: Now, how much, what portion of your time do you spend teaching now, or did you, when you were really engaged in research? Speaker 2: So, I've given up some of my teaching duties, but not all of it, because I like teaching. And that one was of the reasons I came back to Brown [University], because I like teaching, I like working with students. So, I do, I used to, before I became chair, I co-directed our core pharmacology course. I was a graduate program co-director. I taught, I gave lectures on a couple of other courses, you know, that were outside of biomeds. So I gave some lectures on endocrinology courses, I gave two lectures in introductory neuroscience course. And I still do those things. I gave up the directorship of the core pharmacology course. I gave up the graduate program co-directorship, but I still teach in those courses, because I like doing it, for one thing. In the pharmacology course, there isn't anyone else that has the expertise in that area that I teach in the department, so I do that. But I enjoy doing it. September is a horrible month for me, because I'm teaching in two courses, and this past September was really bad because we had the self-study going on, and we had some other faculty issues going on. So, September tends to be the busiest month for me. And then after that, then things slow down quite a bit, but somewhat. But I still have the other duties, but the teaching is behind me, because I do all my teaching in September. And the two lectures that I give in the introductory neuroscience course on chemical synaptic transmission, I've been doing those two lectures since I was at Brown the first time. And I continued to do them when I was down at the NIH [National Institutes of Health]. They would fly me back up every September, and I'd give those two lectures in this huge 400 student course, and talk about chemical synaptic transmission. So, that was something that I continued to do, even when I was at the NIH. But yeah, the chairman duties, on top of everything else--I gave up all my committee work. I do serve on committees when called upon. I served on the search committee that hired our newest provost. I was on that search committee, but I don't serve on any other committees. I just got off all those committees and gave up the co-directorship of the graduate program and the directorship of that course, but everything else, I still do. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 24334 Speaker 1: Now, where do you see the field of sigma receptors heading in the next decade? Speaker 2: So, I think we're in a state, at a stage in the field now where we're just beginning to figure out what these receptors might be doing. There are people studying this system from a number of angles. So, most of the, if you were talking to me five years ago, I would say that most of the people in the field are coming into the field from neuroscience, because they were originally thought to be opioid receptors. And so, people of my age group, I guess, generation, started out studying opioid receptors, from a standpoint of the CNS [central nervous system]. But in recent years, the field has branched into other areas. So, one of the areas where the field is going is in the area of drug abuse. It turns out that the sigma 1 receptor is a target for, a potential target, for developing drugs to treat drug abuse. One of my colleagues I collaborated with is Ray Natsomoti, who's now at West Virginia University, and has pioneered this work in showing that the sigma receptor, that the sigma 1 receptor, when it's blocked, will ameliorate some of the toxic effects of cocaine, some of the local motor effects of cocaine. One of the things that, one of the toxicities of cocaine is that it causes convulsions at high dosages. And she found that if you block sigma 1 receptors with sigma 1 receptor antagonists, that you block the convulsive effects of cocaine. And so, and you can do this even after the animal has been given a dose of cocaine, a convulsive dose of cocaine. So, that's a potential therapeutic use of the sigma 1 receptor, targeting the sigma 1 receptor. Others have shown that blockade of the sigma 1 receptor has effects on drug self-administration. So, if you train animals to self-administer cocaine or-- there's a group at Boston [Massachusetts] that's doing alcohol, and give them sigma 1 antagonists, that you can block or inhibit drug self-administration in these animals. But more importantly, it's been shown that blockade of the sigma 1 receptor blocks the process that's called, the process where the animal begins to self-administer again after they've been off the drug for a while, so re-instatement, it's called. So, you if make an animal addicted to cocaine, and give him certain--and then take the animal off cocaine, and then give certain cues, the animal will go back to self-administering cocaine. And this is thought to be what happens in humans, where they go to rehab and they're off drugs for a while, and there are certain cues--stress, other cues, that get them self-administering drugs again. And it's been shown that blocking the sigma 1 receptor will block this re-instatement process. So, there are people who are interested in targeting the sigma 1 receptor for treatment of drug abuse, and I think that's a direction that the field is going to go. The other major direction, also involving a sigma 1 receptor, is learning and memory. The sigma 1 receptor is expressing a part of the brain called the hippocampus. And it's been shown by a group in France that blocking sigma 1 receptors in the hippocampus will induce memory loss in animal models of learning and memory. So, there are several animal models where you can train a rat to find a floating block in a pool. Or, you train a rat to do a certain task, you know, go through a maze to find food. If you give them blockers of sigma 1 receptors after they've been trained, they forget how to do it. If you put a rat in a pool that's been trained to find a block of wood, they can't. They swim around like it's, like they never had that experience. So, the corollary of that the activating sigma 1 receptors must play a role in acquisition of learning and reinstatement of memory. So, there are people who are interested in developing sigma 1 receptor agonists for treatment of memory deficits, like Alzheimer's disease, or just any sort of cognitive defect they have. So, cognitive enhancing agents is another sort of way that the sigma receptor field is going at the current. Story_ID: 24335 Speaker 1: And then there's the sigma, the sigma 2 receptor side, where we're involved mostly with the development of anti-tumor agents, targeting the sigma 2 receptor to produce drugs that will target the sigma 2 receptor, specifically so-called targeted therapy where we target the sigma 2 receptor and turn on these apoptotic pathways in cells. And I said before, because most cancer cell lines, most cancer cells express these receptors, what you end up with is a broad spectrum tool for killing the tumors. Where we are now, we can do this, and we do this in culture, in a tissue culture medium. But the real test is does this happen in animals that actually have tumors? So, where people are going now is developing tumor models, using tumor bearing animal models to test novel compounds. And so, where we are now is at the stage of generating the right types of compounds that could be administered to animals that will have the right pharmacal kinetic properties to get to the tumor and to activate this cell death process in a tumor. Some work has been done along those lines. It's been shown that some sigma ligands can reduce tumor growth in animals. There has been some limited work along those lines, but I think there's going to be more and more of that type of work. One of the other things that I didn't mention that we found, is not only does the sigma 2 receptor activation directly kill cells, but it also enhances the activity of other more standard chemotherapeutic agents. So, if you give a sigma 2 receptor agonist, plus adriamycin, plus taxol, you see a synergism, and you get enhanced tumor killing at lower dosages of the chemotherapeutic agent, so that you avoid some of the toxicities of these high doses of these compounds. So, that's another use. And I think, we don't understand yet the mechanism of that, but one possibility is that the sigma 2 receptor is one of the things that's been shown by us and by others, is that the sigma 2 receptor when activated, down regulates the genes for drug efflux pumps. Tumor cells have developed the ability to pump drugs out of them. So, there's an actual molecule that pumps any tumor agents out of the cells. So, if you give a cell taxol, a tumor cell taxol, there are these pumps that pump that taxol right back out of the cells, so taxol doesn't have a chance to do anything. So, one of the things that the sigma 2 receptor does is it down regulates the expression of these drug efflux pumps, and that might be one of the ways that the sigma 2 receptor is able to synergize. So, combining the sigma 2 receptors, sigma 2 receptor agonists with other chemotherapeutic agents, is a way I see the field going. And that's the way cancer therapy is going anyway. It's all combinations of drugs now. There's no more single drug treatments. It's all three or four different drugs in combination, because together they will synergize and activate multiple apoptotic pathways. And that's something I think we can do with the sigma 2 receptor. Tumor imaging, that's still a way to go with the sigma 2 receptor field that's being developed. One other thing with the sigma 2 receptor is that it has to with the brain is protecting--we think that we protect cells in the brain from some of the, from the toxic effects of some of the anti-psychotic agents, by blocking the sigma 2 receptors. So, there are lots of ways that the field can go, and I think it's headed, in the next ten years, I think we're going to know a lot more. The sigma 2 receptor gene hasn't yet been cloned. There's some evidence that it might be related to another molecule that is involved in some of the actions of progesterone in tumor cells, but it's not, but the gene has not yet been cloned. Once the gene is cloned, then I think we'll have all the molecular biology tools in our hands to manipulate things, and learn much more about how the receptor functions, and what's its structure is. But yeah, I think in the next ten years we're going to be, the sigma receptor is going to be much more known than it is now, in terms of development as a target for--there aren't any big pharmaceutical companies or anything like that yet interested in targeting sigma receptors, because we're still at that basic phase where we're still in the testing mode. But once we've confirmed that this works in animals, I think a lot of the, you know, the companies will get interested. And we talk to them when we go to conferences, and they're keeping an eye on us in terms of getting an interest in that. And I think that's where we're going to be in ten years. Story_ID: 24336 Speaker 1: Where do you see the field of pharmacology evolving, as technologies like NMR [nuclear magnetic resonance] and protein crystallography yield a much better picture of drug targets? Speaker 2: So, that gets back to the field of structural biology. And structural biology is a field where you're interested in determining where the actual three dimensional structure of the molecule is. And if you have a drug molecule, a drug target, and you know the structure of that drug target, you can design, the hope is you can design drugs that will be able to specifically fit into that drug pocket, in that drug binding pocket in that target molecule. It's called rational drug design, where you're not just making compounds randomly based on a known structure, which is what drug companies tend to do, is they synthesize huge libraries of compounds, every different sort of analog and then throw it at the target and hope one is a hit. The idea here is to try and know something about the structure of the drug target, and then design your molecules specifically to fit major tools. One is x-ray crystallography, where you can make a crystal structure of the compound bound to your target, and you see what the actual crystal structure is, how the drug fits. And there's a nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, and NMR spectroscopy is where you're actually looking at drug in a solution, and you can actually look at dynamics of how the drug goes on and off the receptor, what amino acid residues the drug is coming in contact with. So, these tools work hand in hand to get at that type of information. And we have structural biologists at Brown [University] that are doing just that, looking at various targets, protein kinases, protein phosphates. There are a lot of different drug targets that are out there that we're interested in learning the structure of and, you know, someday we'll know the structure of the sigma 1 and sigma 2 receptors. It's a lot more difficult--these are proteins that are embedded in the membranes, and that makes it difficult to use these two tools to get at those structures. But, eventually I think we'll get there. But this area, this field of structural biology is a big boom to pharmacology, because it's going to narrow down the trial and error process to where you can make predictions about which drugs to make. You don't have to make as many compounds. And you can design a drug that would theoretically have fewer side effects, because it fits right into the target that you're interested in. And then by knowing other targets that the drug might happen to bind to, you can know how to tweak the molecules so that they won't bind to those other targets as well. So, it's a big boom to pharmacology, this area of structural biology. Story_ID: 24337 Speaker 1: What impact does the continuous emergence of designer street drugs have on pharmacological research? Speaker 2: Well, that's an interesting question, because as you know, there are more and more designer street drugs out there. These drugs are targeting, you know--the problem is they're made on the street, they're not chemically pure. They're usually made by people who are not chemists. So, there are all sorts of problems with that, aside from the abuse potential. But there's one drug that actually led to the discovery of a cause of a disease. And thereby using that information, you learn something about how the brain works. So, there was a drug that was taken--I think this was in the late sixties or early seventies--that was causing people to have the symptoms of Parkinson's disease. And it was found that in autopsies of patients that had taken this drug, that the dopamine neurons and the dopaminergic system were being degenerated. So these, the dopamine system is the system that's involved in Parkinson's disease. And this drug was causing a degeneration of these dopaminergic neurons and giving the patients these symptoms. And by making that discovery, it was determined that what was happening with this drug is that the drug was being taken up, it was then being oxidized in the cells, and this oxidation process was causing oxidative damage to the neurons. So, that's now thought to be a potential cause of Parkinson's disease, because we don't really understand all there is to know about why the dopaminergic neurons started to degenerate in Parkinson's patients. And one theory is that there are certain environmental toxins that might be coming in and being oxidized, and taken up specifically by these neurons and then being oxidized by this drug. And that would be a potential cause. So, this is a case where an impurity in a street drug actually helped, you know, neuropharmacologists and pathologists figure out one of the aspects of what's going in Parkinson's disease. But it continues to be a problem, because these designer drugs keep cropping up. There's always new ones that crop up, but every time one crops up, there's a chance of figuring out what the mechanism is. And a lot of times the symptoms reflect some sort of a normal disorder that gives you some information about the etiology or something. Story_ID: 24338 Speaker 1: This just occurred to me, and it's kind of a crazy question. But did you ever see the marriage of designer drugs and pharmacology to the point where people can get high and then not be addicted? Speaker 2: (laughter). Well that's, well, there are two aspects of that. So, there was always the hope of having opiate related drugs, pain killers, that would be addictive, and trying to separate the pain killing activity of drugs from the addictive activity. And that hasn't quite happened yet. There are some drugs that are less addictive than others, but the two processes are so closely linked in terms of the brain mechanisms, that I don't know if it's even possible to do that. I mean, the aspects of, you know--what drugs of addiction do is they hijack the normal system in the brain that makes us do things that are pleasurable. So, the part of the brain that makes us want to eat a delicious steak dinner, or it makes us want to have sex, or it makes us want to feel rewarded when something good happens, or you know---that's the system that's affected by almost type every drug of abuse, is the dopaminergic system and the limbicomies of the brain, which is a very old part of the brain. That's what we think evolutionarily is there to keep us eating, to keep us drinking, to keep us having sex, so that the species can go on. And in order for the animal to want to do those things over and over again, they have to be pleasurable. So, people take drugs for the pleasure. But part of that is the piece that makes us crave to do that over and over again. And that's the piece that keeps us wanting to do it. And the two things are separate. People don't abuse drugs that don't get them high or make them feel good. And so, those two things are linked. So, maybe there's a drug out there that--I mean, for a long time, people thought marijuana wasn't addictive, but it is. It can be just as addictive as heroin. The type of addiction and the physical consequences of the addiction are different, but it's still addictive in terms of the craving and what happens. I mean, this was proven in animal models. And yeah, that's a good question, and I don't know if that will ever happen. But if it does, that's going to be a very popular drug. (laughter) Story_ID: 24339 Speaker 1: Now, there is one drug called ibogaine, which I've done some work with, and it turns out to be a good sigma 2 receptor ligand. And this is an interesting drug, because it's a hallucinogen, and it's a drug that's used in rituals, ritualistic ceremonies, in Africa. But it got into the states [U.S.] in the sixties, and it is fairly hallucinogenic, but usually people who take these drugs are multi-drug abusers. And so, they're heroin addicts, or whatever. And there were anecdotal reports that people who had experienced the ibogaine high, when they come down, they don't want to take drugs anymore. And they just are, have lost their sort of craving to take drugs. And this was picked up on in these anecdotal studies. And clinics in Europe were developed for using ibogaine to treat drug abuse, and there's some interest in the United States. And there was a lot of interest in it in the late '90's [1990s] as a potential for developing drug abuse. And I've worked in treatments for drug abuse, and I've collaborated with Kenneth Alper, who's at NYU [New York University]. He's a psychiatrist who's still interested in this idea of using ibogaine as a potential treatment for drug abuse, because it seems to work in animal models and in these--I went to a very interesting conference that he sponsored, actually, at NYU. And the first day of the conference was science. So, we talked about--we don't know the mechanisms of how it does this. I got invited because it turns out that it binds to the sigma 2 receptor and actually causes the same apoptotic signaling that other sigma 2 agonists do. In fact, there was a clinical trial that was set up to use ibogaine, and tested, and it was FDA [Food and Drug Administration] approved. But when it was discovered ibogaine caused some neurotoxicity in animals, the study was pulled, and never really done on the scale that it needs to be done, because of this neurotoxicity issue. I got invited because we were able to show that ibogaine kills cells and culture through--and that could be the mechanism for the neurotoxicity. But there are other analogs of ibogaine that don't bind to the sigma 2 receptor, but maintain their ability to block drug self-administration in rats. And I went to this conference. The first day was the science. The second day was anecdotal, where they brought in people who had set up these drug treatment clinics in Sweden, and there was someone from Germany. And they talked about how they used ibogaine to treat these patients. And then they had these testimonials from people in the audience who had family members that said, you know, if my brother had ibogaine he wouldn't be in rehab now or he wouldn't be dead now, or you know, it was really quite moving. And there were people who had experienced, themselves, that I was a drug addict, I was taking cocaine, I was on heroin--and I did ibogaine and I've been clean for the last ten years. But it hasn't been a study, because it has some toxicities, it has some cardio toxicity. But that's an example, perhaps, of a drug that produces a high--well, in this case, hallucination. I guess you can call it a form of a high, but it doesn't seem to have the addictive capabilities. But that has yet to be sort of scientifically proven in a scientific study, control study. Speaker 2: How do you spell this? Speaker 1: Ibogaine, I-B-O-G-A-I-N-E. Story_ID: 24340 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major step that you would have, that you regret taking, that you would do over? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I'm the type of person that, you know, my philosophy is if you--you can't just do one thing over again, and have everything else be the same. I figure that as soon as you change one thing, a whole bunch of other things that happen after that are going to change, you know. So, I don't have any regrets. I don't think there's anything that I would do again. You know, if I think about it, maybe I would have gone away to college, maybe I would have--I sort of would have like to have seen how that felt, to live in a dorm. But, yeah, I don't really like living with other people, so I don't know if I would have enjoyed that anyway. So, yeah, I don't know, I don't have any regrets or anything that I'd change. I think that my path in life has been what it is, and I don't really think that I would change anything. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 24341 Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look back, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think, you know, the work that I've done has contributed to a field--and I think that the body of work I've done professionally has--you like to think that you've made an impact in the field that you're in. And I think I have. I think that the discovery of the multiple sigma subtypes, the linkage of the sigma 2 receptor to apoptosis and, you know, tumor killing... Maybe none of this will happen in my lifetime, but perhaps some day down the road, that connection will be made, and who knows, there'll be a cure or a treatment that comes out of this body of work. I think that I've helped a few people along the way, mentored some people who have benefitted from my experiences, and I think that comes from teaching, it comes from working with folks in your lab. I mean, I've had a lot of undergrads work in my lab that have gone on and been in contact with me and tell me that me that because I worked in your lab I'm where I am now. I see people, you know, not everyday, but I often run into people who say to me, "I took your lecture, and your lecture opened up my eyes to pharmacology and made me head to the direction or neurology," or something like that. So, yeah, I think that those will be my legacies, I think, the work I've done and the people I've helped. Story_ID: 24342 Speaker 1: In terms of the people you've helped, what advice would you give young minority students today who are looking at pharmacology or any of the sciences? Speaker 2: I, you know, you have to be--this isn't for everybody. You have to the be the type of person that perseveres through disappointment. 90% of the experiments you do don't work, so you can't be the type of person that gets discouraged. I see this with undergrads, as I have in my lab. Some of them get really bombed out when an experiment doesn't work. You know, they get really discouraged, and I have to keep talking to them, and you know, "This is how science is, and you've got to keep going." Others just keep rolling on, you know, think of the next thing to do. What I tell my students is that every experiment tells you something, even those that you screw up. If you add the wrong thing to the wrong tube, just remember what you did, and maybe you'll--how many scientific discoveries have been made by somebody screwing something up. So, you never--you just learn from everything. You just learn from everything you do, and hang in there. It's hard work. You know, you've got to be willing to work hard. The money's not good, so don't get into this field if you think you're going to get rich. It's a lot of schooling, you know. You go to grad, you go to college, you go to grad school, you do a post-doc, you know. It's years before you actually are in a position where you feel like you're making a decent living (laughter) and making a contribution at the same time. So, it's not an easy road, and it's not for everybody. And look for mentors, don't try to do it by yourself. Seek out--if nobody's coming to you to mentor you, then seek out mentors. You know, go talk to people, find a mentor. I always tell people that that's not easy either, because mentoring, nobody teaches you how to mentor. I had good mentors that were around, and nobody--there's a saying, that if you find a turtle sitting on top of a fencepost, he didn't get there by himself. And that's, that's from mentoring. And I try to instill in students to listen to criticism, because your work is--if you're going to be in this field, you have to have a thick skin. You have to be able to promote your work, you have to be able to sell yourself. You have to be able to sell your ideas. You have to convince people of your hypothesis. So, those are all things that go into this field. And I think it's not just limited to pharmacology, I think that's just general advice. The specifics of pharmacology, I think you, get a good background in chemistry, because pharmacology is the use of chemical compounds, and I think the best pharmacologists are those that understand where the molecules come from, the properties of the molecules they're using. And that only enhances how you look at them when they're interfacing with the biological system. So, get a good grounding in chemistry. Be a good writer, because it's all about writing. You're always writing. And if you can't communicate your ideas, you're not going to get very far. So, I'm always helping and enforcing and advising about writing, because it's so important. Be a good speaker. Be a good speaker, don't be shy. You can't be--in this field, you have to put yourself out there and make yourself known. So, if I run into a student that's got a shy streak, I try to talk to them and say, hey, look, you have, you know, you have to be a little bit more aggressive because it's very competitive out there. Everybody's competing for funds and competing for notoriety and wants to be the first to do this or the first to do that, so you have to put yourself out there, and you can't be a wallflower, or whatever they call that. Those are all the things that I tell students and try to give advice on. Story_ID: 24343 Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us something about your family. I know you're married, and I know you have a son. We saw him just a few minutes ago. Speaker 2: So, I'm married. I've been married twice. My first wife is named Bobbie and my second wife is named Bobbie [Barbara Eleazer] also. It's spelled differently, but it's the same thing. So, I've been married twice. My current wife has three kids, so the son you saw is a stepson. So, I have three stepchildren, all grown and my, most of my, my immediate family, most of them have passed away. So, my mother's not living, my father's not living, and I have a brother. My grandparents on both sides have passed away. We had a streak of time where there were several tragedies in our family. My mother [June Eleanor Reese] had three sisters. One died in a car accident, and the second one died of a heart attack, and my mother, she ultimately died of heart failure. And their mother outlived all three of them, so my grandmother on my mother's side outlived all three of her daughters. And so, we have a small family left, nuclear family left. So, my brother--I have a cousin that lives just outside of Baltimore [Maryland] in Columbia [Maryland], and we get together. And he has two, he has two sisters. And we have another cousin and we get together fairly often. So, we don't have family reunions or anything like that because there's not a whole lot of people left, at least on my maternal and paternal side. On my paternal side I have a lot of cousins still in Virginia. And they do, I think one of them has done a history of the Briggs side of the family. And my second cousin on that side of the family--I'm still close to my brother. We talk just about every other day. In fact, he was here during the summer visiting. Yeah, so family life is interesting. (laughter). Story_ID: 24344 Speaker 1: Okay. I know when we were talking about your ancestry, I was just thinking that Petersburg was such an historic place, being the last real battle of the Civil War. Maybe a lot of history down there was covered, I don't know. But that's everywhere. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's everywhere. I'm a civil war buff. I like to study the civil war, so I've been to many of the battlefields. But I have not yet been to the Petersburg battlefield, believe it or not. So, that's a, I'll get there. Speaker 1: It was Battle of the Crater. Speaker 2: Yeah, Battle of the Crater. In fact, the guy who was blamed for that debacle was Burnside from Rhode Island. Speaker 1: General Burnside. Speaker 2: And they have a big monument to him down at the Burnside Park. And you know, I think he was the only general that Lincoln fired, or something like that. Because he blew up the hole and then had the troops charge down into the hole, and they couldn't get out of the hole, and so it ended up being a big massacre. But, yeah, he's got a big statue, sitting on a horse. Speaker 1: He's complicated. He did some good things. Speaker 2: Yeah, he did some good things, too. Speaker 1: But it was the idea that just didn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that idea just didn't work, yeah. But he's most well-known for his sideburns, I guess. Speaker 1: Correct. Story_ID: 24345 Speaker 1: So, well is there anything I haven't asked you about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I think you--hobbies--you haven't asked me about my hobbies. Speaker 1: Drumming, you covered that somewhat. Speaker 2: Drumming. Speaker 1: But go ahead-- Speaker 2: So, I've done marital arts, Chinese martial arts. I've studied Kung Fu, Thai Chi. There was a time when I was a post-doc, that I was in really good shape. I went to the Kung Fu school just about every day to work out. And I was in very good shape back then. (laughter). I'm still in pretty good shape, but I don't get to work out as much as I'd like to now. I collect lanterns, as you can see up there. In fact, they're on the fireplace. That's one of my things that I like to do. I collect musical instruments, drums, I've got drums all over the house. Yeah, those are my--photography--I like photography still, even though I made the switch over to digital. I still take my camera everywhere I go. My wife always complains about, you know, everywhere we go you got your camera, and you're leaving me taking pictures of--and I'm trying to keep up with you. So, yeah, those are, I think, my main hobbies. Traveling, I live traveling in different places. Story_ID: 24346 Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a guy who treated everybody fairly, who helped a lot of people and made some significant contributions to this field. And I think--I don't have any kids of my own. I have step kids, but I don't have any kids of my own. So, my legacy I think is going to be my work and people that I've helped along the way. That's going to be what I leave behind. Story_ID: 24347 Speaker 1: So, this photograph is me and my mother, I think at George Hill Park in Baltimore. And I'm a baby, so I'm guessing it's sometime around 1952, '53' [1953]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That is myself on the left and my brother on the right. That's me in my backyard in Baltimore as a Cub Scout. Speaker 2: It's 1961. Speaker 1: Okay, 1961. It's a good thing the date is on the back of some of these pictures. Okay, this is me, my cousin Gilbert, Gilbert Bannister, who lives in Columbia, Maryland, and my brother at our house eating crabs in Baltimore. Speaker 2: Okay, is that left to right? Speaker 1: Left to right. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. It's '58' [1958]. Speaker 1: That's my father and I. I'm in the baby carriage. (laughter). Alright, that's, those are the band days. That's St. George's Date. I think we're playing at Loyola College. And this has to be 1974, 1973. That's my brother with the bass guitar on the left. That's me on the drums in the middle, and that's Pete Moore with his back to you. He's the lead singer. That's my mother, my brother, myself and my father. It looks like my house in Baltimore. Speaker 2: Okay, and just for the person typing that up-- could you give everybody's names? Speaker 1: Oh, the names, okay, yeah. The mother-- Speaker 2: Start with your mother. Speaker 1: My mother is June Bowen. My brother is Byron Bowen. Myself, and my father, Herbert Bowen, Jr. This is me, my brother and my grandfather, Herbert Edward Bowen, Sr. in our backyard in Baltimore. This is at my grandparents' house in Hopewell, Virginia. That's my grandfather, Herbert Bowen, Sr., my father, Herbert Bowen, Jr., me with my face hidden behind my grandmother, Mary Eliza Bowen, and my brother sitting on her lap, Byron Bowen. That's my father and me, I think in Jewel Hill Park in Baltimore. This is another shot of-- Speaker 2: Same location? Speaker 1: Same--this is actually Christmas time. See the Christmas tree? My grandmother had a silver aluminum Christmas tree with those colored lights shining on the Christmas tree. So, that's my grandfather. My mother, June Bowen, me, my grandmother and my brother. That's my mother and me in the middle and my brother sitting on top of the Chevy there in 1958. Speaker 2: So, that's me on the left and my brother on the right in our bedroom in Baltimore. Speaker 1: This is my father on the left and me as a baby, and that's my mother holding me in front of my grandmother's house in Hopewell, Virginia. And I think this is when she had the store, the restaurant. And I told you she had a restaurant in the front, and they're standing right in front of the house there, in Hopewell, Virginia. Speaker 2: That's my mother and father at the fall formal. He was an Omega Psi Phi. It looks like it was January, 1947. Speaker 1: That's me at the house in Baltimore. This is just an enlargement, that's an enlargement of the same picture. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is a baby picture of me. Speaker 2: So, this is my mother on the left, my grandfather, my grandmother and my father at one of their anniversaries. I don't know what anniversary that is. But it was an anniversary celebration in Hopewell, Virginia. Speaker 1: These are my maternal grandparents. That's Orlando Reese on the left and Melissa Reese on the right in their house in Disputanta, Virginia. Speaker 2: I think some are marked that we've already taken out. Speaker 1: Yeah, I just, there's only two left in the book here. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, this is a class picture. I don't know if you want that. Speaker 2: There may be some reflection problems, but I can hold it up. Speaker 1: That's me right smack in the middle with the ladies there on the front row. I'm not sure what grade that was. Speaker 2: And this is from the band days. That was the cover of our posters at St. George's Gate. And on the left, that's Byron Bowen, my brother and Pete Moore, the lead singer. Sitting down is Ky Braxton. That's me standing up next to Pete Moore. And that's Petey Vaughn, the keyboard player. So, bass player, lead singer, lead guitar player sitting down, me on the drums and Petey on the keyboards. Speaker 1: About 1970? Speaker 2: That must have been about 1973 or so. Speaker 1: Is that it? Speaker 2: I think that's it. Is that it? Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much. Go ahead and tell us about that picture. Go ahead and tell us about that picture. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother, June Eleanor Bowen. I'm not sure how old she is in that picture...