 Story_ID: 4113 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Dorothy A. Brown. D-O-R-O-T-H-Y A. B-R-O-W-N. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is September 1953, and I was born in Minden, M-I-N-D-E-N, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am the current elected Clerk of the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is October 8th, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're presently in my office in Chicago, Illinois in the [Richard J.] Daley Center, 50 West Washington Street, Suite 1001, Chicago, Illinois 60602. Story_ID: 4114 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is honey barbeque wings. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is red. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is summer. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Vacation destination, my favorite vacation destination is Minden, Louisiana, my hometown. Speaker 1: All right. And finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or saying, "I am the epitome of Dr. Martin Luther King's dream", because when I was elected Clerk of the Circuit Court of Cook County in 2000, over a million people voted for me, and they judged me by the content of my character and not by the color of my skin. Story_ID: 4115 Speaker 1: Now, I'd like to ask you about your family history-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --as much as you can tell me. I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side and your father's side, but first, can you give us the names of both parents, spell those names for us and give us dates of birth and places of birth? Speaker 2: Okay, my, my father is David Rabb, Sr., born in Athens, Louisiana, born May 10, 1922. My mother is Dinkie Rabb, R-A-B-B, born in Athens, Louisiana on July 30th, 1928. Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a significance to or a story behind the name Dinkie? Speaker 2: Actually, there is not. Everyone, when I tell them my mother's name, they think that I'm telling them my mother's nickname. But it's actually her name, and she never said that there was any significance behind it. Speaker 1: She doesn't know any story about--she never asked why did you all name me Dinkie? Speaker 2: (Laughter) No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, it's interesting because she was the only child in her family that had that kind of name. The others had Catherine and Natherine, Carolyn, Elana, Elnora, and my mother's--Laura, to name the girls, and my mother's name was Dinkie (laughter). Speaker 1: That is odd, you know. But there's a story there somewhere. We just can--but we can't get to it right now. Speaker 2: We just can't get to it (laughter), right. Speaker 1: All right. Well, tell us about her side of the family. How much do you know about them? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: My, my grandparents, I know them. Rosie Hampton. She was a homemaker. My grandparents were, were relatively old when I came to know them. My grandfather was actually already retired when I came to know him, and his name was J. D. Hampton. And, but I, but he, he was a garbage truck worker or sanitation worker in this day and time. And he was a smart man, man. He was a brilliant man. And I just remember going there and enjoying going there on Sundays and him schooling me and my siblings on the ways of the world. The things that were in the news, he enjoyed talking to us about it. And I realized how brilliant he was at that time. My, my grandmother was, was basically, she was a homemaker, so she was mostly a homebody. And she didn't really have that much to say. She would fuss at him a lot of times, but other than that, she didn't have that much to say. She was a sweet lady. I remember--I don't remember my great grandfather at all. I, I remember my great grandmother, but all I remember about her was she had both legs cut off. And I just remember her, visiting her on some Sundays before she passed. And she would be in this bed and with, with the two legs--from the time I knew her, she had the two legs cut off, and she was very old. And-- Speaker 1: Was she a diabetic? Speaker 2: It had to have been diabetes in the family. And as a matter of fact, my mother wound up with diabetes, one of her few sisters, one of her few siblings, sisters or brothers, to actually wind up with diabetes. But at the time I didn't know what that was. I didn't know why she had her two, her legs cut off. But I remember--and she, but she, but, yeah, she was an intelligent woman. And that, and I've always been a person to listen to my elders. And I would sit at their feet and, and learn things. And I learned a lot from her. I learned a lot from my grandfather. They liked to talk about world news. And, and so they were brilliant people. Story_ID: 4116 Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories about life way back when, you know, that come down? Speaker 2: For, that they would tell? Actually, they would talk about today. They would talk about the day at that time, and what was happening, and who was the President, and what was happening in the news. One of my uncles actually ran for mayor of our town, Minden, Louisiana. My mother [Dinkie Rabb]'s family and my father [David Rabb] himself was, were deeply involved in the Civil Rights Movement during the '60s [1960s]. And I was very young so they wouldn't let me work on the picket. We had, my oldest sisters worked on the picket line. The first place that we boycotted was the A&P [Supermarket] because they didn't have any African Americans working at the A&P. And my uncles really were leading that, that, the Civil Rights Movement in our, our city. And George, one of the, one of the Civil Rights workers actually came to Minden and actually marched with us, Forman, I believe. Speaker 1: What was that? James Forman? Speaker 2: James Forman, yes, actually came to Minden. And I remember marching with my father downtown and holding his hand--my father was deeply involved, and holding his hand as we marched during the '60s. The only way he would let me go is that if I would hold onto his hand. And so, but they were--my, my father and then my mother's brothers were significantly involved. And they were leaders in the Civil Rights Movement in our town. And as a result of that my, my aunt, Aunt Natherine was the first one hired at the A&P, first African American hired at the A&P. My uncle, J. D. Hampton ran for mayor of the city in Minden. He did not win, but he--it was a, it was really historical for him to do that. And then my father talked me into integrating the high school in my freshman year because we, they, they had, had the decree that the schools had to integrate. And we came, the plan that, that Louisiana came up with was the choice form. You could make a choice to go to what school you wanted to. But very few people were making a choice to change schools. Initial--eventually, it, it revolved into, evolved into your having to go to the side of town, to the school on the side of town that you lived in. And now, in my hometown, the high school has been converted into the junior high school so everyone, regardless of your race, creed or color goes to my high school, as your junior high school and goes to the predominantly White school--what it was predominantly White at that time, as the high school, so they're totally integrated. And the elementary schools are integrated as well. But-- Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: My high school is Webster High School [Minden, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: And you started school in what about '67 [1967]? Speaker 2: I started school in about '67, yeah, about '67. And, and so--but actually, I--so I integrated Minden, Minden High School. It was a white high school that my father asked me would I let him select for me on the choice form to go to the white school. And it wind up being ten of us that actually went to the white school and integrated. Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you about that in detail later. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But just in terms of your father's--well, we were talking about your mother's side of the family first and-- Speaker 2: And my, my, and my father--it was my mother's brothers and my father that were leading the movement. Story_ID: 4117 Speaker 1: Nobody, on either side of the family, did they ever talk about the origin of the family? Did they talk about slavery or being a freed black in the 19th century? Did they talk about Reconstruction or any of that historical stuff? Speaker 2: Not really, but I got the impression that my, my, my great grandmother, you know, was, was a part of that even though I was too young to really listen to, you know, everything that she was saying or really even comprehend and understand the significance of the things that she was saying. But I got the impression that she was, had that kind of history. You know, too many times, we don't really ask the right questions to get the right answers in those, in that regard. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So that's either side of the family, you don't really--. Speaker 2: On my father [David Rabb]'s side, I really never met his mother [Carrie Rabb] and father [David Rabb]. They were both deceased when I was born. So I never met his mother and father at all so I don't know very much about them at all. I met one of his, my great aunts, which was his father's, his father's sister. And as a matter of fact, it's interesting because she also had at least one leg cut off. And, and, that's what I remember about her. And she was, you know, a very intelligent woman. We would visit her some time as well. And she never really, she, she--it seemed like she might have talked about things like that, but I was too young to really understand what was being said. Story_ID: 4118 Speaker 1: Well, what was your mother like? What kind of personality did she have or what did she do for a living? Speaker 2: My mother [Dinkie Rabb] was a really, really sweet woman. It was interesting because she always did for others and she always wanted us to do for others. She was a humble-type person and she taught us to be humble. Her thing was, don't say anything; don't make any waves and, and, and just, you know, go along, if you will, which I found out later in my first job, that wasn't my personality. But, but that, but that's what, the way she was. My mother, we had eight--there were eight of us. And so we all had to ride in a small car. And what my mother would do, just to show you the kind of personality she had, if we, if it was raining and we were trying to go to school that morning, my mother would find a way for her children to get in the car, and then all the neighbors' children to get in the car too. And we would take everybody to school. Of course, we would be packed in like sardines, but yet, we would complain to her that, when my mother wasn't able to take us. And we would look up and our next door neighbor who only had two children, would be going to school and taking them to school. They wouldn't stop and take us. And we would ask our mommy, you know, "Mother, Mom, why, why don't, you know, why don't they take us?" And then the next time it was raining, and they didn't have a ride, she would take them again. And we didn't understand that (laughter). But that's the way she was. And, and if someone was complaining, or we were complaining about someone or someone--she would say "Don't say anything." She didn't want us to make any waves. She was, she just believed in helping people. She was a very religious woman. Or she, she was a member of the Church of God in Christ. My father [David Rabb] was a Baptist. And so--and we went, but we went to church with my mother. So and in the Church of God in Christ, it is somewhat of a humbling type of teaching, to do good to those who despitefully use you, bless them that curse you. And, and, and obey those that have rule over you. That--those are, you know, that's scriptural, and --. Speaker 1: Obey those who what? Speaker 2: Have rule over you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's scriptural. And it talks about leadership and obeying leadership. That's scriptural. And so my mother really talked, believed and taught, you know, scripturally. And so she took us to Sunday school. And we stayed there all day. And she would--and we, and, and we would stay at church all day. And as a matter of fact, it was interesting because my church was about thirty miles from my hometown. Actually, seventeen miles, I said thirty. It's actually seventeen miles to be exact from my hometown. Our church was in Athens, Louisiana. We're from Minden, Louisiana. And we didn't go to church in Minden. We went to church in Athens. But we were the only Church of God in Christ family in Minden. Everyone else went to the Baptist churches. There were about two or three Baptist churches and one Methodist church. So in that time, Church of God in Christ people were called Holy Rollers, okay. And so I didn't know what that meant. And so, but my, my fellow classmates in elementary school knew what that meant. So then they would call me a Holy Roller, and I didn't understand why they were calling me a Holy Roller. That gave me an inferiority complex even in my childhood that I eventually, you know, surpassed, obviously. But it was something that--they tried to make it seem a stigma, but now I know that it was a benefit to be raised in that kind of environment and to, to be raised with that kind of upbringing so that we didn't, none of my mother's children strayed too far off the map. So it was wonderful to be raised by my mother. So she was a very religious woman. She, she got sick in her, in her latter years. But she was a cook 'cause she worked--initially, I first remember her cooking at a café, Mr. Ed's Café, okay. And she cooked at the Coffee Cup. She cooked at the Coffee Cup first, then Mr. Ed's, Ed's Café. And my mother, what she would do, is she would have my two oldest sisters to come and, and cook on the weekends, okay, because it--so we could make extra money. They weren't making that much, but come to make extra money to help the family make ends meet. What my mother would do is she would get off about 3:00 p.m. And she would go to Mr. & Mrs. Ed's home and make sure that their children were off the school bus 'cause this was her second job. She would get them off the school bus, feed them, cook food for them, feed them, and then she would make sure that they had done their homework and put them to bed while her eight children took care of themselves. And she did these two jobs because she wanted to make sure that we were able to have a decent living. And so she worked hard. She left--she had to open up the Coffee Cup at 4:00 in the morning. And then she would work till 3:00. So she left early morning, and, and, and then she worked 'til 3:00. And then she went to their house. And she would get to our house about--I would say once Mr., Mr. & Mrs. Ed got off work, see because what they--it was their café. So they had to stay and close it up. So once dinner hours was over, I guess, then they would come, one of them would come home, and then she could, she could come home. So, but she did that. And, and so she was a cook and, and a domestic worker. And then later on she got a job at the Louisiana Army Ammunition Plant as a cook also. But then, then being there, she was in the union, which was a break. And the she later got a job at the, at Western Electric [Company] as a cook as well in the cafeteria. And, and so when she finally got ill, without, no longer able to work, she retired from Western Electric. Story_ID: 4119 Speaker 1: Tell us about your father [David Rabb]. What was he like and what did he do? Speaker 2: My father, he was a very quiet man. He, you know, I remember him coming home from work. He was a very hard worker. He worked at the Louisiana Army Ammunition Plant [Minden, Louisiana]. That's the first job I, that I know that he had. And during that time, they were making ammunition. You had the Vietnam War in the '60s [1960s], the upper 60--later, latter '60s. So it was a very booming plant. He was a union steward at that Louisiana Army Ammunition Plant. And I remember him writing, bringing union grievances home. And he couldn't write that well so he would give it to whichever teenage daughter. My, my sister, Juanita [Rabb Johnson] did some. And then later on and when I was a senior, I would write his grievances. And, and he was very concerned about the workers. My mother [Dinkie Rabb] and my father, let me just say, both went back to school in their adult life. They went to my elementary school in the evening, Jerry A. Moore Elementary School [Minden, Louisiana] in the evenings. And I remember helping my mother and my father with their workbooks cause they believed in education, but they didn't have education. So they were trying to graduate from high school. My father got further than my mother. I think he got up to the ninth grade in his workbooks. And my mother probably got up to about sixth or seventh grade in her workbooks. But it was really my father that was the impetus for them going to Jerry A. Moore Elementary School for evening classes to try to get that education. And so he just worked hard, and then my father had two disabled sisters and brothers, my Aunt Velma and Uncle Colonio (ph.). And they were still up on the farms, and their parents had left them this farm. And they were really all living up there. My family even lived up there. I didn't live up there with them. I was actually born in Minden. But most of my sisters and brothers were born on that farm in the, in the family house [in Athens, Louisiana]. And Aunt Velma and Uncle Lon were both disabled, you know, both on welfare. Their families were on welfare. And--but they had a lot of children. My aunt had seven children, and my uncle had about 6, I believe he had 6. And they were, they were on welfare, but they needed to work the farm in order to be able to live a decent life. So my father would get off work in Louisiana Army Ammunition Plant. He would go up to Athens to the farm and he would plow the fields for them because they could plow because they were, they both had something wrong with their legs. And my father would plow, and he didn't plow with a tract, a tractor. He didn't have that. He plowed behind a mule. And they had pigs and cows. And so in the fall, we would kill--they would kill the pigs and the cows. Then they would cure the meat, and then they would store that meat. And that would be what they would have for the winter. And then, and my father would--he plowed the cornfields, the peas, watermelons. Then he had the cotton field. He basically focused on the cotton field. They let him focus on the cotton field. And what he did was, he brought his eight children, and my aunt's seven children, and my uncle's six children and we were his, their--his cotton hands on weekends. So we chopped the cotton in the spring, and we picked the cotton in the fall. Now, my uncle's and aunt's children, they actually got paid, but my dad's children, we didn't get a thing. We were always told that we were gonna get, but we never got paid (laughter) 'cause every time it, it came time for us to get paid, he said, "Well, I'm gonna give you something to go to the fall fair when the fair comes to town, the carnival." And then when it was time to get that money for the carnival, he would say, "Who do you think bought those shoes on your feet? That's how you got paid." And every year, we would do the same thing. And we couldn't figure out how could he, how could we fall for it every year (laughter). But we fell for it every year. But we didn't have any choice did we? (Laughter) Speaker 1: You couldn't say no. Speaker 2: We couldn't say no (laughter). So, but, but that was a good experience for me, working in, in the cotton fields of Louisiana with them. My oldest sisters and brothers actually were able to go to other people's cotton fields and they made like $3.00 a day during that time. And, but, so my father, he was a very religious man as well. As I said, earlier, he was of the Baptist--he was a Baptist. And he actually became deacon before he died. He was ordained a deacon. I was the closest to my father actually, for whatever reason, because I, I was the only sibling that was able, that actually went to his ordination as a deacon. And I've always listened to him. He was so quiet and for some reason my other siblings didn't necessarily have the patience to listen to him. And I always listened to him very closely. My father in the '80s [1980s], he came down with a brain tumor. And he said--but he would not let them operate on him. That's when he had to retire because his personality started to change because of his brain tumor. But he lived, he came down with his brain tumor before I went off to college--well, while we were off--while I was--probably in the late '70s [1970s], early '80s, he came down with the brain tumor. He lived 'til 1997 with a brain tumor that actually started shrinking, the doctor said. So, and he--but as a result, the kind of medicine that he had to be on and that sort of thing, he wind up having to retire as well, which was really hard on my father. But then he started going around to nursing homes and buying--he started buying Bibles and taking them around to nursing homes and sitting there with the senior citizens, to--with the people in the nursing homes and reading to them. We would find out, you know, where, where is he? He's at the nursing home. He's bought everybody Bibles and he, he's giving them. So he just had that kind of heart. But the other thing about my, my, my father and my mother from the standpoint of just believing in education. I told you about the fact that mother worked those two jobs. And, of course, my--my father did too from his, in a sense that he, you know, worked at Louisiana Army Ammunition Plant and then went there and plowed the cotton fields in the evenings and on weekends. Well, when we all went off to college, we went to school four hours, at a school four hours away, you know, Southern University was in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. And Minden is in the northern portion of, of Louisiana. And the way we got to school was that my father would drive us. He would get off work at 5:00. He would take, drive us for that four hours, and we'd leave about 6:00 or 7:00. He would get, we would get down to Southern at 11:00, 12:00 o'clock at night. He would turn around, drive back to Minden, get home, 4:00 or 5:00 and go to work. And he did that over and over again for eight children. And we were stair steps. And finally, at the time that I became a junior, he finally bought us a car so we could bring ourselves home. But he was just that kind of a man. My sister me told the story recently that I didn't even know, my oldest sister, that it was getting cold. My father told her, you need to take your coat because at first we would--he would let them go on the train. And she was going back to school on the train, and she, and he said--no, on the bus. And she said, "You need to take your coat with you, Laura." And Laura said, "Okay." And they had the coat in the car, and she got right out of the car and got on the bus without the coat. And she said, when she got to the first stop, I think they stopped in Homer, Louisiana, she looked up and my Dad was there. And she said, "Why are you here?" He said, "You left your coat in the car," and he had followed (crying) he had followed the bus to make sure she had her coat. But he was just that kind of man. So, you know, we wouldn't be where we are, are today if it wasn't for the sacrifices of my mother and my father. Story_ID: 4120 Speaker 1: How did they [Brown's parents David and Dinkie Rabb] meet? Was there a story that they told about how they met? Speaker 2: My mother was a basketball player. (Laughter) And I was a basketball player in high school. And a lot of times she would say that, they say that I, I played like her. I was like her. And she was a basketball-- Speaker 1: And that was very popular down South, I guess, at a certain-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --point. I mean if you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, for girl's basketball. Speaker 1: People that are, you know, in their '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s] that played girl's basketball. Speaker 2: Really. Speaker 1: Right, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In the South, and I didn't know it. Speaker 2: Is that right? I didn't know that. But, yes, my mother was a basketball player, and, and, and my father, but they actually lived near each other, and he just would come over, him and his brothers would come over. And he had like six brothers, and my mother had, you know, seven sisters. And they would come over--she was the only one that married a Rabb out of that family. But he just would come over and visit and, and they wind up getting married. Speaker 1: Was your mother tall? Speaker 2: My mother was about--she was average height. She was not tall. Speaker 1: Now, you're fairly tall. Speaker 2: I'm, I'm, I'm somewhat, yes. Five [feet] six and a half [inches] not, not as tall as I, I needed to be. Speaker 1: Well, you look taller, I don't know why. Speaker 2: Probably because I wear these three and four inch heels (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: But, yeah, my--but, but, you know, but I was fast (laughter). And my mother obviously, was very fast too and very accurate in her shooting and, and, and that's what I capitalized on, just being accurate and the shooting and being quick. And I was very skinny so you could get around (laughter) very quickly and that's, and that's what she was as well. But that's how they met. And they met in Athens [Louisiana]. And then they decided--when they, when we moved to Minden [Louisiana], that was moving uptown 'cause Athens even today is a very wooded area. And we called going--we felt like we were going to the country when we go, when you go to Athens. So we would vacation actually in Athens. Story_ID: 4121 Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the sights and sounds and smells in growing up. Speaker 2: Actually, it's interesting because I suffered from sinus problems all the time--. Speaker 1: We can eliminate the smells. Speaker 2: So the smells though was that, that, you know, so a lot of times, I would wake up, and I would sniffling and sneezing and I would have to wind up--I would go out and I would take a blanket, and I would lay down in the sun in my yard and just--with my head back. And that would, would, would stop my sinuses. But the interesting thing about growing up, you know, looking at the, the plum trees. See we had plums, a plum field not far from my house. We would go up the railroad tracks and pick the blackberries or the red berries try to not get hit by the train when they come by. And we would sell them. We would go and pick pecans, and this is in Minden [Louisiana]. This is not even in the country. This is Minden, pick pecans and sell them. And the butterflies on the flowers. My mother [Dinkie Rabb] had a flower bed. And the butterflies on the flowers was this, they were amazing. And the, the lightning bugs and dusk dark before night, when you're playing hide 'n' seek, and, and that was our favorite game late at night, Hide 'n' go seek, and are you ready (laughter). And, but the lightning bugs, and catching the lightning bugs and, and looking at them and how beautiful they were. And we don't even have lightning bugs. And looking up in the sky at the stars and trying to see the Big Dipper at night. And looking at the, the rainbows when the rain would cease. One of the amazing thing that, to me too, was how rain, how it would rain in spots. I could be at, up in Athens [Louisiana] at my, on the farm, and my, my uncle's house is about a block and a half from my aunt's house. But they're right down the same little dirt road. And I could be at my uncle's house, and it would be raining. And we could see that, down at my aunt's house, it wasn't raining. Or, or vise versa. It could be getting ready to rain at my aunt--raining at my uncle's house and it was moving towards my aunt's house. We could outrun the rain to my aunt's house. And I said, why--it rains in spots. And, or it could be raining down there and never rain on my aunt's house. And so that was--those were good scientific type of learning experiences for us. Speaker 1: You were right on the edge of some weather pattern, I guess, at the time. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know. But it rained in spots between their houses. Sometimes it would be raining at one house and the sun shining down at the other house. But that was interesting to me. And then the neighborhood, growing up in a neighborhood and the camaraderie with the children in the neighborhood because we, because we had eight children, because my parents were so sweet, everybody would come to our house and, and play softball in the backyard, even though we had seven girls and one boy. But all of the boys, of course, maybe that's why they came, because we were girls (laughter). But we were little, so we didn't know. But they basically played--they were playing base--softball and we would play sock ball. You know, you'd put several socks together and you stuff one sock--all these socks into one sock. And that's your ball. And then you find a big enough stick to be your bat, and then you figure out different things to be the bases. And we would play sock ball for the longest in the backyard. Very few fights. My mother, you know, did not permit us to fight. She did not want us to fight. So very little time which you'd have a fight. And we didn't have much food, but Larry Thomas. If his mother wasn't home and hadn't and, and hadn't gotten, or hadn't got a chance to cook, when everybody else would go home, Larry Thomas would stay at our house. And my mother would always feed him. And he loved to eat her red beans and, and cornbread. And so she would just feed people even though we, she had eight children to feed. And, and those were the things that I remember most about that. And then also living on a--we lived on a main street, High Street. We lived, lived on a main street. So cars coming down, but very few--I don't remember any child getting hit, but I do remember once from a, from a, and it had to be from a racist standpoint, me and my sister, this car slowing down, and this, this Caucasian gentleman, he slowed down as if he was gonna let us go. And we started to go and then he speeded up, and I was, had sense enough not to go. I just felt like he was not going to stop. And, but that was a different experience for me, and I didn't really understand it because there were two sides of town. And so, and so I really didn't quite understand what was going on there. But those are the kind of things that I remember from my childhood. Story_ID: 4122 Speaker 1: Tell us about school. And what was the name of your grade school? Speaker 2: My grade school was Jerry A. Elementary School. Speaker 1: Jerry A. Moore? Speaker 2: Jerry A. Moore Elementary School [Minden, Louisiana], yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and that was in-- Speaker 2: That was in Minden. Speaker 1: In Minden. Speaker 2: Louisiana, yes. And I lived on Creighton Hill--. Speaker 1: Was that a segregated school? Speaker 2: Pardon? It was black. Speaker 1: A black school. Speaker 2: It was predominant--it was black. Speaker 1: And you lived on Creighton Hill. Speaker 2: I live on--I lived on Creighton Hill, yeah. Speaker 1: How do you spell Creighton? Speaker 2: Creighton Hill, C-R-E-G-T-O-N [sic], something like that. Speaker 1: Oh, E-I-G-H-T-O-N Speaker 2: E-I-G-H-T-O-N, yes. Speaker 1: Like Creighton University. Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I lived on Creighton Hill. We still call it Creighton Hill. And then everybody lived--there's either Thompson Waters, Creighton Hill, Crosstown, Middle Quarters, that sort of thing. We lived on Creighton Hill, and so everybody that lived on Creighton Hill went to Jerry A. Moore Elementary School. And then once you got to the sixth grade, cause Jerry Moore only went to the sixth grade, then you went to Phillips Junior High School [Minden, Louisiana], which was across town. Speaker 1: Okay, now, who is Jerry A. Moore named for? Speaker 2: Jerry A. Moore was I believe the first principal of that school Speaker 1: Okay, so it was a local black man. Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: Jerry A. Moore. Okay. Speaker 2: And he was deceased when I, when I was going there. Mr. Chatman was the Principal when I was there. Speaker 1: And how old was the school? Do you have any idea? Speaker 2: No, I, I would think probably in the '50s [1950s], that it was actually started. It was a relative--it was a brick school. Speaker 1: Fairly new when you were--. Speaker 2: It was brick, so it was fairly--right, fairly new. So since it was brick, I would say probably in the late '40s [1940s], '50s. And Mr. Chatman was the Principal, as I said. And, and they really taught well at that school. It was a great school. Kids, children that came out of Jerry A. Moore were some of the smarter children. One thing that my mother [Dinkie Rabb] and father [David Rabb] were not able to do was to go to PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings. It really meant something. In a small town like that, it really meant something for--for your parents to be able to participate in PTA meetings or, you know, some of mothers would bring cookies to the teachers or apples to the teacher. My parents didn't do that. So I would make B's and C's whereas I probably should have been making As because I found out once I got in high school, that I actually was smarter than most of the kids that were making the A's and B's. But in high school, it was a larger school. Nobody knew who your parents were. So it was base--it was based upon what you knew, your merit. Speaker 1: So that's-- Speaker 2: Not whether or not you had a, you know, your parents were able to really participate. Or, the other side of that is, or whether or not you were able to dress nicely 'cause our--because we had eight children, and we weren't making that money, we weren't able to dress that nice. I was at, I was the fifth girl so I wore hand-me-downs. My mother made our slips out of those white sacks that the flour came out. But, of course, after you got to a certain age, you couldn't wear it 'cause it only was a, a certain length. But she made our slips out of those white sacks, and I wore hand-me-downs from all my, my sisters. So we weren't dressing that nice. And then, of course, as I said earlier, we had the little stigma of, of, of being the holy rollers of the town (laughter). So it was interesting, but Philip, Phillips Junior High School, from Jerry Moore Elementary School. That was it. I spent only two years there, the seventh grade and the eigth grade. And actually I, I actually realized that I was actually smart at Phillips Junior High School. And one of my instructors, science instructor, who was also my homeroom teacher, you know, kind of helped me and Mr. Smith, and he's actually still living, was very good in coaching me. And I was able to come into a realization of how to study and the fact that I actually had a, a gift of, of being, of knowledge, of being able to learn very easily. And that was the first time. And, and in all my years, I've never made a D in anything, but I made a D on midterms for music. So, I'm not musically inclined. That was the only D I ever made in my entire career. And I remember that D. But, and I remember it because Mr. Smith, even though I had A's and I had a over 3.0 average, he would not let me call myself on the honor roll. And that was, that was hurting to me. I said, "I'm over a 3.0 average 'cause I had enough A's to balance out the D." You can't make the Honor Roll with a D. And so I didn't get into the National Honor Society. I didn't get into any of that because he was my homeroom teacher and said, "You can't be on the Honor Roll with a D." And I said, oh, and that was kind of hurting to me as a child, but I overcame it. Story_ID: 4123 Speaker 1: You said you weren't good in music, but most music courses at that level are just understanding the theory of music, not, not actually being able to have talent, you know. Speaker 2: Well, the thing about it, music is--I'm a relational thinker. Music was the first course that I ran into where there was no relationship. You just need to know that "every good boy does fine". It didn't relate to anything. How does "every good boy does fine" relate to music or relate to anything. There was nothing to relate it to. So-- Speaker 1: Sort of, so what you're playing the music, the notes-- Speaker 2: The notes, right, to learn--that I had to realize that, and I learned it later, that you just have to--there are some course, you just have to memorize that. There's nothing that it relates to. Speaker 1: Well, it actually relates to the notes you play. So there's a direct relationship between that "every good boy does fine". Speaker 2: Is it really? That must be why I got that D. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I didn't know that. Speaker 1: It's a E, G, B, you know, that--. Speaker 2: You know, E, G, A, or B. Speaker 1: The notes. Speaker 2: --on the scale. Speaker 1: Is that right? Maybe I should go back and take it now. Speaker 2: Those are the line notes, and then the notes in the spaces are F-A-C-E, face, you know. Speaker 1: Right, F-A-C-E. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Exactly, but what does it relate to? They don't even relate to each other. Speaker 2: Well, they do. I mean if you're playing an instrument, the notes you play are the letters, you know,-- Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Oh, see I wasn't playing an instrument. Speaker 2: So they didn't have you playing the instrument, but you had to learn that, but you didn't-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: So they didn't make it clear what the relationship was. Speaker 1: No, I guess not. So, but I wind up bringing that D up. So I was okay. But, but that was kind of a traumatic, but, but very good experience for me because he was hard on me, which made me even harder on myself and to dig in deep and work even harder. Story_ID: 4124 Speaker 1: In terms of music and cultural activities, were you restricted being a Holy Roller-- Speaker 2: Church of God in Christ. Speaker 1: --in terms of what you could do socially and couldn't do? Could you, I mean could you attend movies or or listen to any music on radio? I mean, I don't know what--. Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Dinkie Rabb] was, was, was a person that--my mother was like this: She did not try to put her religion on her children. She wanted you to make up your own mind. But there were certain things she did not want us to do and certain places she did not want us to go. But I looked at 'American Bandstand'. I even danced to 'American Bandstand', and 'Soul Train'. We looked at it and danced to it. And she would just kind of laugh at us because we were children and she would--did not want us to miss, to not experience the kind of things that children experience. Some mothers that had children that were Church of God in Christ wouldn't let them wear even a gym suit 'cause you're not, you're not supposed to wear shorts. But my mother did, you know, and I played basketball so I had to wear shorts. And so she did not limit us in that way. And she let us go to parties when we got in high school and went to parties. We experienced life as it was. And so that we could then make that decision for ourselves after we became adults. Speaker 1: Now, was there any difference in your church that you could perceive of from the Baptist in terms of what you all did or why they would call you holy rollers and-- Speaker 2: I, I think it had something to do with the ladies that were saved and, and really in the church wore longer dresses. They wore dresses down to their ankles. They were wore sleeves down to their wrist. Sometimes they wore blouses up to their, you know, up to their chin almost. So the attire was different. They didn't dance. I said my mother let me, let us dance, but they didn't dance. They didn't listen to certain kind of music. Speaker 1: Didn't they dance in church? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, shouting in church, yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: They danced in church (laughter). Speaker 1: I thought they might, but I'm not sure about all the denominations. Speaker 2: That's what we're known for. Speaker 1: Okay, that's--I wasn't sure, but I thought that might be--. Speaker 2: Yes, clapping hands and, and shouting in church. That, that is one of the things we are definitely known for. Speaker 1: So those kind of expressions are done in church--. Speaker 2: Emotional, yes. Absolutely. Speaker 1: And they're more emotional-- Speaker 2: Rejoicing in church. Speaker 1: --than other churches on some levels. Speaker 2: At the, and, and that, in that day and time. In this day and time, you can't tell the difference between a Baptist church and a Church of God in Christ because everyone--and the Charismatic movement that came through, even Catholic, Charismatic Catholic churches, people worship the Lord and, and rejoice in the Lord. Speaker 1: And they're even Methodist or Congregational churches now with drum sets in them (laughter). Speaker 2: Drum sets, that's right, that's right. And it all started with the Church of God in Christ. You know, it's interesting because people would come on Sunday nights. We would have service on nights, Sunday nights, and other people wouldn't. My church was, like I said, it was seventeen miles away in Athens [Louisiana] out in the country. And you would have to drive almost 5 miles up a dirt road to get to it, and it was sitting out there in the middle of the woods all by itself. And people would come at night from the Baptist churches and peep in the windows of the church to see-- Speaker 1: Peep in the--? Speaker 2: Peep in the windows, yes, to see the saints dance. Speaker 1: Would they ever come in and--. Speaker 2: Every now and then, they would come in. Speaker 1: But they would just peep in the window? Speaker 2: They'd peep in the windows. And then eventually, they started coming on in and joining the service, yeah. Story_ID: 4125 Speaker 1: Tell us about high school. Speaker 2: High school was a very interesting experience for me. As I said, I--. Speaker 1: You were an experimental student. Speaker 2: I was a experimental student only in the 9th grade. Speaker 1: One of ten, right. Speaker 2: I was one of ten, yes. Now, I played basketball, I did mention that, in elementary--in, in junior high school. That's when I found out I had basketball talents. It was in the 7th and 8th grade, I was also on the basketball team over there. The high school coach at the black high school [Webster High School, Minden, Louisiana] was trying to recruit me to come to high school and play on her basketball team. Well, I wasn't even really thinking about it. I think I was a--might have even been the captain of the junior high school team. And I was pretty accurate in my shot even then. Well, when my dad [David Rabb] asked me to go and be an experimental student to integrate that white high school [Minden High School, Minden, Louisiana], I didn't think anything about it. You know, I wasn't going to play in the pros or anything like that. I decided to go and do that for my father. So I went to the white high school, and I excelled in P.E. [physical education] (laughter), played very good basketball. They wondered, you know, who is this woman. So my teams would always win, of course, in our intramural sports and that sort of thing. Story_ID: 4126 Speaker 1: I actually excelled better than most in my academic studies. I didn't even realize--but the interesting thing about it is I didn't even realize one time that I actually made the honor roll [at Minden High School, Minden, Louisiana] because I had so many C pluses and B minuses. I mean they just would not give me a solid B or a solid A. It would have to be a A minus, a B--a C plus, a B minus. I didn't, and I didn't really know what honor roll was--. Speaker 2: So you were getting--well-- Speaker 1: --and my name showed up in the newspaper, in the school newspaper. And someone came up to me and said, you're on the, you're on dean's--"You're on the honor roll this semester." I said, "I am?" Speaker 2: Do you think they were knocking you down a half a point just because you were black? Speaker 1: You know, I don't know why. It was a very--. Speaker 2: But they weren't doing to everybody, right? It was just--. Speaker 1: I never really looked at other people's cards. But I got that impression that that had to do with it because I was smarter than a lot of those kids. And, but it was a very humbling experience, and a lot of times humiliating experience during those days. You know, people being concerned about the fact that my teeth were whiter than everybody else's when I smiled. And the boys would be the ones that would, would get behind us on the stairwell and, and ridicule us, you know, and call us names, to the point that we hid during lunchtime. I mean we didn't have lunch with the general populus. We would go and get our food, but we would go and hide around the front of the school where they very seldom would come so that we didn't get ridiculed. It was a very humiliating experience. The, the worst part about it was being a freshman, but being a, a African American, black freshman. Freshmen were called crabs for whatever reason at that school. And they sent them through different kind of rituals as a freshman. But it was even worse, you know, for a black freshman. And so we would hide and then go back to class, you know, after, after lunch was over. And we would hide just so that we wouldn't be, would not be ridiculed. And it was a bad experience because I wouldn't go into any, join any clubs. I didn't go to any football games, any basketball games because I could not participate in the social things. I could have gone, but I felt uncomfortable going cause I thought I would be ridiculed. So I just thought it was not good for the freshmen to have to--to not have, not enjoy high school in the manner in which children are supposed to enjoy high school. Story_ID: 4127 Speaker 1: Then my coach wanted me to come back to the black high school cause she wanted me to play basketball. The, the basketball coach recruited me back to, to Webster High School [Minden, Louisiana]. So my 10th grade year, I went back. And many of us, maybe--everybody but maybe two, I think two people, maybe, and one guy, one gentleman that started with us that actually stayed the whole four years. And then the decree--there was another decree when I was 11th grade and I wind up going back to that school [Minden High School, Minden, Louisiana] for like two months and then went back to Webster High School. Anyway, when I went back, I saw some of the old, some of the kids that were there when I was in 9th grade. Things had changed a lot. People weren't ridiculing you as much, but then also we had more black kids there. And, and, and also I, you know, the teachers were fair as well, and there was even some black teachers there by then. But when I went back to Webster High School, and in 10th grade, my team, and not with, not with my help, of course, but they actually went to state and won, won the state champions that year. Because I was on the bench, I got a jacket too (laughter). Speaker 2: So you didn't even start at Webster when you went back? Speaker 1: I didn't start, no. No, she wanted me as a, a backup person. She, she wanted me as a backup. But she also wanted to train me because she had her, her team--you're always building a team for the next year because her team members were in the same grade, the best players were in the same grade. So she knew she needed to train you so that you really started when you were a senior. It was very seldom that a freshman would start, maybe a, a junior. The, the varsity team consisted of juniors and seniors mostly. Speaker 2: The tenth graders wouldn't, wouldn't--. Speaker 1: Tenth graders didn't--plus, I, it was my first year with them. And so I was on the bench, and we went to state, and she put me out there for one minute, just for one minute (laughter). And I messed up in that one minute. So she pulled me out. I got the ball and I traveled. And so I guess I thought I was, you know, I don't where--you know it was a, it's almost NBA [National Basketball Association]. Final, you know, final game in the NBA, when you're in high school and you're in that final game, it was the final game. She put me in the final game, championship game 'cause you're at the tournament all weekend. But she put me out there in the championship game, and, and, and I traveled. So she pulled me. And that was my little one minute of fame. And, but we won the game anyway (laughter). But then after that, after the others left, in the 11th grade then I became a star. I was a starter in the 11th grade, and then in the, in my senior year, I was, I was actually captain of the basketball team, and got most of the awards and trophies and things because I was the high point person. I was a roving forward. At the time, you know, girls didn't rove all over the court like they do now. Everybody didn't go to every, both ends of the court. So I was a roving forward. Speaker 2: So there was a certain designated player that could do that? Speaker 1: Exactly. Exactly. Speaker 2: Okay, but not everybody. You all were playing what they used call captain basketball or something like that? Speaker 1: Is that what it was called, captain? Speaker 2: I think that's what they called it. Speaker 1: Two people could, could rove the whole court. Speaker 2: Yeah. That's the kind of basketball that they had girls playing up until, you know, the last, I guess fifteen years or so. Speaker 1: I think in the, in the '80s [1980s], they changed it. Speaker 2: Yeah, last twenty years or so. Speaker 1: Right. So it was, it was exciting. But then also, you know, I had to keep my grades up. But then it's interesting because my freshman year grades kind of pulled my GPA [grade point average] down because I had the B minuses and the C pluses, but then once I got to Webster, I was put in the Advanced Placement class with the advanced students. And I got good grades there. And once, in the senior year, I wind up being number nine in the class of 130, even though I had started out with a bad, somewhat of bad, a report card. But, and that should have told me that--that, that kind of told me that I actually--looks pretty good because I wind up being Number nine, and I started out at a disadvantage. Because I had a over 3.0 GPA, I was able to run for Ms. Webster. And I wind up being a first runner up, which I was shocked (laughter). But I was popular because I was a basketball star too (laughter). So I was first runner up, up for Ms. Webster, in the Ms. Webster court. And that was very exciting for homecoming. And, and I was in Negro History Club. Story_ID: 4128 Speaker 1: Did you have decent instruction in black history and Negro history in your case? Speaker 2: Actually, no. There was no class in Negro history. It was just a club, and you would--and whenever the clubs would meet, they would have a period where once a quarter or once every six months, they would say, today is club day. And everybody's going to club meeting. And they might give you the 6th period and everybody would go to club meeting. And that meeting time, people may talk a little bit about what, you know, that particular club. But no, there was no Negro history taught. Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay. Speaker 2: No, it was just called the Negro History Club. Speaker 1: It was a good idea probably established at some point, but it wasn't followed through on, I guess. Speaker 2: Exactly. Exactly. I'm sure that was the purpose-- Speaker 1: And nobody really-- Speaker 2: --to teach us, but it wasn't, that wasn't really what was done. Speaker 1: Maybe the teacher that started it, left or something and the club remained? (Laughter) Speaker 2: Maybe so. 'Cause that school, Webster High School [Minden, Louisiana] had some of the most brilliant students. We would go to the competitions. They had competitions, academic decathlons and things like that. And my sister, Laura [Rabb Morgan], was really good at that. And at the same time, they would have the choirs to compete. And I don't even think they do that sort of thing anymore where you had math, history, all those kind of academic decathlons, competitions of all the high schools within the parish. And then you would go to the state level. But Webster would come back with top honors in most of competitions. Leon Hayes was the principal for Webster for a lot of years, and he finally died of cancer. I never got a chance to have Mr. Hayes as my principal, other than for about two months, at the beginning of my, my 10th grade year, and he came down with cancer. And he just never came back, and I was just so devastated over the fact that he was not able to be--I was not able to be trained under him 'cause he was just a great principal. But, but it, but my high school was great, a great high school. I basically was the type of person that--as I said, I was very popular because I was a basketball star. So I had friends, I had--always have been the type of person that everyone was my friend. I did not get involved in cliques. I did--never got involved in petty jealousies between female groups and that sort of thing. I always made sure that I associated with all the people. And if you ever, if I ever was a part of your group, and you decided that you wanted to talk about that group, then I--then that was the time that I left or I didn't participate in those kind of conversations. So high school for me was, was very good. I actually started sewing in high school. One good thing, and it came from Minden High School [Louisiana], was I took home economics because by the time I got to Webster, you had to trade off home economics for the basketball. You can only do one or the other. So I never home economics again. But I took it at Minden High School and I learned how to sew. So when I came to Chicago [Illinois], I made all of my clothes, from '75 [1975] to '80 [1980] when my daughter [Detris Brown] was born. And, and, and I learned how--actually, had taught myself to sew even before I went to 9th grade because I had a few dresses that I really, really loved. And I learned--and I saw my mother sewing, and I cut patterns out of newspapers of a dress that I really loved, and made that dress when I was in the 7th grade. And--'cause I really loved that dress. And most of my clothes in high school, I made those as well. Story_ID: 4129 Speaker 1: When you were senior in high school [at Webster High School, Minden, Louisiana], had you decided upon a career? Speaker 2: No, I had not. Actually, I was, I wouldn't even take bookkeeping. My major was accounting, but I wouldn't take bookkeeping because I thought that business was a male profession. I took typing 'cause I thought that, you know, this is for females. So I will take typing. And so I did not know what I wanted to major in. So when I, I, I graduated number nine, as I said earlier, in my class; didn't get any scholarships. At that time, they actually--the counselors actually made us think that grants were like scholarships. So I didn't even apply for a grant. And, you know, they didn't even give us the application to apply for grants, even though I had, it was eight children in my family. My parents weren't making any money, and they didn't even make grant applications available. I didn't know about grant applications until I got to Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. And some of the people down there didn't have as good a grade point average as me were on grants. We actually had just the students loans. So, but we still went, and I still went to college because we were stair steps in my family with the eight children. And your responsibility was, when you became a senior, you had to cook for the whole--all the younger siblings. You had to get them up, make sure their hair was combed and that they got to school. But then also, when you went off to college and you were a freshman, it was your responsibility at the end of the school year to make sure that the student loan application, the admissions applications were mailed back to the child that was a senior. We depend on, on, on the counselors for that sort of thing. But even my other sisters didn't know about the grant applications because they never sent the grant applications back. So, so then that's how we made sure that each, all eight of us went to Southern University in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. And seven of us actually graduate--graduated. One sister that did not graduate actually got up to her junior year. And as I said about my mother [Dinkie Rabb] with education, until the day she died, she was trying to get my sister to go back and finish that last year. But all eight of us, seven out of eight of us have bachelor's degrees, six out of eight master's degrees, two are attorneys; one's a CPA [certified public accountant] and one has Ph.D. out of those eight children that my parents raised. But we all went to Southern University. When I went to Southern, since I didn't know what I wanted to major in, I took a test. They gave me a aptitude test, supposed, that was supposed to determine what I wanted to major in, of what I, my interests were. And because I talked about the fact that I loved people and I wanted to help people and that sort of thing, they told me that I should major in sociology. I should be a social worker. So I started out majoring in sociology. I said, "Okay, I'll take a couple of courses," and I was smart enough to take courses that could be used for another field if I--they could be used as elective if I decided to change because what I did, in the spring when I went home for spring break, I went back to school and I talked to my, my high school science professor. And I asked him, I said, now,--and I've forgotten his name, but I asked him, I said, "Now, I'm thinking about majoring in sociology and being a social worker. What do you think about that field?" And he said, "Oh, you don't need a bachelor's degree to be a social worker." And I said, "Really?" And you don't. He said--you didn't at that time. And you don't really need it now. And I said "Really." I said--he said, "Now, if you're gonna major in sociology, to really make the kind of money that you should make, you're gonna have to make a determination that you're gonna get a Ph.D." I said, "PhD? Oh, my goodness. I just, I just plan to get a bachelor's degree. I don't know anything about a Ph.D. I don't plan to go to school that long." So I said, "I need to think about this." So I did a little bit more research. I went to my brother, David [Rabb, Jr.], and I said, "David, now what do you think I should major in?" And he's the only son. And he had, by that time, he had been commissioned to the United States Army as a second lieutenant cause he was in ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps]. And, you know, that was during that Vietnam War so a lot of people went ROTC during school, during college. And he said, "Well Dorothy, I majored in accounting, but I'm not using it because I'm going to the Army." But he said, "But I thought it was a pretty good major. And I think that you can probably make pretty good money there. And you're smart, and you should think about majoring in accounting." And I said, "Hmm, okay." I didn't even take that bookkeeping course in high school. Now, he wants me to major in accounting. And I said, oh, let me ask a lady. So I called my sister, Laura [Rabb Morgan], who I think by that time was going for her master's at Case Western Reserve [University] in Wisconsin [sic, Cleveland, Ohio]. And I said, "Laura, David is suggesting that I major in accounting." And I said, "What do you think." And he said--she said, "Dorothy, let me just tell you this. If you're going to major in accounting, understand this, you're going at it with two strikes against you." I said, "What?" She said, "You are black and you're a woman. And it is a white male-dominated profession. So if you're gonna major in accounting, you must be the best. There's no doubt about it. If you're going to go anywhere in that profession, you must be the best." And I said, "Okay, I can do that." (Laughter) And so I went on when I decided that I'm going to be the best. I changed my major to accounting, used the sociology class that I took--'cause I only got a B in there anyway, as a elective, and, and I thought it was kind of boring, you know, learning about [Sigmund] Freud, the Freudian theory and all that. I said, you know, this is kind of, bore, boring to me. So I started concentrating on accounting. And that kind of--working the problems out and understanding the little theory behind the problems and the debits and the credits and, and all the different levels of accounting was very interesting to me. And I was able to really grasp it very well. And I--a professor of mine who had been a teacher at, who had been a student at Southern, who had come to Chicago [Illinois] and was, and had gotten a master's here I believe and passed the CPA exam, he came back during one summer, Mr. Harold Joseph. And he was so dynamic and everybody was afraid of him as a teacher. And he--because he failed everybody that summer, but I wasn't in his class, but I knew that he was failing people. But I took, had to take his class that fall, and I got a A. And he told me, he was getting ready to leave to go get a doctorate, and he said, "I need to talk to you." And he said, "You are very smart, and this is a very good field for you." And he said, "Talk to Mr. Harrison about the CPA. There's a exam called the CPA exam and you're a person that I think that can take it and pass it. And you should make sure that, when you get ready to graduate, you find out as much about this as possible." So he was a, kind of a, a mentor for me. But then in my second year, there was a gentleman that, a, a Caucasian gentleman that came from one of the large accounting firms. It was a special program that they would send them to the African American schools to teach. And he was an encouragement to me too. He was actually Mr. Harold Joseph's officemate. And he wasn't my teacher. Story_ID: 4130 Speaker 1: We had trouble on the campus in 1972. So I went to school in 1971. In 1972, the Fall of 1972, we had trouble on Southern University's [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] campus. Speaker 2: What happened? Speaker 1: What happened was, we had a group of students, and, you know, we weren't--most of the students didn't know what was going on, that decided that the president was not treating, was handling the university properly. And they wanted him to resign, and that there were certain things that we should be able to get and, and that sort of thing. So they started to--the unrest. And they started to have student meetings. And they started to boycott classes, okay? And here it is, I'm taking accounting, and I was a first time--I also minored in computer science. And I was taking a, my first computer science class too, 'cause you really didn't take classes in the majors until the next, the second year. And so--this professor actually tutored me during the boycott time because I know we're in college. We're gonna have to go back and do this one day. One day we're gonna have to take these tests. And so he, you know, gave me assignments. And I would do them even though we were not in class. And eventually we did have to go back. But what happened with that unrest that fall, I would--you know, we, we went--we had a big meeting in the gymnasium. And the prof--the president came and actually talked about what he would do. And he answered to me very fairly, I thought, a lot of the demands. I mean you can't wrong what they (unclear), so you can't do everything. Well, the student leaders did not agree that they were, that their demands were answered properly. So they said, we're gonna march to the State Capitol [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and see the governor. And I'm, you know, we're all there, and we just followed them. And we marched. And I had on some brand new shoes so by the time we got down to the State Capitol, my feet were blistered. We marched all the way the high, the, the, the, this one highway. Then we went down in the middle of the expressway. By the time we got to a certain point, of course, it was, there was news coverage 'cause we had all these students marching down to the State Capitol. So we had police escorts. They permitted us to walk in the middle, in the grass, in the express--down the expressway. We got down to the State Capitol. We, it took us about three or four hours to get down there walking. We go down there, and by the time we got down there, of course, they were waiting for us. The governor wasn't there, but they sent out this gentleman that was, was representing Southern on the Board of Regents, a Mr. Stone. And, and he talked to the students. By that time we had gotten down, we were pretty tired anyway. So they put us on a bus and sent us back to campus. They actually gave us all, gave us all these city buses and took us all back to campus. He accepted the, the demands that the students had and said that he would look into them. And then we went back to campus. Well, the next week, it wasn't over. And, and I had just started to stay in the room and study. My roommate came to me one morning and said, "They're saying that everybody needs to meet over at this particular location today; everybody, no exceptions." And so I said, "Oh, okay." And so I went, and that was the day that they had made the decision to take over the administration building. The, the week before the students and, at Southern University in New Orleans [Louisiana] had taken over the administration building. But Southern University in New Orleans was a commuter school. It was a two-year school. Southern University in Shreveport [Louisiana] was also a commuter school. They had taken over the administration building with their demands when the National Guard started surrounding the building. They were in there for almost a week. When the National Guard surrounded the building, by the time the governor had made the decision to send the National Guard in, their parents had come up to the school and blocked the doors, surrounded the administration building and blocked the doors. And they did not go in on those students. We were not a commuter school. Most of us were from upstate so we didn't have parents that could come up to campus and do that. There were some students from Baton Rouge. Well, when we got there, everybody that came over, they had us--they tried to do the same thing that they had done at Southern University in New Orleans, walked into the administration building and took it over; walked into the president's office and took it over. The president--I observed him walking out. He said to the students, "I have a meeting downtown. I am going downtown, and I will be back, and I will meet with you." Well, the National Guard had been camped out in the outskirts of the campus for two weeks. We were in the president's office, I was actually in the president's office. We were eating candy. And, and this is because someone said, and you know, most of these students were, were naïve. We didn't know what was going on. And someone said, "Oh, if the National Guard comes with tear gas, we need some ice or something from the infirmary." So I volunteered to go to the infirmary with some other girls (laughter) and ran out of the administration building. And lo and behold, when I got out of that building, there were tanks. They were in uniform. They had rifles. They were invading the campus. The National Guard had been ordered by the governor to come on campus. And we were amazed because we didn't--we couldn't see out. And when I got out, when I--and they--I was a leader even then, and I told these girls--'cause we ran between the tanks to go to the infirmary. And I said, you know, we better get back to the building 'cause they were rolling, and they were marching. I said, "Let's go back to the building. I don't think we have this kind of time." And they followed me back to the building. By the time we got back to the, to the administration building, we were going in, the National Guard had shot its first tear gas cannister through the window. Tear gas was going everywhere. Students were piling out of the building. They were running out; we were running in. And I said to the girls that were with me, "We need to--let's go in the ladies room." Well, in the ladies room, and we were in there. And everything go really, really quiet. All the students had run out of the hallway, and we were in the ladies room, and we stood up on the toilets so that people wouldn't see if they came in to see us standing in there. And I said to them, I said, "You know, this is not a good place for us to be." I said, "Now, someone could come in this washroom and find us and do whatever, and nobody would be a witness to what occurs in here. So we need to leave this building. We need to come out of here and we need to leave the building." When we came out of the washroom, people still following me. I, they didn't know me. They'd just met me that day. They hadn't even met me yet. Of course, just from me telling them, making these decisions. We came out of that washroom, and I noticed that there was a door to our left, and I said, "Let's go this way." And they were following me, and we went that way. And when we walked out of that building, they thought everybody was out. Well, the cameras were, the television cameras were there too. They thought everybody was out so they were shocked to see us come out. And I--and they turned all the rifles on us. I mean this was like a very frightening experience. They turned all the rifles on us. And the young lady, one young lady to my right decided that she was gonna be tough and so they was telling us, move out, move out, move out. And she decided to stop. And everybody else was like stopping, 'cause she was gonna stop, and I looked over at her, and I said, "Not my life today." And I grabbed her by her arm, and I said, "Let's go." And we moved out. And by the time we got around to the front of the administration building, we observed that there were two students dead on the ground. Now, I had to look at the television station later to find out what had occurred. What had occurred was when the tanks started rolling in, the students on campus that were not in the building decided to try to do what the parents had done for the students in New Orleans. They surrounded the front door. They made a--they half circled in front of the front door of the building. There was a stand-off between the National Guard and the students. The National Guard had ordered to only have tear gas canisters in their rifles. We didn't know this. One National Guard pulled buckshots. He said it was a mistake--instead of a tear gas canister. And when he shot into--you could see it on camera. They shot the tear gas. The students threw the tear gas back. You could see where--you could actually see where the buckshot actually came from because you could see the students falling. Leonard and Brown [sic, Leonard Brown and Denver Smith], they, they have memorials down there now. They fell. By the time the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] got to Baton Rouge, all of the guns had been cleaned and put back on the shelf. So that it took years and reviewing of the tapes to see where did--how, how did the students fall to determine where in that lineup did that, did that buckshot come from. And he never got prosecuted for that. It was a mistake, pulled the wrong thing. I don't know how--you know, I don't know how they have that, how they have that on their backs, the ammunition. And those students died. By the time myself and the girls saw those students there, of course, we started crying. And everybody, when we got over to where people were, they were trying to give us ice for, for tear gas, and I was saying, "This is real tears, this is not tear gas" (laughter). But the governor was flying in, you know, his, his helicopter landed next to us. He was flying--it was, it was horrible. Students went to the--to the register--registration building. You know, they were thinking, if, if we don't get grades, nobody'll get grades. They set it afire, set the registration building on fire. This was in November of '72 [1972]. We were sent home. We didn't--they did not get things calm until February of '73 [1973]. We came back in February. We did the remaining of the semester in one month, the month of February. And then we started the second semester in March. Some students could not come back to that school because of what had occurred. I went back and, and that, that was a very, very traumatic thing in my life, but a very good experience for me to witness. And as a matter of fact, there were students that were still held up--holding up in the President's office, they held up in that office for a week. And they found-- Speaker 2: They never came out? Speaker 1: When they finally got them out, they arrested them. They were some of the smartest students. Even one was from my hometown [Minden, Louisiana], and they never graduated. They arrested them and it was just very sad. This was around the same that, what was it, Ohio State, remember the students got-- Speaker 2: Kent, Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Kent State up there in Ohio. Speaker 2: Yeah, up near Cleveland [Ohio] and-- Speaker 1: Yes, this was like-- Speaker 2: Two students were shot in Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi]. Speaker 1: In Jackson State as well? Speaker 2: That same spring. Speaker 1: Is that right? And we the,-- Speaker 2: Seventy-- Speaker 1: We were '72. Speaker 2: You were '72.. That's-- Speaker 1: And I think they were '70 [1970] or '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: That was '70, '70-- Speaker 1: It was '70? Speaker 2: Spring of '70. Yeah, the Kent State-- Speaker 1: Okay, and we were two years later. Speaker 2: --and Jackson State. Speaker 1: Yeah, we were two years later. And so, and you know, during those times, kids were demonstrating. It was the war, it was, you know, different reasons for demonstrating during that time. Story_ID: 4131 Speaker 1: I went back to school [after the student demonstrations at Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. And became I had kept going, I had been studying all that time. I even took my books and was studying during that time. So I was able to continue to maintain a good grade point average. And that professor did, did not come back, the white professor did not come back. But we were able to finalize and as, as a matter of fact, taking my sister's advice to be number one, to be the best, I graduated number one in the College of Business and number one in the department of accounting in 1975. But what she said to me, you're, you're going into this and you have two strikes against you; you are black and you're a woman, I did not get a job offer from any of the major accounting firms, even though I was number one. The gentleman, African American gentleman that I tutored got the job offer. So this was during the '70s [1970s]. So the accounting firms had not gotten to the point where they felt comfortable in having, this was in the early '70s, well, it was '75 [1975], they didn't have that many African Americans in the firm. And then I wore an Afro, you have to get this picture (laughter). And my mom [Dinkie Rabb] told me, she said, "Now, Dorothy, when you go on these interviews, straighten your hair." I said, "Mom, that's old fashioned, nobody, you know, is going to discriminate against me because I have an Afro." And she said, "Straighten your hair." And I wouldn't straighten my hair. I interviewed with an Afro. I was all--they flew me all over the country because of the fact that I had the--I was number one, but nobody would bring me back for a second interview, and nobody would, would--no one, no one, none of the major accounting firms hired me. And that's what you do when you're number one. You get hired by one of the big eight accounting firms, it was eight at the time. I took a job with Commonwealth Edison [Company], right here in Chicago [Illinois], that's how I came to Chicago, making $11,000 a year. I got two job offers, Honeywell [International, Inc.] in Minnesota. They offered me $13,000 and Commonwealth Edison here in Chicago offered me $11,000. I took this offer because my sister was here. Laura [Rabb Morgan] had moved here by then. And so I had someplace to come and stay and get started. By that time also I was married. So I had my, my husband [Frankie Brown] also came here with me in '75. You know, we cried because I didn't get a job offer, and I said, but what happens when number one is not good enough. Do you just go over in the corner and cry? Or do you come to Chicago and become the first African American to be the clerk of the largest unified court system in the world? Speaker 2: Of course, you do the second thing. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Absolutely. And so, we came to Chicago, my, my husband, my then-husband, and we divorced in 1992. He got a job here, working at the Federal Reserve Bank. He was a computer programming analyst. And he still is in computers. And so we, we, we started--he was making $13,000 and I was making $11,000. But I made the decision. I said, "I will take this job offer from Commonwealth Edison, but you know what. I'm going to take that CPA [certified public accountant] exam that my professor talked to me about. And I'm gonna pass the, that exam," because you compete nationally because they grade those papers. They look at the quality of answers throughout the country when they're grading those papers. And I said, "Now, I will prove that I am just as good as my grades say that I am." So I took the CPA exam here. I passed three parts the first time, then I passed the final part, the last. I think you have to pass at least three in order to--you had to pass two at least, and then you had to make over 50 points in the one that you don't pass in order to keep--in order to not have to take it all over again. So I passed everything but auditing at the time, and so I had to take that over. And I passed that, and so became a CPA in 1977. Story_ID: 4132 Speaker 1: And once I became a CPA [certified public accountant], I then started interviewing again with the big eight accounting firms. It was interesting because Arthur Andersen [and Company] and, and Arthur Andersen is no longer in existence now-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was a huge firm. Speaker 1: It was huge. It was the largest-- Speaker 2: Especially, here in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: --firm of them all. Yes, and it was headquartered here. Speaker 2: Worldwide headquarters out in the sub, a suburb of Chicago--I've been out there because they used to train business people out there. Speaker 1: Yeah, out in St. Charles [Illinois]. That's where I went for my training. They call it the fast training. Okay. And so I, I contacted Arthur Andersen. I know that they had hired one of the girls that was in my CPA review class, and she didn't even pass the exam. So I figured if they hired her, then they should be able to hire me. I passed the exam. Well, they really didn't want to take me from one of their large clients. Commonwealth Edison [Company] was one of their large clients. And then I found out that, that was the line that they gave me. And so I found out from her that she was a--her company was a client, but what they told her to do, all she had to do was tell her company that she was interviewing with accounting firms, not which accounting firm. And then they would interview her. Well, finally--even before they would interview, they had to do one more step. They had to find out had they ever turned me down anywhere in the country, when I was graduating from Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], had they ever turned me down because once they turn you down, they don't interview you again. If any of their offices, anywhere in the country turn you down, they won't interview you again. Well, this was just fate. And this is where my mother's prayers came into play. When I was going to interview with Arthur Andersen, I was in the placement office at Southern, I interviewed with all the big eight accounting firms. And when it was my turn to interview with Arthur Andersen, I was signed up for the interview, and I was sitting there. And I said to myself, "I don't want to work for this conservative firm. They're too conservative for me." And I was sitting there, and I said--the gentleman walked out of the office and started calling my name. And he said, "Dorothy Rabb," and he didn't know how I looked. I got up, and I walked out past him, and I did not acknowledge that he was calling my name. They would not have hired me. I actually--that day I had gone to the interview, I was pledging Delta Sigma Theta at the time. So I went with one of my pledge outfits on 'cause I figured my grades were good enough. I didn't have to worry about how I looked. So I had a Afro and a pledge outfit on. So I would not have gotten hired that day, believe me. I walked out. They searched their database to find out if I had ever been interviewed by Arthur Andersen, and they didn't find my name anywhere. So they interviewed me, and they hired me in the Chicago office. And I worked there for, for three years, from 1977 to 1980, a month before my daughter [Detris Brown] was born. And, but while I was at Arthur Andersen, I got some very good experience with some major companies. And, of course, that was where I learned really, really about corporate America and, and, and poor evaluations and how you must make sure that you keep what they call a file that, make sure--they call it a CYOA, but you make sure that you have yourself properly covered. That's what I learned the hard way, being supervised by individuals that were right there, real close to me in, in age. So they're afraid that I'm gonna take over their positions so then they poorly evaluate you. So, but I also found out that if you went to work with a negative attitude or thinking that someone is going to poorly evaluate you or someone's going to discriminate against you, then you probably will actually do poorly because you're starting out with the wrong attitude. So I work, worked for Arthur Andersen for those three years, got promoted to what they call a semi-senior. At the time--then I was pregnant with my daughter and at the time I was trying to get them to let me go on just be in the office kind of work. And they would not let me do that, told me I had to have a doctor's certificate; actually sent me out on a client. I had been begging and begging to supervise a job. Well, they finally made a decision to--give me a job to supervise and I was eight months pregnant. Okay. I took the job, but, you know what, it was the supervising a job at a hospital. So my mother's prayers were still working. (Laughter) So I went to the--I said, well I, you know, go into labor, I'll just go on up to the Maternity Ward (laughter). But I took that job, and I supervised that job because I knew that when you leave companies, you have to make sure that you are moving to the next level, that you have had supervisory experience because if you don't have supervisory experience, you have to go to the next company as a beginning accountant. Story_ID: 4133 Speaker 1: You worked for Arthur Andersen [and Company] for three years and what did you do afterwards? Speaker 2: Well, what I did was, I had my daughter [Detris Brown] in June of 1981, and I had been working on a master's. I'd been going to school in the evening even while I was at Arthur Andersen. Arthur Andersen would not pay for a master's for an auditor. They would pay for a master's, tuition reimbursement, for a tax person because they felt that you could use that. But for an auditor, they felt that they would train you and give you all the experience, all the information that you needed and you did not need a master's. So my husband [Frankie Brown] and I actually had to pay for the Master's. Speaker 1: And this was at DePaul [University, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: And I went to DePaul University, yes. So I was going to DePaul in the evenings. So I was working late hours at Arthur Andersen. At this time I was really involved with my church, working with various activities, and I was going to grad school. And so I had my daughter in '81--in, in, '80 [1980], in June of '80. And I did not go back to Arthur Andersen in July. I resigned Arthur Andersen. Arthur Andersen has, had these policies of up and out. Either you get promoted up or you're out. And so at the time, I had been informed that I was not gonna be promoted up, so even though I was going on maternity leave, I was out. So I made the decision to resign. And I was--stayed home for a year with my daughter. I said "I will stay home for a year with my daughter." I discussed that with my husband. He was still working, and I decided that this would be a good time to finish the master's in the evening. I would be home with my daughter during the day. And I would finish my master's at DePaul University in the evenings. So that's what I did. And so we, I was able to bond with my daughter, which was good. I wanted to give her that first year of her life. And by that next May was when I, I finished at DePaul. Story_ID: 4134 Speaker 1: And it's interesting because one of the professors there [at DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois] told me, he said, "You know, if you're looking for a job, just send your resume to the president of the company. Don't send your resume--you don't have to really use a headhunter. Don't send your resume to the Human Resources Department. Send your resume to the President of the company, especially given that you have good grades. You have good credentials here." So I did. So CPA [certified public accountant], MBA [master's of business administration] at this point. I sent my letter to, my resume to Mr. Thomas. It was Thomas, the President of First National Bank of Chicago. And I actually had a headhunter that was looking for a job for me. And the headhunter called me, and he said, "I called First National about getting your resume in there, and they said, they already have your resume. As a matter of fact, you're a friend of the president's." I said, "Really?" (laughter) "'Cause your letter came down from the President's office." I said, "Oh, is that right?" And so because my letter came--my resume came down from the president's office, they thought I was a friend of the president. So I got hired. So that's a tip. So I got hired. And I started working as an audit manager. I was hired as an audit manager in the audit department. And it was interesting because I was one of the first few African American females to be a audit manager in that department. But the interesting thing about it, and it was kind of hard for me was, when they made the decision that they wanted to demote me, they didn't demote me. They didn't fire me. They reorganized the department and changed the titles for the grades. So my grade now was an audit senior and they hired some people in who were audit managers. And one of the gentlemen that I had--that I had trained, a Caucasian gentleman, now, he was an audit manager. They didn't put him over me, but--when he became an audit manager, and those, those were the kind experiences that you have, you know, coming up the ranks. That's why I am in a position now where I always make sure that I'm respecting and treating people fair because of the way I was treated. Story_ID: 4135 Speaker 1: One thing that I didn't tell you that I did when I was in college was that I came to Chicago [Illinois] during the summer of '72 [1972] and worked in a factory here in Niles, Illinois on a paint line. I was, a paint line of Pathfinder, Inc. out in Niles, Illinois. My sister [Laura Rabb Morgan] lived in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] so we had to get up at 4:00 to get out to Niles, Illinois by 7:00 to clock in. That was a, a good experience for me to know how to treat people. I mean they had a union out there because we didn't belong to the union. And I'm not saying that they treated people inappropriately, but it--hard work, putting up those parts on the paint line. We painted car parts, the mirror on the big trucks. We painted those. It would go through this big, big furnace and would come back, and it would be painted, and we'd have to pull them off of the paint line. And I have a back injury from that right now. If I get too tired, my back will hurt from putting up parts on that paint line. And then in '74 [1974], I went to Minnesota, and that's where me and my husband [Frankie Brown] got married actually, in Minnesota 'cause he was working for Control Data [Corporation] as a summer intern. I was working for Peat, Marwick & Mitchell [Peat Marwick International] as a summer intern as a C--in a CPA [certified public accounting] firm, and Peat Marwick didn't even give me a job offer either, even though I had done a summer as an intern. They always, people usually always hire their interns. But I--we were up in Minneapolis, Minnesota and we actually got married that summer up there in nineteen seven--July of, July 20th, 1974. So, but those experiences, the paint line, working in the cotton fields with my father, being a summer intern in Minneapolis, Minnesota, those experiences--and then being at Arthur Andersen [and Company] and, and not being properly evaluated because you had a supervisor that thinks that if they evaluate you too high, you may take over their job. And then going on to First [National Bank of] Chicago and being reorganized out of a managerial position, those kind of experiences taught me to make sure that I treat people fair, that--what's wrong with treating people fair. What's wrong with making sure that people are able to do a good job for you. As, as Clerk of the Circuit Court [of Cook County, Illinois], I would be--it would not make any sense for me to treat people unfair. If they're not doing a good job, if they don't have the right mental attitude for the job, then in my opinion, I look bad because I am the elected official. And that--but that's, even before I was an elected official, even in the jobs that I've had, as a manager, I've always treated people fair. Story_ID: 4136 Speaker 1: So at First [National Bank of] Chicago [Illinois], I stayed there, even though they reorganized me. My mother [Dinkie Rabb] always taught me, don't leave a job unless you've got a job, Dorothy. So I would not leave that job. I stayed there and in 1984, the year after Harold Washington won the Mayor [of Chicago], Odell Hicks decided to leave Arthur Andersen [and Company] and start a CPA [certified public accounting] firm. I had been working with the National Association of Black Accountants on their scholarship committee and actually had interacted with, with Mr. Hicks in trying to get Mayor Washington to be our scholarship dinner speaker. And we were able to do that. Odell was so impressed with the fact that--how tenacious I was and how, how I followed up with him. And I, I would call him and I said, "Where do we stand on getting the Mayor as our speaker?" And he said, "Oh, I contacted the secretary." I said, "And what did she say? And when is she gonna get back to you?" And I would ask him these follow-up questions to get enough information to see if, if it was really moving. And he was able to get the Mayor, and he did come and speak for us. But he was so impressed. Odell was so impressed with the way I did that, he calls me the next year and he said, "I am starting an Accounting firm. I'm leaving Arthur Andersen. I've not made an announcement of this." And he took me over and showed me the space that he was building out, getting built out for his firm. "And I would like for you to come and be one of my managers." So I was the first that, that he hired, and I talked with my husband [Frankie Brown] at the time. And he had a steady job. And I said, "Now, we'll, I'll be going with someone that does not have--they're just starting a brand new firm." And we made the decision that we could take that risk. And I helped Mr. Hicks build that firm up from the ground. I, I recommended another lady who actually, the next year, I became president of the National Association of Black Accountants. I was the first female president of the local Chicago chapter. And I had her to run for vice president. And she won. And I was so impressed with her, Ms. Bonnie Carr, who has Carr & Associates now, an accounting firm. I was so impressed with her, I asked, I asked Mr. Hicks to interview her to be one of the managers as well. We did everything. We did the compilations. We did the reviews. We did the audits. We did the taxes. We knew that if we did not get the job done, we would not get paid. So I--the latest I ever stayed in working with Mr. Hicks was 5:00 a.m. in the morning and coming back at 8:00 to start back over again. One time I had a secretary to walk out on me. I was over at a client getting proposal, information for a proposal--no, actually, over at a, at a, a subcontractor we were gonna do, accounting and computers. And I was over at his office, the subcontractor's office getting his portion of the proposal and I was in contact with her over the phone, saying, "I'm on my way back, I'm on my way back." And I got back to the office, and she was gone for the day. And I didn't know how to use the computer. It was just this Selectric typewriter, but at that time, you didn't have computers. You had the Selectric typewriter, but it was a step up from regular typewriters. And I didn't know how to use it. Well, I had a friend that had a data processing company, a word processing company that typed things for people. And she had--I remembered that she had a Selectric typewriter. And I called her, and I said, "You're gonna have to give me a crash course in how to work the Selectric typewriter tonight 'cause we need to get this proposal to the client. And we need it to get to the client tomorrow morning." And she taught me. And I typed that report that night. And from then on, I said, "I will never be held hostage by a secretary again in my life. I will know how to use every computer in the office, every machine." And I even had some clients that said the same thing. They had been held hostage. If the secretary needs to go, they left. They knew how to use the computer. They, and you didn't know how to use it, and that was it. I stayed until 5:00 a.m., working on that proposal and got it done. From then on, I typed financial reports. I did, you know, a lot of things to help get the work done, and then taught my other manager how to use it, the system as well. Story_ID: 4137 Speaker 1: We [Odell Hicks and Associates] were the accountants for Harold--for Mayor Harold Washington, and we were responsible because Odell Hicks was Mayor Washington's Finance Committee chairman. So we were the accountants for Mayor Washington. We did his D-2's for the Board of Elections. And one of the significant things about Mayor Washington is that he wanted to report every contribution, every dollar. He, you--there's a cut-off. You only had to report dollar amounts over a certain amount. Anything else, you can report as a lump sum. But Mayor Washington wanted to report every dollar. So we spent hours and hours doing that report. One night, as a matter of fact, I hit the wrong button and lost the--and I had to spend the rest of the night putting it back in. I didn't know at time with Lotus [Software], that there was, they didn't have the undo, but if you hadn't saved it, you still had the old. And I really didn't know that, the system that well. But I spent hours putting the information in, and I got it back in. But that's the kind of commitment that you have to have. So I worked for Odell. I was the, I had wind up being the, one of two senior managers on the audit of a, entire City of Chicago. In 1988 or '89 [1989], Odell actually was asked by Mike Mayo, who was a Partner at Deloitte & Touche [Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu]. Deloitte & Touche was the lead firm. And the City of Chicago was then, and I believe still is, audited by a consortium of firms. They are, there ten--there were ten minority firms, African American and Hispanics, and there was lead firm and was the general contractor, a majority firm, Deloitte & Touche. And they wanted to make sure that there was a representative, a senior manager from the minority firm side and one from Deloitte & Touche. And initially, I was not even on the City of Chicago audit. My partner, the manage--the other manager was on the audit. I had all of the other clients. I had all of the shoebox clients. And I just, I just stayed there, and I, and I worked diligently on those clients. And one day, the--Deloitte & Touche called and said that they had a job that they needed someone to come and complete because the senior had to go to another client. Well, I wasn't a senior. I was a manager, but I've always been able to--of the, the impression--I've always been of the thought that as long as you can learn something new, it doesn't matter. Go and do the job. So I went to do the job as a senior over at, at the City of Chicago. And I reported to two managers, an African American woman and a Caucasian gentleman. But, you know what, I respected them. I never told them I was a manager. I respected them. I learned that job. I did--I wrote that report. I knew more about that report than anyone, and when it was time to get that report presented to the partner, I, the actual--the senior came over that I had actually taken his place, but I wasn't done yet. So I told him, "I'll take it to the partner." And I took it to the partner. And the partner was so impressed with the report, and my, and, and how I'd done the report and my grasp of the information because when we would go to meetings to discuss it with the client, I was the only one that could discuss it because I knew most of the information. He called the next year--now, mind you, I hadn't even been on, assigned to the audit, he called Odell the next year and said, not only do we want Dorothy Brown to be on this audit, we want her to be one of two senior managers managing the entire audit because she did such a good job on that. My mother's prayers were still working. By this time my prayers were working (laughter). And I became--even the manager in my firm that had been on the audit for three years, I was managing him. I managed--we, the senior managers, the two senior managers managed all the managers of the, of the audit. So I managed the audit for the City of Chicago. I was on top of the case, whatever I was asked for. And that's one thing that I always like to tell young people, be on top of your game at all times. And I found out something when I was at Odell Hicks, and this is when I came to the, to the awakening that many things that I thought that I had suffered during the time that I was at Arthur Andersen [and Company] and First National [Bank of Chicago] and Commonwealth Edison [Company], that I thought was racial discrimination, was not racial discrimination because at, at Odell Hicks, we had the same kind of competitiveness. And I said, this is not racial discrimination. This is human-natured competitiveness. And if you can find the low man on the totem pole and knock him off, he will be knocked off. And when I found--came to that realization, then I started operating differently when I dealt with people. I had more confidence in myself. I started making sure that I was on top of the issue, that I had a positive mental attitude in everything that I approached. Story_ID: 4138 Speaker 1: As I was working for, being the senior manager on that audit [of the City of Chicago, Illinois], a few years later, Deloitte & Touche [Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu] became the auditors for the Chicago Transit Authority. Well, they had been so impressed with the work that I had done on that audit, they recommended me to be the general auditor, heading the audit department at, at the Chicago Transit Authority. And Clark Burrus was the Chairman of the Board at that time, and he didn't know my technical skills. He had seen me at various social events, but I was able to get them to recommend me for that job. And I became the general auditor for Chicago Transit Authority. And just by being, and just, just having that change in thought, and having a positive mental attitude in the things that I did everyday. So then I went to Chicago Transit Authority as a general auditor. And after I got there-- Speaker 2: This was around 19-- Speaker 1: This was in 1991. Speaker 2: '91 [1991], okay. Speaker 1: June 1991 was when I became the general auditor for the Chicago Transit Authority. Well, one thing that I didn't talk about was all during the '80s [1980s], I had been working with my church. I had been working with not-for-profit agencies, with youth, my ministry is youth, and working with senior citizens. I realized that I had been managing programs. I managed a 1,500-plate dinner for my pastor's 50th ministerial anniversary. I had managing different things and so, in the community. So I realized that I had more to offer, and I, I decided that I wanted to be a public servant. But I did not to do it unless I was an attorney. If you remember the Anita Hill and Clarence Thomas hearings, I was so impressed with those African American attorneys that presented during those hearings. I said, I want to be just like that, but I also said that I want--in order to shore up my credentials, to run for public office, I wanted to be an attorney. But all during the '80s [1980s], I was working for Arthur Andersen [and Company], I was working overtime there. I was working, as you can hear, I was really, really late for Odell Hicks. I was the President of NABA [National Association of Black Accountants] from '84 [1984] to '85 [1985]. I only did that for one year, and I had a daughter [Detris Brown] that was born in '80 [1980]. And I had a husband [Frankie Brown] at the time. So I did not have the time to go to law school. When I went to, to, to CTA, by that time, I was separated from my husband. And I, also at CTA they had a no-overtime policy, which was great for me, a no-overtime policy. But as a committed professional and a new general auditor, I worked overtime anyway the first year. And I shored up that department. I did an assessment of, did a risk assessment of the entire agency to see exactly where our risks were and then develop a ten-year audit plan. I did all that in my first year. And then the following year, I was, I was in a position, I felt, to--I could work at least a hour of overtime. Law school started at, at 6:00. CTA, we ended work at 4:30. So I still could work a little overtime and still--actually, 4:00 and I could still go to law school. And so got into Chicago-Kent College of Law [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 4139 Speaker 1: Let me just raise a point that's, that is interesting in this regard that you were inspired by the Anita Hill, Clarence Thomas-- Speaker 2: Oh, I was inspired, yes. Speaker 1: --broadcast of the Senate Hearings on television, I guess. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And you thought that, you wanted to be a lawyer, and you thought that in order to be an effective politician, you probably should have a law degree-- Speaker 2: Well, yes, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: --but let me say, I guess the point I'm making is that, as someone, I guess just an observation of black politicians in the City [of Chicago], most of them do not have a law degree. In fact, it's been known by some people that we have legislators that don't have any degrees at all, every few of them-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in City Council now, you've got like maybe two or three lawyers in the black community that are in City Council out of twenty-five people, you know. And so, or maybe more. Speaker 2: Well, and, and, well, I had made the decision, see I've always been-- Speaker 1: I think at that time the 6th Ward Alderman was the only lawyer, black lawyer in City Council-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: Judge John Steele. Speaker 1: Steele, yeah, John Steele. He was the only one in 1990, in the early '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: Okay, well, I have, I've always been of the opinion that, you know, and I thought that I was going to be legislator. And that's what I was preparing for at the time. And so I felt that if I was going to make the law, I wanted to know the law. Me, personally, this was my personal commitment. Many of the legislators do a good job in analyzing the, the various bills that come before them using the other kind of experience that they have. But for me, I wanted to be an attorney. So, so I did not run any office. I could have run for an office as a CPA [certified public accountant] and a MBA [master's of business administration] anytime in the, in the '80s [1980s]. But I wanted to be an attorney because I thought that I was gonna be a legislator. So I just would not go, would not seek public office without being an attorney. And then when I saw the Anita Hill, Hill hearings, Anita Hill, Clarence Thomas hearing and saw those African American attorneys that were so smart and articulate, I--that just impressed me even more. And, and my other thought was, as a general auditor, I had met a lot of CPA attorneys that were inspector generals or general auditors, cause inspector generals actually oversee both audit departments and investigations on the federal level. And I said, well, you want to map out your different paths, and if I decide to be an inspector general on the federal level, then if I became an attorney, I'm already a CPA, then that would be an option open for me as well. Story_ID: 4140 Speaker 1: So I got into--was admitted to Chicago-Kent College of Law [Chicago, Illinois] in 1992. And my daughter [Detris Brown] was in the 7th grade. And I said that I didn't want to be in law school her entire high school career. And so--and it takes four years to do evening school. So I doubled up in my courses. And I went to summer school for at least two years. And I was able to graduate in three and a half years instead of four years, and I graduated with honors. But the, the way I did that was simply being focused, committed and studying all the time, zero social life, but just getting the job done. And then still, by that time, I was separated, and my husband [Frankie Brown] then was actually not even living in Chicago. So I had total responsibility for the welfare of my daughter, for the care of my daughter and not any--my family is not here. I only have one sister [Laura Rabb Morgan] here. Speaker 2: Was your husband originally from Chicago or was he from some--did you meet him in Louisiana? Speaker 1: My husband is from Monroe, Louisiana. I met him at Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. And, and so he was from Louisiana as well. And we came up here together. So he went--he be, he's a, a computer program analyst, as I said earlier, and he became a consultant at that time. And that, that consulting firm sent him to different companies throughout the country. So by that time, I think he was actually working in Oklahoma. And so I had total care for my daughter. And so I had to pay for whatever I got. I didn't have family here. The ladies at church helped men tremendous. I'm a member of the Key of Life Tabernacle Church of God in Christ [Chicago, Illinois]. As I said earlier, I'm, I was Church of God in Christ raised and, and I'm still a member of the Church of God in Christ. And those ladies at the church helped me tremendously in raising my daughter as well. But for the most part, and you can't always get people, you can't use people in volunteering to do that, for the most part, I had to pay. I paid for my daughter to be cared for. My neighbor--I had two senior citizens that were neighbors when I moved into my current. And they didn't have any children, and they actually asked me to care for my daughter because it was a joy for them to have a child around the house. So she would come home from kindergarten on the bus, and they she would go to Aunt Ruth and Uncle Claude's house in the evenings. And so they really helped me a lot in caring for her as well. But she was 7th, 8th, 9th--I finished law school in her first semester, 10th grade year. And that was, it was very difficult for her, my being in law school, my working those long hours was very difficult for her. Now, she's in law school now herself. So she didn't come out any worse for wear, but it was a very difficult experience having a professional mother. I always tell mothers, you know, always take your time and, and set your priorities and give your children that time. Give your spouses that time. That's very, very important. And even here at the Clerk of the [Circuit] Court [of Cook County, Illinois], you know, I try to make sure that people are taking care of their families. And I think more bosses should be that way, make sure that people are taking care of their families. If there's a job that's, that's due, then try to see if you can give someone else, have, have someone else help that person get that job done so they don't spend the night. Now, every now and then, you're gonna have, there are gonna, there's gonna something obviously that only you can do. But hopefully, that's the exception and not the rule, and the boss can be, a understanding in that. And I think companies now are more understanding 'cause you have more working mothers. When I--in the '70s [1970s] people did not come back to work after they had children, women, I'm sorry. Women did have, come back to work after they had children. They were at home and they were housewives. Now, women are, some of them are going back to that now. But now, you have the flex schedules. You know, you have the day cares right in the same location as the parent and that sort of thing. But, but, but going to law school, and my daughter and I, we, we, we made it through that, you know. And, and she's a very good young woman now. Her name is Detris Demaris Brown, and she's at Drake University Law School in Des Moines, Iowa. And she's a great person. I've tried to train her in everything that I have learned over the years, being, my being an elected official doesn't mean a whole lot to her. Most of the people, most of her friends don't know that I'm an elected official. But that was a, that was very, a trying experience for both of us. Story_ID: 4141 Speaker 1: But once I graduated from law school [Chicago-Kent College of Law, Chicago, Illinois]--and while I was in law school, people would ask, okay, you say--and I said in my personal statement, I'm running for public office. I, I'm only going to law school to run for public office. I'm not going to law school to be, practice law. And they would say, well, what are you going to run for? And I said, well, first of all, if I say an office, someone holds it right now, so that wouldn't be very smart. Secondly, God hasn't revealed it to me yet. And when he reveals it to me, I'll know it when I see it. So then I graduated from law school, and I went back to CTA as a general auditor for the Chicago Transit Authority 'cause I had a major position, pretty good. And I was going to stay there until God revealed to me what position that was there for me to run for. And December of 1996 was when I saw in the newspaper that Miriam Santos for up for an appointment by President [Bill] Clinton. As a matter of fact, it was in [Michael] Sneed, the ['Chicago] Sun-Times'. It said, Miriam Santos, the current city treasurer, is up for an appointment by President Clinton. And I said, wow, okay, that's a financial position. I'm a CPA [certified public accountant]. It's administrative. I've had over twenty years of administrative experience. By that time, I had decided legislation was not for me, being a legislator, I didn't have that kind of experience. I'm an administrator. I had--not only at work, but in, in, in my philanthropic activities, I worked administratively. So by that time, I, I had become a member of the--Working in the School Board, where we tutor disadvantaged children, financially disadvantaged children in inner-city neighborhoods. I was the treasurer for that organization. So I had done a lot of things administratively and had done them very well. So I said, you're an administrator. So I wanted a administrative position. So that's administrative. Okay, it's financial. The law degree helps to balance out the credentials. I think I'll look at the city treasurer's job. And so I said, well, I went to visit someone, I said--I went to visit Clark Burrus. And I said, "Well, Mr. Burris," I said, "If in fact, Miriam Santos was appointed by President Clinton to a position, how--what would happen to the city treasurer's job or how would you go about getting appointed to that job?" And he said, "Well, you really need to know someone." I said, "Really." Well, you need to know the Mayor, the Mayor would make that appointment. I said, "Oh", and at that time, the Mayor was Mayor [Richard M.] Daley. And so, so he said "Why don't you go visit Jon [Jonathan] Rogers". He's--I'm out of the, I'm kind of out the--he's, he's was a executive vice president at First National [Bank of Chicago], but he said, "I'm on the downside of my career. And I'm not as in-the-know now, so why don't you go visit a few people, one of them being Jon Rogers." Story_ID: 4142 Speaker 1: Now you went to see Jonathan Rogers. Speaker 2: Jon Rodgers, who is a President of Ariel Capital [Management]. But Mr. [Clark] Burrus said he's also the President of the Chicago [Illinois] Park District. And he said he was appointed by the Mayor [Harold Washington] and so he can probably give you some insight into that. So Mr. Rogers did meet with me. And he said, "Well you need to get out and meet people. You need to know more people. And also and you need to go to some of these events and, and, and get to know people." And I said, "Oh, okay." And so I went to--I started going to things and I actually saw him at an event. I said, and you see I took your advice. I'm at this event. Then that was, what '97 [1997], about February '97. Then I actually started helping Dan Hynes whose the current [Illinois] State Comptroller, run for State Comptroller. You know, well I informed Dan that, you know, I was actually looking at running for public office myself, and he just needed to be aware of that. And he said, you know, that wasn't a problem. You know, he just preferred me not to, you know, do that--talk to people about that while I was helping him, during his visits and things like that. And we agreed. And, and I respected him in that regard. By that fall, when Miriam Santos did not get appointed to anything by President [Bill] Clinton, but she made the decision to run for Attorney General of the State of Illinois. And so that was in September of that year. She made the decision to run for attorney general. And, and I found out later she had said that she would not run for City Treasurer [of Chicago]. Well, I knew that the attorney general's race, she would probably win the Democratic primary, so the general was not until the next November 1998. And the city treasurer's race was February 1999. So you could not be running for both of these things at the same time. So I thought, I figured that pretty much she was not gonna run for city treasurer. But, you never know. But I could not wait till November of 1998 to plan for a February 1999 race. So I had to put together my organization. So I put together an organizing committee, and one of the first commitments they had me make to them was, if Miriam Santos loses the attorney general's race and decide to run for city treasurer, will you run? They asked me that question the very first night. Will you, before we can make a decision to help you and commit to you an entire, will you still run for city treasurer even if Miriam Santos decide to run? And my answer was, yes, because I felt that I, I had the credentials. I qualified to be the city treasurer and so--though and I, and I, and I would. and I should run. And if I was gonna--and I wanted to be City Treasurer of the City of Chicago. And so I told them yes, because if I said, no, then I mean I wouldn't have helped me, obviously. And also if you're gonna be in this business of, of politics, you really have to run against someone in these races. And you have to be able to hold your own. One thing I have learned, you can't win unless you run. And so, I made the decision. Story_ID: 4143 Speaker 1: We started to work towards getting my name out there [for her campaign for City Treasurer of Chicago, Illinois]. We started to make the list of the people that I needed to go see to tell them that I was running, some of the major players in Chicago. The organizing committee, but it was consisted of, of the gentleman, Mr. Squire Lance, who I started working with, who I met working with the Dan Hynes campaign, actually. And I told Mr. Lance, I said, "I am going to run for city treasurer." First I told him I was gonna run for public office. And he just kind of blew me off, oh, yeah right, everybody wants to run for public office. And then when Miriam [Santos] decided to run for [Illinois] Attorney General, and I said, you know, "I want to run for city treasurer." And he said, "Let me find out what your credentials really are." He knew I was an attorney, and it--we sat down one night and went over my credentials. And he found out that I was an attorney, a CPA [certified public accountant] and a MBA [master's of business administration]. And his eyes got this big and he said, "This is great. Now, let me find out what your base would be." First of all, of course, the African American community would be your base, but what organizations have--do you belong to? I said, well, I'm Church of God in Christ, and I have 6 million people worldwide. Right in, here in Chicago, it has seven bishops. And I have been a part of the local church, the district church, the state church as well as the national church. I have been working with youth for over ten years, if not longer. And all of the bishops know me. My young people are now adults. The young people that--I had scholarship funds for young people, although the, the young people that I helped, their parents appreciated the things that I did for them. I was also a member--I said I was President of the National Association of Black Accountants and I, and am now still a member. President of, member of the Black Women Lawyers, member of the National Association of Black MBA's, Member of the Cook County Bar Association, the Chicago Bar Association. When he--and not only a member of those organizations, but an active member of, of those organizations. Chicago Bar Association, I wasn't member of that organization. I had just joined. But Delta Sigma Theta Sorority. When he found out that I had that kind of base, and that not only had I been members of those organizations, organizations, but I had been an active member, he said, "You have a base of support. The first thing I always want to know if people have the base of support. And the Church of God in Christ is a very well-organized organization. And if you've been working, then those members should definitely support you." And so we started to work and he told me to put together an organizing committee that consisted of a very diverse group ethnically. And we did that. And people with backgrounds, accountants, attorneys, ministers and so we did that. Joann Alter, who I had met in 1990--'92, when I--there was a, actually a party at her home back in 1992. And Joanne Alter was a former water reclamation, [Chicago Metropolitan] Water Reclamation [District] commissioner. Actually, when I met her at that time, and I told her that I was in law school and I planned to run for public office, she made the statement to me before I left her home, she said, "When you get out of law school, look me up. I will help you." And she, and she said to me, "Do you know the last woman that I told that to?" And I said, "No." She said, "Ms. Carol Moseley Braun." And Carol Moseley Braun was U.S. Senator, had just won--and just become a U.S. Senator. And I said, "Great. I will look you up." But even before I got out of law school, I started working on the Working in the Schools Board with Joanne Alter and as a treasurer. And so Joanne appreciated all the support I had given her even while I was law school. I was a treasurer in an organization. I really didn't have the time and organized their financial--the financial aspects of that company--that organization. So she was on my organizing committee. Her husband, Jim, worked with us. And so, and Mildred Morrow Smith (ph.) and her husband, Allen Smith (ph.) and Lucille Dobbins, Attorney Geraldine Simmons. Mrs. Dobbins is a CPA. Attorney Geraldine Simmons. My current treasurer, John Butts, the minister that was there was Elder Van Wells. And we all met--and, and then Squire Lance. And we all met at, at that home that night and started--and then Leon Jackson, who builds shades and blinds and he also has a computer company, was a chairman of my organizing committee. And those individuals, we started working towards my becoming the City Treasurer of the City of Chicago. Story_ID: 4144 Speaker 1: Well, what happened? We--Miriam Santos did not win the [Illinois] Attorney General's race. And it took her an entire month, the entire month of November to decide that she was gonna get in the race of City Treasurer [of Chicago, Illinois]. I was already, no one knew I was in race, nobody--they didn't know me. I was in the Bud Billiken parade the summer before and we had Dorothy Brown--I was president of the NWPC [National Women's Political Caucus] and by that time we had Dorothy Brown and NWPC salutes the 150th Anniversary of the Women's Rights Convention. And they were like, whose Dorothy Brown? And everybody, and I had on brown, they said, that's the young lady in brown--it just happened I had on brown, but they said, we said, that's okay. You'll know who Dorothy Brown is soon enough. That was our tactic, our name recognition tactic, just get the name out there. And so, so Miriam made the decision to run for city treasurer, and we were already circulating petitions. At that time, they changed the number of signatures that you needed from 2,500 to 25,000 because it became a non-partisan race. When there was a Democratic primary--when Harold Washington won in 1983, there was a Democratic primary, and then there was a general election, if you remember correctly. And so by this time, the Republicans were in charge of the state legislature, and they decided that they were gonna change it. And I think that they probably felt, well, maybe they'll have a better chance of becoming--getting into office if they made the city elections non-partisan. So the mayor, the city treasurer and the city clerk were non-partisan races, didn't have to be Democrat or Republican. So they changed the signature requirement from 2,500 to 25,000. We didn't know that until September of 1998 when it was time to start to circulate the petitions. We were thinking we could put together 2,500--we can do that. We can even do 10,000 for that matter. 25,000. And a lot of people thought you couldn't do that without a political organization, and I didn't have a political organization. But you know what, I had almost 400 people to circulate petitions for me. We put people through trainings on how to circulate petitions. We had volunteers that had never circulated petitions before. All of the philanthropic activities, my youth activities and senior citizens things that I had done during the '80s [1980s], people--I wasn't doing that because I thought I was gonna run for public office. But people appreciated what I did. My children were now adults. They could circulate petitions for me. The--their parents appreciated what I did for them. They circulated petitions for me. I had worked on all these different levels. So all of these different--I had mothers in the church walking on the street, circulating petitions for me. One mother in particular, Mother Juanita Conway, who recently was injured, and she's in a nursing home right now because--and we don't really know how she was injured. She was hit across--over the head. But Mother Conway told me, she said, "These guys hang out on my street every day, and I went out there, and I said, 'you guys are registered voters. Sign this petition for Dorothy Brown.'" I had them--one mother stood at a currency exchange all day and got petitions signed for me. It was just a heart-wrenching experience for me. Homeless people did petitions for me. I would be out--this one gentleman, homeless gentleman was standing by Walgreens. And I passed by him, and I said--and I asked him, he saw my petitions. And he said--he saw me getting petitions signed, and he said, "I'm registered to vote." I said, "Okay, sign my petition." He said, "You know what, I can circulate those for you." No, he didn't ask me--I asked him. I said, "You know, you're standing out here every day. Why don't you--you can--why don't you circulate these petitions and get signatures for me?" He said, "I can do that, I can do that." I said, and we're paying--we, we were actually paying $5.00 a sheet. I said, "We're paying $5.00 a sheet." He said, "This is fantastic." So I gave him 10 sheets. And when I came back out, he said, "I know where I can go." I know he had already in mind where he was gonna go. I said, "Now, they have to be registered voters, and they have to live in the City of Chicago." He said, "Okay, okay." And he said, "I'm telling you, I'm registered, I'm registered at my sister's house." He said--he was homeless, but he was registered to vote. I said, "Okay, fine." So I left it with him, and I said, "Here's the name. Call this office, Mr. Squire Lance, call and ask him, when you get done, and we will pay you." And I left. And that--I forgot all about it. But that Saturday, by that Saturday, he had started calling the office, looking for a Lance Square. Well, he was mispronouncing the name. And he thought it was me. He thought that that was my name. He didn't know that I was Dorothy Brown, the lady that he was circulating for. So just so happen I was in the office that evening when he came. And he came in with his sig--his petitions. And we had this policy that we'd look up on the voter rolls to make sure that you were registered to vote before we would accept your petitions. And they looked him up, and they found out that he was registered to vote, and when you, when he, when they said he was registered to vote, he jumped straight up in the air. "I told you, I told you, I told you I was registered to vote." And I said, "Okay, you're registered to vote." And then we wer0e sitting there, and they, and they notarized all his signatures." And, and they paid him. He said "I know what I'm gonna do, I'm gonna--", he was gonna go to this particular place, you know, single, single, you know, SRO [single room occupancy] and take a bath, and, and then go out and enjoy himself. I said, "Okay," and he said, and he said, and you're Mr.--he said, "You Ms. Lance Square?" I said, "No. I'm Dorothy Brown." He said, "You're Dorothy Brown?" I said, "Yes, I am." He said, "Oh, people would come up and they would ask me who you doing this for? Who is Dorothy Brown?" And I would say, "I don't know, but I'm getting paid." And they would sign my petition. I didn't have to say anything you and they would sign my petition. He said a lady came up in a limousine and, and she gave me $50.00 because she said, "You are doing something instead of just standing on the corner, begging for money. You are doing something for somebody. And she gave me $50.00 while I was circulating these petitions." And she said--and then when he turned the petition over, and he had his name signed on it, had his name signed actually at the bottom, kind of off to the side it was good he didn't sign in the place he was supposed--and it was in pencil so we could erase. I said, "Why is your name, why did you sign down here? I told you not to--not to put anything on it." He said, "Because the other homeless guys were coming up to me and try to steal my petitions because they knew I was getting $5.00." And I said, "What?" I said, "Find those guys and send them over to the office. We trying to get 25,000 signatures. They can circulate petitions too. And if they're registered voters, they can circulate too." And he said, "Oh, is that right? Oh, I'll let 'em know." 'Cause, so he was protecting his petitions. So it was just a hard-won--and so I had homeless people circulating petitions for me. We needed 25,000. We got 42,000 signatures. Story_ID: 4145 Speaker 1: When we showed up at the [Cook County, Illinois] Board of Elections that day, and we turned in 42,000 signatures, the media just went crazy. And they started, and they started asking and trying to say, well, who circulated these petitions for her? This is the first time this has been required. She got--she needed 25,000. She doesn't, she doesn't--she's not a member of any political organization that we know of. So who circulated these petitions for me? I was working at CTA [Chicago Transit Authority]. So they said, it must have been Frank Kruesi. Well, Frank Kruesi hadn't even, had never met me. He worked at the office. He hadn't been at CTA that long. He'd never met me because he saw, saw me later, he said, "They said I was circulating petitions, but you're Dorothy Brown. I've never met you before." And so, and then I reported to the Board, I reported it to Valerie Jarrett. And Valerie Jarrett was the Chairman of the Board [of Elections] by that time 'cause Clark Burrus had actually retired. So he didn't circulate my petitions. They said Mayor [Richard M.] Daley had circulated my petitions. So even during that race, I had a issue with some African Americans thinking that I had been put up to run against Miriam Santos for Mayor Daley. They didn't realize that this was a woman that had decided, and people had decided that I had the credentials and believe in myself, and the belief that I could be the City Treasurer of the City of Chicago. People would look at me and say, you want to be the city treasurer of what city? Do you know this is Chicago? This is a big city. And I said, yeah, well, I wasn't from here, so, you know, I, I just was always with the, with the thought that you can be whatever you want to be and you do whatever you want to do. Speaker 2: Well, you know why they that, that you were some kind of plant by--you know why they thought that? Speaker 1: Why would they think that, that I was a plant by the mayor? Speaker 2: Well, the history of the city is, is kind of like that, you know, I mean that's how-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, there have been a few races I think during, during the late '70s [1970s] that I thought--that people thought that, that people were actually just put up to run, but they weren't-- Speaker 2: There were a series of scandals in the '90s [1990s]-- Speaker 1: Oh, in the '90s? Okay. Speaker 2: --where certain aldermen, certain aldermen were targeted for investigation-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and they were, you know, deposed from office, Operation Silver Shovel-- Speaker 1: Oh, well, yeah. Speaker 2: And quite a few others. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: And there were investigations where certain aldermen that weren't in friendly relationship with the mayor were deposed because of the investigation. And then someone, he'd appoint someone to take their place. And with Santos being under investigation, it appeared as if, you know, you were someone who may have been, may have been the mayor's choice. Speaker 1: Well, the other thing too is that, the Mayor had appointed Santos during, in '89 when he took office, as city treasurer. And then there had been a change in the relationship between the Mayor and Santos. She, you know, I think there was some issues with the Pension Board, but she was on and that sort of thing. So there had been a change in the--a strain in the relationship. So a lot of people thought because the, because of the strain in that relationship, that the Mayor was putting somebody up to run against her. But he really did not put up anybody. If I had not gotten in that race, Santos would have been unopposed. But I had made a commitment to my organizing committee that I would stay in that race. And so we stayed in that race and thirty days before the election was what, when Ms. Santos was indicted, on a federal indictment. That was complete surprise to me and everyone else. I guess it was because of something that had occurred during the [Illinois] Attorney General's race in an attempt to raise money. So here it is thirty days before the election. She's under federal indictment, and I'm the only one in the race against her. And so the media started trying to look in to see who's running against Miriam Santos because really I hadn't gotten any press before that time, very little. Steve Neal wrote an article on me, which was fantastic because I had gone to visit him. When I went to visit Steve Neal, it was interesting because when he found out that I had actually turned in 42,000 signatures, he realized I was a, I was a serious candidate. And he came up with this article that, and said that I bought some class to the treasurer's race. He said, Brown brings class to the treasurer's race. Well, that was the most publicity that I had gotten. And I was, and, and Ms. Santos would not debate me. So I was not getting any name recognition, very little, but I was working the city, going to places, doing the grassroots things, had all those volunteers that had helped me get the petitions. So I had quite, quite a few people that were out there for me. But people were afraid to give me money. They were afraid to donate to me. So I, it was really--I think I might have raised--I don't think I raised $100,000 in that race. So when Ms. Santos got indicted, I made the decision to not say anything negative about her and not to say anything about her indictment. The media talked about that. I did not talk about her indictment at all and never did I do that. So on election--when election night rolled around, we almost split that vote in half and she was twelve-year incumbent. But the, the committeemen decided the day before the election, and I remember standing up at the James Thompson Center [Chicago, Illinois] and a reporter came up to me that Monday evening, and he said, "It's my understanding that the committeemen are going to support Miriam Santos on tomorrow" 'cause they were neutral in the race up until that point because of her federal indictment. I got the endorsement of the 'Chicago Sun-Times'. Miriam actually got the endorsement of the 'Chicago Tribune', but the Chicago Tribune' said some very positive things about me in that endorsement of Miriam Santos. Story_ID: 4146 Speaker 1: Now, the next day when Miriam [Santos] won that race [for City Treasurer of Chicago, Illinois], I'm the type of person--I really thought I was gonna win that race 'cause I just had that kind of faith. So I didn't have a concession speech prepared. (Laughter) And I never really conceded. And from what I understand the reporters said, they just had to cut away from my party because they said, well, I guess that's the best we're gonna get from Dorothy Brown because when I came down from the suite, not until I came down did I realize, you know, there were a lot of people crying. They were hurt. And I looked at them because I had faith, and one thing I, I realize that whatever God has for you is for you. And if he did not permit me to win that election, then it was not for me. And I looked at the audience and I, and, and the first thing that came out of my mouth for them was, "What God has for you is for you. And I will be back." And it was hard for me to say. They had told me upstairs, the thing they wanted me to say first was I will be back. And they had told me, "You have to say this. You have to give people encouragement." And, and, you know, I had to take heart and really dig deep down inside of me to be able to say that. That was a hard race for me. This was my first time being out here, and that was a big, that, that was a disappointment. But God gave me to say, to the people, "What God has for you is for you, and this must not be it for me tonight, but I will be back." And so we lost that race. And, of course, Ms. Santos actually wind up being convicted that April, two months later. And a lot of people wanted me to be appointed to the office of City Treasurer. And they went on campaigns to--which really helped me in the, in this race [for Clerk of the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois] because I got better name recognition from, from people trying to get me appointed as city treasurer than when I was running because there was a Dorothy Brown Day here and there was a Dorothy Brown Day there. Reverend [Jesse] Jackson had a Dorothy Brown Day at Operation PUSH and Reverend [Willie T.] Barrow had this campaign for everybody to, to e-mail, fax, call, do whatever you can, write a letter to the Mayor [Richard M. Daley] to appoint Dorothy Brown as City Treasurer of the City of Chicago. And I was all into it, and I really thought that that's what, you know, because, because I had said that, that I was waiting for God to tell me what to run for. And this is what he put me into, so I really thought that this was what I was supposed to be, especially after she went to jail. I was so disappointed when I was not appointed to that office. What that did tell a lot of people though that the mayor did not put me in that race against Miriam Santos. People were surprised. I looked at a, there was a, a program that--on cable that ran after the election that I actually got a chance to look at 'cause I didn't really look at programs during that time. And I was looking at this cable show, and these--there were some African American gentlemen sitting there by--just berating me about being put in this race against Miriam Santos and, which meant African Americans did not come out to vote. There was a very low turnout 'cause they--I guess if they weren't gonna vote for me, you know, African Americans in the race, they didn't want to vote. And some people actually voted for the mayoral race, but passed up on the treasurer's race because they really thought that, that I was put in there to undermine this, this young woman. I was called by a, a white couple the day after--when, when I did not get appointed, and they told me, they said, you know--the day after the election night, actually. They said, "We voted for you because you--we realized the night before--we had decided that we were not gonna vote in the city treasurer's race because Miriam Santos was under indictment, and we were not gonna vote for her. But we were not gonna vote for you either. But we voted for you because we realized the night before election that you had never said anything negative about Miriam Santos, and you had run a very professional and classy campaign. And whatever else you run for, we're gonna be there for you." And then when Mayor Daley appointed someone else to be City Treasurer of the City of Chicago, I never said anything negative about Mayor, about Mayor Daley. I said, "The mayor has the right, and he does and he did, had the right to appoint whoever he wants to appoint to City Treasurer of the City of Chicago. It's his office." People were saying, well, you were the only other person in the race. Well, I looked back at school, and I said, what happens when number one is not good enough? Do you take your ball and bat and go home? You don't do that, but you also don't talk negative about other people. So I never said anything negative about Mayor Daley. And people say to this day, 'cause you never said anything negative. And this is Chicago politics about Miriam Santos and you never said anything negative about Mayor Daley, we're gonna vote for you whenever you run for office. Story_ID: 4147 Speaker 1: So then someone did an article saying that I should run for Clerk of the [Circuit] Court [of Cook County, Illinois]. And I'm saying, "Okay. This is too soon. One thing I'm not doing is running for offices just for the sake of running for offices." People were contacting me saying, "You've got this great name recognition. You should run another office", and they were naming them, ticking them off. And I said, "Wait, hold it. You all don't understand. I am not running for offices for the sake of running for offices. I want to be an effective public servant. I ran for City Treasurer because I felt I was qualified for that office." So when they came to me about Clerk of the Court, I said, "Give me the research on this office, and I will study it for a week. And I'll get back to you because I am concerned whether my credentials qualify me for this office." And as I was reading it, I said, "Oh, my goodness." I said, okay, I'm an attorney and this is a court system. As an attorney, I understand the importance of the proper management of court records and how--and the importance for public safety and the civil liberties of individuals and how it's necessary to properly care for them. As a CPA [certified public accountant] and an auditor for over twenty years, I understand systems, both manual and computerized systems. And the Clerk of the Circuit Court has all kind of divisions and districts and departments that need to be operated effectively and efficiently. Then as a person with a master's degree in business administration and finance [MBA], I real--I found out that the clerk invests its, its own funds. The clerk's office invests its own funds. I said, "I can make sure that we properly invest the funds and return even more interest income to the cities of Cook County." I said, "This is probably a better office than being the City Treasurer of the City of Chicago." And so I made the decision to run for the Clerk of the Circuit Court. And it was a right decision because, you know, Miriam Santos got out of the jail the next year. And the person that was appointed as city treasurer had to give that office back to Miriam Santos. God was looking out for me. My mother--my mother [Dinkie Rabb] died in 1996, October 1996. My father [David Rabb] died six months later in March 1997. Those prayers were still working for me. If I had gone into that job, I would have been out of a job at that by Februrary of the following year, in the middle of this election 'cause this primary was March of the following year. But then, of course, I didn't slated for this position. I went before the Democratic Party for slate making, made a great presentation. People told me I had a great presentation. And it's difficult to win a countywide race, Cook County, larger than thirty-six states in the United States, one of the largest counties in the United States. It's difficult to win a countywide race. And then to be a minority, black and female as my sister told me earlier in my career. And, and, and African Americans are not the majority in, in Cook County. It's difficult to win. Story_ID: 4148 Speaker 1: So I made the decision to run for, for Clerk of the Circuit Court [of Cook County, Illinois]. And as I, I was saying earlier that, that this is a large county. It's not predominantly African American and to try to run for this office without the support of the Democrat Party is, is quite a feat. Of course, you know, I had a faith and just believed, but we went before the Democratic Party for slate making. And we did not get slated. I think I got, had four committeemen to vote for me at that particular slate making, Alderman Ed Smith, Congressman Danny Davis was the person that actually nominated me that day, Alderman Dorothy Tillman and Alderman Mike Chandler. There were four committeemen that day, but, of course, there are eighty Committeemen so I couldn't win with four votes. But they said I'm--had the best presentation. We, there were, there were four of us that presented that day, three previously elected officials presented that day. And you know, I was told, you had a great presentation, and that sort of thing, but I said, well, what happens when number one is not good enough? What do you do? So we all made the decision, those that were not slated, made the decision to run for office anyway. And we, we continued to--we were already circulating petitions, and we got the petitions done. And no one made--everyone made the decision not to challenge anyone in the petitions. And it was very professionally done. The, the individuals that I ran with, we're good friends now because we did that election very professionally. There was no negative, no real negative campaigning done in that race. We had Alderman Joe Moore, Commissioner Pat, Patricia Young and Alderman Patrick Levar in that race. But actually, we would actually let each other know about places that meetings were taking place in order to go and present. So it was a very professional race because just like I did when I was in law school, I would give people my outlines because I felt like it's between you and that bar exam. So you can have as many outlines as you want to. So in this race, it's between you and the voters when the time came. So I ran that race. I went everywhere. I went to my opponents' organizations and talked to their people. They invited candidates to come. Why not me too? I was a candidate. I went to an organization, all the Far North Side [Chicago, Illinois], north suburban organizations. I was able to go to the Winnetka [Illinois] Democratic organization and, and at that--at that particular slate making, I was actually able to block an endorsement because you had to get 65 percent and 45 percent of those people--60 percent and 45 percent of those people believed in my presentation. I had ten position papers talking about what I was gonna do for this office. They believed in my, in me through that presentation, and they would not change their votes. They stayed for hours. They took several votes, dropped off the people. It wind up with--one person with 55 percent and me with 45 percent. They asked for the final time would anybody change their vote? And they said, no. We went, we knew after we blocked that endorsement and we were that close, that we had a very good chance. We got endorsements from the 'Chicago Sun-Times', endorsement from Chicago Tribune, endorsement from the 'Pioneer Press', endorsement from the 'Daily Herald'. I got every newspaper endorsement because I was the one that was talking about the issues and what we were gonna do in this office. This was perfect for me because being an auditor and a CPA [certified public accountant] for over twenty years, I understood the systems. And so I knew how to make recommendations, even in my position papers, as to what we would do. And we had great researchers during that campaign too. My campaign manager during that time was Patrick Bottiman (ph.), who is a committeeman of Woodland Township, and Mr. Squire Lance who was my, who was my campaign chair then and, and, and continues to work very hard with me. The two of them worked diligently in that primary race. And we won. We got--and people were saying, okay, there were three previously-elected officials. They're elected, but also there are three Caucasians and she's the only African American. So they'll split the white vote. What happened? I won 51 percent of the vote in the City of Chicago and I won twenty-one out of thirty suburban townships. That's why I told you earlier that I'm the epitome of Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s dream because when I won that election in 2000, that primary election in 2000, I was judged by the content of my character and not by the color of my skin. Over--and when I ran in the general election, I ran against a Caucasian woman in the general election, over a million people voted for me in that election. It's mind boggling to think that a million people could walk into a voting booth and select Dorothy Brown, this little girl from Louisiana, the Holy Roller family, poor uneducated parents, picking cotton in the cotton fields, chopping cotton in the cotton fields, working in the factories, not being evaluated properly all the time, working hard. Over a million people voted for me. When I was going to school to get my master's, to become a CPA, to become an attorney, I used to say to myself when I was out there in the cold of Chicago, I would say, "Dorothy, why are you doing this? Why aren't you home with everyone else in the warm? " But there was something down in me that would not let me do it. There was no way I could not do it. I was being prepared for this day. And when I won that election, it was history in the City of Chicago. It was one of the first grassroots campaigns, truly grassroots campaigns in the City of Chicago since Harold Washington's campaign, truly grassroots. Mothers gave me dollars, five dollars, people donated to my campaign who had never donated to campaigns before. And that's why I'm committed to making sure that I make all of the citizens of--of Cook County proud of me in the work that I do in this office. Story_ID: 4149 Speaker 1: What would you consider as your legacy as--up to this point I guess, as Clerk of the Circuit Court of Cook County [Illinois]? Speaker 2: My legacy as Clerk of the Circuit Court is bringing professionalism. My--my philosophy is professionalism over politics, making sure that we have people in positions. And I don't mind, I let--people recommend to me. I don't mind anyone making a recommendation of someone to me, but just make sure that they're qualified to do the job. Bringing professionalism into the office, 21st century technology. I have changed out this office and brought it into the 21st century. We had green screen dumb terminals here. And I've changed over 85 percent of them to Thin Clients or PCs. And also customer service. I believe that people should be treated with courtesy and respect. People should not be treated like they stole something just because they come to the court system. This is a very intimidating system and we violate a person's Constitutional right, 14th Amendment of the law, equal protection under the law. And we intimidate them into not even filing the case. Story_ID: 4150 Speaker 1: This bureaucratic heresy (laughter) to talk like that (laughter), maybe I'm trying to be too funny, but it sounded like bureaucratic heresy in Chicago [Illinois] to say that everybody is important and count when the come in the Clerk of, of any form of government, you know. Speaker 2: Oh, no, everybody's important. That--I am shifting the paradigm of thinking of how government employees treat customers. And just to call them customers is a new thought process. And that's what I'm doing every day. I received a letter from an attorney only six months after I took office. And he told me, I have been practicing in the court system for over forty-five years. And I have never been treated with the kind of professionalism and respect that I've been treated since you took office [of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois]. And then he sent me a letter just recently this year, and he said, it's been two and a half years, and he said, nothing's changed. It's only gotten better. Your office is a role model of how governmental offices should be run. The bygone attitudes of rudeness, he said, it was very refreshing. And I'm not saying that we don't still have some rude people. Maybe this gentleman just hasn't run into them yet. But he practices, he's, he's from Glenview, Illinois, but he came to see me recently. And he told me, "I've practiced all over this system, and people have changed." The clerks treat you better. They answer your questions. They don't treat you with the kind of disrespect that they--that he had experienced before. And I hear that all over. I hear that from people all the time. I just believe--see I was treated that way. I, I worked, you know, as an attorney, I, I finalized my own divorce, worked with an attorney to finalize my divorce. I finalized, made some changes to my child support also that, that portion of it. But in coming to the court, related to my child support for my daughter [Detris Brown], when she was emancipated at eighteen, I handled my own case because I was an attorney by then. But coming and getting those papers, you walk in, you see the sign. The sign says one thing. You walk under that sign--and this is why I changed out all the signs so that the signs actually say the services being performed under there. You, you go up to that particular sign because that's what the sign says, and they look at you like you're crazy because you came up to the (laughter)--and I said I was gonna change that and I have. And then you go and people treat you as if they don't want to serve you. You feel very intimidated. You feel like you don't deserve to see your case file. So I knew that I did not want people to feel that way. And so I have been working. I have championed this. My legacy is going to be 21st century technology, but improved customer service is gonna be right up there. Employment development training is also going to be there. Treating employees with courtesy and respect. I told my employees, we must first treat one another with courtesy and respect, and then we must treat the customer with courtesy and respect. And I told them I will train you. If you want your employees to treat people better, if you want your employees to give good quality service, then you must train them. So I have--I'm partnering with the City Colleges of Chicago, Chancellor Wayne Watson. We have time and stress management, we're teaching our employees. Customer service, leadership training, respect in the workplace, which is diversity training. Also, they're gonna teach my frontline employees up to six foreign languages because I believe that they'll, they'll be able to at least make a person feel comfortable until an interpreter can get to the counter. We have an Ethnic Advisory Committee for the Hispanic community, for the Irish community, Italian American community. We have, we're gonna put together an African advisory committee, senior advisory committee. We'll have a women's advisory committee. All these different advisory committees to help us treat and see--and hear the issues from the different organizations and help us treat the customer better. And then operation efficiency. My, my background as a CPA [certified public accountant] and a, and, and MBA [master's of business administration] and an attorney help me to make sure that the system operates better. And so we have changed that. I've made a lot of changes from the operation efficiency standpoint. And then financial accountability. This is a day of budgetary constraints. And so we have to make sure that we properly account for the funds. So I have hired professionals. I have a gentleman that's my chief financial officer, Mr. John Morales--diversity is important to me. I have diversified this office from the top to the bottom. Mr. John Morales is my chief financial officer, a Hispanic gentleman. Mr. Craig Wimberley, my chief information officer, is an African American gentleman. My--he's also my acting executive clerk right now. Mr. Squire Lance, who worked with me is my executive clerk for public policy and human resources, but he's on leave right now. Ms. Bernadette Freeman is my executive clerk, she's an African American female. And then we have Mr. Michael Moore who is a Caucasian gentleman as the associate clerk for family bureau. Mr. Dennis McNamara, Associate, a Caucasian gentleman, who is the associate clerk for criminal bureau. Ms. Connie Schumacher is a Caucasian woman. I have a very diverse staff and I think it, it mirrors the accounting. And that's what I promised when I took this office. And those are the kind of things that are gonna be the legacy for me in this office--keeping my promises, saying that I'm gonna do something and doing it. Story_ID: 4151 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: For the black community, my hope is that we will work together even more, that we will make sure that we continue to be at the table. I see us slipping away sometimes from the table. And we need to make sure that we continue to be at the table. And I also hope that when we get in positions, that we don't forget our brothers and sisters. Out of that very diverse staff, and that includes African Americans in very high-level positions as well. I respect--I have respect for women in positions. Sometimes they say women can't work for women. African American women can't work for women. I have African American women on my staff. But my hope is that, when we get in position, we won't forget to reach back and help someone else along the way. If you don't help your own, no one else will help you. So that's my hope, that we will stay at the table and we make sure that we pull other--bring other people to the table, that we don't get there and say, well, I made it. And I don't want to worry about anyone else. And, and so that's a real concern of mine, that we start to--even those who are at the table, they're starting to slip away. And, and I want--another concern of mine is our young people, in the African American community, keeping up the struggle with dignity and discipline, making sure that they continue to achieve. In my day, our parents wanted us to be more than them. They didn't have the education. So they worked, trying to make sure that we got the education. Now, our children--because we have the education, we give it--a lot of us have given our children so many things until they don't really have anything to motivate them to get the education because they can have it without the education. I want us to find a way to make sure that we continue to motivate our children so they--I want them to look at our history, see the struggles of our forefathers. They don't understand 'Plessy v. Ferguson', separate, but equal doctrine back then. And we knew that it was separate, but unequal. They don't understand 'Brown v. Board of Education' and what we had to do to, to, to make sure that we had equal education for, for all. So I want our young people, I'm very concerned about our young people not grabbing hold to their link in the chain. I always say, we're all links in the chain. Sometimes people start to despair and say, I can't do it all and, and I'm losing hope. Realize that you are just a link in the chain of success, regardless of your race, creed or color. But you have to make sure that your time on this earth, that your link--Sojourner Truth did it, Frederick Douglass did it, Harriet Tubman did it, Harold Washington did it, Thurgood Marshall did it, [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] did it, made sure that their links in the chain of success for the African American community and even other communities, because I was talking to someone. I went to the Harold Washington display, and they said, until Harold Washington slated Hispanics and gave Hispanics major appointments in his administration, they had been ignored in this city. So we have other races as well. But you are a link in the chain of success for this society and you have to make sure that your link is strong, that you do everything that you can to make sure that you're living your life in a way that when you leave this world, you would have left something for someone else to hold onto. Story_ID: 4152 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a woman that made a difference, as a woman that was fair, as a woman that was a great leader. I call myself--my leadership style is firm, but fair. A woman that loved people, a woman that loved God, that's how I'd like to be remembered. Speaker 1: And the future? I know this isn't the last office you'll probably seek, but you're still waiting to find out what else is in store? Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. I'm running for reelection this year, this--next year in 2004, March 16, 2004. I will re--up for reelection as Clerk of the Circuit Court of Cook County [Illinois]. I have started a lot of work, but there's still a lot of things to do. And I focus on one thing at a time so I'm not about the business of, of just using an office as a stepping stone. Someone told me the other day that they appreciate the fact that I actually won this election and began to do the work. I didn't just say, "Look me up in four years when it's time to get reelected." I actually started doing the work. So I will focus on this, and when God gives me what he wants me to do next, then I will focus on that because then I know that it will be the right thing to do. I'm going to focus on my daughter, Detris Demaris Brown because all those years that--and we have a great relationship now. I'm, I talk to her probably almost every day and, and we--either on the computer, we're instant messaging each other or on the telephone. And I'm supporting her. And she graduated from Howard University in Washington, D.C. with her undergrad in business information systems. And I helped her, and we're trying to help her get into Drake University Law School [Des Moines, Iowa]. But I want to make sure that I'm supporting her in everything that she, she wants to do because she, she really gave up a lot. She sacrificed a lot for her mom to be where she is today. And I appreciate my, my ex-husband. His name is Frankie Brown, Frankie C. Brown, and he's living in Arkansas now. I appreciate the things that he did and the time that I, that, that we spent together. We were married for eighteen years. We were not together those entire eighteen years, but we were married for eighteen years. So I appreciate the time--and he didn't have to let me go to work for Odell Hicks and work and he, and he permit to take that kind of risk. He did not have to let me stay home with my daughter for that year and get my maste'rs in business administration, and he work and support the family. He didn't have to do those things. So even though we are not together now, I appreciate the things that he did as well. And so this is tremendous for me. You know, I want to mention my, my, my seven siblings. I have Laura [Rabb] Morgan here in the City of Chicago and, and she recently retired. She was a administrator for community colleges. I have Ms. Bobbie Rabb who is a Librarian in the State of--in Tennessee, in Memphis, Tennessee, City of Memphis, State of Tennessee. My brother who is an attorney, and Laura has a doctor's, Dr. Laura Rabb Morgan. Bobbie has a master's in Library Science. My brother is an attorney. He's Mr. David Rabb, Jr. He's in Shreveport, Louisiana. He's an attorney there. My sister--he also has a Masters. My sister, Ms. Carrie Rabb is a factory worker in Minden, Louisiana. So we run the gamut. And Carrie is a, a sweet and dear woman. She took care of both my mother [Dinkie Rabb] and my father [David Rabb] in Minden while they were in their last days. And we appreciate the things that she did. My sister, Ms. Juanita Rabb Johnson, who is a postal worker, a supervisor for the post office in Shreveport, Louisiana. My sister, Ms. Linda Rabb Isaac, who is a social worker in Shreveport. Now, Juanita and Linda both have master's degrees. And Carrie is the sister that actually became--got up to her junior year in college. So she achieved up to a junior in college. And then finally, my sister Vicki Rabb, who is in Minden, and she is a postal, a mail carrier in Minden, Louisiana, and she has a bachelor's degree. So my sisters and brothers are great support for me every day, and I really appreciate them. And we're carrying on, in spite of the fact that our parents are deceased and, and I want to make sure that I'm making, making my parents proud of me because, you know, I know that I am the epitome of the hopes and dreams that they had for us when they sacrificed their lives. I say they sacrificed their lives because their bodies were worn. They were not old when they died. My mother was sixty-eight. My father was seventy-four. Story_ID: 671710 Speaker 1: --Me with my, my then husband, Frankie Brown and my daughter. This is the year she was born, Detris Brown. That was in 1981. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And Frankie is Y or I-E? Speaker 1: Frankie, I-E. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: C. Brown. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and Detris--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Detris, D-E-T-R-I-S, D. Brown. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great. And did I get a year from you on this? Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty one [1981]--1980, the year she was born, 1980. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next photo. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is in 1980 when I visited Atlanta [Georgia] with my church, in September 1980. This is me and my daughter at a church in Atlanta. My daughter, Detris. Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next, please. Speaker 2: (Laughter) This my, me with my ex-husband, now, ex-husband, Frankie C. Brown and my daughter Detris in 1984. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, very good. Speaker 2: (Laughter) This is my daughter, Detris, at her one year old birthday. That would be June 1981. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, okay, next photo. Thanks. Speaker 1: This is when I was president of the National Association of Black Accountants. And this is Max Robinson, who was a news anchor in Chicago [Illinois], now deceased; myself; my ex-husband, Frankie Brown; my vice president, Bonnie Carr [Bonnie J. Carr]; and her husband, Clarence Carr. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and that was left to right, right to left--(simultaneous)--. Speaker 1: Left to right would be Clarence Carr, Bonnie Carr, Max Robinson, Dorothy Brown and Frankie C. Brown. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and what year approximately? Speaker 1: That would be in 1985. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is in 1974, the year that I got married, spending summer in Minneapolis, Minnesota, visiting my sister in Chicago for the 4th of July. That is my brother-in-law, James Morgan [ph.], my sister, Laur- my oldest sister, Laura Morgan [Laura Rabb Morgan] and myself and then Frankie, my ex-husband, Frankie Brown. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Perfect. Next. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: This at my daughter Detris' third birthday party, the third year, so it would be about 1983. And these are children that I'm reading the book to at her birthday party. And Detris has the pink bow in her head. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Well, thank you, that's a good way to identify her. Okay, next. Speaker 2: (Laughter) This is my daughter, Detris, with her legs stretched out and my niece, Sharon Rabb [ph.], and this is in Shreveport, Louisiana. My daughter--at my brother's [David Rabb, Jr.] house. My daughter was spending the summer. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): This would be like '87? Speaker 2: That would be, (makes sound) the year would be--can you read that driver's license (laughter)? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You would say that (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You were trying to read it. You would read it. Let me see, I may be able to read that license. I can't read it. Put that over there. But she looks like she was what, about six or seven so that would be--that's probably about eighty- eighty- let's say '86. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And this my daughter, me and my daughter, Detris, at about 1987 at the birth--Father's Day birthday celebration for her uncle James--no, first Father's Day celebration for her uncle James. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is a picture on the grounds of my church which is in the country in Athens--Athens, Louisiana. This is a picture--I'm in the middle with the white stripe down the middle of the dress. These were the miniskirt days (laughter). These are--three of them are my sisters--we have, and one deacon from the church. Deacon; then my sister, Linda--my sister, Linda Rabb Issac; my sister, Vickii Rabb; my cousin, Silvatine Longhorn [ph.]; myself; my cousin, Geraldine Longhorn [ph.]; and my sister, Juanita Rabb. And the deacon is Deacon James Morris [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay, very good. Next. Speaker 2: I didn't say the year on that one. That's okay. Speaker 1: Oh, do you want to add the year for the previous--just say for the previous photo and the date--(simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: I can, that's okay. For the previous photo, the date was about 1972. Speaker 1: Okay, and then this photo? Speaker 2: This photo is 1974. This is when I came to Chicago. That's my brother-in-law, James-- Speaker 1: Fourth of July celebration--(simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: --Sr. It's the fourth of July, yes. My sister, my ex-husband and myself. Speaker 1: Okay, got it. Next. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 1: For my church, King of Glory Tabernacle church [King of Glory Tabernacle Church of God in Christ, Chicago, Illinois], and this is a shot of the, me as the chairperson, and then this, in the picture is Minister Randall Christa- DeChristopher Randall, who was the assistant chairperson. Speaker 2: Is that R-A-N-D-A-L-L? Speaker 1: DeChristopher? R-A-N-D-A-L-L, yeah, DeChristopher, D-E--D-E capital C-H-R-I-S-P-H-E-R [sic.]. Oh, did I miss a O, (pronunciation) DeChristopher, whatever. Speaker 2: Okay, and you did say 1987? Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-seven [1987], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, this would be a family reunion in Minden, Louisiana on my [maternal] grandparents' [Rosie Hampton and J.D. Hampton] property. And this would be 1984 thereabouts. And this would be my sister, Carrie; my sister-in-law -- Speaker 2: You're talking left to right? Speaker 1: Yes. My sister, Carrie Rabb; my sister-in-law, Esther Rabb [ph.]; my oldest sister, Laura Rabb Morgan; my sister, Carrie Rabb Allen--sorry about that. Myself; then there would be sister, Juanita Rabb Johnson; my sister, Bobbie Rabb; and my baby sister, Vickii Rabb. Story_ID: 671711 Speaker 1: This is a picture at the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles in 2000 [2000 Democratic National Convention, Los Angeles, California]. And this is myself, along with the recorder of deeds, Eugene Moore. This is, this is a shot in the, on the, the floor of the convention, the convention floor. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, next. Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: This is at my inaugural ball for the clerk of the circuit court [Circuit Court of Cook County]. This would have been in December of 2000. On this picture is my sis- older sister, Laura Morgan [Laura Rabb Morgan]; and then my campaign committee, Ms. Joanne Alter [Joanne H. Alter]; then we have attorney Geraldine Simmons; Ms. Mildred Morrow Smith [Mildred M. Smith]; my campaign chairperson, Mrs. Flora Lance [ph.]; myself; another committee member, Dr. Allen Smith [ph.]; and then my PR [public relations] firm representative, Ms. Kitty Kurth; and then Mr. Kevin Lampe. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great. Next. Speaker 1: (Laughter) This was in 2003 at an event held by the African community for me, and this is myself in the middle in the orange and yellow, formal African garb, along with several women from the African community. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Go ahead. Speaker 1: This is in 2003. My daughter, Detris [Detris Brown], graduated from Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. And this is actually taken in her apartment. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Go ahead. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, this is, I chaired the annual scholarship affair for the Southern University alumni association in--Chicago [Illinois] chapter. And this would be in 1995. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Great. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, this would be my daughter in her freshman year of high school, and myself; and that would be about 1994. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, very good. (Unclear) clothespins on there. Speaker 2: This is my official portrait when I started at CTA in 1991 as a general auditor for the Chicago Transit Authority. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This would be my official portrait for my race for city treasurer of the City of Chicago in 1999. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: (Laughter) This would--this is me talking to Sister Pam Thomas who, who was the math competition coordinator for the first jurisdiction, Church of God in Christ [Church of God in Christ, Inc.], Scholastic Motivation Ministries, for which I was the chairperson. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, now, let's see here, we're doing to top, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is, in the center is my pastor, with the microphone, Elder Jeffrey Hodges, who is praying for me, and a group of women who had come out to support me at a breakfast for the kickoff of my city treasurer's campaign. (Unclear) Um-hm. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next one. Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: This is my official portrait for the clerk of the circuit court, Cook County [Illinois]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is that like you, your yearbook? Do they like herd everybody down to the basement and you get a photo? Or does the guy come in your office or -- Speaker 2: How do we do that? I went to his studio. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, okay, just curious. Okay, next. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's my designer. I, I made that dress. You can put that in there, the suit I got on. I know my daughter wasn't born 'cause I didn't make anything after she was born (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Didn't have time. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother's family. We have my grandparents in the middle, Mr. J.D. Hampton and Ms. Rosie Hampton and seating, seated in the middle--seated with them, you have my uncle Sam Hampton [Samuel Hampton]; and to their right is Uncle Joseph [Joseph Hampton]. Standing, we have Uncle J.D. [J.D. Hampton], who actually ran for mayor of Minden [Louisiana]. We have Aunt--the late Aunt Zak, Ellen- Eleanor Lewis, Elena Lewis [ph.]. Then my uncle Jimmye Hampton; my aunt Nat, Natherine Hampton [Natherine Hampton Sims]. My uncle Henry Hampton [John Henry Hampton]. That's my mother [Dinkie Hampton Rabb] in the back; and then my aunt Elnora Hampton [ph.]. Story_ID: 671712 Speaker 1: --Shot of my family. As you see me and my seven siblings and myself. We have Vickii Rabb; Carrie Rabb Allen; Linda Rabb Issac; Laura Rabb Morgan; brother, my only brother, David Rabb [David Rabb, Jr.]; my sister, Bobbie Rabb; my sister, Juanita Rabb Johnson; and myself. Seated are my parents, Dinkie Rabb [Dinkie Hampton Rabb] and Da- David Rabb [David Rabb, Sr.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Just repeat the date for me. I think I was in pre-roll. I'm sorry about that. Speaker 1: This would be about 1980-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Eight [1988], did you say? Speaker 1: Eight [1988] (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, thanks. Speaker 1: My sister, Laura's wedding in 1979, and we have my brother-in-laws and my ex-husband and Issac. My brother-in-law (laughter) Issac, I forgot his first. My ex-husband, Frankie--wait a minute, no, that's my brother. I'm sorry, I can't see that. That's my brother, David Rabb; my ex-husband, Frankie Rabb [sic. Frankie Brown]; my brother-in-law, Murphy Issac [ph.]; my dad, David Rabb; my brother-in-law who's getting married, James Morgan [ph.]; my sister, Laura, the bride; my mother, Dinkie Rabb; my sister, Linda Rabb; my sister, Bobbie Rabb; my sister, Juanita; my sister, Vickii; myself; and Carrie Rabb. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You know, I should probably ask you, since they may be looking at this tape individually--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Individually, I'd better say their whole names--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --Rabb is R-A-B-B. Speaker 1: R-A-B-B. Should I give their-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I think the other tape had unusual spelling--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I gave their whole names on the other one--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --but I think we'll be-- Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I gave them whole married names on the other one, but that's okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. All right. We're getting there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: The year I graduated from Webster High School [Minden, Louisiana]. This is my official graduation picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Good. Speaker 2: I was in the Miss Webster court. I was a first runner up. You know, if you shoot it wide you'll see Miss Webster [Miss Webster High], but you don't have to--that is myself, Miss Webster; Ruby Jones; and the second runner up, Ms. Cassandra Abrahams [ph.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Ruby Webb Jones [ph.]. Speaker 1: Part of the Negro History Club. And that's me in the--to the far right, standing on the second row, with the short sleeves and then these are the, many of the scholars of my graduating class of Webster High School. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, this is me with my fellow senior basketball team members. I'm number ten. Then we have Sharon Walker [ph.] standing next to me; Brenda Lewis [ph.]; and Shirley; I can't remember the young lady kneeling on the left. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Aren't you supposed to have five on a team--(simultaneous)? Speaker 1: Oh let me look up her. No, these are the senior graduating members from the team--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, the seniors, I see. Okay. Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: Larry--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go left to right real quickly. Speaker 1: Left to right: Shirley Smith [ph.], Sharon Walker, myself and Brenda Lewis. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good, all right, what else do we have? Speaker 1: This is on the family farm at a family reunion, my father and his siblings, his living siblings. And that's looks like--I don't know who that guy is, but, and a friend, family friend. My aunt Velma Longhorn [ph.], who is still living; my father; and my--in the forefront is my uncle Colonial Rabb [ph.]; behind him, who's deceased is Uncle Cedric Rabb [ph.]. And we have Uncle Nathaniel Rabb [ph.] and a family friend. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, no credit to the car, huh? Speaker 1: Oh, the car, yeah. What car was that? Speaker 2: Cadillac. Speaker 1: Oh, what year was that? It looks like it's -- Speaker 2: A '70 [1970]-- Speaker 1: What was that on the, on the, nineteen what on the--1986. Does that say '86? Speaker 2: No, but this is--oh, yeah, that's eighty- Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986]--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986], right. Speaker 1: Oh, but I don't know what kind of car that is. Speaker 2: That's a '79 Cadillac. Speaker 1: Is it really? Speaker 2: Fleetwood [Cadillac Fleetwood]. Speaker 1: Can you tell that? Speaker 2: Yes, I can. Story_ID: 671713 Speaker 1: This is me with the Queen's Court, the 19--I'm sorry, the 2002 St. Patrick's Day Queen's Court. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is a St. Patrick's Day also. Here Jim Houlihan, assessor, Cook County [Illinois] assessor, James Houlihan, kneeling; we have state's attorney, Dick Devine [Richard A. Devine]; city treasurer of the City of Chicago [Illinois], Judy Rice [HistoryMaker Judith C. Rice]; myself; and Eugene Moore, recorder of deeds. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 1: That's all the countywide elected officials. (Unclear). We have President John Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.] of Cook County Board [Cook County Board of Commissioners]; attorn- state attorney general of Illinois, Lisa Madigan; and myself. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Well, this is on the House [Illinois House of Representatives] floor. And we had behind us Alderman Preckwinkle [HistoryMaker Toni Preckwinkle] and Cook County Commissioner Deborah Sims, President Stroger, a friend and myself and Eugene Moore. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, this is at the signing, when the governor [Rod Blagojevich] signed the new expungement slash sealing law, and you have the governor seated and many--and Emil Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.]; [HistoryMaker] Monique Davis; Kimberly Light- state senator [HistoryMaker] Kimberly Lightford; state senator Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]; state representative Lovana Jones; and myself. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, good. Speaker 1: This is at the 2002 PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois], Rainbow PUSH Women's Luncheon. You have myself, Jesse Jackson, Jr. [sic.]--Jesse Jackson, Sr. [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], Pastor JoAnn Long, former President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], and the owner of Captain Hard Times [Captain's Hard Times Dining, Chicago, Illinois], Ms. Josephine Wade. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next photo. Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is a, at Chicago Defender before the Bud Billiken Day Parade [Bud Billiken Parade and Picnic]. Of course, this is David Millner? Speaker 2: Millner. Speaker 1: Millner and myself with, who is this, Mickey [Mickey Mouse] and Minnie Mouse. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Did we get a year on that one? Speaker 1: For the--that's 2003. Bud Bill- August 2003. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. What else have we got here? Speaker 1: This is-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That might be okay. Speaker 1: --yeah that's right, okay. The two thousand and- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah that one's okay. Speaker 1: --two [2002] celebration of the Asian Pacific American Heritage Month celebration. Two thousand and two [2002]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a celebration of the Polish American Casimir Pulaski Day. And that's me with some Polish artifacts and the staff. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And the year? Speaker 1: This would be 2002. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next photo. Speaker 1: This is when we honored Ms. Mary Ann Duvain [ph.], who lost her son to a, DUI, reckless, DUI driver who committed reckless homicide. And in celebration of, we have Ms. Mary Duvain holding the Heaven Now license plate, myself in the blue, secretary of state, [HistoryMaker] Jesse White, who presented her that license plate and then several family friends. And then also the other mother holding a plaque who also lost her child in the same car accident. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The year? Speaker 1: That would be 2001. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is a great picture. This is a celebration of the office's Take Your Sons--Take Your Daughters and Sons Day [Take Our Daughters and Sons to Work Day], April 2003. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Wow, good turnout. And that's you in the center, right? Speaker 1: (Unclear). That's me in the back--in the center, yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Japanese delegation in Japan. Me and--with myself in the middle. (Unclear). Okay. When we hosted the Japanese delegation to talk about the court system. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, good. Speaker 1: Oh, those--the former picture with the Japanese. Those are various members of the Japanese, Japan court system. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is 2003, Polish Constidution- Constitution Day Parade. Myself with some ladies dressed in Polish garb. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. And what about this one? Speaker 1: This is my Italian American advisory group picture. Right next to me is State Senator Lou, Louis Viverito. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You'll have to spell that one for us? Speaker 1: (Laughter) B-I-V- uh-oh, we're gonna have to look that up. Viva, Vedo. V-I-V-I-R-E-T-O [sic.], I believe. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Now, he's a state senator--(simultaneous)? Speaker 1: State senator, yes. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is he currently servicing? Speaker 1: Currently serving, you can look that up, yes. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, all right. Speaker 1: This is, would be the 2001 Cancer- American Cancer Society Relay for Life team from our office. That'd be me in the middle and staff members from the clerk of the circuit court [Circuit Court of Cook County]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This would be a celebration of the--okay, Latino Sabatas [ph.]--Sabade [ph.], Latino in September of 2003, a Latin American celebration...