 Story_ID: 323446 Speaker 1: Today our guest is [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne. [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock is doing the interview. The videographer is Matthew Hickey, and observing is Carolyn Scott and Ron Brewington [HistoryMaker Ronald H. Brewington]. Mr. Browne, can we begin by my asking you for your full name and if you could spell that for us, please? Speaker 2: Roscoe Lee Browne, R-O-S-C-O-E, L-E-E, B-R-O-W-N-E. Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we today for this interview? What city? Speaker 2: Oh, we're in the office of Diane Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson], and we're in Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date? This is the hard one? Speaker 2: I wish knew, the 5th? Speaker 1: The 5th. Speaker 2: Today is October 5, 2005. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 323447 Speaker 1: And now I'm going to ask five very simple questions. They only require a small, simple answer. But they tell us that it will relax you and more importantly relax me. So, I'll begin by asking you what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, dear God, I have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay, well-- Speaker 2: There are dishes my mother [Lovie Usher Browne] made that were extraordinary. I think out of her dishes it would be chicken pot pie and her extraordinary corn pudding. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: But, who (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How about your, oh-- Speaker 2: --who knows what my favorite dish is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I'm cooking, what my friends love best that I cook are crabmeat imperial, which was created by a slave back in Baltimore [Maryland], and poulet au vin champagne, which is a marvelous chicken dish. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Let me ask you about your favorite color. Speaker 2: Emerald green, I think. Speaker 1: All right. The--your favorite time of year or season? Speaker 2: That's difficult. I do love all four seasons. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I suppose since I was born in the spring of the year, my favorite season may be spring. Speaker 1: Spring, okay. Your favorite vacation spot? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh dear. I've not taken a vacation for quite a while, but I go off every now and then in more ways than three. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I love Italy, I love Barcelona [Spain]. If I can be nowhere else, then I'll be in New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: All right, and finally, your favorite phrase or your favorite saying? Speaker 2: No such animal-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I have no idea-- Speaker 1: Maybe-- Speaker 2: --carpe diem. Speaker 1: Okay, then I don't know whether these questions relaxed you or (laughter)-- Speaker 2: They did nothing, but it's fine. I mean you're so pleasant that I'm relaxed with your presence. Speaker 1: Thank you very, very much. Story_ID: 323448 Speaker 1: Let's begin. We have your name, and let's go to your date of birth and your place of birth. Speaker 2: I'm born May 2nd, 1922. And I'm born in Woodbury, New Jersey, at 83 Carpenter Street. Speaker 1: All right, okay (laughter). Speaker 2: For example, there are some friends of mine from (unclear)--I lived at International House [New York, New York] who, at some point, we had come down to Woodbury to see my oldest niece's graduation and because Sylvia [Sylvia Browne] was going to sing. She's my oldest brother's daughter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my friend from Turkey was driving. It was his car. And there as a young lady from Korea, a fellow from France, and a young lady from England. And so I said to my brothers and sister when we got there, "I'll take mom [Lovie Usher Browne]," so. My mother is a cadre going back to the school, and Mary Lee [ph.], the one from Korea, said, "Mrs. Browne, that Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] bores us with about why he hates coffee, is it true?" My mother said, "What is the story?" So Mary Lee proceeded to tell the story and all of the variations that I would give. And part of the story was that my mother was about to have my little brother, who is three years younger than I, and she went to the hospital. And Mrs. Ross [ph.] from across the street came to take care of me. I was the baby. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Unclear) four others, sister, my sister and three other brothers. Any rate, the story went on and on and on and on, and so when it's done, my mother said, "Well, it's almost all true." And I looked and said, "Mom, which part isn't true?" She said, "I never went to the hospital to have any of my children. I went upstairs." Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So, indeed, I was born at 83 Carpenter Street (laughter)-- Speaker 1: And you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) upstairs. Speaker 1: --and you still remember it. Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: Let--and we're going to explore more of your siblings later, but let's go ahead and get them down on the record right now, the oldest-- Speaker 2: The oldest is Sylvanus, Jr. Speaker 1: Could you spell that for us, please? Speaker 2: S-Y-L-V, as in Victor, A-N-U-S, Sylvanus Browne, Jr. The next is Arthur William Edward Browne [Arthur "Ted" Browne]. Speaker 1: Arthur William-- Speaker 2: William Edward Browne, famous in the sports world as Ted Browne. And he was only Ted Browne. No one knew that his whole--that his first name was Arthur, not in college, not in high school, unless they happened to see it on some formal sheet. They said, "Hey, Ted, it said your name here is Arthur." And then there's Douglas [Moses Douglas Browne]. Speaker 1: Douglas, okay. Speaker 2: And my youn- and my sister is Juanita [Juanita Browne Neal]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then my younger brother is Hugh Victor [Hugh Victor Browne II], named after my uncle, one of my father's [Sylvanus Browne] brothers. Speaker 1: Okay, the--now that's, that's five, and I, I heard you say-- Speaker 2: We're, we're six-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --including me. Speaker 1: Oh, six, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Good enough, good enough. Story_ID: 323449 Speaker 1: We're gonna go back and see how far back we can go on your mother's side in your family. I'm not sure how far you can take us back. And then we'll try the same thing on your father's [Sylvanus Browne] side. Let's begin that process by getting your mother's full name. Speaker 2: Lovie, L-O-V-I-E, Lee Usher, U-S-H-E-R, Browne. Speaker 1: Okay. And her date of birth? Speaker 2: My mother was born June 25, 1884. Speaker 1: Okay, and her place of birth? Speaker 2: San Antonio, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. Now comes the hard part. How far back do you have knowledge of your mother's family--grandparents, grandparents, great-grandparents? Speaker 2: Well, I know something of the Indian [Native American], and I know something of the Irishman, who was named Usher. Speaker 1: Okay, the Indian was great (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Indian was my mother's, my mother's mother's father I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother's mother's--no, I'm not sure. We've been delving lately. And if you ask me this next week when my friend who's been, for reasons that are unclear to me, he said, "I want to find out all about you." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I said, "Go find out about yourself." And he did come upon the Irishman about whom-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I knew. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Irishman, well, in 18--I suppose '51 [1851], whenever that awful potato plague occurred in Ireland, there was a man named Usher in San Antonio or thereabouts in those environs who had one member of his family left in Ireland, and he brought him over, a young man. And that young man did indeed fall in love with one of the slaves-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who was my great-grandmother or greater than that; I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember telling this story once, and this woman said, "You mean he raped her?" I said, "No, they were lovers." She could not stand that fact (laughter). But any rate, because he inherited that land when the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --his brother, I guess fifty, fifty-one years or so, was old then or a man could have a heart attack. He did die, and young Usher inherited the land and the slaves. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the-- Speaker 1: The Indian I'm not sure when he came in, but he, he may have been the one who fell in love with their child. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Let's, let's get a name for the Irishman in 1851. Speaker 2: I can't tell you-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --only Usher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ask me next week though. He's digging. I'll find out. Speaker 1: We'll come back and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and ask that question. And from that relationship there came, there were children. Let's call them your mother's grand- grandparents for now until we establish it. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I wish I'd known you were gonna ask me this because I would have had him--I'd have Wren [ph.] ready, I would have told Wren that. Now I need to know. Speaker 1: Okay, we, we will, we'll come back to you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right-- Speaker 1: --later. Speaker 2: --'cause I'm gonna--he's digging and loving--I said, "Did you find Mike Browne [ph.] yet?" He said, "Yes." He was the, he was the blacksmith, and he had purchased his own slavery in Kentucky--purchased his own freedom in Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he is my father's-- Speaker 1: On your-- Speaker 2: --uncle. Speaker 1: --father's side, okay. Speaker 2: --uncle, brother to my father's father-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to my grandfather. Speaker 1: We'll, we'll certainly visit that. On your mother's side, and we'll come back and visit her-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --grandmother. How about your mother's mother? Should we, any-- Speaker 2: I only, I just know that she was a beautiful lady. I know nothing about her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother used to talk about her. She'd say, "And mama would do this, and mama would do that," but what mama was doing, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I never met any of my grandparents. That's the great pity. I never saw any one of the four-- Speaker 1: Okay, Okay. Speaker 2: --only pictures of them. Story_ID: 323450 Speaker 1: Let's go over to your father's side now. And you spoke about Mike Brown [ph.]. Speaker 2: Well, my father, I wish I could tell you how many brothers and sisters he had. I met most of them. One or two were dead by the time I was born. But I--let's see, there's my father. He was not the eldest. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Sylvanus. Speaker 1: Okay, Syl- Sylvanus, all right. Speaker 2: That's Sylvanus Browne. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I have a feeling he was about the third son. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Julian [Julian Brown (ph.)] I know is older. Julian had worked--I never met Julian. Julian had worked with Booker T. Washington in founding Tuskegee [Tuskegee State Normal School; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: William [William Brown (ph.)] was older. I think William was also my father's father's name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Hugh Victor [Hugh Victor Brown], who was the superintendent of schools in North Carolina, was younger-- Speaker 1: Younger (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) than my brother [sic. father]. Speaker 1: Hugh Victor. Speaker 2: I knew him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Extraordinary fellow. Annette [Annette Brown (ph.)] was younger than Hugh Victor. Of the ones I had met, my father was the eldest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was he-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then Hugh Victor, and then Annette-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and then Mary Victoria [Mary Brown (ph.)]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then Ralph [Ralph Brown (ph.)], who's middle name I don't know. All these I, I knew and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --adored. They were extraordinary people (laughter). It was quite a remarkable family. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I knew Naomi [Naomi Brown (ph.)], who died very young, but I knew her when I was six or seven or so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my Aunt Mary died only recently. She almost made it to, to a hundred. Speaker 1: Okay, Mary Victoria. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my Aunt Annette lived I think to be ninety-eight. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I knew her well. She was a lovely poet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my uncle, Hugh Victor, who was junior to my father, lived to be 102 or three [103], I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay, but he was the superintendent of schools-- Speaker 2: Schools, in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in-- Speaker 2: --Goldsboro, North Carolina-- Speaker 1: --Goldsboro, um-hm, okay. Speaker 2: --for many years. Story_ID: 323451 Speaker 1: This you should know--when, my father [Sylvanus Browne] was about sixteen or eighteen maybe, and it was just he and the younger ones who were still at home, and they had a little meeting or something like that. It was kind of a meeting, in which he asked them--I don't know if there was a relative who had E on Browne or not, but they were disposed to differentiate themselves from all the other Browns whom they knew. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And my father asked, "Shall we add the E?" And I asked my Aunt Mary [Mary Brown (ph.)], I said, "When did"--because she didn't have an E-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and neither did my uncle, Hugh Victor [Hugh Victor Brown], who was the superintendent of schools [in Goldsboro, North Carolina] for a long time. She said, "Well, Sylvan did ask, and we thought he said no Es." But instead, my father had said an E. And it was my father who added the E to Browne-- Speaker 2: Okay, so-- Speaker 1: --because that family did, not one of them had an E on the end of Browne-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --before that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: There was some Browne that they knew with an E. He may or may not have been a relative, but there were too many Browns around who were not of the same family. And not too many. I don't know what that means, but they were very young people; he was eighteen, and the others were in their teens I suppose. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he said, in his voice, which was around here somewhere: "Do we add the E or--?" Speaker 2: Now we know what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) "Are we Brownes with an E or not?" And-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and he believed--no, she believed, my Aunt Mary. She's the only one I ever asked. She said, "Well, we thought Sylvan said no Es." I don't--gathering respect for his own father. But it's his family of which I am a part. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We're all B-R-O-W-N-E. Story_ID: 323452 Speaker 1: Let's go back to those years of your mom [Lovie Usher Browne]. Do you know anything about her being raised in San Antonio [Texas] as a child or-- Speaker 2: Oh, God, I wish I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) whether she came from a farm? Speaker 2: --had known. I'd, I'd call Juanita [Juanita Browne Neal] and ask her some questions. I think the assumed that Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] knows. It's only because my mother and I were such great friends. Well, everybody whom I ever met who met my mother fell instantly in love with her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know if you get (unclear) Cicely at some play. I go, "Cicely, here is my mother," and Cicely just screamed, "Mrs. Browne," and just ran into her arms. However-- Speaker 1: We're, we're, we're gonna assume that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cicely Tyson. Speaker 1: --Cicely Tyson. Okay. Speaker 2: She was this exceptional and quite beautiful woman. Speaker 1: Did, did she relate any incidents of her growing up in San Antonio, whether it was-- Speaker 2: Yes, we talked about-- Speaker 1: --a farm-- Speaker 2: --them all the time. And (unclear) will occur to me to tell you-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --she would ride the horse, ride, she would ride horseback with no saddle. She could jump upon the horse and ride and so could Aunt Irene [Irene Usher (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And most of my mother's sisters and brothers I never met except Aunt Irene, who was older-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --my Uncle Bud, whose real name was Otto [Otto Usher (ph.)]-- Speaker 1: Okay, but they called him-- Speaker 2: --who-- Speaker 1: --Uncle Bud, B-U-D? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was clearly a descendant of the Indian [Native American]. You could not miss it. It's in his features and in his hair. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I met-- Speaker 1: Do, do you know whether that was an urban setting, where they grew up or, or a farm setting? Speaker 2: It was sort of not unlike Woodbury [New Jersey], sort of country, but it was in San Antonio. But I have seen the place, but now it's, it has become more urban than it was. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 323453 Speaker 1: I will tell you how my mother [Lovie Usher Browne] and father [Sylvanus Browne] met. Speaker 2: Right, let's go there. Speaker 1: My father, before the First World War [World War I, WWI] began, was a first lieutenant in the [U.S.] Cavalry. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I remember as a child I'd say he was the first lieutenant in the Calvary, and he says, "No, son, that's where Jesus was." He was the cavalry. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And one day an officer friend of his, incidentally, I did meet this gentleman when I was around eight. And he was an officer, superior to my father, that is, I think, a major or colonel. My father was a first lieutenant. Any rate, they were stationed--it was the Buffalo Soldiers, and they were stationed outside of San Antonio [Texas]. And he, he came back to the camp and said, "Browne, I was just in town, and I met this family, really beautiful young women. And one I think, and she is the most beautiful, I think she's about your age. You wanna go in with me tomorrow?" And so, so they next, he said, "Well, yes," so he did. And these two officers rode up on horseback, Lovie and Irene [Irene Usher (ph.)], who is older, were sitting on a veranda, a kind of a swing, those old-fashioned sliding swings. And they got up when these gentleman rode up. And Irene said, "I'll be right back. I'm gonna go mix you, make you some refreshments," meaning lemonade. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And that left Sylvanus and the major or colonel--it's a pity I can't remember his name--and Lovie. And the officer said, "Ms. Usher, this is Lieutenant Browne." And my father would always--he lived to be ninety-six, and he was courtly that last week, his ramrod straight always. I know this is the way it happened because not only did I ask him out, out of, out, out of my mother's earshot, and I asked her when he wasn't around. When this gentleman came to our home when I was around six or seven I asked surprisingly to my mother and father: "Would you like to see my mother's garden?" And he said, "Yes." And they were amazed because no adult was allowed, that is I wouldn't allow any adult to take my hand unless it was my mother, my father, or my Aunt Susie [ph.]. But any rate, so I reached up and took his hand, and he held on tight, and we went out the garden. And he was admiring the flowers, and I said, "Can you tell me what it was like when my mother and father met?" And he told me precisely the same story that I'm telling you-- Speaker 2: Whoa. Speaker 1: --that my mother had told me and that my father had told me. It is that he said, "Lieutenant Browne, Ms. Usher." My father bowed courtly and deeply. My mother did a kind of a curtsy. And as she's coming up, his eyes are lifting up and they meet, their eyes, and he said, "My name is Sylvanus." And she said, "That's a lovely name. Mine is Lovie, and I'll just call you Joe for short." All my life, all my life, as long as I've known them, that is the only name I've ever heard her call him. She's referred to him as Reverend Browne-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but, or, or Sylvanus Browne, but speaking to him, it was always Joe. Speaker 2: That's a wonderful story, wonderful story. Can we establish a date or approximate date on that? And if we can't-- Speaker 1: Around 1980--1884 they're born. They both, I think, were like twenty-five or six. Speaker 2: Okay. So that would mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think they were both twenty-five. Speaker 2: --from 1909. Speaker 1: That sounds like it. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: It's close if I'm-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 323454 Speaker 1: Obviously, in those days the Buffalo Soldiers were comprised of all black soldiers. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so the major was a black soldier (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and I wanted to establish that historically. Speaker 2: Yes, he, he was a black, they were all blacks. Speaker 1: Right, and-- Speaker 2: And I must tell you that when I was about seven, my father [Sylvanus Browne] had in his study a footlocker. It lived there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I own it now. And my older brothers would never disturb my father when he's in there writing or reading. And often it was closed; often it was open. But, of course, I was next to the youngest, and I had no notion of-- Speaker 1: Proto-- Speaker 2: --this is something you don't do-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --protocol, yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, I did knock. And he just looked up and says, "Come in Roscoe Lee [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]." And so I went in and sat down. The trunk, whenever he was in it, the footlocker was always open, and he's reaching, taking out papers, putting things in there. After he finished writing something, he's putting it in there, taking out something to, as a reference or whatever. And I said, "Can I read those?" He said, "What did you ask?" I said, "May I read those?" And he, then he looked, and he said, "Lovie [Lovie Usher Browne]." And she called back, "Joe." He said, "Your son wants to know if he can read the cards I sent you from France during the First World War [World War I, WWI]." He just, he didn't say that; he said during the war. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And she said, "Which son?" And he said, "Your son." And she said, "Oh, Roscoe Lee, of course." And she went on doing what she was doing. My memories of the study was upstairs. I know at some point after our house had burned down the study was downstairs (laughter). But, at any rate, he just said, "Yes," and he started to reach, but my hand was already there. And there were these, about these many postcards to my mother from France. And my father always, if there were no rubber bands, he would create something that could bind. He could make anything. He would take cardboard, like a box, and cut it and so it's--I don't know what 'cause I, I don't know how to do anything. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they were bound by two very thick rubber bands, and there're about that many. And I smiled and eagerly pulled them out, took the bands off, put them over here on the floor next to me. I was on the floor. And this is what my father saw me doing. And I remember his (unclear)--his very strong hand just gently reached in, and he said, "Son?" I said, "Sir?" "We know you're a fast reader, but you can't read that fast." I said, "I know." And he took his hand away, and I went, through all of them. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I put them back. He looked at me. I saw him do a little like this and not knowing what on earth this boy is doing. I got rubber bands; I put them back around, put them back in, jumped up, and went about whatever kids at six or seven are about to do. I went back out to go outside. It was spring. Later, and luckily I overheard them, I'm sitting out on the steps off, just off the kitchen. It was spring or summer because there was a screen door, and the door was open, and they were in the kitchen. And he asked, "What you reckon he was doing." And she said, "Oh, that boy, don't you know what he was doing?" He said, "I have no idea." "He was simply checking to see if on all the cards, if you had signed them Joe." (Laughter) And that's really all I was doing. I was looking. My God, I'm thinking--I didn't make any sound. I'm thinking, my God, he called her Joe. This is the thirtieth one. He's still calling her, calling himself Joe. He's still signing the name Joe. It was always Lovie-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --or my loving wife, or it might be signed, your loving husband, Joe. Speaker 1: Well, that's a beautiful (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I love it. I just love it. Speaker 1: --beautiful story. Story_ID: 323455 Speaker 1: Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Brock], I made a mistake earlier. Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: My mother [Lovie Usher Browne] and father [Sylvanus Browne] are three days apart. He was born June 25, 1884. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: She was born June 28th, 1884-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and all those thousands of miles away from each other. She was born in San Antonio [Texas]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and he was born in Henderson, Kentucky. Speaker 2: Henderson, Kentucky, all right. Speaker 1: And he's just three days older than she. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Isn't that marvelous (laughter)? Speaker 2: One of the things I wanted to just briefly revisit was your father growing up. Obviously, education was very important in the family. We know about your uncles, but let's, let's get started with your father (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, yes, they--my father is more self-taught than formally-taught, although he went to school in Henderson, and he went to, I don't think it was called a high school. I think it was called something like a normal school, where young people study trades. My great-uncle, whom, of course, I never knew, Mike Brown [ph.], had been, I almost said indentured but, more or less is what he was to some people there in, in Kentucky. But he knew everything there as to know about horses and-- Speaker 2: He originally was in slavery, and he-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay-- Speaker 1: But in order to-- Speaker 2: --indentured-- Speaker 1: --get, purchase his freedom and in order to keep him, they allowed him to purchase his freedom. And he stayed still working 'cause he did everything, the horses, and he also was a great blacksmith. And my father was taught the blacksmith trade by, by his uncle, Mike. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that in getting into the [U.S.] Cavalry was a very natural step for him because he knew horses. But my, my Aunt Mary [Mary Brown (ph.)] went to school there in Henderson, and then she went to I don't know. I can't remember which college because she became a teacher, too. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And her husband, whom I met, his name Palmer [ph.]--it'll come to me. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Remember, I'm ancient. I'm (laughter)-- Speaker 2: We-- Speaker 1: --I forget things. I have premature, what's it called? I forget (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. And we know that's not true 'cause you're-- Speaker 1: Probably senility. Speaker 2: --you're, you're doing a great job here. Speaker 1: Probably senility. But at any rate, he--and my aunt, my Aunt Annette [Annette Brown (ph.)] did teach somewhat, but she mainly was a writer. She never married. Speaker 2: Okay, this was Aunt Mary? Speaker 1: My--that's Aunt Annette. Speaker 2: Aunt Annette, okay. Speaker 1: Aunt Mary married, and she was a teacher. And they named a school, a, a, an old folks, I think they called it elder citizens, a facility in New Haven, Connecticut, where she--or is it Hartford [Connecticut], one of them--where she and her husband worked. She was a teacher. And I attended that. She was then ninety-six. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: My father had died-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --by then. He lived to be ninety-six. And they had named it the Mary Victoria Brown--oh, she would, she's kicking me now. What was her husband's last name, Stafford [ph.]? I knew him, and I liked him. He was a lovely man. And they both taught in that school system in New--in Connecticut. I think it's Harford-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --or New Haven, so I--one of them, it's one-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --or the other. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And after the celebration, the ceremony to rename this senior citizens, not elder-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --senior citizens' community something or other, the mayor came. And what was significant about his coming, I think had he met my Aunt Mary and he was the mayor, he'd shown up anyhow. She had been his favorite teacher. Speaker 2: Whoa, wow. Speaker 1: And it was extraordinary to watch him well up as he's speaking about this remarkable woman. She was incredible. Story_ID: 323456 Speaker 1: Aunt Annette [Annette Brown (ph.)], she was the poet, and she has had also taught school. Speaker 2: I think, I think Annette taught. She was so learned. When my brother, Ted [Arthur "Ted" Browne], the one whom the world thinks is named Arthur-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --now, the world knows his name is Ted. They don't know that his name is really Arthur (laughter). When I would be performing in Central Park [New York, New York] when I became an actor in 1956-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it was my brother Ted who would come backstage, backstage, it was out there in the wilderness in Central Park, but he'd knock on that flap and said, "Ross [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]." And I'd--we, we knew all knew how each other sounds. And I said, "Ted?" He said, "Got a visitor for you," and it would always be my Aunt Annette-- Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: --had come up from Kentucky to see Roscoe speaking, as she would say, the bard. Speaker 1: Right, right, right, one-- Speaker 2: I ache that she did not live long enough to see me speaking August William--August Wilson, because it isn't just the other day, I mean not just since he died but before he died while he was awake to hear. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He was being called the American Shakespeare. And she would love-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --to have heard me speaking that particular bard. Speaker 1: That would be very appropriate. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, your, your father [Sylvanus Browne] now had, as a result of your Uncle Mike Brown [ph.], joined the Buffalo Soldiers. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And he-- Speaker 2: Mainly because he knew everything about horses (laughter), he-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mind you, when I'd played Nightlinger [Jebediah "Jeb" Nightlinger] in 'The Cowboys,' I knew nothing about the horses. I knew which was the front. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That was important. Speaker 2: But I knew nothing else about horses. But I remember, of course, that my father became a minister. I think it really was about the year of my birth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think the reason that my older brothers would have suggested, it's probably true, that he thought he should become a minister because the devil has just moved into his home (laughter) in the presence--I sure could remember hearing him in one of his prayers saying, "Lord, show me how to get the devil out of the boy." And it was always, "Lovie's [Lovie Usher Browne] son." That--except my brothers were outrageous, so it could have been any one of them, (laughter) really. Speaker 1: The, the, what I, what I'm trying to do is set up the chronology there. Did--of course, prior to World War II [WWII], he was a Buffalo Soldier. Speaker 2: Yes, he was. Speaker 1: Did, did he enter the ministry after World War II (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think--oh yes because he and my mother married, whenever that was-- Speaker 1: Right, and would that-- Speaker 2: It's easily figured out because my oldest brother--well, my two older brothers have now gone into the great beyond. But-- Speaker 1: William-- Speaker 2: --what I--no, Sylvanus [Sylvanus Browne, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Oh, Sylvanus; I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Sylvanus, Jr. or was called Bus, because he loved--my father would bring back home a, a Buster Brown belt or something, some Buster Brown something. I think it was a belt, and he loved it. And they began--and, "Where's my bus, my bus?" So they called him Bus. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 323457 Speaker 1: And he [Browne's brother, Sylvanus Browne, Jr.] was called Bus until he died. I just saw my--his daughter sent me two weeks ago some photographs of Ted's [Arthur "Ted" Browne] granddaughter's graduating in law in--at Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.]. And there were a bunch of them there, and they sent me photographs. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But Sylvie [Sylvia Browne] also sent me the same package. It was just last--well, I was in New York [New York] last week and the week before, so it must have been three, four weeks ago. She sent me a package in which not only were these pictures but a VHS of a year or two before my brother Bus died of his singing with the champion--he was not a member of that group, Champion Barbershop Quartet [ph.]. I think all members were white. And one of the singers really knew how beautifully he sang and also that he was a, used to sing with barbershop quartets. And there is this VHS, and I have it now, of their singing--what was it, Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]? And my brother who had the most exquisite baritone voice, he'd been given a scholarship with Curtis Institute [Curtis Institute of Music] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], which is eleven miles away from Philadelphia--from Woodbury [New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But he had fallen in love and decided to get to work 'cause he wanted to marry Alberta Kline [ph.]. That's a family one should trace. I'm gonna tell my friend find out about the Klines. They're extraordinary people. But any rate, and they were--he was at the Curtis Institute for Music, but he wanted to get married, so he had to leave there. He was there on scholarship. A great lady, not Schumann-Heink [Ernestine Schumann-Heink], but someone of that caliber gave him this scholarship because his--oh, I could, I could really hear him singing. I hearing them when I was small singing in my father's [Sylvanus Browne] church [Second Baptist Church, Paulsboro, New Jersey] the most astonishingly beautiful baritone voice, ah. But anyway, he married Alberta, and she finished college and became until she died-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --this great schoolteacher in Maryland-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Centerville, Maryland. Speaker 2: Centerville-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --right? Okay. Speaker 1: But the Klines, I must remember for Wren [ph.] when he continues to go hunting for my past, I must tell him, you must check the Klines, too, my older brother's-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --in-laws. Story_ID: 323458 Speaker 1: The one thing that, that stands out here is that the family believed in education. All of you did very (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you see, when he [Browne's father, Sylvanus Browne] became a minister--I was gonna tell you, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as you know I'm, I'm such a scattered-- Speaker 1: Not a problem. Speaker 2: --mind. Speaker 1: We'll-- Speaker 2: --I remember I would ask, "Where, where is dad going," or I'd ask him when I was around twelve, thirteen. He was going down to Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and spending a month there every summer at the seminary-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --getting--oh, he took many courses there. He was a first-rate public speaker, but I think theory and things of the Bible what--that you could only get in a seminary, someone teaching religion-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --as they were teaching it when I was in college [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. And although he knew a great deal, this was formal. And he got something that I don't know, was a degree or a certificate or something or other, but-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --he moved up rather quickly in the hierarchy of, of Baptist ministry. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I mean there was the Baptist Ministers Conference of Philadelphia and Greater Philadelphia [Baptist Ministers Conference of Philadelphia and Vicinity], which included Woodbury [New Jersey]. I think at some point he was president. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know he was recording secretary. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When he was recording secretary I was about eight or nine. And my oldest brother [Sylvanus Browne, Jr.] would always hand me poems to learn, only because he knew I loved it-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and he said, "You could sing this one, kid." And he'd hand it to me. So when my father, when he was having some meeting, some ceremony at a church in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and then one in Camden [New Jersey], where my father became that minister-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it was the biggest Protestant church in South Jersey called Baptist Temple [Baptist Temple Church] in Camden, to which many notables came. And, but at the one in Philadelphia, there was something involving the Baptist Ministers Conference. I was asked to speak. I was not more than eleven. Eleven was the outside, but maybe eleven, to speak James Weldon Johnson's 'The Creation' for, at, at some ceremony which they were celebrating Mahalia Jackson. Years later when I had been a runner, and now I'm an actor, and I had worked for the Schenley Import Corporation [Schenley Industries, Inc.], we run into each other in, in Detroit [Michigan]. And she says, "Were you that sweet little thing when you were eleven?" She said, "You're Reverend Browne's," said, "you are that Roscoe Browne [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], aren't you?" Well, she was just, well, like that. Story_ID: 323459 Speaker 1: And I did it also for Ms. Anderson, the same poem ['The Creation,' James Weldon Johnson] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Marian Anderson? Speaker 1: Yes. And I, and I read, and I read one for her. It was, it was one of Johnson's [James Weldon Johnson], and it was, and it, you know, they all were meant to be sermons in 'God's Trombones' ['God's Trombones: Seven Negro Sermons in Verse,' James Weldon Johnson]. And Marian Anderson wanted to hear a particular one because she already had heard me do the 'The Creation.' And she did say marvelously to me, she said, "It's when you're, when you speak it, young man, it's, it's moving." She said, "It's moving like a great spiritual." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: She was so clean. And mind you, many years later, her memory was absolutely vivid about it. I went backstage at Town Hall [The Town Hall, New York, New York], and she just looked up, and with my mother [Lovie Usher Browne] and my sister [Juanita Browne Neal], to hear her annual, I think, Easter concert. We went backstage. She's sitting at her table. She's just signing autographs. We're not special. We're among the people in line. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And she looked up, and she said--I was what? Oh, I know exactly how old I was; I was thirty or thirty-one. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She said, "We've met before, haven't we? We've met before, haven't we?" I said, "Yes, ma'am." She said, "You were a little thing then." I said, "Yes." She said, "And what is your last name?" Not what is your first. I said, "Browne." And she said, "With an E?" I said, "Yes, Ms. Anderson." "You are the reverend's son." And she mentioned 'The Creation.' And she was so happy to meet my mother because at that particular time when I did it for her my mother was not there-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and to meet my sister. I mean I was all dressed up and shining, as my father [Sylvanus Browne] and I drove off to this thing. And Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] is going to say 'The Creation.' We didn't know for whom. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He may have known, and he may not have, but I had no idea. Story_ID: 323460 Speaker 1: Which sister was this that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have only one sister-- Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: --Juanita [Juanita Browne Neal]. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, right, right. Speaker 2: She's almost a year and a half older than I. She was born 1920, and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --I'm '22 [1922]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: As I am eighty-three, she is now eighty-five. But I'll be eighty-four before she can eighty-six (laughter), so I'll be eighty-four in May-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and she's in August. Speaker 1: The-- Speaker 2: She's a schoolteacher, too. Speaker 1: And she's a schoolteacher-- Speaker 2: And my brother-- Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: --Ted [Arthur "Ted" Browne] was a, the second oldest. He, he directed, he ran a, they call them superintendents. I don't know what they were called, a quasi-prep school somewhere in, in Upstate New York. But before that, he was an extraordinary athlete. He was with the Negro leagues in baseball and in football. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He was among the young men that Branch Rickey looked at before he chose the one he should have chosen, who was Jackie [Jackie Robinson]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he, he played, he was quarterback on those, one of those teams. And he played, he could pitch and short--all, all of it. He was an extraordinary athlete. Speaker 1: Gifted. Speaker 2: Very quickly, but he also was assistant coach, then he came coach at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --where he went to school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my next brother, Douglas [Moses Douglas Browne], he went to Wilberforce also, and they both are graduates of Wilberforce. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My sister went to the same school that my sister-in-law, Alberta [Alberta Kline (ph.)], went to, Glassboro State Teachers College [New Jersey State Teachers College at Glassboro; Rowan University, Glassboro, New Jersey] to become a teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. The, so and, and I'm just trying to establish this. Obviously, you're doing-- Speaker 2: It's not easy with this circuitous mind going on. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Not yours but mine (laughter). Speaker 1: I, I think, I think we, we're, we're-- Speaker 2: You can audit this. Speaker 1: --getting it. Speaker 2: You can edit this well I hope. Speaker 1: We don't want, want to edit it. Historians (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're gonna leave my madness-- Speaker 1: --historians-- Speaker 2: --as it is? Speaker 1: Yeah, yes. Historians like to hear it-- Speaker 2: I have knife-- Speaker 1: --strictly from you. Speaker 2: --and a gun, I will (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 323461 Speaker 1: Where I wanted to go, because you're establishing quite a reputation performing in your father's [Sylvanus Browne] church [Second Baptist Church, Paulsboro, New Jersey], and you have this household where education is a premium, and I, I think we may have missed, though, did your father ever tell you any stories of what it was like, the Buffalo Soldiers during World War II [WWII]? Speaker 2: He was telling my oldest brother [Sylvanus Browne, Jr.]. And I, I was around six or seven, and they were talking. None of it is clear in my head except they, I, I adored watching them. I didn't know it then, but the word that I'm about to use did not occur to me at all, but they seemed to be in, they were binding, bonding, them, he and my older brothers really bonding about that experience. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so it's not that I didn't really understand, but it kills me to think that I used to type my father's sermons, but I never--always mean to--I never asked him to tell me those stories. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. How old were you when you used to type these sermons for him? Speaker 2: Twelve. Speaker 1: Okay, 19-- Speaker 2: I was twelve or thirteen, around then. Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had not gone away to college yet, and I went away to college. Speaker 1: Okay, about 1935? Speaker 2: Yes, 1939-- Speaker 1: We're in the middle of it-- Speaker 2: --is when I went to college-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --went to Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I was seventeen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I should type them before that, like when I was in high school [Woodbury Junior-Senior High School, Woodbury, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He'd write them out, and I could really read this. It's an extraordinary looking handwriting, but you had really to know it to find out what it was he was saying. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: I mean I could still sign his name exactly as he signed it, if it was ever anything I needed to forge. Speaker 1: Right, so you could-- Speaker 2: But I didn't, not even my report card, except when it was a reprimand, and still I didn't. I did ask my mother [Lovie Usher Browne] once, "Once you sign this, do I have to show it to him?" She says, "Honey, of course; he has to sign it." Speaker 1: (Laughter) (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: And it was usually about deportment and not about grades. Speaker 1: Yeah. What, what I was trying to do was get a good flavor for what it was like there in the household, you know, with your brothers-- Speaker 2: We read-- Speaker 1: --and your sisters [sic. sister, Juanita Browne Neal], and-- Speaker 2: --we read to each other, or we read, I mean one person may be reading, and everybody would-- Speaker 1: Would participate (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and somebody was handing a book around. I mean Victor [Hugh Victor Browne II], who was the youngest, he couldn't wait 'til--because when he was three or four, he was going (making sounds). He wanted to join--there are four others of us-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --he wanted to join the four, I mean the four big boys 'cause I, I'm only three years older than he. When every August 20th, we would appear wherever they were, even after they were married my brothers would appear August 20th outside the screen windows until she married, singing: "Nita, Juanita, as thy soul if we--," you know that song? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: We used to sing it to my sister. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And for years before, Juanita I think today would not really admit that. But she was at least ten or twelve before she discovered this was a song in 'Twice 55.' You ever heard of that? It's an American song book, and it's called 'Twice 55,' which means there are 110 songs in them-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and before she realized that her brothers had not created that song. Speaker 1: (Laughter) For her. Speaker 2: My older brothers knew it, and we would all sing it-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --on the 20th. Any time of the day we would just go out by the screen, and sometimes it'd be early in the morning; sometimes late in evening when she most thought we weren't going to. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And we'd have dinner, and she, and she won't, she wouldn't say anything. We could see her sulking a little, my brothers, and then just before she's going up the stairs we'd be out by that screen window singing, "Nita, Juanita." It's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Every August-- Speaker 2: Every August 20-- Speaker 1: --20th. Speaker 2: --her birthday. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 323462 Speaker 1: Tell us about school. What was school like growing up? This was, we're talking about the '30s [1930s] now. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: We're in a deep depression [Great Depression]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But the Browne family is doing well. They're, they're really, really-- Speaker 2: We were doing well because not only was my father [Sylvanus Browne] a minister, but I, I used to go with him. I knew that money, that whatever that, those few pennies they paid him, I knew where that was going. So my father also worked as a parcel post deliverer-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was to keep his family in health and, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: --good hearth and all of that. Speaker 1: The-- Speaker 2: He still managed to--don't know how he did that because he was not a scrupulous saver, but he did manage most of the money that sent my oldest brother [Sylvanus Browne, Jr.] to the Curtis Institute [Curtis Institute of Music, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Although he had a, a full scholarship, there were things he had to buy. Although Bus would, Bus was really rather self-sufficient. He could, he'd find all sorts of ways to work to help that. My brother Ted [Arthur "Ted" Browne], my father did send him most of the money that took him to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], although he was also on a full-- Speaker 1: Schol-- Speaker 2: --athletic scholarship. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He did the same for my brother Douglas [Moses Douglas Browne]. I think he paid all of the thing for my sister [Juanita Browne Neal]. And when Victor [Hugh Victor Browne II] was gonna go first to Virginia Union [Norfolk Unit, Virginia Union University; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] and then to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], I think he had the money then. It was only I that--this is not a swagger. It's only that in 1939 when I was ready to go to college-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --I wasn't. I was gonna get married and do all of that, but instead, I decided to go to school. And when I heard one fellow, a, another athlete chatting with my brother Ted, I, I asked him what, where is this school. He said, "It's called Lincoln University." I said, "Well where is that?" He says, "Not even an hour's driving." I said, "Really?" And so he told me, and I got my whatever that is. What is it you get from the school, your, your record, but it's called-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --something else. What is that thing called? You've got your-- Speaker 1: Your-- Speaker 2: It's like a transcript-- Speaker 1: --transcript, right. Speaker 2: --but it has another word. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Diploma. Speaker 2: And I--what did you say? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Diploma. Speaker 2: Oh no, that I had. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I had that in hand. But I had to send this off to Lincoln late. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean these guys are getting ready to go back to Wilberforce and to, and to Lincoln, Barry Honey [ph.], Barry Honey, spelled Honey. Speaker 1: This would be late summer-- Speaker 2: Yes it is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you were hoping to go (laughter). Speaker 2: --late. And they, they wrote and called and said you should come ahead, and all the particulars were in that letter. And I showed it to my mother [Lovie Usher Browne] and my father, what the tuition would be and room and all of that. And so the day that I was due-- Speaker 1: So that was not a scholarship. That was just-- Speaker 2: No it was not. Speaker 1: --an admission. Speaker 2: That's all, no scholarship at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So my mother, and my brother Douglas, and I--my brother Douglas drove and my mother and I, threw whatever that was that I had in these, pitiful belongings in the car. And we drove there, and the old--it wasn't the Scotsman. That was Johnson. Ah, the, I think he was from Germany. I'm not sure--Grim, and anyway, Harold F. Grim. My mother, who, as I said before, was absolutely irresistible. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: She simply took, opened her purse and put in front of him--she says, "That's what his father and I have," and it was seventy-five dollars. And Dr. Grim counted it. He looked at her again, knowing she is not to be resisted. He looked at her, and my mother was rather quiet of demeanor. She was be, she would be more or less like that. And he just leaned over the phone, and he said, "Can you work, son?" I said, "Yes, sir." He said, "Mrs. Browne, we will admit only if he will work off this, what, what is owed by you and, and Mr. Browne," he said. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So, he took it, and I was assigned to sweep and mop the stacks and floors of the married--no, the Vail Memorial Library, which was an imposing edifice. It's still there at Lincoln. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: They have another library that's a little larger now. It's called the Langston Hughes [Langston Hughes Memorial Library] 'cause Langston was a graduate, an alumnus of Lincoln. But at any rate, and I was to polish those marble stairs, and there were many, leading up into the library. And I was to begin the next day. And so, after my mother saw where I was gonna be sleeping and staying in, she and Douglas went back down that highway. Story_ID: 323463 Speaker 1: So there you were at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: And having to get up in the morning at the, the crank of dawn--I know it's called crack, but one would be cranky at that hour--to go to the library [Vail Memorial Library] and begin before breakfast. And there would be an upperclassman already there. Most upperclassmen had not yet come. Only freshmen were there. I think for fifteen days we would be there before the upperclassmen came back. And Lincoln then was an all-male school, all-men's school. And they were (unclear), and they were marvelous, these guys. Now it's of course co-educational. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And some of the old guys cannot bear the fact that I think almost, I think all--yes, every year, I think, since it became co-educational, the old guys cannot bear it, almost always a valedictorian is a young woman. And the reason is very clear, because they're brighter than we are. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Exactly. Speaker 2: (Laughter) But there it is. But, at any rate, so I got up that morning. I met my--I had two roommates then. I got up, and I went to work. The last thing I was to do were the stairs, those marble steps. They were many and broad, really broader than that. So, always I'm, well, now I know it, but always in, in that period there's an upperclassman who knows where the books go and who comes in early from his holiday, his vacation to help ready the, the library. So I had swept and mopped the lower stacks. And I was up on the main floor, and I was, I had swept, and I was beginning to mop upper stacks. And I looked over at him 'cause he--there were little truckloads of books to be put away. And I said, "May I help you?" And he said--he looked at me. He didn't ask if I knew how they went. He said, "Yes, you may," and he introduced himself, Hansen Benjamin William Clifford Kwaw Kwate Aswasabrimpong Jones Corte [ph.]. They've called him only Jones Corte. His best friends called him Swas [ph.]-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: --and some of us called him Hansen, H-A-N-S-E-N. He was from Ghana, except then it was called Gold Coast-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --because Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah], who was there at the same time--that's another story--had not left to go back and claim his country and name it-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Ghana. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And that was his best friend there. I didn't know that then, of course, didn't know who Nkrumah was either. Story_ID: 323464 Speaker 1: But his name is Hansen Benjamin William Clifford Kwaw Kwate Aswasabrimpong Jones Corte [ph.]. And he simply looked at me and decided I knew. And when he says, "Yes, I think you may." He said, "What's your name, please?" I said, "Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]." And he said, "You have another name?" I said, "Browne," and we shook hands. And he watched me for only one bunch of books. He saw me take them up. And I knew he was watching, and I put them where they should go, okay. Coming from down that spiral staircase in the back of the upper stacks was this very tall reed thin man with a shock I think of white hair. Or was it jet black? It was either snow white or jet black; I don't remember. He was Belgian. His name was Larabee [ph.], and he said, "Is this yours?" And I turned, and his hand was on the mop, where he indicated the mop. I said, "Oh, yes, sir; I'm sorry." And I went to--he says, "No, no. What are you doing?" Oh no; I'm sorry. It's not the way it happened. I'm putting books away. He says, "Young man, what are you doing?" I said, "I'm returning these books that were here over the summer to their shelves." He said, "We don't just put books back on the shelves, young man." I said, "No, sir, I know. These are 300; this is sociology. I said those are 200s down there. They go up over here; that's religion." And he's looking at me. And I said, "Oh, the 800s, they're over there, literature." And he's, he's just amazed that this seventeen year-old looking like fourteen knew the Dewey Decimal System [Dewey Decimal Classification]. And he asked, "Do you mean to say you know the Dewey Decimal System?" I said just said, "Yes, sir," but I thought, doesn't everybody know it? (Laughter) I did. I really thought it. I just said, "Yes, sir." He said, "Very well." He says, "Continue." Then he said, "Is this yours?" I said, "Yes, sir; I'm sorry." I went get the mop and the bucket. He said, "No, no, you don't do this anymore." He went to the phone, called the head office to say--and it's just marvelous. He turned to ask me my name. Jones Corte had written it down: Roscoe Browne, Jones Corte. I can still see--his handwriting is exquisite. And all he wrote was Roscoe Browne and pushed it toward him and the phone so he could see, 'cause he was turning to say, "And what," and Jones Corte did that. And he called me. He said, he said some words it seemed in code, but it meant that I was no longer to be a janitor at the library [Vail Memorial Library, Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] and that certainly I was not to do the stairs, that there was this young child here who knows all things the Dewey Decimal System (laughter). Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So I could also not only put the books away, but there are things you did in the office, too, about who, where they went and who's got 'em and all that. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 323465 Speaker 1: Ralph Hakool [ph.], who was from Camden, New Jersey, and he was there [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] on an athletic scholarship, but he had, it was called a work scholarship. And I thought Ralph would never forgive me. He was a marvelous basketball player and truly a great young man, and he came, became a great person. Where he is now, I don't know. I hope he's alive and well and happy. I think he was going to be a doctor. But at any rate, that day he was--when his friends saw Ralph scrubbing with Dutch cleanser those marble steps [at Vail Memorial Library], and Ralph said, "That kid over there." Well, Ralph knew who I was because I had run track in, in, in high school. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I had won some events in highs school running track, so he knew who I was. But he said, "That Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], the kid from Woodbury [New Jersey]." Speaker 2: (Laughter) Let's, let's just go back a wee bit to high school because you were a marvelous athlete. And we don't wanna (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was a runner. My brothers were the really great athletes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They played everything. I (unclear)--I must say what my brother Ted [Arthur "Ted" Browne] said when he came home from we then called Easter holiday. Now they call it spring break. And I was in high school, and he was in college, maybe a senior or junior. He was nine or ten years older than I. He's the second oldest. And Ted, with two of his friends, were sitting out on our front, called a sun parlor, yes. That's right because it was enclosed, used to be a porch. Then they enclosed (laughter) and it became a sun parlor (laughter). And my mother [Lovie Usher Browne] said, "You know that Roscoe has the highest"--I was passing through, had gone to make the guys some lemonade. Speaker 2: Right, okay. Speaker 1: "Roscoe has the highest"--she said, "in the Columbia standardized examinations in Woodbury," and she said something beyond, and it was true. It was more than Woodbury. "He has the highest grade in the French standardized--Columbia standardized examinations." And Ted said--I heard him--"Gosh, mom, can he do nothing yet?" Because I wouldn't go out for these sports. So then he's there another time, and she told him, knowing that I overhear all over this and knowing that nothing bothered me, really. My mother's eyes and my eyes, we, they would meet. And when they, when it's all done, we are just in hysterics. She said, "Do you know that Roscoe has made the junior varsity and the soccer team?" And Ted said, "Gosh, wouldn't you know he'd go out for some foreign sport?" (Laughter) And that day had decided to--I swear to you--that day, that day, I knew something he did not know. I knew that day was the last day for the tryouts for the Woodbury High School [Woodbury Junior-Senior High School, Woodbury, New Jersey] mile relay team to run in the Penn Relays [Penn Relay Carnival]. I knew it; he didn't. They were celebrating him there at the high school because he was this four-letter star. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he and the other fellows were at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] were, they were gonna train there in the afternoon, after three o'clock up on the track. And Capone [ph.], who was the great coach-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --who swore by my brother, would be there. Bill Stern--they would all be there. And these fellows are gonna be there to watch and encourage the young boys. We were all fifteen, sixteen years old. Story_ID: 323466 Speaker 1: We're gonna try out for Woodbury High School's [Woodbury Junior-Senior High School, Woodbury, New Jersey] mile relay team and, on which two of my brothers had run, my brother Ted [Arthur "Ted" Browne] and my brother Douglas [Moses Douglas Browne]. So I just got on my bike and sped up to the high school, ran to find Jack Abram [ph.], who was one of my really good friends. And I know that he was called the manager of the track team--always a manager, somebody who does not run track-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --or, or football, or whatever. I said, "Jack, I want to try out." He said, "You know your brothers are gonna be up here." I said "I know." I said, "But, you know, I can beat these guys." He said, "How are you gonna--." I said, "Jack, you see me run when you and I could take a walk through the woods, and we run." He said, "Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], this is around a track." I said, "Yeah, but I've seen them. I know which ones they are." I said, "I can beat them." I didn't really think beat them. I just thought I could make that team. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I didn't think I could beat long-legged Jones [ph.], who became one of my great friends, or Florsheim [ph.]. I didn't really know that I could. And he said, "Well, okay." He said, "You got a jock; you gotta (unclear)--you got to wear spikes." I said, "Spikes? What am I gonna do with spikes?" So he handed me the spikes. And I took off my shoe, and I said, "Well, they hurt." He said, "No." And I put 'em on. I got--I said, "Okay, I'll just run in my sneakers." And there I am to try out. And sitting in the stands are--oh, almost the whole school used to come to watch the tryouts and who's gonna be on the, the relay--I don't know if you know about the Penn Relays [Penn Relay Carnival]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Of course you do. It's such a great big festive thing in that area. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: It's just eleven miles from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Even down to Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Yes, (laughter) of course, it's such, it's such a festive thing. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, and Capone [ph.], when he saw it was I, whom he referred to as hey you--my little brother is called little brownie. My brother Ted had been, and Douglas had been called little brownie 'cause Ted was brownie. My older brother [Sylvanus Browne, Jr.] was, they all called him Bus. And then Ted Browne became the famous one, and he became Ted Browne. My sister [Juanita Browne Neal] was hey little brownie. Douglas was, he was brownie, and Victor [Hugh Victor Browne II] was little brownie, and Roscoe was hey you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Hey you was going to challenge. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And he did not want my brother Ted to be really embarrassed, so he put me with his two fastest guys whom everybody knew were, were brilliant, and therefore, that's less embarrassment if I'm beaten by these two guys. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, of course, to make the whole story--you know how it ends. We were around the track. They, they darted out of their marks so fast I'm wondering, where are they going? Speaker 2: Were you wearing sneakers? Speaker 1: I was in sneakers. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And I went around them on the back stretch. And of course, what am I, fifteen, sixteen? You're hardly out of breath. I, I've got to go way around and come back. And the only outrageous thing that my, made my brother go. And so I got to the tape, and I saw it. And they said the wire. And I thought, I've never done that before. It'll cut my chest. So I reached out to it to pull it up, and it just came right off in my hands, you know, 'cause it's just a little, tiny-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --weightless string. And they thought that was a flourish. I won. I could still see my brother Ted standing up (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was this the first time you had ever competed in-- Speaker 1: Oh yes. Speaker 2: --any-- Speaker 1: Oh yes-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --as a runner. Speaker 2: As a runner. Speaker 1: Yes. I--he just stood up, amazed. I, I don't know what I was saying to, to Jones and, and Florsheim. I don't think I had a chance to say anything to them. They just, they came and just swept me up. They were much taller than I; Florsheim, built more like that. And they were absolutely delighted. And because they were happy, I was really happy, and I made that team. Speaker 2: Right well, and, and as a result (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That Woodbury High School mile relay team in 1936, or '7 [1937], or '8 [1938]. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 323467 Speaker 1: And as a result of that win, there was no--schools did not began to notice or whether they wanted (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course not. Speaker 1: --to give you a scholarship? Speaker 2: This is 1930s, and it's Woodbury-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --New Jersey. And not only--I did run a few more times. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But no, there were no, they were not giving track scholarships then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Football almost only and some baseball and some basketball, but there were no track scholarships going. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At any rate, we'll go very fast through it. That one, Frank Buchanan [ph.], who lived across the street from me, he was born in, he was born in, in a--no, he was born in a hospital-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but he grew up in 80 Carpenter Street, 83. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We went there the same time to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay, Frank Buchanan. Speaker 2: And at--he just died last year, breaks my heart. He was an exquisite, marvelous fellow. He--oh, I was told that if I joined, if I could make the glee club, I could maybe make the choir. If you, if you made the glee club, you might be able to join the choir because almost always the choir came out of the glee club. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the choir, they paid you for it-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --because you had to sing twice a week on Tuesdays, I think and on Sundays. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I tried out for that, and I made it. And then February came, and I was, you were told that if you make the dean's list, that takes more money off--scholarship money. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I would call my parents [Lovie Usher Browne and Sylvanus Browne] to say you don't have to pay anymore yet. And then Frank said because at Lincoln if you came from the same city, you called each other city-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --or state. The only ones who couldn't bear it--except sometimes they were, sometimes they were amused, were the ones from Africa, who'd say, "I'm not your state. Stop calling me state. You come from someplace like Maryland. I come from Accra [Ghana]. I am not from your state. Don't call me state." Later on Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] began to love it, but Jones Corte [Hansen Benjamin William Clifford Kwaw Kwate Aswasabrimpong Jones Corte (ph.)] never minded it. But there were some, Desu [ph.]. "He called me city. He, he called me city. I come from Lagos [Nigeria]. I'm not his city." Well, Frank said to me one day, and there was no track, as in a track-- Speaker 1: Was Frank your closest friend then, by then? Speaker 2: Well, yes. We were best friends growing up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But by then--this is, this is February. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: By then--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) February of 1940. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Oh, February-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, had-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It's come around, hasn't it? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It is 1940. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: By then you're roommates, they're your best friends. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And being an all-men's school, your roommates are always called old lady. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who's your old lady? That was always your roommate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's your old lady. So, Frank said, "City," and he had never called me city. I mean we grew up together. He was Frank. I was either Ross or Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]. They called him Baba. They--Butter, they called him, 'cause Frank was heavy. He was something so special, brilliant also, really brilliant. Any rate, he said, "City, you see those guys?" I said, "Yeah." They're running. There was--they are drawn by, with chalk between the Recitation Hall and the Vail Memorial Library a track was drawn. And this is gonna be Lincoln University's mile relay team and they're training on a green, on a green swat. They had no track. They had a football field and a track. They were running around there, and the coach had measured out 440 yards. It's enormous green. He said, you know, he said, "You can kick their asses, you know." I said, "Frank." He said, "City." I said, "What?" "If you make that team, your dad wouldn't have to pay a penny." I said--he said, "Yeah. They wouldn't offer it to you when you were in high school [Woodbury Junior-Senior High School, Woodbury, New Jersey], but they will--," I said, "Really, if I make the track team?" He said, "Yes." So, of course, I was on that, that relay team going to the Penn Relays [Penn Relay Carnival] (laughter) again. I was on it all--as long as I was at Lincoln, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we also ran in something called the c-- Speaker 1: So you ran on the--this is now '40 [1940]. Speaker 2: Forty [1940]. Speaker 1: Yeah, so in your first year there at Lincoln-- Speaker 2: And '41 [1941]. Speaker 1: --and you're--excited the school, and they gave you a full scholarship. Speaker 2: Yes, I didn't--my father, seventy-five bucks [dollars] was what he had to pay. Speaker 1: All right, and then that-- Speaker 2: My father said he was giving me (unclear). And he said, "And Roscoe Lee, you know they, when he graduated, they owed him," (laughter). Of course, it's not true. It's just that you don't get any of that money-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --just that you, everything's been taken care of-- Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay-- Speaker 2: --by singing and running and getting good grades. Story_ID: 323468 Speaker 1: What about your subsequent years there at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], because I know-- Speaker 2: The what? Speaker 1: Your subsequent years there at-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --at Lincoln. Speaker 2: --mind you, it was such an extraordinary place. Reginald Benn [Reginald E. Benn], whom they called Reggie, he's now--oh, I think he may have died last year--he's a famous surgeon from Boston [Massachusetts]. There was something called a conference on democracy being held, quite naturally, at one of the black schools down South. And I was selected as a freshman--Reginald must have been a junior--to go as delegates from Lincoln. I had no idea what we would do. We were to go there-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and participate. You, you know, you, you would be assigned to a committee. I don't think you had to speak or do anything. It was a conference on democracy. (Laughter) I loved it, in 1940. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm sort of thinking that it was really in '39 [1939]. But any rate, it could have been, like in the fall of the year. Otherwise, it was in the spring of '40 [1940]. I think it was in the late fall. And we take the Trailways [Trailways National Bus System; Trailways Transportation System, Inc.] or--don't you love in conversation, of course, I keep switching tenses? But you'll forgive me that. Speaker 1: Yeah, certainly. Speaker 2: So we take--rather than we took one--so we take, it's either the Trailways or Greyhound [The Greyhound Corporation; Greyhound Lines, Inc.]. They stopped right in front of the arch at Lincoln, heading south. I had never--yes, it was my first time. I know that I went on the track team to run down--we, we drove in cars. At any rate, just before we got to Williamsburg, Virginia, this fellow, I could still see his face, he just looked through the real--the rearview mirror. We had a stop, and he said, "Would color passengers move to the rear?" And Reginald had to look at me as if I didn't know that I was one of the coloreds (laughter). And I said, "What do we do?" I was seventeen or eighteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I said, "What do we do?" He said, "We don't go, we don't go back there." He was one of the most exquisite gentlemen, also, that one could ever meet, Reggie Pearman--I mean Reggie, Reginald Benn. Speaker 1: Benn, okay. Speaker 2: Reggie Pearman was a, a track mate of mine when I was running track in New York. But anyway, Reginald Benn. And so finally we--the next stop is Williamsburg. It seems to me that he's made two stops before in which he said that, after we'd crossed the Mason Dixon Line. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: "Colored passengers move to the rear." He never looked back, this rearview mirror. So, we get to Williamsburg, and right across the street is Williams and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia], where we pull up. We pull up at a kind of a coffee shop. You know the, the college kids are coming and going, soda fountain-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --stuff like that. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he said it again. And they have had passengers down to get on, and they're getting on (unclear). And he does, he doesn't curse; he does nothing. He gets off the bus, and he comes back, and there are two policemen. One is all pockmarked with acne and passion. He must have been a policeman since he was sixteen, which was last year-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and another more (unclear), robust. And they came to us and asked if we were gonna move to the rear. And Reginald said, "No. We think we'll get off here." And they did not touch us. The younger one looked slightly menacing, but I can't swear that. Story_ID: 323469 Speaker 1: You (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They went ahead of us, and we came off. We were not told that we could sit on--there was bus thing where you could wait. And Reginald [Reginald E. Benn] went to a telephone. There is a pay station, and it was outside. And there were so many Williams and Mary College [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia] kids right there, within arm's length. They were right there, and, and here's the bus, and here's this thing, and he calls. I don't know where we were going, Virginia Union [Norfolk Unit, Virginia Union University; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia], Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], or Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], one of them at the conference of democracy. He called whoever it was that answered. He said that he and another student from Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] were put off the bus, and what shall we do? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I, they, we were--Reginald said we were told to wait here. Somebody would be here within twenty minutes. And in less than twenty minutes, it wasn't what is called a limousine, but it seemed very long car, black car. All limousines back then I called them hearses. Anyhow, I had no idea there was such a thing as a, as a limo. I should lean back? What is it? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: But this car arrives, and out steps--I'd seen pictures of him. It was Judge Hastie [William H. Hastie] at-- Speaker 1: William Hastie. Speaker 2: Yes, William Hastie. He was the main person the main person who was gonna speak to us all there at this conference on democracy. And he, not, he didn't do anything to make it look we gotta get out of here fast. He came up and the man with him said, "This is Judge Hastie. This is?" I said, "Roscoe Browne [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]." We shook hands. "This is Reginald Benn," shook hands. He said, "Gentlemen, come." We got in the car. He went like that, and we were gone. Speaker 1: Okay. That was your first experience? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'd been south before when my father [Sylvanus Browne] wanted to visit my uncle, Hugh Victor [Hugh Victor Brown] in Goldsboro, North Carolina. And we were called the kids, my sister [Juanita Browne Neal], my younger brother [Hugh Victor Browne II] and I. And so the kids are gonna go. My three older brothers, they're out doing whatever it is they do. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But, and the three of us and my mother [Lovie Usher Browne] and father, we would drive south, and we didn't have to get--we were all sitting in a rear seat (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --in the backseat. And my father knew something that I--it never occurred to me just that he knew where black folk were. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And if we were hungry, he would, he would come into a town, and he would--I didn't know what he was looking for, maybe the railroad track--maybe a sound or a sight, but he knew where to go. And we might go into my first experience of a restaurant was somewhere down there. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But it was an African American place. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And we'd go in, have something to eat or a bathroom or whatever, and we continued. But I never had experienced it before, "Colored passengers move to the rear." That's the only time too. Speaker 1: And obviously just the way you tell it, it has, it left a lasting impression-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, I chatting like this with, with Camille Cosby, and it never--we got a, we got so away from Lincoln that I forgot to tell her about that moment. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: And it's, it's there. I see Reginald particularly. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I, I didn't feel like a brash, either seventeen--I, I was not more than eighteen, but either seventeen or eighteen year-old-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I, I loved it when he said, "We're not going back." And I loved that, and I loved it when he said but--to the man standing there, he said he, you know, "We're gonna get off. We'll, we'll get off here." Speaker 1: That was beautiful. Speaker 2: And I loved it the way Reginald said it, and we did it. Story_ID: 323470 Speaker 1: I suppose it was the next year after that experience, or it could have been the same year-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --because my memory is that I was a freshman. I could have been a sophomore, but I think I was a freshman. There was another, there was a conference on leadership-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], to which conference came. Now mind you, Lincoln was a small, in population, college. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It had some fame. But when I began, I think population of students I think was five hundred; I think no, no more. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Including the seminar, I think it was five hundred. Speaker 2: (Unclear) so, 1939. Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You don't think it was much more than that, that's fine. Speaker 1: --that's 1939, right. And to the campus came a very young Roy Wilkins, a very young Adam Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], a Louis--is it Louis?--Granger [Lester Granger], Walter White [Walter White], Lillian Smith, the playwright and author, Eleanor Roosevelt, A. Philip Randolph, W.E.B. Du Bois. I think I have them all. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The most extraordinary moment for me was--my memory is that I was really seventeen, but if not, it was the next year-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that as each one spoke, we were all deeply moved. I mean all the students were there. All the professors were there. There were twenty-eight professors I think then, fourteen black, fourteen white. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The president was, was Wright, W-R-I-G-H-T, an extraordinary man. He looked exactly like Mr. Tibbs, the elder, Walter Livingston Wright. Speaker 2: Walter Livingston Wright (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Livingston Wright. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm almost digressing 'cause he in-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --never mind. I will get--remind me to tell you something extraordinary-- Speaker 2: About-- Speaker 1: --that he did. Speaker 2: --about, okay. Speaker 1: Well, any rate, and I think he introduced the conference. I mean yes. Well, as each one spoke, all the students were very deeply moved. We were amazed at these celebrated personages, all of whom we knew, that is to say we'd seen them-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in the newspapers-- Speaker 2: Newsmakers. Speaker 1: --and on news reels. Story_ID: 323471 Speaker 1: My memory is that maybe two other gentlemen spoke first [at the conference on leadership], and then Mrs. Roosevelt [Eleanor Roosevelt], and then Lillian Smith. And they all touching--she was directly--I'd never seen her in person before, so directly, sensibly, and simply honest, Mrs. Roosevelt. But as each one of the men whose names we, as young African American men, we were looking--I mean this is somebody I want to be. And as each one spoke, I know we're all thinking--and that person who spoke, spoke with such certainty and self-assuredness that you really knew he was saying, "I'm the leader." And it was a young and brash Adam Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], and he got us going. And there was an, a more simply stated Roy Wilkins, and it was more--intellectual is maybe the wrong word. But any rate, he got us going too. And then Granger [Lester Granger] spoke, and in some way it was, we were rabble-roused-- Speaker 2: Good. Speaker 1: --and it was, and it was wonderful. And then Walter White [Walter White] spoke, and he spoke so specifically about the struggle, as protected by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], that he had us on the edge of our seats when he would describe lynches and lynchings and things that were going on then-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --throughout the country but mainly down south. And then A. Philip Randolph spoke, and I thought, I've heard the most astonishing or astonishingly, elegant, and real manly personage, almost the way I felt about my father [Sylvanus Browne]. It was wonderful to hear him. And then finally Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] stood to speak, and everybody on stage, everybody on stage, they all looked, and they looked at us almost like that to say this is Moses. And mind you, each one who had spoken before began his or her remarks by lauding the reputation and the scholarship of Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. And they named great distinguished people who had gone there, every single one of them. I think I was seventeen. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I will never forget Mr. Du Bois' first words. He said--I mean they all said, "Morning." "Good afternoon." Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: He did not. His first words were: "I don't like Lincoln University. I have never liked Lincoln University. And I don't know that it is possible for me to like Lincoln University, despite the fact that I want you young men to know this is an extraordinary institution of high scholarship. But I tell you, when an institution, particularly a black one"--he may have said colored; we were still colored then-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --"particularly a black one cuts off one half of the intelligentsia of this, of this, of this people," he said, "how can I possibly"--well, the, it went berserk because everybody got it right away. We don't let chicks come to this school (laughter), and they got it. But his first words, and he wasn't kidding: "I don't like Lincoln University, never liked Lincoln University," (laughter). But he did say that he was there because this is not only a worthy thing, that you young people are worthy, and how worthy we are. But he finished with a little Philip--you must get them as you grow up and go out of here. You must get them to change this policy of making this an all-male (laughter) school, all-men's school. He was extraordinary. Story_ID: 323472 Speaker 1: Absolutely (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And mind you, it was such a small amount of people, 'cause they're there a week. Speaker 1: Right. (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You could, you could chat with them and-- Speaker 1: So you did get a chance to-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, when-- Speaker 1: --do--and did you seek out-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --W.E.B. Du Bois? Speaker 2: --I put myself in his path. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And he was wonderful to me. He was wonderful to me. As he had told them--when I graduated finally in '46 [1946]--I should have graduated in '43 [1943], but the [U.S.] Army came in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they told us that if you--I was going to be a senior. And I was president of the student body. I was junior I remember. And the dean suggested I get all the seniors in who were going to be--and there was the Army. And they told us, "If you young men will join the ERC, the Enlisted Reserve Corps, we will not take you until you have graduated. We will, you will not get one of those letters." Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And we were liable to go, you know. So we joined, and they took us (laughter). They, we joined-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) They did not keep their word. Speaker 2: They took us, I mean was so quickly; they took us all. And when I came back from the Army, I had to come back to graduate. And I was a student instructor during that time because they thought I knew all that stuff. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But I did, I graduated. Then I came back to teach. But between graduation and coming back to teach, I went to Middlebury [Middlebury College, Middlebury, Vermont], to the French School. It's a summer thing-- Speaker 1: Ah, okay, okay. Speaker 2: --into to a French school to get more and proceed more in French. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It was an astonishing thing because you were not allowed even to sigh in English. You could not speak a word of English. Speaker 1: How did you happen to be selected (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If you wanted to sigh, you had to go: oh, la la la; that was the sigh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You applied. And if they would--and they would look at your record. And my record in French at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] was, was good, so they said, "Come ahead." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And these great people, you know, Andre Morize, who was the teacher or head of romance languages at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and was the world's authority on Voltaire was our direct teacher and Gizanski [ph.] and Mademoiselle Bray [ph.] avec le nez, we used to kid because she had this extraordinary nose. But she knew it, and she knew her nose was also lovely. But it was Mademoiselle Bray with a nose, avec le nez (laughter). But any rate, so I came back to teach and then decided I should get some graduate work, or Horace Lambond [ph.] decided I should go to get a doctorate. Speaker 1: Okay, now let's get the chronology straight. Forty-three [1943], you enlist in the Reserve [U.S. Army Reserve]. Speaker 2: We're taken before. It's in part of '42 [1942]. Speaker 1: Okay. And they promised you, you can graduate (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We graduate, 'cause I'm due to graduate in June '43 [1943]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They took us. Speaker 1: Before that time. Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), if you-- Speaker 1: How long did you spend in the Army? Speaker 2: 'Til it [World War II, WWII] was over. Speaker 1: Okay, so '45 [1945]. Speaker 2: Almost two years. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: And when it was all done and we were still in active service in Italy, when it was done, they had all these Americans there in France and throughout Europe, but mainly France and Italy, and they didn't know what to do with us. They didn't have enough boats to get us all home. And it was only by boats that they were bringing us home. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And the decided, oh, these are young Americans, robust, we'll have some inter-theater. It was an ETO, which is European Theater of Operations-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and the MTO, which is the Mediterranean Theater of Operations, and we would compete in whatever sport it would be. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And ours, we--they knew that, they knew who Mozel Ellerbe was, and he was an extraordinary sprinter. I'm thinking he was from Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], but he was world famous. He was brilliant. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he knew everything that had happened in the CIAA, the Colored Intercollegiate Athletic Association [Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he went down the list, and he saw my name, and he knew this kid can run. He's a half-miler or a miler if he'd only make up his mind. So he came and he gave me a list. Story_ID: 323473 Speaker 1: He [Mozel Ellerbe] gave me a list for me to go in--down through the 370 Combat Team [370th Regimental Combat Team] to go down through this list. They gave me a jeep. And I wasn't driving, and so somebody would drive me around--it was great--and to ask these fellows, "Do you want to be runners? We're gonna run against the ETO [European Theater of Operations] and some little races against each other around." And some were really great runners-- Speaker 2: Right Speaker 1: --whose names I did not know. Speaker 2: You were a part of the Mediterranean Theater of Operations (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I had to go to find one fellow, and I find him, and his name is Harrison, William Harrison Dillard. So I go and I find--I call him (unclear). I go and find Harrison. I know nothing about him. And he tells this story better than I do, but more sweetly he tells it. I said, "You're not going to know what to do with us, so you know, those boys who used to run," I said, "An Ellerbe says that you used to run." I said, "Look, you don't have to be good," to Harrison Dillard. I really said, "You don't have to be any good. You don't have to be any good," says, "You're gonna have these trips to Paris [France] and place and Vienna [Austria]." Well, he ran like fifteen [seconds] flat with his, with his boots on. But I, I mean everybody in track knew who he was. I had no clue because I simply ran, ran the Penn Relays [Penn Relay Carnival], ran in the CIAA [Colored Intercollegiate Athletic Association; Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association], and I would run in the middle of Atlantic thing against a few schools that were not African American, or colored, and I'd win. So, but I didn't follow it at all in the Garden [Madison Square Garden, New York, New York]. I never looked at that at all and didn't know who won the national one, and I did not know that the greatest living hurdler was the fellow to whom I had just said, "You don't have to be any good, (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: "Just if you can run, you know, we'll all do this." It was great. Story_ID: 323474 Speaker 1: That was your primary job when you went into the [U.S.] Army, just to find people who (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh-- Speaker 1: --could compete on track? Speaker 2: Oh no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was, no, I was part of the I and R platoon. It was called the Intelligence and Reconnaissance platoon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And during the actual war [World War II, WWII], it was my platoon in Italy with an, with a 370 Combat Team [370th Regimental Combat Team] that would go out and find where the Germans were, where the Italians who were still fighting were--and go through minefields. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Only two members of the teams did not have to do that: Richie, James Richie and Roscoe Browne [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], because I could translate some of the stuff that these guys would go and bring back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My German was not great. I mean Professor Cuner [ph.] would said it was never great because he said, "You don't, you do, you, you, you don't put the interest in German that you do in French and these other romantic languages," he would say. But at any rate, my German was pretty good. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I could read all the military stuff-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in German, so I had to translate things they would bring back, and so many of those splendid young men died. I mean one truly great man, Johnny Birdsong [ph.] was his name, from Mississippi. And he was a battlefield commission officer, but on the battlefield he was Sergeant Birdsong to us. And, and when he became lieutenant and he said, "Come on guys, don't forget I'm Johnny," and he was just marvelous; he was everything that--and I think Gary Cooper was splendid in, in 'Sergeant York.' But Johnny was that essence of what York [Alvin York] from the back country, you know, the backwaters, sort of that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --John Bir, John Birdsong. And he died after he went back through a minefield to bring back the guys who were still over there, and they terror to get back through it because one or two had gone off and exploded. And he had to lead them back, and he did. But he was hit by a wayward shrapnel from a mortar, an 88 [88mm] I think. I used to know all those guns. I think it was a German 88, I think, (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --and he was killed that way. Now, I was part of that group. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was only when the war-- Speaker 1: And we know nothing about this group. Speaker 2: --when the war ended-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --did we decide, when they decided to let's have some fun because you can't get these guys home. Speaker 1: Right. What, where, where I was going, we know nothing about it. This is the first I've heard of it, at least, and so, it's a part of this history that you need to give us there. You were bringing intelligence back-- Speaker 2: They did. Speaker 1: --white and black soldiers. Speaker 2: Yes, the soldiers, no, no, in the, the 370 Combat Team, all of this enlisted men were black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Some of the officers were black. The officers mainly in charge were always inevitably white. Story_ID: 323475 Speaker 1: I used to own, but what happened to my musette bag, I will never know. But at any rate, I did have material that would tell how we were regarded by people as far back as Washington [D.C.], that they may turn and run, so stay behind them and shoot them. And they would not. As the young men came in to be--who were lieutenants who had been to Fort Benning [Fort Benning, Georgia], young black men who came in as lieutenants. And they, their specialty, as was my brother Douglas' [Moses Douglas Browne], their specialty may have been heavy weapons. No way. They were made platoon officers because those guys are so available-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to the front and to death, all of them were made--not one was allowed to be, to stay a heavy weapons, heavy weapons officer. That my brother Douglas lives today is partly because he and his guys just knew, "We're not gonna go this way." And they led those young men into battle and back. But the I and R [Intelligence and Reconnaissance] platoon simply would trace through with patrols to get enemy--they'd go through the line. They were not to fight, but they would--we all wore-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --carbines. They would fight if they had to, if they were shot at maybe. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they would bring back the stuff, and anything that had to be directly translated, I did. But the one who plotted it on the map was James Reese--Richie [James Richie] who was this extraordinary draftsman from Texas. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he was incredible. Speaker 2: And this information was shared with both black and white-- Speaker 1: Oh, sure. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because, you see, the officers-- Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: --who were in charge were white. Speaker 2: Okay, right, okay. Speaker 1: Colonel, Colonel Sherman [Raymond G. Sherman], captain-- Speaker 2: I've, I've never heard of this group. Speaker 1: Oh yes. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: All of the enlisted men were black-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --the 370 [370th Regimental Combat Team] and the 371 Combat Teams [371st Regimental Combat Team] were all black enlisted men. Speaker 2: Were their extraordinary skills and efforts ever recognized (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I think not. Speaker 2: --by this country? Speaker 1: No, no, that has not happened. Speaker 2: To this day-- Speaker 1: That has not happened. Speaker 2: --that has not happened. Speaker 1: That has not happened. Speaker 2: And this-- Speaker 1: And no great battles were won by 370 Combat Team, but they did fight. At one place the leader-- Speaker 2: Is-- Speaker 1: --Captain Reedy [Elmer F. Reedy], and he was a white man, when the guys saw him run at (unclear) Arno, the some of them turned and ran, too. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It was a fight at (unclear) Arno, and that's the only one that I remember was given any publicity in Stars and Stripes and in the American newspapers. But they were stalwart, and they were extraordinary, and they did hard work. Speaker 2: I was going to say that they may not have engaged in any major battles, but just the work and the intelligence that they-- Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: --bought back. Speaker 1: --I promise you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean Mark Clark [Mark W. Clark] came by once and, and did-- Speaker 2: General Mark Clark. Speaker 1: Yes, and he did shake Colonel Sherman's hands. And he was the company commander, and he was a marvel, absolutely wonderful man. He shook his hand, said something great about this group, the, the combat team, and he shook the hands of, of these two young white lieutenants, and he shook Richie's hand, and he shook mine. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, okay. Speaker 1: Well, we were the ones there, so. But then he did seek out Johnny Birdsong [ph.]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He said I understand there's--and he was very tall, very straight, and voice had no tenor, no nuance. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He wanted--and had to go and find him. I mean Johnny would not show up there. They had to go find him. He wasn't hiding anywhere. He was there wherever his barracks--'cause we were sometimes in tent. Sometimes we were--mind you, when you think of young men who, who are hand to hand in battle in that war there's nothing for us to say. I mean, if I say to you that I was blown out of a ditch once, what is that? I, I mean literally it was like being in an earthquake. The thing went off and explosion--and reverberates. And you're in this thing, and you're blown out, and you blow back. And if you don't have any shakeup in your head, of course, obviously anybody can tell that I do. But if you (laughter)-- Speaker 2: It's-- Speaker 1: --it's nothing really to talk about. But these young men who were in that company of the I and R platoon, they crossed that place. I didn't and, and James Reese--Richie didn't either, but the rest of them did. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And we were the I and R platoon, which stands for intelligence and, and reconnaissance. Story_ID: 323476 Speaker 1: And my best friend, Madison [ph.], Madison what? Oh, something Madison. It will come back. The war [World War II, WWII]--the night--the, the day, it was around my birthday that was done. It was something in May, and it was close to May 2nd, maybe May 4th, something or other, and it was all over. And we were up in La Spezia, Italy, and it was done in some wayward Italian mortar. I, I used to know the, the caliber of that mortar. It's a, it was a piece of junk actually, but it was wayward. When I say Italian, I don't mean that with any deprecation. I mean only that the Italians already said we're, we're done with it, but there was some, perhaps young or maybe some older, some older fasciste, who had not really given up. And they knew there were Americans here where nothing was going on. I mean the war was over, and nobody was there. It was not far from there that they found, the, they found Mussolini [Benito Mussolini] and Clara Petacci trying to escape not far from where we were. And they caught them and shot them and hanged them, you know, and they hanged them (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: --feet down--heads down. And it was around that time, and there was no more fighting to be done. And some wayward mortar came over and, and exploded. And one shell, one piece of it, one shrapnel, struck my best friend. And when they told us it was all done I asked, "Could I have a jeep. I want to go back to Lucca [Italy]," where they said they had, had buried all these young men. I just wanted to see if he was really there. I just didn't want to believe that he was there, 'cause I saw him. He sort of smiled, and he was taken to GRO, grave registration office [sic. Graves Registration Service (GRS)]. And then I came the next day, and they said no, he's gone; he's, he's dead. And, and they told me he's in Lucca. And I said he can't be. And so I wanted like a week and got a jeep and-- Speaker 2: You wanted to see for yourself. Speaker 1: See something that said his name, just wasn't gonna have it, such a waste. Speaker 2: Yeah, and no-- Speaker 1: --and twenty-one or two-- Speaker 2: --recognition of--I mean these people-- Speaker 1: They were there, and they were Americans. And they came back here, and they were, and we were not Americans. Story_ID: 323477 Speaker 1: Now you found Dillard, Harrison Dillard-- Speaker 2: Isn't that great (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) this great hurdler. Speaker 2: "But you don't have to be any good," (laughter). Speaker 1: And of course (laughter)--I'm trying to remember it. I couldn't remember him being on the cover of either Ebony or Jet or something like that. And-- Speaker 2: He's on the cover of everything-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --by '48 [1948] and '52 [1952] when he-- Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: --surprised the world by winning the Olympic 100 meters, because in the tryouts for the 110-meter high hurdles, he kicked a hurdle and stumbled and didn't make it. And you have to be one of three. All the guys who won know he's the best, and he's not going. But, I should know his name, but I can't think of it. The fellow [Eddie Finnegan] from Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio] who is Harrison's coach had put him in the 100 just to get him warmed up, revved up for the, the high hurdles. So he placed in that. He placed three. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's all you have to do. So he went to the '48 [1948] Olympics [1948 Summer Olympics, London, England] as this third stringer. And now-- and now he wins it-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 2: --and then waits for a year then goes back and wins his own race. There's nothing like him-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --never was. Story_ID: 323478 Speaker 1: You served. The war [World War II, WWII] is over. You're ready to leave service and come back to the States. Speaker 2: My very first thing, I get home, and I'm so happy to see my parents [Lovie Usher Browne and Sylvanus Browne] and my sister [Juanita Browne Neal]. And none of my brothers--one is there. Victor [Hugh Victor Browne II] is not out yet. He's in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps], the younger one-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --youngest. And my brother, my brother Douglas [Moses Douglas Browne] is out, and he's back, but he's with his wife out here in California (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, in California. Speaker 2: My brother Ted [Arthur "Ted" Browne] was in the [U.S.] Army also, but he was now with, I guess he was with Mae [ph.] then, they call Mary [Mary Brown (ph.)]. She, she, she still lives. She's here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that was in Virginia, I guess-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because, yes, he was the coach of, of football at Virginia State [sic. Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] at some point--either State or Union, one of them. And my brother Bus [Sylvanus Browne, Jr.], of course, he came quickly. He was already married, and he came quickly because, well, he loved all of his kid brothers, but Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] was rather special to him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was there and fine, and he was happy. However, after I did all of that, after I did that, I, I'd simply called Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] and said, "I'm ready to come back to finish to graduate." And they said, "Please come ahead," so I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I graduated in, rather than in '43 [1943], I graduated in '46 [1946]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's three years later. My presence was not a good one, except almost all of the, yes, the whole student body rather, I think rather loved me. There were three or four who were favorites of mine when I was an upperclassman and they were freshmen or sophomores. But I've come back, and now I'm a member of their class. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I was the class of '43 [1943]; they were the class of '46 [1946]. And I come back and for--I can see them. I shan't say their names, but it was like a disservice of me to return and be to the campus what I was before I went because they wanted to be whatever it was that I was. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And they should have been. And when I returned I was once again, whoever that was, that, whoever that person Roscoe Browne was who left, he's come back, because they all knew we had not graduated, the bunches of us. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And that made me I think, yes, it's in the yearbook. Jack [ph.] wrote that word, obtrusive. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: It, it was literally that; that was obtrusive because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you were teaching part of the time and trying to-- Speaker 2: A little. I was, you know, I was teaching--I was still a student, so I was-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --I--what do you call a student profess--student instructor. Speaker 1: A student instructor, right. Speaker 2: I mean I took over a class or two when something happened. Story_ID: 323479 Speaker 1: But I must rush back to tell you one quick story about when I was a freshman. Dr. Reynolds [ph.] who taught history was on the, we had a pond at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. And he went ice skating, and he broke his leg. And whoever sat it, I think in Oxford, Pennsylvania, just four miles away-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --if, if our doctor on campus had set it, it would have been fine. But they took him to that hospital, and it was set, and, and it was set wrong, so they had to re- they had to break it again. So they knew that there was living in, in the seminary--I forget the name of that building--many African students who, some of whom were studying theology but also one or two graduate students. And they did not like this charity, particularly the one I'm about to speak of, but because they didn't have to pay while they were at University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the one who really knew history as well as Dr. Reynolds was, was Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah]. And so they asked him: would you like to take over that class? And he, of course, and he took over this class. And I--mind you, all the classes were small, like sixteen, seventeen people. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: If we had thirty, that, it must be a laboratory. It was rare that we would have--there was--you really had direct contact with the professor. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's when he first gave me the moniker that he gave to me later when he--became president of Ghana and came back to this country. And the Lincoln alumni, he was going to speak at the United Nations [UN]. And the Lincoln alumni gave him a--a breakfast at the Waldorf [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York]. And those of us who were around, Dr. Cannon [George D. Cannon], everybody, called and said, "Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], you must come." By then I'd become an actor. And mind you, the entire time that I had seen him on Lincoln's campus I never saw him smile. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, the, somebody from the UN and some official from the United States--I don't think it was a president. I don't know who it was, somebody, they escorted the president of Ghana into the room where we were at the Waldorf. I will never forget the jaunty walk, this look. And then he seized old Lincoln classmates even once because he was a freshman there, too-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --young, I mean these men. Mind you, when he took over this class I was only a freshman; I was seventeen years old. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he was already getting a graduate, doing graduate work. He came in that room, this jaunty walk, and then he saw these men in this great, arresting, embracing, flashing smile. And he called out to one of them, "City," (laughter)--(unclear) it was just great. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And while he spots me down the nine, and he says, "Excuse me one second." Now mind you, this thing that I'm gonna tell you is what he said about me when I was this freshman when he took over this class. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He comes down and he said, he said, "I'll be right back." He said, "Roscoe Lee." I said, "Oh, sir." He said, "Manny Mitchell [ph.] tells me you have become an actor." I said, "Yes, sir." He said, "You must come home." He said, "Of course you cannot direct or be in 'Othello'"--no, "You cannot direct or be in 'Otello.'" I said, "The opera?" He said, "You're still a fresh kid, aren't you?" (Laughter) I said, "Sir?" He says, "No, I mean 'Othello,'" that you can't do it here, there, you"--I said--no, he said, "Home." And I said, "Home? I don't want to go to Woodbury, New Jersey." "You are really a fresh kid. I mean home to Ghana." He said, "Jones Corte [Hansen Benjamin William Clifford Kwaw Kwate Aswasabrimpong Jones Corte (ph.)] is there. And he said, 'Bring Roscoe Lee home.'" He said, "You can't do 'Othello' there." I said, "Why not?" "Because you can't cast the other parts. I've kicked them out," (laughter), just so, I can't--and mind you, he hadn't. You know, there were only some people who he knew were either devils or, or not honest men. He did let them go, but he kept anybody--he, he was just a marvel. And it was this country that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --helped destroy him. Story_ID: 323480 Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely-- Speaker 2: It was the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) absolutely. Speaker 2: --thing a-- Speaker 1: Absolutely, and-- Speaker 2: He [Kwame Nkrumah] was just--but I will never forget the jaunty walk and the smile when he said-- Speaker 1: But he remembered you from the-- Speaker 2: Oh, he said, "Roscoe Lee [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]." Mind you, he saw me all the time there. He saw me. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He came to see me run at the Garden [Madison Square Garden, New York New York]. He and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Azikiwe [Nnamdi Azikiwe]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when they were both at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and at University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And I would run at the Garden when they were still going, getting these extra degrees, and I'm at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], and I'm running for the New York Pioneer Club-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --at Madison Square Garden. They would unfurl these great robes and just wave and call out my name-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and was Azikiwe. Remember, he was-- Speaker 1: He-- Speaker 2: --you know, the first real president of Nigeria. Azikiwe, yes. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Well, he's from Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: But, but you, you've (unclear)--the first you ran in the, in the Garden now-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --when, were, were you at Lincoln, or were you at Columbia? Speaker 2: Oh no, I was going to Columbia-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --living in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: At Lincoln, I ran only--I think maybe--did I got to--'cause Lincoln had no money. I don't know if I got to the national championships. I won, I won the CIAA, the Colored Intercollegiate-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Athletic Association [Colored Intercollegiate Athletic Association; Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association]. I won that in a half-mile. I won it in a quarter-mile. I may have won it in a mile, not the same year. I was bored easily and quickly. I don't know if Lincoln sent me to the nationals outdoors and certainly-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --not to the indoors. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was when I was going to Columbia. I was running--oh, Dan Ferris [Daniel J. Ferris] was the head of the AAU [Amateur Athletic Union]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Usually, now, now there's a president. There was one then, but the secretary was really the one who ran it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Presidents knew it; everybody knew it. It was Dan Ferris' show. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Dan Ferris was the one who selected young men to run on teams going to other countries. And so it's what, 1949, 1947 maybe, '47 [1947]. I don't know when I went to Columbia, '47 [1947]. I graduated in '46 [1946] from Lincoln. I think '47 [1947]. It's all mixed up, but I did go back to teach. But at any rate, Dan Ferris had seen something about my running at Lincoln, and he selected me for the American team running in, in British Guiana [Guyana] and Trinidad [Trinidad and Tobago] and Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was amazed he knew my name. And he appointed as the coach of that team Joe Yancey [Joseph J. Yancey, Jr.], who was the man who founded the New York Pioneer Club. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: They used to love to say, of Harlem [New York, New York], but of course it was Harlem. That's where he founded it. But at any rate, so that's where I met him, Joseph Yancey. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my-- Speaker 1: By now you had learned to run in those spikes (laughter)? Speaker 2: Oh yes, I, yes, I won. Spikes, I--they were indoor spikes as well, you know, for the Garden-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for the armories where you also ran the flats; you wore flats, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --not sneakers but flat track shoes. Oh yes, I had learned--I learned to look--shortly after that I had to wear spikes, and I ran in them at, one in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --Penn Relays [Penn Relay Carnival]. Speaker 1: Penn, Penn Relays, okay. Speaker 2: I mean Capone [ph.] looked, and you know, "You've got to wear spikes," he said, "You've gotta," (laughter), you've gotta ding and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But any rate, so, there I meet Joe Yancey and his wife, Josephine [Josephine Greaux Yancey]. She still lives. She's great. Story_ID: 323481 Speaker 1: He said, "So do you go--are you going back to Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]?" I said, "I may to teach, but I'm, I'm--been accepted at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]." I said, "I've been accepted at Columbia and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--grad schools in literature. And I don't know which one I'm gonna go to. It depends on my friend, John Trent [ph.]. And if he's going to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], then," I said he's going to be in law. So I called up, I, I called up--I, I was en- enrolled at Harvard. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I had this, that great man, Mac, McKennan [ph.]--the hell is his name--great teacher of Shakespeare [William Shakespeare]--and I couldn't--I kept calling the law school. I was only there less than a week at Harvard, and I kept calling the law school wondering, where the hell is John. And I got somebody there who said, "Oh, Mr. Trent did check in, but he's decided to go to Columbia Law School [New York, New York]." And so, I mentioned the girl, (unclear). I knew she was gonna be there, so. I will think of his name. He's the--(unclear) one of the famous--think of any African American. You actually resemble him a little, great lawyer in Pennsylvania. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's a slightly longer name but great famous. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: John was of that family, but his name was Trent. And this man was an uncle. John's mother was that family-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --whoever that is. It will come to me. Speaker 2: Not, not Higginbotham? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Isn't that a great name? And why isn't he on the [U.S.] Supreme Court? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Why not indeed (laughter) because the president is breathtakingly stupid and devious and all those other things. But, so I find him at Columbia. And I call Columbia, and I say, "Is it too late? I'm a week"--and they said, "No, no, you can still come to graduate school, and, and you will have--you will come. And Maurice Valency will be your advisor." And I call International House [New York, New York], and they say, "Well, yes, we have students from all countries." I said, "No, I'm American." Oh, I had already called them before from British Guiana [Guyana]. And I'd said only in case I don't go to Harvard and I go to Columbia, may I stay there? And they said, "Of course." So when I called them again I'm New York [New York] now, they said, "Yes, once again, we take"--I said, "I'm not; I'm an American." He said, "Well, yes, we still take--we have some, some amount of Americans in this, at the, at International House." Well, I called Joe Yancey [Joseph J. Yancey, Jr.], and he said, "You're here?" He said, "So you're gonna run for the Pioneers [New York Pioneer Club]?" I said, "Of course." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And Joseph, when he used to tell the story, he'd say that's why he came to New York, to run for the Pioneers (laughter). I said, "Yes, of course," so I--he asked me to meet him for dinner at--no, he said, well, he said, "We've--oh, Gaga [ph.] is here." I said, "Who's Gaga?" He said, "Jo's mother," Josephine [Josephine Greaux Yancey]. They call 'em Joe and Jo. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Their first daughter is named Jo-Jo [Josephine Yancey Skeete] (laughter), Jo-Jo, Michele [Michele Yancey Walton], and Yvonne [Yvonne Yancey Mayers]. He said, "Well, Gaga's here. It's Jo's mother," he said. "And so, the kids," I've never met their kids. I've never met them except in British Guiana. And these were tiny babies, a year apart-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --first and third, two years apart (laughter); they're a year apart. And I said, "No, I've, I've been here now three days, so I know where I am. I'd like to walk into--is it in Harlem [New York, New York]?" And he said, "Yes." 'Cause I knew his street was in Harlem. He lived on 130th [Street]. Yes, 420 West 130th, right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I said, "So I'll just walk down and over." He said, "Yeah, well, it's called Frank's [Frank's Restaurant, New York, New York]." I said, "Great." Story_ID: 323482 Speaker 1: It was just a great--the whole place was great then. Then it went to hell, and now it's really coming back. Speaker 2: Yes, it is. Speaker 1: I went to have lunch with my aunt who recently, she called, found me. I was in New York [New York]. She said, "Darling, could you come up?" I said, "Come up where?" She said, "I bought a house. I thought I told you." I said, "You bought a house where? Upstate [Upstate New York]?" She says, "No, in Harlem [New York, New York]." And I tell you, on this ragged, awful street two, three years before, and my aunt has this extraordinary palace, and the whole street is lovely. And it was a mess when she saw it to buy, rat and, and some rats with two legs. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It was infested. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And now she's turned this into a really lovely, lovely baronial home. Speaker 2: Wonderful. I'm glad she's doing that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's, it's extraordinary. Speaker 2: --because-- Speaker 1: So I walk over to Frank's Restaurant [New York, New York], and there are Joe [Joseph J. Yancey, Jr.] and Josephine [Josephine Greaux Yancey]. And it's the most marvelous dinner. And then Honi Coles [Charles Coles] come in, you know, the great dancer. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And they say, "Hey, Charles." That's how they intro--Joe was a very formal man. He'd be amazed now if he were alive that I'm saying Joe. I always called him Joseph. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He would be amazed that I referred to him as Honi. I always called Honi Coles, Charles. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: And he loved that, even when we did a Broadway show, you know, 'My One and Only'-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --with Tommy Tune and Twiggy. He was--and he got a, he won a Tony [Tony Award; Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] for it, Honi Coles. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But anyway, he came in. He said, "Oh, this is Charles 'Honi' Coles." And I said, "How do you do, sir?" And he said, "Why don't you sit and have a drink?" And he does, and he sits. And then they remember they've gotta go and get Gaga [ph.]. Gaga has to go back to Brooklyn [New York], the mother of Josephine. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he said, "We've gotta get you home." And Honi said, "Where are you living?" I said, "International House [New York, New York]." He said, "Right up here on Riverside [Riverside Drive]?" I said, "I got him. I'll take care of him." And he took me. They went home. And Honi was managing, sort of managing the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]. So he said, "You want to see one of the shows?" I said, "Yeah." So we go down. It's Dinah Washington. And you walk in, and there's a seat right there. And you know, you're still very close to the stage-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --if you've been in the Apollo. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: You're right there. He said, "I'll come back and get you." He said, "Have fun." So I watched it. He came back and got me; took me backstage, and there was Ms. Washington on the floor with her fellas shooting crap, craps, shooting crap. What is it? Speaker 2: Craps. Speaker 1: Crap, craps. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And she said, "Honi?" He said, "Yeah?" "And who is sweet stuff?" He said, "Oh, that's Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]; that's Roscoe Browne." She said, "What do you do, sweet stuff?" And Honi said, "He's a runner." She said, "Numbers?" (Laughter) I said, "No, ma'am." And she said, "Sweet stuff, do you shoot"--oh, I meant never to tell the world; now I'm telling the world yes-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that my--I'll be dead before they all know that she--that my, her name for me was sweet stuff. So, (laughter) she said, "You, you, do you know the bones?" I said, "No, as a matter of fact I don't." She said, "Come on down here," so I went down. Mind you, she's younger than I. I know that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I knew it then, and she was younger than I. I was twenty-six, twenty-something by then. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Any rate, she says, "You really don't know?" I said, "No, ma'am." She said, "Will you please call me Dinah." I said, "If you don't, if you stop calling me sweet stuff." She said, "Then I'll just call you SS," (laughter), "and that'll be between us," she said. She--"So if that lane, that lane's got the, he's got the bones. He's gonna throw 'em. He's gonna make a point. He's come--here, they'll come up. Then he's gotta make that point." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: "So if that lane over there wants to bet against him, he says, 'Bar you don't.' He says--if he says that, you say, 'Bar you do.'" I said and he--he said, "If he said, 'Bar you do,' you say, 'Bar you don't.'" I said, "Okay." So he threw 'em. He had to make five. And this guy said, "Bar you do," and I said, "Bar he doesn't." She says, "No, honey, you gotta say 'Don't,'" (laughter). Speaker 2: Not doesn't. Speaker 1: Right. It was that fast and that quick, and I didn't even mean to. I mean to say, "Bar he don't." I said, "Bar he doesn't." "No, no, no, honey, you gotta say"--okay. So then I joined the New York Pioneer Club (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and began running for them. Story_ID: 323483 Speaker 1: Did Dinah [Dinah Washington] later become a fan of yours-- Speaker 2: She came twice to-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --she, when she was in town. She came twice to the Garden [Madison Square Garden, New York, New York]. Well, we had lots of friends in common. She knew that Miles [Miles Davis] and I were friends and Stan Getz, Pres [Lester Young]. We were amazed to come just to those, to those things. I used to pretend it was because the whole Pioneer Club [New York Pioneer Club]--(unclear), "You're gonna come to see Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]--how can that little bitty thing with, with his stride this long-- Speaker 1: But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) we're gonna see him run." Speaker 1: --but then what seems amazing is you were better known at this point for your athletic ability-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --running, than you were for your scholarly ability, which was you-- Speaker 2: Well, what's really amusing about that is, you know who [HistoryMaker] Roscoe C. Brown is? Roscoe C. Brown was one of the 99 [99th Pursuit Squadron]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, those, the 99, you know, that, those flyers. Speaker 1: Oh, right, oh yes, you mean--I, I do know. Speaker 2: Yes, 99th (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We used to go the movies together, in fact. Speaker 2: Yeah, Roscoe? Speaker 1: Yes, right. Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause he's from Washington [D.C.]. Mem-- Speaker 1: Yep, and-- Speaker 2: --remember his father? He's Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: His father was in the government. Speaker 1: Right, exactly. Speaker 2: Roscoe C.-- Speaker 1: I-- Speaker 2: --Brown then was teaching at one of the schools, not downtown, but uptown in Manhattan [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, he-- Speaker 2: No, he may have been teaching-- Speaker 1: --he became the-- Speaker 2: --downtown. Speaker 1: --he became the president of Queens College [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: That's correct, but he was teaching somewhere downtown in a college when I was running and living in International House [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's one of his big jokes, is that he said, "I don't understand it. You"--I, I used to get his mail because they knew that I was a scholar, and he'd get my mail 'cause they knew he was the athlete (laughter). And then when I taught at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], I taught for one year. I taught a course in poetry. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'd become an actor by then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then it really was pronounced that I would get his mail, and he would get mine. And he used to love to enter a room. We were doing something for a great lady, Ruth Owens [Minnie Ruth Solomon Owens], Jesse Owens' widow, and it was at one of those big boardrooms down on Wall Street. And there were a bunch of us who had been asked to be there to, to get all this money out of these guys with the loot, and I was one of them. My name was given, done by her. And so I'm there. It was actually Herb Douglas [HistoryMaker Herbert Paul Douglas, Jr.] who, who did most of the inviting, and so it was Herbert who had asked me to come. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, Herbert was a great runner and broad jumper and all of that and a great (unclear)--official, official officer. And Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. loved it particularly in that room and any other room. He'd come; he'd--I'd see him see me. And he'd go way to the other side and yell, "Hey, Roscoe," just so that I would turn and say, "Oh, hi, Roscoe," (laughter). He loved it. He's a great man. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: You do know him? Speaker 1: I do know him-- Speaker 2: Oh, he's a-- Speaker 1: --and, and I had forgotten him. Speaker 2: You went to school. Speaker 1: And, and I did--we didn't go to school together (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he's older than you are. Speaker 1: --but we used to run together a few years ago. We went to see the first 'Rocky' movie together. Speaker 2: Ah. Speaker 1: And as we're leaving the movie, 'cause we had gone to almost all-white movie and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --he's telling everybody, "I was rooting for Rocky, and he wasn't," (laughter) and so forth. But I've-- Speaker 2: That's funny. Speaker 1: --I've talked to him and, I've talked to him in the last two months. Story_ID: 323484 Speaker 1: Where I wanted to go from here is how you got into your acting career. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I mean you're a scholar. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You're a runner. You're making quite a name for yourself (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everybody knew in '52 [1952] that I was, I would go to the Olympics; everybody knew it and they were sure of it-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and so was I. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In '51 [1951] I was-- Speaker 1: Now would that, this be your first trip to the Olympics? Speaker 2: No, it would be my first attempt. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: So in '48 [1948], I go to the Olympic tryouts. That dreadful man, an absolute Nazi, Avery Brundage, Brun- Brundage. Speaker 1: Brundage, right. Speaker 2: What is his name? Speaker 1: Right, Brun-- Speaker 2: He had allowed one of his friends to be a starter. The guy was a mayor I think of, of Cleveland [Ohio]. The guy had nothing against me. He just was an amateur. He didn't know what to do. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So were all lined up. I'm in the final six, and we were all lined up. There's Mal Whitfield-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --who became one of my closest friends. Always during the indoor season, always, Malvin stayed at my apartment-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in New York [New York]. Gotta stop? Speaker 1: Yes, we, we do. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, you're almost in the shot (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so-- Speaker 2: Go on? Speaker 1: --let's go on. Speaker 2: So always--we became really great friends. So there's Whitfield, and there's Reginald [Reggie Pearman], and there's Jack Dianetti. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Is it amazing that I will not forget that name, a little fellow from Michigan? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He said, "On your mark, get set." He shoots the gun, and there was a break. He said, "Everybody up," so everybody got up except Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]. I turned that way. And our numbers then were only on the backs of our shirts. So, you know, two you're out. Now I think they give it to everybody. And then the second one, if you're it, you're out, still you're out. But he called my number, and I said, "No, I"--not much, but I knew I had another chance. So we're back down again. I remember that was rare for me running in--outdoors. I always used to run the half of a crouch position. But that was rare, except I knew how to be calm and not leave until the gun goes off. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he shot again, and he had to shoot it a second time. And I should have jogged with the other guys; I didn't. I turned back around that way, kicking my legs, and he called out my number again: "You're out." There was such a hubbub I cannot tell you. I thought Joe Yancey [Joseph J. Yancey, Jr.] might commit murder. The New York--it was somewhere. I don't know where it was, but it wasn't in New York. It may have been in Ohio. I'm thinking it's really College Park, Maryland-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --were the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]? Speaker 2: --the Olympic tryouts, I'm, I'm thinking. So, but at any rate, the New York track writers, Jesse Abramson, Joe Sheehan, Lou [Lou Greenberg]--oh, Lou, what is your last name--marvelous fellow, and Bernie--Barney Kremenko. I thought they might kill that man. They came running onto the track, and they're saying it's a kid, and it's, and it's the Olympics, and you can--and the guy didn't know what he was doing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: About Avery, they tried to appeal to Avery Brundage. He was having none of it. I was out. So that's what happened in '48 [1948]. And who knows, I might have made that team. I was quite good, but-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --I don't know if I would have made that team. Speaker 1: So that was 1948 (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Forty-eight [1948]. So in '52 [1952] and '51 [1951] I had run the best in the world in 800 meters. Story_ID: 323485 Speaker 1: So, the Olympic team is set. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, and I am not on it in 1948. So, there, it's, it's, yes, the Olympics [1948 Summer Olympics] are gonna be in London [England]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So they're gonna sail on a boat. Of course, that's what you sail on, isn't it? They're gonna go-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --by boat to England, and all the guys are in New York [New York]. I mean the whole team. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I live in New York. So we're gonna have dinner, and we--did I make dinner? Maybe, I could have, but we went out maybe dinner. We went somewhere into Times Square [New York, New York] area. We were about eight. And they're all going to the Olympics except for Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: They were all on the team-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --is-- Speaker 2: Jack Gianetti is-- Speaker 1: No, Dianetti's [Jack Dianetti] not going 'cause-- Speaker 2: Dianetti. Speaker 1: --he wasn't one of the final three-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --in the--I mean he didn't, he didn't place, what I mean. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He may have been fifth or sixth for all I know. But it's, the half-mile would be Reginald [Reggie Pearman] and Malvin [Mal Whitfield]. That's not fair, Roscoe. Who is the other one? And then there would be Hugo Myelco [ph.] running the quarter-mile, I mean, really great friends. So we are all been to dinner, and we're just walking up Broadway, Harrison [Harrison Dillard]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Adasee [ph.], Irving Mondschein; we're all walking up Broadway. And it's Irving who said, "A newsreel," 'cause back then, they had these newsreel theaters. And we all knew that you could see the entire thing; you could see all of it, the Olympics--I mean tryouts. And they were scrupulous back then. They would show you anything you, they'd show you the whole thing. Then they stopped. I said, "Wait a minute; let's go," 'cause they said, "(Unclear) Roscoe is not going." I said, "Let's go and see." Well, when it got to the 800 meters, we all leaned forward. And I never heard such splendid cursing in my life, and it was true. That's how I knew (unclear). Only one who had broken twice was Jack Dianetti. The only one who never broke was (laughter) Roscoe Browne, never broke, didn't cross it once, never got a chance to cross it, 'cause the dummy said, "You're out of here." Speaker 2: So everybody knew you had really -- Speaker 1: I really-- Speaker 2: --been the-- Speaker 1: --had not broken. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And the only one who had broken twice clearly was--he's a nice kid. I don't know if he lives or where he is, so I never mean to pick on him, but I remember his name. It was Jack Dianetti from Michigan. And each time I'd simply turn. You'd see me get up, just walk back that way, and then when he say, "On your marks," I turn around and get back to the, to the mark. And then the second time I turned, and my number is on my back. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It's the only one he can read (laughter). Speaker 2: So, so he said-- Speaker 1: He said that number. Of course, the other guys were jogging up the field. You could see they're still now, they're jogging up. But he called my number twice, and that was it. Speaker 2: And Brundage would not change anything or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh no. Speaker 2: --overrule him, or-- Speaker 1: In my paranoia, I've always known that Avery Brundage didn't want Roscoe Browne on that team for reasons that are unclear to me, but-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --there it is. But mind you, who knows? I, I may not have placed among the three-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, finally (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But-- Speaker 1: --anyhow. So we get to '52 [1952]-- Speaker 2: --but we'll never know because you, you were never given the chance-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --or the opportunity. Story_ID: 323486 Speaker 1: So we're now into 1952. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And in '51 [1951] I had been the best in the world, 800 meters. I did it in Paris [France] at the Stade Jean-Bouin. It wasn't a particularly outrageously fast time. It was just the best of the year-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --all over the (laughter) world. It was 149-something, although I had run faster than that in the next year--no, that same year in, in Austria, in Vienna. It was 149-something, point 2. And then I was challenged by Elmar Brugh [ph.] because he was after all the European 1500 and 800 meter champion that year. So I had come from behind to beat him that day. I was just back in the rock. And the Americans say, "Ross [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], go get the lead out, come on." And I came around the--and won it. So he challenged me on, on the, over the PA system. I mean the, the reporters came to the mics and said to him in French, of course, 'cause he's French, "What's that like?" And he said, "Well, I, I really am 1500 meters," he said in French. "And I'd like to challenge Monsieur Browne to a thousand meter race." And then they brought the mic to me to--they start to translate, and I said, "Mais non, je comprends." And I said, "Perhaps," in French, I said, "Perhaps Monsieur Elmar Brugh does not know that I am the American 1000-yard champion twice," I said. I said, "What's a few little tiny meters to me?" (Laughter) And so the race is on. We went to the track [Stade Olympique Yves-du-Manoir], Colombes [France], Colombes, right. Speaker 2: Okay. And this was late (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that was like-- Speaker 2: --nineteen fifty-one [1951]? Speaker 1: This is '51 [1951]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So it's there like a week or two weeks later. And there are other people in the race from around the world, but I do win it. And I set an Americans--it's called American citizens, 'cause nobody runs a thousand meters. It's, it's not a race anywhere, so it was called American citizens championship and record. The record that I had broken that day was Glenn Cunningham's, 'cause he was a miler. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But he ran this thing there for these people in France and Paris at Colombes, is the name of the track. So, my friend, Mal Whitfield, years later we were--he's living in my apartment in New York [New York]. And I ask, 'cause he knows I would never open anything personal, never, never, never. I said, "What is that little book?" He said, "That little book?" "Yeah, yeah." I said, "It's not the chicks," 'cause I knew it's, I knew which book he kept the names of girls. He said, "Well, anytime any of you, particularly you, go to Europe or anywhere and set a record I write it down there." 'Cause you know, we're in the same event-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --except he would not run thousands. Indoors, Malvin was, he had won the indoor 600 [meters] when I won the indoor 1000 [meters]. But we both were 800 meter runners, half-milers. I said, "And you're going after them?" Well, I had three somewhere in Europe. He went to these tiny little towns and broke them and, 'cause he knows me better than most people. He knew that once I heard about it, I would laugh my (laughter) head off. It's only one he's never found, and it's too late because we both can't run anymore. But it's too late. I, I told him recently, "You never found the one in Oberhausen [Germany]." He said, "Do you have a record?" I said, "I have a track record in Oberhausen." I said, "You found Ludwigshafen [Germany], and you went to that track, Colombes, and broke what was my American citizens record," (laughter). And I think I have one somewhere else. I'm not sure (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. That's-- Speaker 1: But you know, nobody-- Speaker 2: --still standing? Speaker 1: Nobody has it then. It's not even a record that says I won it or something. Speaker 2: Right. But that record is still there. Speaker 1: I guess it's still there-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --maybe in Dublin [Ireland]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It's, it used to be my proudest boast that I was twice the Irish national champion, because you know, track works the same way as tennis, for example. The American U.S. Open [U.S. Open Tennis Championships, New York, New York] tennis champion this year is Roger Federer from Switzerland. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It's the same thing in track. If you run it, you are that country's open champion. Story_ID: 323487 Speaker 1: So I won it [800 meters] one year in Belfast [Northern Ireland] and one year in Dublin [Ireland], so I was twice the Irish national champion. They had then asked me, one reporter said, "Can't I get one quote?" He said, he said, "I'm new, and I've got to--." I said, "No, my friends are taking me off to dinner to their home, and their mothers are waiting to take me home." He said, "Just one quote," and I gave him one quote. It was in the, it was a banner line in the Dublin--whatever paper that was. It said, "Keep Ireland Black," (laughter), 'cause you know what a black Irishman is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yep. Speaker 2: The, the '52 [1952]-- Speaker 1: What this knee went into a cast-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --that year, I mean after all that running in Europe. And I won every place I ran in Europe (laughter). Then I ran, I ran--I had won most of the American indoor things. And then something happened. We don't know what it was, but it was this knee. And we went to see a doctor, and by we, I mean Joseph Yancey [Joseph J. Yancey, Jr.] and a couple of other people took me. I can see the man, and he put it in a cast or something. And then in, in late April, Hugo Myelco [ph.]--he's a doctor now, and he lives in, just outside of San Francisco [California]--and Hugo is studying medicine. And he called me, and he says, "Ross [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]?" I said, "Hugo." "We had a lecture today at med school from a Hans Kraus, and boy, I'd like for you to meet him. And I have a feeling he's available to us. And I don't think you should have that thing on your leg." So I said, "Where are you?" He said, "Well, Richie [ph.] and I"--Richard is his younger brother--said, "Richie and I, we're just on your side of the bridge," 'cause they live in Queens [New York]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I said, "Okay." So he came to my apartment, and we looked up Hans Kraus, knowing he wouldn't be there in the easy dictionary--phone book. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: There he was, Hans Kraus, Central Park West. We call him. It's around seven or eight p.m. And in somewhat strong, Germanic accent he said, "(Unclear)." So we went to him. (Cough) The first thing he said was, "Would you like me first to remove this medieval cast," (laughter) "on your knee?" And he did, and he did that thing with purple dye. And he said, "It is true your--the meniscus was tearing, not yet torn." And in that instance--I don't know if he said that. I think Hugo translated something. Wasn't in German, but he said, "No, Ross, I think he means it's not torn," because he's giving me these exercises. And after a while he said--asked me if the tryouts were--he puts something, a wrap, but not that cast. So he removed it on my birthday, and two weeks or so later were the tryouts in '52 [1952]. I'm not certain if that's so, but I think it was two weeks or so later. And I did go and started around, like I heard, I heard something click. Reggie Pearman was right next to me. He heard it click, too--stepped off and that was it for me and the Olympics. That was that. And I keep blaming it all on Avery Brundage (laughter). What is name? Speaker 2: Avery Brundage. Speaker 1: Brundage. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Of course, he didn't think about me at all. But-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but loving and beloved paranoia makes me believe he didn't want me on that team. Speaker 2: And that click was the meniscus just tearing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Well, finally they went into, they went in like this, you see, with a scalpel. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And it was in three pieces. Story_ID: 323488 Speaker 1: 'Cause now, you see, they don't. That is a--one very quick thing about that--it's not really about that--so my father [Sylvanus Browne] dies. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I go to Woodbury [New Jersey] for his funeral. My mother [Lovie Usher Browne] has long since died. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He outlived her twenty years. They were both seventy-seven when she died. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he lived to be ninety-six. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: So nineteen years. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, I'm there at Frank's home, Buchanan [Frank Buchanan (ph.)], when I was this kid, remember? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: City. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I said, "I've seen everybody except Ted [Arthur "Ted" Browne]," (unclear) my brother. And so at some point, maybe somebody's wife somebody said, "Ted, Ted's, Ted had the same operation you had some years ago, you know, where they--." I said, "Then he won't be here." I said, "It takes ten days or so before you can do this with your leg." You cannot do it because instantly upon their using a scalpel, instantly all tendons, all stuff, they all instantly begin to atrophy. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Instantly, there's a--they begin to atrophy. And so I'm, I couldn't do that. I said, "He won't be able--." I said, "When did he have it?" And they said, "Yesterday." I said, "Are you kidding? He can't be here for dad's funeral. No way, can't even be in a--." I said, "Will they"--one person asked, "Well, maybe in a wheelchair?" I said, "No, he can't be here." I look up and here he is twirling a cane, coming down the street. And he gets there. I said, "You are such a fraud." He said, "What is it, kid?" Now, remember, I told you his real name is Arthur-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Arthur William Edward Browne. I said, "Ted, I had that operation. You can't--." He says, "No, they've got a new one. It's named after me. It's called arthroscopic," (laughter). Isn't that outrageous (laughter)? And that's it. Speaker 2: So, that, that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But mind you, it was yesterday-- Speaker 2: --that did it-- Speaker 1: --and he was out the next day, you know. 'Cause you know, they just pluck it now-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and those guys are out. Speaker 2: And I notice in football players that-- Speaker 1: Out-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --'cause they, they do the laser thing. They just pluck it right out, the meniscus. Story_ID: 323489 Speaker 1: We're going into 1952. Your running career is over. Speaker 2: I'd run once or twice after that but not much. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can't really run because it [meniscus] hasn't snapped. I heard it click, but it hadn't torn completely. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And I was not gonna run anymore. But when Jamaica in '52 [1952]--I guess it was, in '53 [1953], or later actually, because I became an actor in '56 [1956]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so it must--I think I was already an actor, except--no, I wasn't. I was working for Schenley [Schenley Import Corporation; Schenley Industries, Inc.] when Jamaica received its independence-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --or took its independence, or it became independent. And Herbert McKenley, one of the great runners ever from there-- Speaker 1: Herb McKenley. Speaker 2: --and Herb and, and George Rhoden and Arthur Wint, and they wanted Joe Yancey [Joseph J. Yancey, Jr.] to bring a team to celebrate the independence of Jamaica. And they said, "And don't come without Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]," so they did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, they knew that I wasn't running really anymore, but I was still young and in great shape. So I did go, and we had a marvelous time. I think that was it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't think I ran anymore because I went to work for Schenley Import for four years for no reason at all except that they read in the paper that-- Speaker 1: That-- Speaker 2: --I had done this American thing in Paris [France], and then they read that he will not be going to the Olympics [1948 Summer Olympics, London, England] and because of his knee and that he will not be going back to teach, 'cause I had been teaching at some point between '50 [1950] and '52 [1952]. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And they read it, and they thought, my goodness, he teaches college, must be well-spoken. One guy said, "Yeah, I saw him be interviewed after he won a race." And so, they sent for me-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --and offered me this humongous job, which had no title. They had to make up one, and nor did anybody know what it was I to do, I was to do. It was called the national sales representative for Schenley Import Corporation (laughter). Speaker 1: So you represented the company? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And when they had this big press conference at Empire State Building [New York, New York], which is where their offices were then, I'll never forget, Major--what's his last name from Jet, Major [Major Robinson]-- Speaker 1: Oh, right-- Speaker 2: --we became really good friends. Speaker 1: Right, right, I remember he lived out-- Speaker 2: --Well he-- Speaker 1: --in Claremont [California]. Speaker 2: --kept complaining. He said, "Why"--but he wasn't the only black journalist there. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: There were more around, but mainly there were sports journalists and one or two from the business community, because after all, Schenley Import-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know, Schenley Industries [Schenley Industries, Inc.]--and this, this kid was an American. I had won the American championship twice on, also on the relay team twice or three times. I don't know. I don't remember now. And never got Major asking--he says, "Roscoe." Now everybody can hear him, but he really (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Major Robinson. Speaker 2: Major Robinson. He said, "Roscoe?" I said, "What?" "Why didn't you want us to say it's the first black national sales representative?" I said, "Major, let me say it to you once more slowly. I am the only national sales representative. There never has been another one of any color." He said, "Shit." He says, "Is that true?" I said, "Yeah, there are no other national sales representatives of any color, any height, any width, any race. I am the national sales representative for Schenley Import Corporation." And so I was that for four years, and nobody knew what, nobody knows what I did, and I didn't do anything. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: They kept giving me bonuses and raises, and I'd say, "What for?" Story_ID: 323490 Speaker 1: Shall I give you one example? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Would you like, really? Speaker 2: Yes, one example (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. One day--because what I was meant to do is something close to what is called the missionary. You know the missionary in liquor business? If somebody goes out and talks about the brand and gives you lots of free stuff, and they're called, in the liquor business, missionaries (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: They are called that. But any rate, so I was meant to do something not unlike that, except I was not to be giving it away. They gave me once a year--I'm sorry, once a month--$300 worth of liquor would show up at my apartment for me, for entertainment. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I hardly drank at all then. And I'd just give it to my friends. I had met Norma Millay [Norma Millay Ellis] by then and, and her husband, Charles Ellis. I'd load it up to take it Upstate New York but to--mainly to my friends. But one day, I'd only been with the company [Schenley Import Corporation; Schenley Industries, Inc.] I'd say a month or less when Davidson [ph.], who was the vice president of the company and the head of the metropolitan company. But O'Leary [John O'Leary (ph.)] was the head of the import company, but he was vice president. He and Ed Paretts [ph.] called me at home and said, "Kid, can we, we pick you up? We're gonna go to Chicago [Illinois]." I said, "When?" He said, "Tomorrow." I said, "Fine." They pick me up; we went to the airport, and we go. And we get to--what is the loveliest hotel, old, in Chicago? We get there. Is there one called Brown or some color? Anyway, we get there. And we go to check in. And I turn and I said, "(Unclear), where are your bags?" And he said, "We're not going anywhere, kid." I said, "What do you mean you're not going anywhere?" He said, "We've got to go to Wisconsin." He said, "Let me subs- you have a suite here, and there's, these, there will be a folder in your suite." And I said, "What do I do?" And Davidson said with this great smile, "Just straighten out the market, kid." And they get it, and they go off. Yes, I keep thinking we had dinner; we did not. They go off. I go up, and there is this thing that's already there, big. It's been sent by air, air people. And in it, a list of names. And you might want to visit these people, and, and it really means visit like a bar or a restaurant. And there were all these--they were just lovely. The ones I took care of mainly in New York were in Harlem [New York, New York], but some others were downtown and in Brooklyn [New York]. I didn't have a Visa[AB1] for the Bronx [New York], but I think I wanted to, but I didn't. So, I go to one place because I was hungry, and it serves a great steak there, so I go there. And I meet the owner, and he comes over. And oh, they had pressed these things on me, and they were in my folder, cards. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'd never had a business card before in my life, didn't know what they were. I just opened, and there it was: Roscoe Brown [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], national salesman (unclear). So I said, "Yes," and hand him my card, and that amused me very much to do that. And he was very nice. Story_ID: 323491 Speaker 1: Okay, cut to the chase. Oh, by the way, he took me to--Sugar Ray and I were friends. Speaker 2: Sugar Ray Robinson. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he used to come to this--I became friends because Joe Yancey [Joseph J. Yancey, Jr.] introduced us. So we used to go down to the--hell's the name of that bar that he owned? Speaker 2: Oh, Sugar Ray's [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Sugar Ray--Sugar Ray's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Sugar Ray's it was. I used to go there a lot. I mean all the track guys used to come to see us run. And he used to complain to me, "You never come to see me box." I said, "I find it so cruel, and I can't bear." I said, "The whole purpose is to knock somebody senseless." I--he said, "Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], I'm an artist." I said--and he, and he went and looked at his friends. He said, "I never said that before." I said, "But you just said it, didn't you?" Well, this guy took me. He said, "You want--do you like boxing?" And this is voice: "You like boxing, kid?" I said, "No, sir." He said, "Well, we got Sugar Ray and Randy Turpin [Randolph Turpin] tonight." And he said and I got ringside. I said, "Did you say Sugar Ray?" "Yeah." I said, "I would love it." He said, "You said you don't like boxing." I said, "I didn't say it. I just said, 'No, sir.'" We go. It's ringside. Randy Turpin--Sugar Ray used to love to tell the story that, "I saw Roscoe, and Randy almost cold-cocked me," (laughter). At any rate, I went to see it. Okay, months later, I'm back at Empire State Building [New York, New York]. I almost never went to the office, almost never, but I go to the office. And there's something there to sign, and I said, "Where is everybody to--" Elsie Sullivan [ph.], Lorett Sullivan [ph.]. She said, "They're in there watching the Kefauver hearings [Kefauver Committee; U.S. Senate Special Committee to Investigate Organized Crime in Interstate Commerce]." I said, "Oh, really?" So I go in, and there were big sofas. Schenley [Schenley Import Corporation; Schenley Industries, Inc.] did everything very correctly. It was, it was (unclear) quite lovely. And there was this big screen here, not big, big like we have now, but a big screen. So I'm behind them. And that hellion from Alabama, Mack [ph.], he's saying, "Mr., Mr., Mr. Guzik [Jake "Greasy Thumb" Guzik], were you--." He said, "I am afraid to answer. I, I refuse to answer, (unclear) it may incriminate me." What the hell is his name? Mississippi maybe--really a hellion senator. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so he said, "This is the third or fourth time you said that Mr., Mr., Mr. Guzik." He said, "Did your lawyer on your left tell you to say that?" "No." "Did your lawyer on your right tell you to say that?" "No." "Who told you to say that?" "I seen it on television yesterday." Well, that was my grandfatherly friend, and I had no idea, and I yelled out loud. I said, "Ed," I said, "That's my friend. That's that grandfather guy who took me to the boxing match." I said, "That's Mr. Guzik." He said, "Roscoe, that's "Greasy Thumb" Guzik." He was the trigger man for Al Capone. Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he was a lovely old grandfatherly guy who introduced me to his sons and his grandchildren. And he took me to this boxing match. And he had this big marvelous steakhouse in Chicago [Illinois]. And I described him to them when I came back. I said, "Yeah, and I met this great grandfatherly guy, and he's just wonderful." His name is Guzik, meant nothing to anybody until we saw him on television. Speaker 2: That, that's amazing. Speaker 1: "Greasy Thumb" Guzik (laughter). Speaker 2: I remember that name, remember that name very well. Story_ID: 323492 Speaker 1: Now, how do we get from your being this high-powered executive at Schenley [Schenley Import Corporation; Schenley Industries, Inc.] to your acting career? Speaker 2: I bet you I can do it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That sounds like a switch-- Speaker 2: --very quickly. I'll do it very quickly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: I should not tell you this secret, but then when the people see this I'll be dead, right? So I will tell you-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that whenever I'd tell him a story that he really loves, Laurence Fishburne always asks me, when we're out in company: "Would you tell him about the (unclear)," and then he always says sort of (unclear) to me, "And take the A train." He loves all of the excursions that goes on, but-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --he knows you have to--you can go directly to the point maybe. But he always says, "Take the A train." Speaker 1: Take the A train-- Speaker 2: So, I'm taking-- Speaker 1: --on this. Speaker 2: --the A Train-- Speaker 1: Good. Speaker 2: --for you right now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On one Friday afternoon my phone rings, and it's the president of Schenley Import, O'Leary. And he says, "Hey, kid, this is John O'Leary [ph.]." I said, "John"--I can't remember if that's his name, something O'Leary. I said, "Hi, sir, how are you?" "You probably read in the paper, at least in the Tribune [New York Herald Tribune], that"--'cause they jumped, you know, that, "We're going to merge with the domestic company." (Unclear) there's been--there was gonna be no more Schenley Import. We're merging with the domestic company, and it's just gonna be called Schenley Industries [Schenley Industries, Inc.]." I said, "Yes, sir, I did read that." He says, "Well, you didn't know we're gonna kick you way upstairs, I mean. We've got a really, another fat job. And we even, this time, we know what, we know what we're doing. We know what you can do for us, and it's," he said, "it's really up there." I said, "I don't know, sir." He says, "What? I thought you liked us." I said, "I do, I, I"--and I named all these people. I said, "I love Davidson [ph.]; I love Larry Yafa [ph.] and Ed Paretts [ph.]; and Ms. Till [ph.]; and Lorett Sullivan [ph.]; and Sally Spear [ph.]." I said, "I love all of them, and I love the way you guys introduced me to the, to the underground." He said, "It's called underworld, kid; it's called underworld," (laughter), 'cause there's great stories about that, but-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --I'm on the A train. I said, "So, I'd, I, but I'd just like to think about it. Can I call you tomorrow?" And he said, "No, tomorrow is Saturday." I said, "You mean I have a weekend to think about it." "That's right, kid." I said, "Thank you, sir. I'll call you Monday." I hung up. I called my, it's a great butcher. I called my butcher who also had great fish and ordered some things, began to make dinner, realized I hadn't asked anybody; then I called Leontyne Price, who said, "Yes, I'll be right there." And I called Josephine Premice. She said, "Oh, darling, I'll be over." She's in Brooklyn [New York]. And I called Susan Fonda [Susan Blanchard], who's then married to Henry Fonda, but we were close friends. They were just divorced, actually. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so she said, "Yes." Story_ID: 323493 Speaker 1: Now you've invited all of these people to dinner (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, only because they were close. And although I did not know anything I was going to say to them, I knew these were the three women I would want to say it to first. Speaker 1: Right, these were-- Speaker 2: I knew that. So any rate, whatever it was, I didn't know what it--I mean I had no idea. So, we're having dinner. I've made dinner. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I know exactly what I made for them, but we won't go into that. I made dinner. And Leontyne [Leontyne Price] said, at some point, "I suspect this dinner." Because when she's talking with us she is of exquisite English, but she's clearly from Laurel, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: She said, "I suspect this dinner." And Susan [Susan Fonda; Susan Blanchard] said, "Why? We're the three who taught Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] to cook. You know, when you and he used live to at the--when Leontyne and I lived at something called York Studios [ph.]--you did all the cooking. He never knew, and so when he got this, this big job at Schenley [Schenley Import Corporation; Schenley Industries, Inc.] and he had, then he got this big apartment, we knew that he's gonna have to be able to turn an egg over or boil water for his tea," 'cause I hate coffee. But Josephine [Josephine Premice] always could see everything, said instantly, "What do you want to tell us, darling?" And nobody knows where it came from. I said, "Tomorrow I'm gonna be an actor." And those women, boy, did they attack. And they were all in this business, either by marriage or by what they do. There's nobody like Josephine in a nightclub or on stage doing what she does or, and did so beautifully, and nobody like Leontyne. She's already this super diva. And Susan is the daughter of Dorothy Hammerstein [Dorothy Blanchard Hammerstein]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Oscar Hammerstein's [Oscar Hammerstein, II] wife. She's not his daughter, though he always thought of her as his daughter, 'cause she was seven years old when Dorothy and he met and fell in love. And Dorothy divorced Blanchard [sic.] in Australia and married Oscar, but he brought Susan up in--I mean she's that close to show business is what I mean (laughter). And-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and she was married to Henry Fonda. Josephine, yes, Josephine said, "What do you want to tell?" So I tell 'em, and they are outraged. Speaker 1: Outraged. Speaker 2: Josephine said, "You're not a kid, you know," 'cause I was thirty-five-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --thirty-five years old in 1956. And Susan said, "You don't even know you're black," which meant, of course, you don't know how tough it's going to be. And Leontyne said, "They'll have you bearing torches," because that's operatic, you know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --the torchbearers in opera. We call them in theaters spear carriers (laughter). But at any rate, and they went to town about it. Speaker 1: None of them liked the idea? Speaker 2: No, I mean Josephine actually spoke the great truth is that, "Hey, darling, we'll never be able to go to Pavillon [Le Pavillon] anymore." The Pavillon was really the chicest and the loveliest restaurant in New York [New York]. Well, I have made all this money working for Schenley, and I used to take them to, one at a time, but take them to Pavillon. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, they really assailed me. And I went into the kitchen to turn this dessert that Josephine, I'd watch her make in, when she was still living, yes, she was still living at home with her father [Lucas Premice] and her sister [Adele Premice]. It was a great dessert, something-flambe. And I went to make that, and I turned around and I said, "Where is Jo?" And Leontyne said, "She'll be right back." And Susan said, "And you're not to leave." I said, "I live here." I said, "You three witches will have to go"--that's not really what I said but (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --if anybody goes. "But she'll be right back." She went out, and she came back with trade papers. Story_ID: 323494 Speaker 1: Now I had all these friends in theater, but I had never, ever read a trade paper. I never read Variety or Show Business or Backstage. Josephine [Josephine Premice] said, "All right, darling, now let's have a look." And so she tells me this, and she said, "Look at that. Would you like to be, do that character?" And she reads it aloud. She reads it invitingly. I said and that's a great role. She said, "Well, about forty thousand actors who've been acting for years, and they'll be the ones," (laughter) "after that role, and one of them will get it." And I said, "You're not gonna stop, are you?" And Susan [Susan Fonda; Susan Blanchard], really feeling I'm being really assailed, said, "(Unclear), are we going dancing?" I said, "Yeah, the guys are meeting us at--." I said, "They'll be coming here." Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I didn't invite them dinner. It was only after I had invited these three and began cooking did I tell--yes, that one, two, three women, yes, two guys to come or to meet us at the Palladium [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, I said, "We'd better go." And so they, they're kissing me on either side and saying, "We don't mean to pick on you, but Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], you can't do this. I mean really you just can't do this. I mean God, I mean you had a career coming in this business thing. And, and you'd be rich. And my goodness, who knows what they're gonna do with you." And I said, "I haven't told you that they were gonna kick me farther upstairs." She said, "What?" I said, "There was no longer gonna be Schenley Import [Schenley Import Corporation]. There's gonna be the only Schenley Industries [Schenley Industries, Inc.]." I'm saying this in a taxi. But we all go to the Palladium. We have a marvelous time. And I finally get everybody home, and finally I'm alone with these three papers. And I open the first one. It's Variety, and it's a foreign language. I didn't understand anything (making sounds). I didn't know what it meant, but it was I opened Backstage, red light gossip, 'cause it really does bore me, and I threw it away. I opened Show Business. It was page twenty-five. I really do not remember page numbers, but that page was twenty-five. And I said that--this was Friday, and it said Saturday was the last day for actors to audition for the inaugural season of the New York Shakespeare Festival [Shakespeare in the Park] in Central Park [New York, New York]. You'll (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now let me stop you-- Speaker 1: That's what it said. Speaker 2: --because I just want to be sure that we understand this. You had never acted, never gone to an acting school, never entertained the idea of becoming an actor-- Speaker 1: I never entertained the idea of becoming an actor. I had never gone to an acting school, and I had acted at International House [New York, New York] a little bit. We did little some things with, as, because we were all international. And we did a play, and, and we did another play, that's it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then Trzcinski [Edmund Trzcinski] knew that two of my friends--I mean two of my friends knew that Trzcinski was doing this play. And I'm, I'm still going to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] then. And I'm, I'm running. He said, "Come on be in it, Roscoe, it'll be fun," Saul [Saul Glushach (ph.)] and Ellie Glushach [ph.], and so I go. And Trzcinski's the guy who wrote 'Stalag 17.' Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: And we knew him, Ed Trzcinski, so I went, some little part, Lazarus or somebody, only because Lazarus dies and comes back. And I looked like one who had died and come back (laughter), so I played that role. But at any, that's it. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: In college [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] two times, two plays. My one line in one play was, and I said it exactly this way: "This gun will shoot a bullet through a five-inch board." And one other play I was in was T.S. Eliot's, a grand piece in the--'Murder in the Cathedral.' Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was it. But I had no notion nor any hinting in my person or any outspoken anything that I knew. I simply said, "Tomorrow I'm gonna be an actor." Story_ID: 323495 Speaker 1: Well, this is the second time you've done this in your life. The first time was: I'm gonna run track and beat everyone else out there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, only because he [Arthur "Ted" Browne] said, "Gosh, mom [Lovie Usher Browne], can't he do nothing yet?" And then, "Wouldn't you know he'd go out for a foreign sport," (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I knew that day, and I just went and did it. But any rate, so I read it. I did not presume to think that I could act, but I knew I knew the literature already. I'd taught some of that in, at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so I went down there. The next day was Saturday, and I went there. And I'd do you my whole audition, but that would outrage the world. But, by six p.m. I had my first professional job. And the first words that Joseph Papp said to me after the director had me read and whatever, and I realized this, this must be Papp. I had not heard of him. All of theater knew his name. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But I knew nothing. And, but (unclear), he was just sitting in the back in this audition. And there were a lot of actors there to audition. It was in a little church [Emmanuel Presbyterian Church] down the Lower East Side [New York, New York]. And he just came down, and he looked at me. He says, "You're new to me." I said--he said, "Well, you're new to me. How long have you been an actor?" Meaning, why have I not seen you? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I said, "Well, I've been an actor for twelve hours, but I have no intention of bearing any torches." And he broke up laughing, and he said, "No, you're good. You love words." He said, "You see"--these were his exact words: "Shakespeare is a whole world, and you're part of it." And I stayed there, and he said, "Okay," and I said, "Thank you." He says, "I'm Joe Papp," just like that. Speaker 1: And that play was that he-- Speaker 2: 'Julius Caesar' [William Shakespeare]. Speaker 1: 'Julius Caesar.' Speaker 2: I was the Soothsayer-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I'd not acted, you know--and Soothsayer in the first half and Pindarus in the second half. And he loved it when (unclear), they continued doing plays and I'd say, "Joseph, there's no role here for anything." I said, "Petruchio's servant something, anything, some, one of those little hangers-on." Well, I was a hanger-on, and, and it was, it, it made Colleen Dewhurst this 'Taming of the Shrew' ['The Taming of the Shrew,' William Shakespeare]. And, and Jack Cannon, who was one of the great people, he threw an absolutely made up fit. He came--we were all there sitting in the park [Central Park, New York, New York], or on the Lower East Side, 'cause we began the Lower East because the park wasn't ready yet to put down those chairs and just build a stage. He said, "Can you beat that?" And he's just cussing. He was a most marvelous curser. You really knew that he had invented all the words. He said, "They like me all right. And they raved about Colleen." He said, "Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] doesn't have a line in it." And they talked about how this marvelous guy moved through (laughter) the--and it was I, and we laughed ourselves silly. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: Colleen says, "All you gotta do, darling, is walk." Story_ID: 323496 Speaker 1: I just want to take you back. For Monday morning, you had to announce to Schenley [Schenley Import Corporation; Schenley Industries, Inc.] that you were no longer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, I-- Speaker 1: --going to-- Speaker 2: I called. I didn't call O'Leary [John O'Leary (ph.)]--I called O'Leary's; he was not there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, his secretary and general, it was Ms. Till [ph.]--I said, "Ms. Till, its Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]." She said, "Oh, my darling, how are you?" I said, "O'Leary called me Friday." She said, "I know. So, it's a great big fat job. Are you doing it?" I said, "No, I'm gonna become an actor." And a long, long moment, not, not as long as I'm doing it but long. She said, "You know." I said, "Yes?" "Oh, I think you'll be marvelous." Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: She said, "I have a feeling he will think so, too." I said, "Should I call back to speak to him?" She says, I" will tell him because he is out in Long Island [New York], and who knows when he'll get back. They're having meetings about this merger," she said, "We with those, with those"--she said that word, "those domestics," 'cause we were the import company. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: We handled only Dewar's White Label, which was the (unclear) thing and Dubonnet, some dreadful gin--I am told by gin drinkers; I don't drink it--some equally dreadful rum, Carioca [Ron Carioca], I think, and a Canadian whiskey that can never become famous, but we had Dewar's White Label scotch, which could make anything else sell. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: All you had to do is promise them eight bottles of Dewar's (laughter) or a case. Story_ID: 323497 Speaker 1: And so you started off with the Joseph Papp Theater [The Public Theater, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: That's correct; that's exactly where--its [New York Shakespeare Festival; Shakespeare in the Park] inaugural season in 1956, and we got to Central Park [New York, New York] actually in '57 [1957] because it took them that while. And Joseph [Joseph Papp] was still fighting with Moses, you know, Robert Moses, the-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --commissioner of parks-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --who was determined that we pay, and Joseph said, "No," I mean that the audience pay. He said, "No, this is going to be free Shakespeare." And they decided, therefore, he has to be a Communist. (Laughter) They (unclear)--it was that quick, that instantaneous; of course, he's a commie. Speaker 1: Right. Your--how long were you with Joseph Papp theater (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seven seasons. Speaker 1: Seven seasons. Speaker 2: I, I, my truly great roles were the Fool in 'King Lear' [William Shakespeare], with Frank Silvera, who played King Lear. One has to read the play to know that the Fool ranks in lyrical beauty with Hamlet. And he's, he's an exquisite character. And I knew something that nobody else knew, and I still know it. I think nobody else does know it, and I'm neither gonna tell 'em. I know where the Fool went, and I know where he came from. Or the other way around: I know where he came from, and I know where he went. And the critics really did say glorious things, well, that one and my playing of Autolycus in 'A Winter's Tale' [sic. 'The Winter's Tale,' William Shakespeare]. You'll have to, you, you, and yeah, reread that play to, to know what he is. He's a, he's a pickpocket, he's a seller of songs, of wares. He is such a marvelous character. And as I told someone just the other day, and they're gonna show that on television, they're talking about Joseph Papp. They'll show it on one of those PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] stations. I did say to them that as inasmuch as I tend not really to remember verbatim criticisms that praise me--I mean critics that praised me, I do remember this one. It ended with: "And as for Mr. Browne [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]--as for Mr. Browne's Autolycus, he should be given the keys to the city, if he has not already stolen them," (laughter). I loved it. And that was in The New York Times. Well, that and Aaron the Moor, you know, from 'Titus Andronicus' [William Shakespeare]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But the best and the most satisfying thing I did there during those seven years was to create an evening called--well, it was originally called 'An Evening of Negro Poetry and Music' ['An Evening of Negro Poetry and Folk Music,']. And my actors were, going from left to right: [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones, Gloria Foster, Moses Gunn, Cicely Tyson, [HistoryMaker] Leon Bibb, Ellen Holly, Roscoe Lee Browne--no, Josephine Premice, and Roscoe Lee Browne. There were three great musicians, Bill Lee among them, Spike Lee's father. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It was an extraordinary evening, and it's so, it was just raved about by all the press in New York [New York]. So when, when Jerry Tallmer of the Post [New York Post], his banner line was--'cause one of poems by Arna Bontemps has a line in it, and it's called, "A hand is on the gate." And that was his banner line as he said the most astonishing things about these actors and this evening, as in a most important evening in the social and, and, and a--artistic history of this city, and maybe the country, stuff like that. So he finally went to Broadway as 'A Hand Is on the Gate.' Speaker 1: Okay, and how long did it (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not very long. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were people dying to bring in some, some theater that would make (laughter) money. Speaker 1: And that's, that's-- Speaker 2: And we opened in a, in an absolute real, genuine thunderstorm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it went on for hours and hours. We still had a packed house, but it opened under those auspices. Story_ID: 323498 Speaker 1: Producers, though, were beginning to notice you and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had already pulled me out, you know, occasionally. 'The Blacks' ['The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet] happened during that period. You know, the original company of 'The Blacks'-- Speaker 1: Was-- Speaker 2: --Genet [Jean Genet]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --'The Blacks.' Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: The original company, [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou--I'm reading how they appear on stage--Maya Angelou, Charles Gordone, who wrote 'No Place to be Somebody.' Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Flash Riley [James Flash Riley], Lex Monson [Remus "Lex" Monson], oh, Raymond St. Jacques, Godfrey Cambridge, Ethel--Helen Martin, Cynthia Belgrave, Ethel Ayler, Cicely Tyson, [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones, Louis Gossett, Jr. [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.], and Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's the original company of 'The Blacks,' and it was, it was a singular piece, and it was also seminal. Many theaters started because of it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: The NEC [Negro Ensemble Company] came, even took over that theater when we closed that play. Speaker 1: St. Marks-- Speaker 2: St. Mark's Playhouse [New York, New York]. All those young actors--well, we were--well, I was the only really old one, but all those young actors who were not in it originally, they passed through it, took over roles. Billy Dee Williams took over James Earl's at some point, Max Julien, [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks--they'd kill me if I can't think of--it's so many actors came through and among the women also. Speaker 1: Right, right. And we're getting into nine-- Speaker 2: Was an astonishing piece, though. Speaker 1: --nineteen sixty [1960], '61 [1961]. Speaker 2: That's what that is. Speaker 1: Yes, and-- Speaker 2: 'Cause 'A Hand Is on the Gate,' went to Broadway I think around '67 [1967] or-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: ---or '68 [sic. 1966]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In the meantime, I, I was selected by Robert Lowell, you know, that, that great American poet, and really so much did he create to become a great, great playwright. He was never truly a great, great playwright. He was sometimes thought as the greatest American poet. But his 'Benito Cereno,' which is an adaptation of the Herman Melville novella-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: About a, about--and is from an (unclear)--Melvin got it from a ship's log, I, I mean of a true slave ship. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, and the ship was named Benito Cereno [sic. captained by Benito Cereno]. It was a Portuguese [sic. Spanish] slave ship. And there was rebellion on ship. And the fellow who seemed--the play opens and proceeds to be this sweet little man who is doing anything that, when the Americans come, wanting to save their fellow white man (laughter) and think that Babu--in real life his name is Babo. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But Babu [sic. Babo] was the sweetest most gentle, and he turns out not only to be the king of this, these bunch of, of, of Africans who'd been stolen, but he will kill. And that was my role. And I won everything you could win with that, yes. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 323499 Speaker 1: I think you're saying to us that your years as this literary scholar helped you to become the actor that you are noted (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that I was a scholar I can't swear--but although I, I was a student and really interested in loved literature. But we had terrible moments with the play before we opened, 'The Blacks' ['The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet] that I refer to later on as the mal-mal meetings. I could refer to 'em then. They were having the meetings, but I never went because I thought when Raymond St. Jacques was calling me, that these were equity meetings. And I thought another Actors' Equity [Actors' Equity Association] meeting? I mean if you--the company has those things. You talk about do I get paid enough, it's whatever, or building or whatever. And finally, it was Cicely [Cicely Tyson] and maybe Godfrey [Godfrey Cambridge] said, "Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], you've gotta come to it." I said, "Why?" He said, "We're discussing whether or not we're gonna do this play." I said, "Oh, really?" So I go to the next meeting. Now mind you, it is only that I was, in years, older than most of them, not a great many but older. But that, but I did say that, "You know," 'cause I heard all the argument, I said, "You know, I, the only thing I can say to you, my absolute friends," 'cause we all adored each other in 'The Blacks,' "is that I've, I've come, you know, to theater from a different place, different from yours in that I came from literature. And you're coming from performance and theater, and you wanted to be actors." I said, "I didn't know I wanted," (laughter) "to be an actor 'til a little later on. And so I must suggest that you're mistaking the, the message. You're mistaking the metaphor of this play for the message." I said, "Nor can I swear the message is as clear as I think you're making it, except if, if, if it's any message at all, it is that power tends to corrupt." Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: I said, "We all know who said it, and we all know that he further said, 'And absolute power absolutely corrupts.'" Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: "But there's--that is the tendency." Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: But they're mistaking (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Godfrey Cambridge. Speaker 2: --they were mistaking their metaphor-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --for the--for the message-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --for the meaning. And the meaning was, was anything at all, it was that power corrupts. And, ah. this is lovely: well, apparently, I said it all too well; by that, I mean I was new to this discussion. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so, and what I was saying was we should go on and do this play, 'cause it was beginning to sway against our doing the play by Maya [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou]. And Abbey Lincoln was then part of the theater, part of the play. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It's, it's, Abbey's--remains one of the greatest people I know, and she's one of my great friends. Why she left the play is another story, and it's, and it's hilarious, and it's great, and it involves Max Roach. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But any rate, and Abbey said--for example, when you read James Earl's book ['Voices and Silences,' James Earl Jones], whatever his, you know, his autobiography-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Well, James Earl [HistoryMaker James Earl Jones] doesn't have it right in there. And, and we've seen each other, but we never brought that up, or I'd tell him: "You don't have that right, and you know you don't have that right." What happen was I finished speaking, and Abbey said, "Well, darling, it's, it's really brilliant what you're saying, but when you get up in the morning and look in the mirror, don't you see a black man?" And I said, because I always think literally, I said, "Only if he's standing beside--behind me." And I went and oh--and they all break up laughing, and that ended our meeting, and we all did the play. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) We all did the play because--well, James Earl wrote in the book, in his book, that, that when--I don't think he said it was Abbey, but it was Abbey. He said when asked, he says, "No," and I can hear him, his writing, but I can hear him saying, "No, I see me." Well, that's not the answer. Speaker 1: That's not what it was. Speaker 2: It, it is an answer though, but it's all right. I mean he's alive and voila. Story_ID: 323500 Speaker 1: And did you participate with the NEC [Negro Ensemble Company] at all? The-- Speaker 2: Only, whenever they would call, often there was a play I really hoped to do, and I was doing something else. But I was doing a play here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Derek Walcott's great play called 'Dream on Monkey Mountain,' and it's true, why should an actor have a difficulty saying I had raves for it, on the air and in, in print. But better than that, the audiences who came, found in Derek's writing something brand new and great. I mean all the characters were wonderful. It's just that Makak was more or less central to the play. I think equally central was the, was, was Lestrade, the one who strides, strides, stridel--straddles and played by Ron O'Neal quite brilliantly. But [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks saw it here. And he called [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward, and why can't I remember that lovely fellow's name, the other founder [Gerald Krone] of the NEC? Speaker 1: There was Douglas Turner Ward, Robert Hooks, and I'm not-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the one-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It'll come back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --nice man. And he said, "Guys"--oh, I don't know if Gordon Davidson did call; somebody called, Alexander--what the hell was his name? Something Alexander, great producer in New York, Cohen [Alexander H. Cohen], and he said when he heard about the name (unclear) the cast's cost prohibitive. And somebody else, somebody called Joe, Joseph Papp. And, and Joseph said something dumb, like, I'm not into importing from this (unclear) place. But any rate-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and Robert then called NEC. And he was still one of the founding members and still actively a member-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and he said, "Guys"--well, he did say, "New York has to see Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] in this play, so we can cast some of the parts there out of NEC, but we must bring him in the play." And that's what I did with the NEC, and I-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --loved it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had the most--it's the only play I did there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it's, I don't know if you know the play. It's just breathtaking. It's wonderful. And it's called 'Dream on Monkey Mountain.' Speaker 1: Right, and I don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it's Derek-- Speaker 1: --know it the way I would like. Speaker 2: --Derek Walcott-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that great poet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've done three of his plays or five. Story_ID: 323501 Speaker 1: Our interview this afternoon is a continuation of our interview with Mr. Roscoe Lee Browne [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. And interviewing Mr. Brown, I'm [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock. Where we left off on our interview last time was you had, had a successful career as a business person working for Schenley [Schenley Import Corporation; Schenley Industries, Inc.]. And it came a time, one Friday afternoon, when they offered you a very lucrative job offer. And instead of jumping at it, you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well-- Speaker 1: --told them that you-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --needed time to think it over. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And you promised them an answer on that Monday. Speaker 2: Right. Well, all right, it, it happened that I think it was Mr. O'Leary [John O'Leary (ph.)] who called. He was the president of Schenley Import Corporation. And I was at home. And he said, "Kid, you probably read in the Herald Tribune [New York Herald Tribune] or the Times [The New York Times] or one of these rags," he said, "but we are being--we're not phasing out. We're just gonna combine with the domestic company so there will no longer be an import company. It will be Schenley Industries." I said, "Oh," and he said, "But kid, don't worry about it or think about it because we're gonna kick you farther upstairs." I said, "Kick me upstairs?" He says, "Well, you're making a pretty penny now, and you'll make a lot more." I said, "I don't know." He said, "I, I beg your pardon, kid? I thought you loved us." And I said, "I do. I, I love you and Ms. Till [ph.], who was his assistant, and, and David Davidson [ph.], and Mary Yafa [ph.], and L.C. Sullivan [ph.], and Paretts [Ed Paretts (ph.)]." I said, "I love all you guys. I just want to think about it. And I love your introducing me to the underground." He said, "Kid, it's called the underworld." I said to him, "Well, can I call you tomorrow?" And he says, "No, tomorrow is Saturday." I said, "I have the weekend to think about it?" And he said, "Yes." I said, "Then I'll call on Sunday." He said, "Kid, what are you--." I said, "I have no idea." So I called my butcher, who also had a marvelous fish section, and I ordered some food and began to prepare it. And as I'm preparing it, I realize I've not invited anybody for dinner. So I called Leontyne, and she said-- Speaker 1: Leontyne Price. Speaker 2: Yes, Leontyne Price. And I said, "I'm making dinner." She says, "I'll be up." She said, "Do I have an hour?" I said, "Sure." I said, "I haven't started cooking. I just began to prepare it." "Well, don't tell me what you're making," she said. I said, "I won't." And I called Josephine Premice, and Josephine still lived then in Brooklyn [New York], St. James [Place], marvelous old house where her sister still lives, her sister, Adele [Adele Premice], who was at that time the assistant to the editor of Scientific American. Adele is an exquisite, marvelous woman. She has retired since. But Josephine said, "Oh, darling, I'll just, do I have time?" I said, "Yes." I said--well, she said, she did, say, "What are you making?" I said, "Jo, you practically taught me how to cook, so I'm doing something." And I called Susan [Susan Fonda; Susan Blanchard] and who was married to Henry Fonda. She's Dorothy, Dorothy Hammerstein's [Dorothy Blanchard Hammerstein] daughter. When Oscar [Oscar Hammerstein, II] met Dorothy in London [England], Dorothy was already in the act of divorcing her husband, Blanchard [sic.]. And Susan was the Blanchard [sic.] child, and she was seven. And Dorothy and Oscar fell in love and married, and Susan became his daughter, and she adored him. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But at any rate, Susan at this point was married to Henry Fonda. And I called and Henry answered. And I said, "I'm making dinner," and he said, "I know you just want Sue to come." I said, "No, I haven't done anything yet. You come, too." He says, "No, I can't." And he called for her, and she, she, she said, "I'll be right over." So, I think she was the first to arrive 'cause she's just 'cross town. Leontyne was downtown in the same house she still lives in to this day. Story_ID: 323502 Speaker 1: At any rate, over dinner, Leontyne [Leontyne Price] said, "I suspect this dinner." Everything I'm telling you now is verbatim. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: "I suspect this dinner." Susan [Susan Fonda; Susan Blanchard] said, "Why? When you and Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] moved from International House [New York, New York] and you both went to York Studios [ph.] and then finally he caught this place, we're the ones who taught him how to cook. And he's always trying out new recipes, probably, she said, from Gourmet magazine," 'cause Susan had given me the subscription, subscription to it. She said, "So he's--." She said, "Are the guys coming?" I said, "Yeah, I didn't invite them to dinner. We're all gonna meet at the Palladium [New York, New York] to go dancing." But Josephine [Josephine Premice], who sees through all things, even now that she has gone, she still sees through all things, said, "What do you wanna tell us, darling?" And I have no idea where it came from, Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Brock]. I simply blurted out: "Tomorrow I'm gonna become an actor." And these three women, I'm glad I told you who they are because you know they all were deeply involved in show business one way or the other (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: Well, they went after me. I mean they--well, the exact words were, Josephine said, "You're not a kid, you know," 'cause I was thirty-five years old-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in 1956. She said, "You're not a kid, you know." Susan said, "You don't even know you're black," which meant you don't know how tough it's going to be. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And Leontyne said, "They'll have you bearing torches," 'cause that's how opera people spoke of those factotums who were around the stage, spear carriers and stuff. Speaker 2: Spear carriers, right. Speaker 1: And, and they really did scream and yell and pleaded, "Don't do this, Roscoe." And they said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All of the three were in agreement that you should-- Speaker 1: Absolute agreement. Speaker 2: --not do this. Speaker 1: Absolute agreement, absolute. Speaker 2: But you had a majority-- Speaker 1: Josephine said-- Speaker 2: --vote. Speaker 1: --and, and you got it. And Josephine said, "Darling, you won't be able to go to the Pavillon [Le Pavillon, New York, New York]," which was the chicest, and loveliest, greatest food in New York City. I said, "Of course, except you ladies will take me to the Pavillon, and you'll take me to Orsini's [New York, New York]." And so while I'm pre--I was preparing a desert that Josephine had taught me to make, something-flambe, banana and something, I turned around. They were in the living room, those two ladies, and I said, "Where's Jo?" They said, "She's gone. She'll be back, and you're not to leave." I said, "This is my house. If anybody leaves, you'll"--I didn't say witches (unclear). I said, "You, you ladies will have to leave." So Josephine was shortly back. It was a lovely, like May shower, and she came in with three trade papers, maybe more, but three I remember. And although I had many friends who were in show business, even jazz musicians, and many were close to me, Miles [Miles Davis] was close; Parker [Charlie Parker] was close; Stan Getz, I mean, I, I don't mean acclaims, as were absolute friends. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But I'd never had read any of those--what are they called for the, the paper, the-- Speaker 2: Critiques-- Speaker 1: --they're the trade papers for--Down Beat is one of them, and I never read any of them. Story_ID: 323503 Speaker 1: So I'd never read any of the ones for actors. And the first one I opened was Variety, and it was in a foreign language. It said boufeau [ph.], box popnut [ph.]. I had no idea what it meant, and I had put it aside. The second one was, I think it's called, or it was then, Backstage, and it seemed to have gossip, which interested me not one bit and totally doesn't anymore. I put it aside, and I opened one called Show Business. I remember doing this, and it was page twenty-five. Normally, I do not remember page numbers, but it was page twenty-five over there. And it said that the next day--well, it gave the date, Saturday of something, of May, which was tomorrow, Joseph Papp was conducting the final auditions for the inaugural season for the New York Shakespeare Festival [Shakespeare in the Park] in Central Park [New York, New York]. There was a note that we would not be in the park yet, but they're getting it ready, but it's where it was going to be. And actors had to, had to speak a speech from 'Julius Caesar' [William Shakespeare] and be prepared to read anything the director asked him to read, him or her. Well, I saw that pin, not--little attention to it--I mean I paid little attention to it. And we finished dinner and all that. Oh, they made fun, too. Josephine [Josephine Premice] said, "Now, darling, look at this." I said, "Yes?" She said, "Isn't that a wonderful play and something you really know all about?" I said, "Yes." She said, "Well, there are forty thousand actors who've been acting for years, and they'll be going for that role." They went through it; they were--and finally, one of the fellows, I think Reginald Pearman [Reggie Pearman] or someone, called, and I said, "Yes, we're on our way." We all went to the Palladium [New York, New York] and danced and had a marvelous time. I could not wait for everyone to be delivered home so that I could get back to my apartment. And I dove into Show Business again, that paper. And I think it was then that I read what you had to do. And I took down 'Julius Caesar' from the shelf, and I knew, I knew the literature. I did not presume to think I could act it. So, I grabbed one of his speeches very quickly and put it in my head, one of Cassius' speeches: he doth bestride the world like a Colossus, that speech. And you had to be prepared to read. And so, at six p.m. the next day, that's about the time I was pronounced a professional actor by Joseph Papp. Story_ID: 323504 Speaker 1: You read for him. And what role were you going for when you went there? Speaker 2: Well, of course, when they wanted you to prepare a speech, I prepared Cassius. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And the director, I don't know, I did not know which one was Joseph Papp. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the director was Stuart Vaughan. And I spoke it. Now mind you, all these actors who were coming to audition were all sitting in sort of a theater, actually it was a church [Emmanuel Presbyterian Church, New York, New York], down on the Lower East Side, New York City. And it was built rather like a stadium, and it was small. And down here, it comes down that way, and down here in the front row are these actors. Well, I had no idea what these actors knew. Actors know--what I did not know--actors know that when you come to audition, you, you are practically alone. Other actors may be in a line backstage, but when you come out you're by yourself. Well, we're all sitting there. We're acting for each other as well. And of course, they were all nervous wrecks. I was not. I'd been a runner. I, I mean there's a man shooting a gun at Madison Square Garden [New York, New York] and all over the world, and I thought how nice to have somebody here to act it for. So I did this speech, and there was a lovely kind of side interest made me know everybody liked it. And the director said, "It's really very good, but I don't know, you know. I don't think we can have a colored Cassius." I-- Speaker 1: Were you the only (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was, oh yes, there was no other. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: He said, "I don't think we can have a colored Cassius. And besides," he said, "Jack." There were about four people in the house who were there because they were great friends and loved Joseph Papp. And they were all great friends, and they were already part of this festival [New York Shakespeare Festival; Shakespeare in the Park] that was about to begin. And he said, "But Jack"--it was Jack Cannon, who just died last year. Jack Cannon--remember when Dennis Weaver was playing Marshal [Deputy Marshal Sam McCloud] something? Speaker 1: Yes, 'Gunsmoke' [sic. 'McCloud']. Speaker 2: Horseback--was it--no, Marshal something. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: You know, it was a, it was another-- Speaker 1: In, in New York? Speaker 2: In New York. Speaker 1: 'McCloud.' Speaker 2: 'McCloud.' Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: His boss was, the actor playing his boss, that was Jack Cannon. Speaker 1: Okay, right. Speaker 2: And Jack just died last year and so did Dennis, just a few months ago, or a month ago, or less. Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: Hadn't occurred to me. Speaker 1: --just less than a month ago. Speaker 2: Right. At any rate, Jack waved to him, "Yes, you already picked me to play Cassius." And Stuart did say to me, "But you're very good, Mr. Browne [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]. Perhaps you"--he walked around and still mumbling to himself, although he would look back and said, "You were very good." I know that he was having this colloquy with Petruck [ph.], asking Petruck, "Are there any black people back then?" So he whirled around and said at some point, "You could be the Soothsayer." And I said, not waspishly, I just said, "Oh, yes, he is an exotic, isn't he?" And there were some actresses sitting in the front row who were there to audition (unclear) their whole look. I could tell this kid is out. He's, nothing's gonna happen here. And so he said, "Well, yes." I said, "Well, fine." He said, "Then you could come back, you see, as Pindarus." He said, "Now Pindarus"--I said, "Yes, I know he is the indentured slave to Cassius. He was captured in some other war." And one of the actors--I can't remember who it was--I mean he's someone who is prominent now. It could have been Durning [ph.], it could be, it could be--I'm not sure--said, "My God, he's read the whole play," said to each other. And I assumed that all actors read the whole, you know, you always read the whole play. But any rate, he said, "Oh, then you understand." He said, "Would you go and prepare little Pindarus, and we'll get back to you." I said, "You don't want me to read any of the Soothsayer's?" He says, "No, you have that," 'cause Soothsayer has--says nothing. He said, "Beware the ides of March"-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and "Caesar, Caesar." Story_ID: 323505 Speaker 1: So the others do perform and auditioned. And then at some point after three of them had been up, he said, "Mr. Browne [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], are you read with Pindarus?" And I said, "Of course." He said now you understand? I said, "Yes, I know they're on the field at Philippi. And I understand he's out of breath." And I know some part of me didn't want to play Pindarus, except as an actor now I know Pindarus is a lovely part, and I thought so the moment I started to play him. It's not big whenever he's there. He's there, and he's wonderful, and he's, he's seen a lot because he's with Cassius. And I knew nothing about acting at all, and it was a good thing to be around all those seasoned actors and to be quiet on stage, and listen, and learn. But at any rate, I'm way across the room, and he says again, "You understand, of course, Mr. Browne, you really are very good; you have great talent, but--you know, Pindarus could be played by a colored actor." Well, he said colored just once too many times for me, being new to the whole thing. And he said, "You remember?" I said, "Yes, he's probably out of breath." And the line is: "Fly further off, my lord, fly further off. Mark Anthony [sic. Mark Antony] is in your camp, fly, fly, fly further off." And I came running on, shouting: "Fly further off, my lord, fly further off. Mark Anthony's in your camp, fly, fly." And then I--the room broke up, and I said, "Is that what you meant?" And then they just died laughing. And there was this extraordinarily beautiful woman in total hysterics. She just stood up and walked down to where we were. And when her arms opened and we became absolute inseparable friends, and it was Colleen Dewhurst. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: She was already going to be part of the festival [New York Shakespeare Festival; Shakespeare in the Park], and she wasn't, she wasn't going to play anything in 'Julius Caesar' [William Shakespeare] not-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --neither Calpurnia or Portia. I think they were the only two ladies you see in the play. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: But it was Colleen. And, and when I say, "Is that what you meant," she just thought she would die. And we all knew that I'm out of--my three friends were very happy to know that my first venture, they said, "Get out of here, kid." But instead, while they're all recovering, this guy stood up in the back and he walked down. I see him, and he said, "You're new to me. How long have you been an actor?" I said, "Twelve hours. I have no intention of bearing any torches." He says, "No, you're good. You have words." And it was Joe Papp [Joseph Papp]. Speaker 2: And you didn't recognize him, of course, 'cause you didn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't know him. Speaker 2: --had no idea. Speaker 1: I'd never seen him. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Never had seen him before. Speaker 2: Right. And so did you play one of those-- Speaker 1: I played both. Speaker 2: You played both roles? Speaker 1: Yes, though-- Speaker 2: Straight this time? Speaker 1: I played them both. Oh, yes, you can depend on that (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, yes, I, I decided that, that Pindarus was a prince from Africa, and he was in one of the wars that Caesar [Julius Caesar] had. And he had been captured by Cassius. And, and rather than having him executed, Cassius took him on as his bondsman. And that's how Jack and I played him. Speaker 2: Ah, okay, okay. Speaker 1: We were equals among equals. He was wonderful. Speaker 2: And when you say Jack, you're saying-- Speaker 1: Jack Cannon-- Speaker 2: Jack Cannon-- Speaker 1: --who played Cassius. Speaker 2: --played Cas- who played, got the role for Cassius-- Speaker 1: Yes, he had a-- Speaker 2: --for Cassius. Speaker 1: He had it before those auditions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He was already selected by Joseph to play. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Colleen was already selected to play Kate in 'Taming of the Shrew' ['The Taming of the Shrew,' William Shakespeare]. And Jack had already been selected to play Petruchio in-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: 'Taming of the Shrew.' Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: There are some roles we all raise and we already knew. They were already ready and done and assigned. Story_ID: 323506 Speaker 1: This is Monday, but you had still promised the Schenley Corporation [Schenley Import Corporation; Schenley Industries, Inc.] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I called them. And I told Larry Offer [ph.] first. He was the metropolitan manager. And he said, "Should I tell David [David Davidson (ph.)]?" I said, "No, I'm gonna call him." And I called Davidson. He was my absolute boss, and O'Leary [John O'Leary (ph.)] was the president. And then I called O'Leary-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and I told him, and he-- Speaker 1: They thought you were crazy. Speaker 2: A little crazy, but he said that, he asked me, how, "How old are you, kid?" And I said, "Thirty-five." He said, "This is gonna great for you 'cause, you know, you still look like a kid." And he said, "That's why I called you a kid." He said, "I, I don't--I can't dissuade you." He said, "I can tell that it won't do. Your voice is very firm, and you said this is what I'm going to do, and that I'd been cast, and I'll be in the inaugural of season of New York Shakespeare Festival [Shakespeare in the Park] in 1956," which was that year. And he wished me luck. And they had a little party for me down at Chundy [ph.] at the Empire State Building [New York, New York], which is where I was. And they all came at some point to see my, my-- Speaker 1: Inaugural-- Speaker 2: --my baby steps as an actor. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: And then they came to see me. There was a wonderful actor whose name escapes me. It's something Smith [ph.]. And it was really less than six months away. It was in, deep into the fall or maybe winter; I remember it was cold. And Joseph [Joseph Papp] called. Mind you, the world calls him Joe Papp. I've always called him Joseph. Then Joseph called to say, "I need you." I'm glad I can't remember this lovely actor, African American. I can't remember his name at the moment. He said, "I need you to take over all a role, and you have thirteen days. And I believe you can learn it, and get it, and do it." And I said, "What is it, Joseph?" And it was to play Aaron the Moor, in 'Titus Andronicus' [William Shakespeare] opposite Colleen [Colleen Dewhurst], who was playing the queen Tamora or Tamora. It's pronounced differently, depending which company is doing it (laughter). Story_ID: 323507 Speaker 1: And there was a lot of stuff to learn. Speaker 2: A lot of lines. Speaker 1: Oh, my dear, a lot of everything about a seasoned actor would love to have presented to him to do. And of course, not seasoned, I was rashly happy. And I knew right away once I was in rehearsal that learning the lines is hardly all of it. And I did invite everybody who had become friends of mine at the, at Schenley [Schenley Import Corporation; Schenley Industries, Inc.], and at some point even O'Leary [John O'Leary (ph.)] came. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: If I'd really known Lewis Rosenstiel--we'd met. He owned everything involving Schenley. He was the, O'Leary was the president of the import company, but O'Leary did come. Ms. Till [ph.] came I think with Lorette, L.C. Sullivan, Lorette Cecilia Sullivan [ph.]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Larry Yoffin [ph.], his wife drove over from New Jersey. And Davidson [David Davidson (ph.)] came. Even if they would come to see me run, 'cause I hadn't quite stopped yet, although my knee had been in a cast-- Speaker 2: You could, you weren't running, though, Olympic-- Speaker 1: Yes, I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: --caliber? Speaker 1: --but did I say fifty--yes, it's 1956 when all of this happened, 'cause I'd been working for Schenley for four years, from 1952-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --to '56 [1956]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And somewhere in '52 [1952] I was running at the Garden [Madison Square Garden, New York, New York] when all this thing happened in the winter before that Summer Olympics [1952 Summer Olympics, Helsinki, Finland], and that's when they put this knee in a cast. But already then I had this job with Schenley, and they had come once or twice to see me run. But they were lovely about it and swore: "Of course you should be an actor," after they saw me acting. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I don't know what they thought when they saw me as the Soothsayer and Pindarus running in and out. He rarely spoke, Pindarus. He holds the thing for Cassius to fall on when he wants to die. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he says, (unclear), I get applause when I'm doing that line about far away, Pindarus fly away. 'Cause everybody knew; they had a sense that I'm going back to Africa someplace wherever I've come from (laughter). Speaker 2: Now the, the, all of these plays took place in Central Park [New York, New York]? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Some were down--the, the fellow who had some problem that made it necessary for Joseph [Joseph Papp] to replace him--well, I mean that theater was the same one we had auditioned in-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --'cause it's wintertime. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: I know the name, but it won't come to me, something--it's a church, and it's on, Henry Street Church [sic. Emmanuel Presbyterian Church, New York, New York], I think. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: It's down there on the Lower East Side [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Okay. Is that near the Henry Street Playhouse [Henry Street Settlement, New York, New York]? Speaker 1: You mean where Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.] is (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Where Woodie King is? Speaker 1: I think it's rather near there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I can't swear it-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but that's where they-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: You know, Woodie and I met when we were doing the play that I mentioned to you, the reason that I did not appear in 'Roots' was I was doing this play called 'Benito Cereno'-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --written by Robert Lowell. And it, and he'd had adapted it from a novella by Herman Melville. And Herman Melville had gotten the story from the logs of a slave ship, a Portuguese [sic. Spanish] slave ship, the, I mean absolutely it happened. The character whom I played was named Babo. His real name was Babo in real life. And you get it very clearly in the Melville story, after he had, had caused and directed this uprising on the ship, killing the, the Portuguese. Some keep sailors, keeping some to sail them to safe port, and of course, then some American ship intervened. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And Babo's head, he was decapitated in Lisbon [Portugal] and his head put on the spikes of the fence around the Palais Justice. And the legend was they had to keep sewing up his eyes 'cause they would never shut. Story_ID: 323508 Speaker 1: During that summer, of course, you did the 'Julius Caesar' [William Shakespeare]. Speaker 2: I did 'Julius Caesar.' Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And I played just--I said to Joseph [Joseph Papp], "I don't care what it is, if he has lines." He says, "You"--I said, "Yeah, I'll do anything; I want to learn this craft." And I think there were two other plays, 'Romeo and Juliet' [William Shakespeare] and I think I played Balthasar-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --the kid who-- Speaker 1: Now was that 'Romeo and Juliet' the next summer or the same (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The same summer-- Speaker 1: Same summer, okay, okay. Speaker 2: I think, and I'm pretty sure that that same summer 'The Taming of the Shrew' [William Shakespeare]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now mind you, we were not yet in Central Park [New York, New York]. It was still called the New York Shakespeare Festival [Shakespeare in the Park] in Central Park. However, it wasn't ready yet for actors to, they had to do something to that land to make it--so we played on the Lower East Riverfront. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was most remarkable because it's not marble but white stone, and you felt when you were doing 'Caesar' and that you were in old Rome. And the people came out of the tenements-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and it was quite extraordinary. And they're coming out of the tenements to--because Joseph Papp insisted and it remained to this day, free. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he had to go through many fights with Moses [Robert Moses], you know, the man who was-- Speaker 1: Parks commissioner. Speaker 2: --the commissioner. He had to go through all those battles, but it still remains free. Speaker 1: Right, that's very important. Speaker 2: So we were down there on the Lower East Side [New York, New York], and it was wild, and extraordinary, and wonderful. And for, my memory is that the 'Romeo and Juliet,' by that time we'd gotten into the park, but I know they weren't finished with it, and so 'Taming of the Shrew,' first appearance was down on the Lower East Side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And in that play, I said, "It's something I can play." I just showed up, and they said, "Yes." I don't remember if he had a name. He may have had a name, Joseph or something. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He was one of Jack Cannon's men, a roustabouts-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know, when he's torturing Kate, as he comes to woo her, because he has to tame her. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he has these fellows with him, and I was one of the fellows, test, a roust--I remember, when he says that's so good, and he pick up the turkey and throw it. And I'd be one of the ones who'd catch it. I think I had no line. There was some music, and we all would sing on occasion. Speaker 1: Okay, but in the, the 'Romeo and Juliet'-- Speaker 2: 'Romeo and Juliet'-- Speaker 1: --you did have a line? Speaker 2: --I was, yes, I was Balthasar, who'd, had not much to say, but they, they, they put me in so many scenes. I remember at some point, when we, we did Mobile Theater--(unclear) Staten Island [New York], to the Bronx [New York], to Harlem [New York, New York], Brooklyn [New York], and I remember as we're coming through, I still see this lady as we're walking through the house. She said to them: "Watch that black one; he's really evil. You know, he starts all the fights, just watch that." Well, I think I did when you bite your thumb--(unclear) I, but I do bite my thumb (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Although, I have a feeling those lines belonged to either (unclear) or somebody. But they would have--once or twice I did instigate the fight, and we had a marvelous fencing teacher. And I was pretty good because I was still rather athletic. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And we had a great time. Story_ID: 323509 Speaker 1: This was '56 [1956]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you've done the 'Julius Caesar' [William Shakespeare] and the 'Romeo and Juliet' [William Shakespeare], 'Taming of the Shrew' ['The Taming of the Shrew,' William Shakespeare]. Where does your acting career now lead you? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I suppose the--you know, before Joseph [Joseph Papp] called me that winter or late October, I mean late fall, to become, to play Aaron [Aaron the Moor], I did some, either staged readings: they'd call me up and say, "Come," or I did a play or two, always off-Broadway, for two dollars and twelve cents or some meager sum. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I, I had done one or two of those. One, one was 'Othello' [William Shakespeare]. Yes, it was not the full play; it was a staged reading, and I played him in the reading. And I ached to play him, really-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and fully. Well, it didn't happen yet. It did happen-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --finally in Canada. But-- Speaker 1: Were you also getting interest from-- Speaker 2: Oh, and-- Speaker 1: --television or-- Speaker 2: No--well, yes. They had sent some things from California. And I really thought it was all authentic crap, and I just said, "No thank you." However, I did some things on camera three and oh, one or two others where one had to--one, one or two were really wonderful plays, like an hour or half hour play, and often it was to read poetry. And I loved doing that. It was done at CBS mainly, down at the, the west boot end of 57th Street-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --which is quite near to where I've been living for the last forty years (laughter) in, in New York [New York]-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --on West 57th. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then this happened: (unclear) call for this play, and I had no notion how to go about this character. I-- Speaker 1: Did you feel you had been typecast though into-- Speaker 2: Oh, in no way. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Aaron the Moor is a precursor to Iago. He is in almost all ways rather like Iago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's brilliant. He is evil incarnate. He is the lover of the queen, Tamora. He is a killer. He is a brilliant general. He's, he's, he's quite exceptional. I do remember that the first reviews came out, that one of the critics whom I rather adored later I got to know, he said wonderful things about this new actor, but that he could tell the actor doesn't know, it was almost the word stance. It may have been that word. And I read it, and I got it. He couldn't be that marshal fellow. I think I play him at the beginning, because you'll remember, they were, the, they had to open. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I was given these thirteen days to get something. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It may have been six days, now that I think about it. I said thirteen days or something else (Unclear) Richardson [ph.] offered me. And yeah, this was six days I had. It was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I tell you now, it was really six days-- Speaker 1: And it was going to-- Speaker 2: --to learn this character. Speaker 1: It was going to open at the East-- Speaker 2: At this place [Emmanuel Presbyterian Church] down the Lower East Side [New York, New York]-- Speaker 1: Lower East Side. Speaker 2: --at, on Henry Street [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 323510 Speaker 1: Firemen and the police, well, they had to put signs up or had to come in. They would not allow--people were fainting, passing out. It was a very bloody piece ['Titus Andronicus,' William Shakespeare], mainly due to Aaron [Aaron the Moor] hacking off hands and hacking off--I mean when, when Titus is gonna, is not playing it square with Aaron, he sends him his sons' heads. And I think it's Tamora who makes a stew of them or something (laughter). It was the other way around. It could be they're doing it to Tamora. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Well, what, whatever that criticism was, I took it; I got it; I got understood it. And Colleen [Colleen Dewhurst] and the other actors who were seasoned, they were encouraging. They really wanted me to be better than, than just good. They wanted me to be really quite splendid. And they were aware that even when we opened, Aaron has this extraordinary speech that rises in, in speed and in flights of language, and the audience never allowed it to be finished. Their applause began before you got to the end----never, ever, ever. And that always saved my whole day of wandering around like this really terrible actor. I mean, it had moments when he has simply spoke wittily. I do remember one critic saying, "We know that Mr. Browne [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] is a witty fellow"--where she got that from, I'm not sure, because he didn't do it as, as the Soothsayer. Maybe they'd see me in something on television. But we--I mean she was really not speaking about Mr. Browne as much as she was about the director [Frederick Rolf]. And this director should curb Mr. Browne from changing Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], curb that. And the poor silly woman had no idea. She, she had only to read it to know that the words that Aaron spoke were literally the exact words that Shakespeare had written. When the two boys say, "Villain, you've run down our mother," Aaron say, "Villains, I've done your mother." Well, the lady knew that this actor had added that. Or when the, the nurse runs in yelling, "Where is Aaron, the Moor?" It is Aaron who says, "Here Aaron is, more or less." Well, the woman knew, this critic, that I had made that up. And, and she is saying that we gathered, you know, for this performance. She's a very--maybe it was the whole performance that he's a witty young man and all of that, but he should be curbed from altering our Shakespeare's purity. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I have no idea. Someone must have written to her at some point to say, "Read the play, ma'am." One critic actually had written, when you, at first glance you thought he was being witty, but he wasn't. He was simply ignorant. He, he didn't like Titus or Andronicus, that is he did not realize that's one person, Titus Andronicus. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 323511 Speaker 1: I heard you say that they may have picked up something from television. Had you been doing television in (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not much. I had--even while we were rehearsing in the park [Central Park, New York, New York], the beginnings, and then we had to go down with the Lower East Side [New York, New York] to do these shows, it did get around rather quickly there's a new actor. And these actors would tell them, "Boy, does he know poetry, and he understands it." So I know I did a few things on television because of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It isn't, it isn't true, as I even suggested once, I had never done any acting before. It's not quite true. I, I appeared maybe in three plays in four years of college [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], always in minor roles. And I lived at International House [New York, New York], and we put on a show twice a year, and sometimes I was, I would even be the director of it and maybe direct a play. But I never presumed to think that I could act also. And it was all some--I don't know what it was. I think, now that I think about, when I directed a play at International House, I'd already become an actor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Is it fair to say then that the reviews you were getting were giving you much more attention that, than you might have gotten? Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think part of that involved the fact that somebody--of course, when you are a, on, on a track team in New York City, Madison Square Garden was packed every time we ran. And somebody, some people in the audience and some, and knowledgeable people in the newspapers were, (unclear), "That's that runner." And that would be mentioned on occasion. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And they did mention it as, as Tindarus--as Pindarus. And I'll never forget, one or two of the actors saying--mind you, they were all welcoming and lovely. They were (unclear) not--all he has to do is run across stage, and he knows that runner. And there's great legs and (unclear), so he gets to review it. They did mention that (laughter) it was the reviews. Speaker 1: What was the, what was the first major role you had in television? Speaker 2: Oh, dear-- Speaker 1: What year also, let me ask you that? Speaker 2: I don't know. It took me awhile to say yes to any of the stuff that was sent from California. Speaker 1: Okay, so when you-- Speaker 2: The 'Benito Cereno' [Robert Lowell] I did do it, we did shoot it for PBS [Public Broadcasting Service]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that did great, get great notices for all of us. There were three of us who received the Obies [Obie Awards; Off-Broadway Theater Awards], Frank Langella, Lester Rawlins, and I-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for that play. And we were really hailed throughout theatrical circles for that play because Robert Lowell was also a favorite of the literati in New York. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was the teacher of many of the young writers then. And when I used to go to parties at George Plimpton, they would always hope that Cal would come, and Cal is Robert Lowell. Story_ID: 323512 Speaker 1: That even began also before I was an actor. George [George Plimpton]--I think I met them when he had come to the Garden [Madison Square Garden, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And we became friends at--people didn't hang out at bars yet, but, so become friends at Orsini's [New York, New York], at Pavillon [Le Pavillon, New York, New York], or some chic place. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And George and his then-roommate [Peter Matthiessen], who's a great writer--I, I want his name; I see him. He wrote the great piece on Geronimo--no, on Crazy Horse. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: And he wrote 'The Snow Leopard.' He's extraordinary. And that house, still there, I'm sure, even though Plimpton has died. It was the last house on East 72nd Street, just before you get to the East River. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I know I'm, I'm old and so I go far field. But there was--that's where I met Jimmy Baldwin [James Baldwin], for example, is at one of those parties that James had just become heralded for, 'Go Tell it on the Mountain.' And all these young writers would be there at Plimpton's, that is Mailer [Norman Mailer], even Buckley [William F. Buckley, Jr.], though he was not noted then as a, writer in fiction, who wrote--marvelous writer. But any rate, Capote [Truman Capote] would show up at these parties. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was always quite extraordinary. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: 'Cause Plimpton was really one of the great gentlemen ever. He was wonderful. Speaker 2: George Plimpton. The, the, we're moving into 1957 now. And your career as an actor, New York [New York] actor, is continuing? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I still did, I think the next year I was William Marshall's understudy-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: As Othello. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I know that they really--I did--they asked me to read, and I did read. And what I think that they, they knew that-- Speaker 2: Now was this a Joseph Papp production-- Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) of-- Speaker 1: Yes, they knew that-- Speaker 2: --'Othello' [William Shakespeare]? Speaker 1: --they knew that, that Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] may have heard of, of Paul Robeson, but he hadn't really seen him. So they didn't know that were he alive, Shakespeare would say, "Yes, Mr. Browne's [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] height is just fine," (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: --"for this role." But William was wonderful. But I did not go on. I was his understudy for a great part of that summer. Now there are other plays I was doing and--my poor mind. Speaker 2: That's okay, we'll, we'll catch it-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --either sooner or later. Speaker 1: Yes. You maybe--we may, indeed, have a third one of these (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) We may indeed, we may indeed. Story_ID: 323513 Speaker 1: Okay, we're in 1957. You are understudy to William Marshall and--in 'Othello' [William Shakespeare]. And what else are you, are you doing? Are you looking (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I-- Speaker 1: --at some things that people may be-- Speaker 2: I've done some-- Speaker 1: --proposing? Speaker 2: --I have done some--why can't I think--it'll come to me--some rather small productions. I, I was even--I didn't know that that play, in 'Land Beyond the River' ['A Land Beyond the River'] Loften Mitchell's play. And one of my great friends said, "There are roles for you in that play." And I said, "Are you kidding? That play is all cast." And so I went down there to see them. I don't remember who the director [Michael Howard] was. My friend was Diana Sands, who said, "There are roles here," and she was in it. And so I became every male character's understudy for it (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: There are about four major characters, and I was the understudy for all four of them. And I went on, on occasion. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You, you-- Speaker 1: And did, did you have an opportunity to assume any of those roles? Speaker 2: Yes, I went on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I went on once or twice. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: They were of different ages, and none of that mattered to me. I was (unclear). And mind you, the thing I should have mentioned is that once I had decided to become an actor, and I watched these actors preparing in, for 'Julius Caesar' [William Shakespeare] I did not know what they were doing, but I could tell they were inwardly turned for a while and not just learning lines quietly. Then, I knew I'd better study. So I asked a friend, "Where should I go?" And, and I remember one my, one of my friends said, "You remember Al [ph.]?" I said, "Morgenstern [ph.]?" "Yeah." I said, "Yes, I like him." He said, "Well, he teaches." And we, we get the number, and I called him up, and he said, "Of course." And-- Speaker 1: This was the first time you were entering formal-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: --acting. Speaker 2: Now mind you, this is while we are rehearsing. And I go down; it was around down in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York]. He was an exceptional actor. I hope he still lives. When they discovered him finally out here in Hollywood, I think they just called him Morgenstern. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But his name is Al Morgenstern. So I went and he took me in, and we did essential exercises that a brand new actor should know. Some were effective memory; some were, and you did scenes. And when the second time, two girls got up to do 'Uncle Wiggily in Connecticut' [J.D. Salinger] I thought, I don't have to watch this again, do I? And I mentioned to one of my best friends, Billy Berger, William Berger, wonderful actor. And Billy said, "Well, you know, Curt Conway," he said, "I am, I'm going to that class. It's up on 52nd Street." So I, I did bid Al, Al goodbye. And Al said, "Yeah, you should--Curt's a great teacher." He was married to Kim Stanley. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I went there, and he really taught me a lot about acting and about how you study a text and how you prepare a scene and how you make it as visceral as you would tend to make it intellectual or mental. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he would make me discover who the guy was, what he would wear, how he walked, everything about him, what he would eat, how unlike Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] he was. Story_ID: 323514 Speaker 1: And then at some point, after three months or four, two girls got up to do 'Uncle Wiggily in Connecticut' [J.D. Salinger] and I thought this is a sign. (Laughter) So, someone said, "Why don't you go see Stella." And she saw me in a rehearsal for one of the plays. It could be the 'Benito Cereno' [Robert Lowell]--Stella Adler. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And Stella said, "You must come to study with me." Oh no, it was not that play. Tell you why, it was something else. Speaker 2: Okay. Are, are we still in '57 [1957]? Speaker 1: We're around '58 [1958]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --fifty-nine [1959], around that same time. Speaker 2: Good enough, okay. Speaker 1: But I began to study with Stella, and so I think it was either '58 [1958] or '59 [1959]. It's getting mishmash now, but I, I will-- Speaker 2: That's okay. Speaker 1: --straighten it out for you. Speaker 2: That's okay. Speaker 1: By now I had met new friends-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in theater. And someone suggested that I--oh yes, asked would I, I do a play at The Actors Studio [New York, New York]. Now The Actors Studio had three divisions who have acting, three units: acting unit, director's unit, and playwright's unit. And I had new friends who were members of the studio, and they said, "You can come and audit." And I said, "I can?" "Sure," and I would go. Now you're gonna do so much you'd be able to get that. But they'd invite me, and I would go, and then I'd meet other actors and directors and playwrights. And Mark Rydell, for example, wanted to become, and this is before '60 [1960]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I think, I think. Mark wanted to become--he was an actor and very good one, but he wanted to become a director. And Strasberg [Lee Strasberg] said, "Well direct something. Direct it here at the studio." So Mark found this extraordinary one-act play called 'Bohikee Creek' [Robert Unger]. And we had become friends. His wife and I were already great friends, Joanne Linville. And Mark sent me this play. And I thought he just wanted me to read it or suggest, 'cause he knew my eye was pretty good, suggest some actor for this. And I said, "I don't know whom to suggest to you, but I--." He said, "Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], I want you to play this guy, and I want Billy to play the other one," Billy Gunn [Bill Gunn]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Billy is the younger one, and I'm the older one. We are illiterates on the Mississippi Delta. We get crabs, shellfish. What's the one in the--not oysters but those other, hop shell, whatever. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And Mark began my real deep learning what acting was, although-- Speaker 2: Even more than Stella Adler? Speaker 1: Stella, she was doing--but I had no play to do. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and so, was cast in 'Othello' [William Shakespeare]. Oh, she was just brilliant, marvelous. Story_ID: 323515 Speaker 1: And Mark [Mark Rydell] knew that I was from New Jersey, and he knew that Billy Gunn [Bill Gunn] was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. He thought we were both brilliant. He thought we were both dramatic and lyrical. So once he decided that it should be Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], and it should be Billy. We met him at the studio [The Actors Studio, New York, New York], and we read the play ['Bohikee Creek,' Robert Unger]; it's a one-act play; we simply read it. And then he asked if we could me at his apartment. Mark is a fine musician. He had a piano there. So we, we went over there to--and we would never open the play. He played Lead Belly; he played Betsy Smith; he played Brian Willie [ph.]; he played one or two marvelous blues singers whom that man, Lomax [Alan Lomax], had (unclear) Lomax made this extraordinary documentary on them. I did a lot of the reading for him. And mind you, I think I did that before I was an actor. But I did other, I mean before I was act, reacting. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And we had one or two of the Lomax pieces, tapes. Then at some point--that was our second meeting. And at our third meeting Mark begins playing some more, and Lead Belly is on the thing. We don't even look at the script, and he said, "Roscoe, can you sing along?" So I sing along. And then he said, "Okay, Billy, you sing." And, and the most amazing thing, because when we read the play, both Billy and I knew how southern black sounded. We were sure. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We weren't bad, but Mark knew it wasn't the thing itself. So with Lead Belly singing 'Po' ol' Howard is Dead and Gone,' so Mark asked us to go in. And then Billy's in, too, and he turned the thing off, and he began to play it at a slower tempo. And what you got was: (singing) "Po' ol' Howard dead and gone, left me here to sing this song." Well, it was so extraordinary for us when the director, the author asked him can you--we used it to begin the rehearsal to get us to that place-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that place in Mississippi on the levee. To get us there we began--he said, "Can we keep the director's"--the author said, "Mark, can we leave that song in?" Story_ID: 323516 Speaker 1: Mark [Mark Rydell] is, he's the director of 'On Golden Pond' that got Mr. Fonda [Henry Fonda] his, finally his Oscar and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Ms. Hepburn [Katharine Hepburn] her fourth. And Mark directed me in 'The Cowboys'-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --the movie with John Wayne. And Mark directed oh, Bette Midler in 'The Rose.' He directed some exceptional pieces 'cause he's a marvelous actor, actor's director. But as I was saying, he wanted to become a director because he's already a first-rate actor. And he said Strasberg [Lee Strasberg] said, "Direct something here at the unit." So he found this play ['Bohikee Creek,' Robert Unger]. And as I told you, he took Billy Gunn [Bill Gunn] and me into a deep negritude journey-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --so we could find these illiterates down on the Mississippi levee, and apparently we did. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and I can remember--I will bring some of those, I'll put some of those in for, those pictures, there are some pictures that some people did, and I can't think of his name right now, but it will occur to me. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: On Madison Avenue [New York, New York] he, he was shown regularly in a gallery. Mainly he, he did very quick and portrait, portraits of, in pen and ink often, of actors at work. And he had done me in, I think in Washington [D.C.]. Well, I'm ahead of the story now, but he did me somewhere. Oh yes, he did me as the Fool in 'King Lear' [William Shakespeare]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --which happened like the second or third--I was there for seven seasons--like the fourth or fifth season with-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --Frank Silvera playing Lear. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he was sitting at the studio with, next to his wife same, her name was Betsy [ph.]. On the very front row of The Actors Studio [New York, New York], I can tell you it's no deeper than this room, much. And I heard him say to her--and my character was sitting on the levee, on the, on the--right where you are, and he is this close. And there's no makeup that Billy, you know, we, neither of us wore any. My arms were bare. I was in overalls but no shirt and literally no makeup. And when the lights come up not fully yet, I'm looking. Our friend has been lynched. And when we are singing 'Po' Ol' Howard,' both he, Howard--I mean he, he, the character I'm playing, and this young man that Billy's playing-- Speaker 2: You're singing. Speaker 1: We're, we're singing, and we don't know it yet (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Set that mood for us by-- Speaker 1: We don't-- Speaker 2: --just giving us-- Speaker 1: Yes, say? Speaker 2: Set that mood for us by-- Speaker 1: Yes Speaker 2: --giving us-- Speaker 1: We don't know it yet, but we are, as we're singing, it's in us, but we don't really yet know it, that we're planning to murder in revenge the fellows who lynched them. And those fellows are coming out, coming back in the boats. And so we're singing it. We're not singing just that Howard is dead; we're planning revenge. And the song went: (singing) "Po' Ol' Howard, dead and gone, left me here to sing this song. Po' Ol' Howard, dead and gone, left me here to sing his song. Po' Ol' Howard, dead and he gone, Lawd." And I'm just there, and I hear the artist say to Betsy, "Are you sure that's Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]?" (Laughter) Mark will hate my telling this story, only because he'd say to me, stopping to tell you that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that I just lost him (laughter) (unclear) that guy again. I mean during rehearsal, for example, he would not even allow us, he would allow nobody to speak with Roscoe. Story_ID: 323517 Speaker 1: Billy [Bill Gunn], he thought, had some facility to get to that character. But I'm rather new, still, as an actor, and that I'm given to chat, and that's Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] chatting. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And here's what that fellow, that, whoever that Roscoe is--(unclear) interfere with this guy that we found. It was so, and he would not allow anyone to speak to me while we were sitting there getting to go on, or we're taking a break. Nobody could chat with me at all. He would not allow it. Speaker 2: Wanted to keep you in that mood. Speaker 1: And Billy read a poem to me. And Mark [Mark Rydell] had, Mark was (unclear)--he, he, he's listening. He can't hear Roscoe speaking, so it's okay. And Billy read a poem that he'd written, and it's about an awful stark, ugly, awful bird in some dream; it was gargantuan. Well, the night before, I had a, I had--oh, it's too long a story. But Leontyne [Leontyne Price] had lost her voice while singing 'La fanciulla del West,' Puccini [Giacomo Puccini]. So Billy--when Mark came in to interrupt Billy--"You're talking to Roscoe?" He said, "I'm just reading something." Mark says, he says, "You were talking like Billy. You, you talking to (unclear), you can be that guy." He said, "So please." And he was really in earnest about it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so I remember picking up a pencil and paper. And I turned this awful, ugly thing that Billy had to this other thing, and it was a, a poem that I wrote for Leontyne. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: It closes the evening (unclear) I do. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And it's called 'Song.' And it says, if the birds do not come, I, whose wings are cleft, and whose gentle talons hold you fast to my breast, and from whose throat comes only the gray--comes, and grating cry of extremity where no music is. Aye, if the birds do not come, we'll sing to you. If the birds do not come, will you, who are spring and flight and all music, will you sing to me if the birds do not come? Now mind you-- Speaker 2: Now you're still doing that with Anthony Zerbe? Speaker 1: Yes, the-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Yes. Our evening ends with that. I did not wish it to. I should quote Anthony, but you have ladies who'll be hearing this at some point. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But our first evening, he said, "If you don't do that particular poem at the end, he says I'm not going"--it was during intermission--"I'm not going back out there." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Well, it was, it was replete with words that I can't say to this camera. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I said, "Anthony." He says, "No, it should close our evening." Well, it does, and it has ever since. Now mind you, Strasberg [Lee Strasberg] saw this in the playwright's unit [The Actors Studio, New York, New York], the play ['Bohikee Creek']. And then the author [Robert Unger] said we also have it in the, in the, I mean in--he saw it in the director's unit. And the author said, "Can we do it also for the playwrights, for the playwrights?" He said, "Yes." And at least Strasberg himself who said that, "You should do this for the acting unit because you two young men have gone to some extraordinary place in this play." It was at one of those--then we did it as a benefit for the studio, part of an evening, 'cause it's only twenty-minute long play or thirty minutes maybe. It was to one of those that Stella [Stella Adler] came, and I was introduced to her. And she decided that she was gonna make me the greatest actor who ever lived, in her very own words. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And I began there with Stella. And I left Curt [Curt Conway]. And I told him I was going to Stella. And I also, already had heard two girls do 'Uncle Wiggily's from Connecticut' ['Uncle Wiggily in Connecticut,' J.D. Salinger] (laughter). I, I took it as a sign for me to get out of that class. Story_ID: 323518 Speaker 1: In the meantime, I was elected as a member of The Actors Studio [New York, New York]. I was invited by Jane Fonda or one of the people doing the play ['Bohikee Creek,' Robert Unger]. And it developed out of the studio, 'They Shoot Horses, Don't They?' And the, the casting, you know, I'm in, I'm there regularly as an auditor, and I've done this great play that they loved Billy [Bill Gunn] and my work in it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, and at that opening night party, it was Gerry O'Loughlin [Gerald S. O'Loughlin] or Shelley Winters said, "Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], why don't you audition, become a member of the studio?" Well, I'm at the table where Lee is. And I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lee Strasberg? Speaker 1: Yes. And I said, "Lee, will you be there?" He said, "Will I be where?" He said--I said, "At my audition." He says, "I'm only there at the third one." And I used their names. I said, "You mean I have to audition for Shelley, for Gerry for (unclear)?" Well, we all laughed. It was an opening night party, and that was the end of it everyone thought. Well, I don't know who was doing the scene that I wanted to see about a week or so later at the studio. It could have been Ben Gazzara; it could have been someone who is dear to me and who could, who really had enormous talent that we didn't always see. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you would see it if it was a great scene that when they do it at the studio, when they would do it there. And I went, and it was the announcement of the new members, people who had passed the audition the night before, the third audition, the one that Strasberg himself sat in on. And so they're announced, and they're always invited to be there, and now they are life members of the studio. And Lee [ph.], that's another, that's a young fellow up in the balcony, he's ready to do the lights for the next scene. And Strasberg says, "No, no, Lee, not yet. We have some more announcements to make." And he said to the house, for reasons best known to me and God and perhaps themselves, "There are people who represent our work in the highest degree and who, for reasons that we don't know and they don't know, refuse to audition. And on those rare occasions," he said, "we elect them, and we did that last night. And we elected two, and it was Celeste Holm and Roscoe." And I broke up laughing. I was sitting in the back with Robert Loggia and Gazzara and somebody, and I just broke up laughing. And Lee said--'cause you never turned your--everybody in the studio was sitting back here, and he's on the front row. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You're where the stage is. And he always did this and say, "Why would you say, and what would you think?" But he turned all the way and looked at me. And I'm really laughing because I don't know why he struck me so funny. But he had it right that I had refused to audition. He said, "Just for that, you have to make a speech." He said, "No one new member ever is allowed to make a speech." And I said, "Lee," was it--and I don't--I think I did know their names. I can't think--no. Was it McKinley [ph.] or some other president who said, "If nominated I won't run, and if elected I won't serve," (laughter). Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And he did get a telegram the next day. The next day it's in The New York Times and the Herald Tribune [New York Herald Tribune], the new members of the studio. It was always a little thing in the theater section. Speaker 2: A little blurb. Story_ID: 323519 Speaker 1: He gets a telegram from George C. Scott and Colleen Dewhurst: "Congratulations on your electing Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] to the studio [The Actors Studio, New York, New York], but we thought, we think you should be advised the Trojan horse has now moved into the studio," (laughter) "and goodbye studio," (laughter), because George and Colleen had both--Lee [Lee Strasberg] had already, had already said to each one of them, "You won't have to audition." But they had turned it down because George simply could not ever think it possible that he could sit in a room and do a scene and other actors tell him what was wrong with that scene, because that does happen in the studio. It's the basis of it, really-- Speaker 2: Right, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that you do a scene, and the actors, who are members, they will critique the scene. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: George would never have that. Speaker 2: He would not have any of it. Speaker 1: Oh, he would never, he'd have none of that. But that really was a telegram. Speaker 2: So you were really moving up in this inner circle of people. Speaker 1: Yes, I was-- Speaker 2: They knew your talent. Speaker 1: I was moving in a circle. I wasn't getting, you know, great work. But I'm beginning to know the actors, and they were beginning to know me. And some, we became friends; before I knew it, we were friends. We would lunch together. They'd call me up: "Come here." "Come there," and I would go. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: While doing one of the playwrights units, a playwright, it was Albee [Edward Albee], had written something, and he had mentioned--they had asked him, "Did you write this for any particular actors?" And he said, "Well, one or two I had in mind, that so and so," and he answered the question. Mind you, only playwrights were allowed to talk in the playwrights unit-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --unless the, the moderator wishes to ask somebody like a director or actor, if he prominent enough or maybe in some way associated with it. But usually only playwrights speak at the playwrights unit. At least it was that way. And, and, and Edward said something about, "Well, I have a scene (unclear) a couple of actors, but I, no, I can't say I had anybody in mind." And Robert Lowell said, "Well, I've been writing a play ['Benito Cereno']; it's an adaptation." And they all turned to look 'cause they almost hadn't--they rarely heard his voice, and he rarely would come there. He had no plays out there at all, just great poetry, and was famous mainly in New York City [New York, New York], well, all over the East Coast-- Speaker 2: Okay, right. Speaker 1: --'cause he taught. Did he teach at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? He taught at some prep schools. Cal he was called, Robert Lowell. And he said, "Well, I've been adapting a play, and I've been writing it, a character for, for Roscoe, whom we saw the other day," he said and something. And Lorraine Hansberry said, "That's very interesting because I've been writing a, a--." She says, "Well, I don't want talk about that yet." Now mind you, it's like '59 [1959]. Speaker 2: Okay, and that's what I was going to ask you. Speaker 1: Yes, this is like 1959; yes, it was '59 [1959]. So, I was amazed I heard Mr. Lowell say it. And then Wynn [Wynn Handman], Wynn would kill me. What's Wynn's last name? He's the founder of, what with two other people [Sidney Lanier and Michael Tolan], the American Place Theatre [New York, New York]. So, within a week or so, he called me up and said, "We have this play, and you are to read it." And I read it with--they didn't keep Robert, but they replaced him with Frank Langella. But at the first reading it was Robert who read Benito. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he was just brilliant. And Lester Rawlins read Captain Delano, and I read Babu [sic. Babo]. And there are many blacks on this ship, Africans. Story_ID: 323520 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Lonnie Johnson [ph.]-- Speaker 2: Lonnie, okay. Speaker 1: --Woodie [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And Woodie tells an outrageous story. And it's true, of course, I did throw a fit at some point. It had more to do with they had brought in some woman to, who was very, she was frustrating as a choreographer. And I didn't think that the dance that these people were doing should be choreographed. But it was Jonathan Miller, you see, he was directing it ['Benito Cereno,' Robert Lowell], and Jonathan had never directed, you know, the famous guy who was a, he's one of the people who wrote 'Beyond the Fringe.' And there was no wonder it came from London [England]--Jonathan Miller, Peter Cook, and that other guy, played the piano, died, '10,' in the movie '10.' Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Dudley Moore. Speaker 1: Dudley-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and Dudley Moore. And there's one other. I can't think of his name at the moment. But at any rate, Jonathan is brilliant. And he hadn't a clue I thought about what actors do. But he, he did manage to put us in the right place at the right time and all that. But, and, and they had this woman to do it, and I just threw a fit, apparently. And-- Speaker 2: According to Woodie (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, I did, and I left. And I was so angry I wouldn't get in a taxi. I just walked those ten blocks, from 50--46th Street to 57th [Street, New York, New York]. And when I walked in the door my phone was ringing, and it was, it was, it was Jonathan. He's saying, "Ross [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], you're right." I said, "Jonathan, I'm so ashamed. I didn't think I could ever do such an unprofessional thing as--." He said, "Ross, you were right. Would you come back?" And I said, "Of course." I said, "Tonight?" He says, "No, no, no, just let us take a day. You rest this evening you, and we'll see you tomorrow." Well, I was, part of my fit was that she had said to me, "You know, you may not get it right 'cause you're not quite ready yet." Stella [Stella Adler], I told her in class that Robert Lowell has written a play, and, and, and there's a role that I really want to do, and they, they want me to do it. And Stella said, "No, I, I will not let you go." And I said, "Stella?" She said, "You're not quite ready. You're almost there. But when I say yes, you're going to be the finest actor in America." She says, "Now everybody knows I've said that to Brando [Marlon Brando]. You've got something he did not have." She said, "You have another gift, and it has to do with poetry, and I'm not talking about speech." Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But she said, "No, you cannot do it." And so I did it, and it meant that I--but Stella did bring--she, she came to see it. And I'm so glad they have it on a record somewhere. I mean we can get it out of a newspaper somewhere. And it was the time that Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] thought there should be some cultural exchange between Moscow [Russia] and New York [New York], or the United States and Russia. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And several playwrights and actors and directors came over. And the night before, the day of their leaving this country, they said wonderful things about actors and people they had seen. But the only one--I love being able to tell you this, but the only one that they had seen in this country who remotely seemed to bring back Stanislavski's [Constantin Stanislavski] truths was this young actor who is playing Babu [sic. Babo]. Isn't that wonderful (laughter)? Speaker 2: That is wonderful. Speaker 1: He was playing Babu. I never thought I would say this publicly on tape and one could hear me say it. And I was so glad to know one can check it (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, and you needed to share that with us. Speaker 1: One can vet it. Yes. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Story_ID: 323521 Speaker 1: So that was at the end of 1959 and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's about it. That's about it. Speaker 1: --you working with the Edward Albees. You've-- Speaker 2: Well, Edward, well, later on did write a role or two for me and, but any rate, so, that very time, that play is all done-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --'Benito Cereno' [Robert Lowell]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And Stella, Stella Adler had advised you not to-- Speaker 2: Not to do the play. Speaker 1: Right, you were not ready, she said. Speaker 2: But Stella brought these people from Russia to see me because she said, "You'll see something when you see him." And she even told me that I, she said I even said, "I don't think he's all--already there yet, but you're gonna see something." And they agreed and said so in a big press conference. Speaker 1: Right, and in a public release. Speaker 2: So that's over and I feel the play was done. And I'm sad a little. I think the play was then and done, yes. I remember I was on a subway. I'm going to the library at 5th Avenue and on 42nd Street [New York, New York], and I'm coming up out of the subway. And Flash, Flash Gordon, Flash, yes, Flash--is his name Gordon? Yes--no, Flash. He's a wonderful actor and dancer. He was with one of the great dancers with [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham. But he was also an actor, Riley, Flash Riley [James Flash Riley]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I'm coming out, and he says, "Roscoe Browne [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]," 'cause I'm, oh, I had become Roscoe Lee Browne by then. I think I explained to you earlier. Speaker 1: You did, but we're gonna revisit that-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --to get that story. Speaker 2: He said, "Roscoe Browne." And I said, "Hello," 'cause I'd met him with Josephine [Josephine Premice]. That's how I met all the Dunham dancers, with Josephine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I say, "Yes." He says, "Why aren't you going down there to try out for this play?" I said, "What play?" And he said, "It's 'The Blacks' ['The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet]. Have you read it?" I said, "Yeah, I read it in French. I didn't know there was an English translation." He says, "Yeah, we're doing it. There's a role that only you should play. You should go down." And I said, "Where?" And I went where he said to go at the-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --at the, it's where the NA--NEC [Negro Ensemble Company] began, but it wasn't formed yet. Speaker 1: Okay, St. Mark's Theater? Speaker 2: St. Mark's perhaps, right. He said, "It's at the St. Mark's Playhouse [New York, New York], and they're doing tryouts now." I said, "Well, the hell with the library. I'll just go straight there." And I walked in, and I read. And Gene Frankel and Sidney Bernstein did suggest that, "You are it; you are really Archibald," he said, "but we'll give you a call by Tuesday." And I said, "I, I have two plays that I'm offered, and, and they were both written for me. And I, I'm drawn toward this one, so I'm afraid you'll have to let me know before the weekend is gone." It was a Friday. And Gene didn't like that. Sidney was sort of like, we can handle that. I said, "'Cause I leave town," I said, "in three hours." And I went home, and they called and said, "You've got the role." But I took all three plays up with me up to Steepletop [Austerlitz, New York]; it's the estate of Edna St. Vincent Millay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I never knew her. She died in 1950, but in 1952 I met her sister and her sister's husband, Norma [Norma Millay Ellis] and Charles Ellis, Norma Millay and Charles Ellis. And Charlie was this great actor, and Norma was an actress. And Charlie was, for example, by all accounts, O'Neill's [Eugene O'Neill] best friend, until Charlie dismissed one particular play and said to any of us it's not a play. And O'Neill, who was apparently, you know, a little unhinged anyhow-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --moved out of that loft that they lived above a, where they live above a stable on Bleecker Street in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York]. Charlie in the meantime was away. Any rate-- Story_ID: 323522 Speaker 1: You've tried out for the role, 'The Blacks' ['The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet] at the St. Mark's Theater-- Speaker 2: Okay, before I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Playhouse [St. Mark's Playhouse, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: --left home to go Upstate [Upstate New York] with these three plays-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --they did call, Frankel [Gene Frankel] and Sidney Bernstein. And they said, "We cannot imagine anybody else being Archibald, and so, will you do it?" And I said, "Yes, I'd love it." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I said, "I have to say something to these other people, so can we settle this on Monday?" And they said, "Yes." I said, "But I just want to say to you that this is the play I want to do." Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: "Are you talking about agents?" I said, "No, I don't have an agent." I didn't yet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't know actors should have agents. I had no agent. So I go Upstate to Steepletop, which is Upstate New York, a little place, a hamlet called Austerlitz [New York]. It is where Edna St. Vincent Millay wrote most of her poetry. She and her husband [Eugen Jan Boissevain] bought that farm. I never met them, of course. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were both--he had died in '49 [1949], and she died in '50 [1950], and we're two years later. When I'm be, just beginning to work for Schenley [Schenley Import Corporation; Shenley Industries, Inc.] I meet them [Norma Millay Ellis and Charles Ellis]. So I'm not an actor yet at all. So, I'm going up there because we talked about the New York Shakespeare Festival [Shakespeare in the Park]. Always in between during those plays, and they're always in the summer, except for the 'Titus Andronicus' [William Shakespeare], there were some little plays that--or maybe they were big plays being done at little theaters. And they would say, "Yeah, we want you to do this," and I would take them with me Upstate. And Charlie would always--Charlie Ellis--would always take them upstairs to read while we're down--and this is a great farmhouse. So this week I bring him three. And one play is called--well, and I say, "Charlie, I can have any one of these plays. Which one should I do?" And so Norma and I are having our usual hilarious time. He goes upstairs, and he's not gonna come down 'til dinner anyhow. When he comes down he puts the three down. We're in the dining room, just he and I and somebody, Norma and someone who's helping bringing some food in, or Norma is making us drinks, which is what Charlie did usually. But, he said, "Well, now this play, this fellow looks like it's been rewritten for you." I said, "Well, yeah, it's, it's a young playwright," something Richardson [Jack Richardson]. I can't think of his first name now. I said, "Yes, he wrote a piece called 'Gallows Humor.'" And, and Charlie said, "Well, he's forcing it a little in this rewrite that's for you, 'cause you're playing this character." I said, "Yes." He says, "Good writing," he said, "but he doesn't finish his work," and he puts it down. He picks up the next play. It's by Jack Gilbert, and it's called 'The Apple' [ph.]. And he said, he says, that's where I got this expression from. "You know, this, this is authentic crap," and he put it down. And he said, "This third one, I can't make it out. I'm not sure what it's about." He said, "I'm sure what it seems to be about is not really what it's about, but it is the most interesting of all three." And that was 'The Blacks.' And that settled it. Speaker 1: You knew you had made-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --the right choice. Speaker 2: Yes. And I called them, I called that theater on a Saturday just to see if they were around, and they were; they were auditioning actors and auditioning. And I said, "If you still want me, I want it. And I'm telling the other people that I, this is the play." And they said, "Done. Great,"-- Speaker 1: That-- Speaker 2: --and that was it. Story_ID: 323523 Speaker 1: Let's just drop back for a hot moment. And you had been known as Roscoe Browne [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]-- Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: --in your Schenley [Schenley Import Corporation; Schenley Industries, Inc.] days. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And somewhere along there the idea to add Lee came in. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Just give us that story. Speaker 2: Because I was always Roscoe Browne. And when I was running track it was always Roscoe Browne. And when I be, when I was working for Schenley it was just Roscoe Browne. And when I became an actor for, in the park [Central Park, New York, New York] for those first three seasons [of the New York Shakespeare Festival; Shakespeare in the Park] I was Roscoe Browne. You can find those old playbills in Roscoe Browne. And one day, Joseph Papp said, "You know, you can get your card." I said, "What card?" He says, "Your equity card." I, I said, "What does that mean?" "You've done enough, and you've had enough speaking parts of some length. You can get your equity card." I said, "Oh, that's great." Mind you, I had no idea about it. I mean I was that naive an actor. So you can understand how naive I am but not, didn't have the sense I would have had agent (unclear) 'til finally I wanted to. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, I said, "Where do I go to do that?" He said, "Down at Equity [Actors' Equity Association]." And that's right where they still are, on 46th Street. So I go down. There's a little--did I tell you this before? Speaker 1: No, you didn't. Speaker 2: There's a little apple dumpling of a lady sitting behind or standing behind the thing, and there's a young woman who is assisting her. And there's a mirror there. We can look into it, but they look in to see who's coming. And I said, "Hi, my name is Roscoe Browne, and Joe Papp said that I can get my equity card and that I should come here." She said, "I saw you. You're just wonderful." She mentioned one of those pieces where I had very little do, do whatever. I said, "Thank you," sweet little lady. And she said, she said, "Dear," to the girl, and the girl then--mind you, remember, there's no, no computers then, and she's going through the files. And I see her face in that mirror. She, she's like this. And, and the lady says, "What is it, dear?" And she takes the card out and hands it to her. There was a Roscoe Brown. I said, "Is there an E on his last name?" And she said, "No." I said, well, I'm born with an E on mine. And she said, "Honey," you know, "it can't work. Do you have a middle name?" I said, "Lee." "Do you want to be Roscoe Lee?" I said, "Lee as my last name?" And I--she said, "Yes." I said, "No." "You want to be Lee Browne?" I said, "No." Mind you, if, back then if I'd had any senses, I, I would be, I would have been Lee Brown all these years I think. Well, any rate, or just Roscoe Lee. But any rate, I said, "No." And she said, says, "You know you can't have that same first and last as this fellow." I said, "Well who is he?" And she says, "We don't know," and she says, "He's on"--there's a thing you can get on Equity. It's on like a leave of absence. You're still a member, but you don't have to pay dues. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: You're still a member, and so you get that. But any rate, he was on one of those things. And she said he's in Lexington [Kentucky], I remember. And I said this awful thing has it probably for the cure, 'cause we heard that people went to Lexington, somewhere in some state for some particular cure. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: (Laughter) But at any rate, I asked her quietly, and I think I had tears in my eyes when she said, "You'll have to change your name." And I said, "I can't do that." And I asked her, "Is there anybody above you that is in rank?" "Well, yes, he's just down the stairs to the left." And she said, "I hope--just give him this," and she wrote something quickly, folded it. I took it down to him. His name will come to me. It's a great name, Agnes--Angus, Angus something [Angus Duncan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I come down, and his door is open. And he has three papers open, and he's on the phone talking to somebody. He's a big man. And he's saying, "Yeah, yeah, right, yeah, ah, I got an actor here, another actor in here with a problem." I mean, he has no idea what it is. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he says, "I'll call you back." He said, "Yeah, it's in all the papers; right, yeah, I've got three of them here," and then he hangs up. Story_ID: 323524 Speaker 1: --"Come in, kid," and I walk in. And I--Angus Duncan, that's his name. Speaker 2: Okay, that's his name, all right. Speaker 1: And I say, I said, "Sir"--he said, "What's your problem?" I said, "The lady upstairs gave me this," and he looks at it--"said I could come see you. My name is Roscoe Browne, and I'd like to keep it." And he said, "You, you got a middle name?" And I'm looking like looking I've just gone through this. I said, "Yes, sir, and it's Lee." He said, "You wanna be [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne?" I said, "Can I do that?" He said, "If I sign this thing here, you can." I said, "Roscoe Lee Browne." I said, "It's my real name," I said. I said, "Yeah." He said, "Well, that's who you're gonna be." I said, "But this"--he's--oh, she'd already told me upstairs. She said, "That's how we got Stewart Granger," she said, "because our Jimmy was already James Stewart"-- Speaker 2: Ah, okay. Speaker 1: --"'cause Stewart Granger's real name was James Stewart. So Granger I think is his mother's maiden name. He became Stewart Granger." Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She had told me that upstairs, and I'm looking at her like I'm almost in tears about changing my--so any rate, I'm down there, and he said, he said, "Look kid," he said, "my boy, my boys and I"--I don't know if it was his friends or his sons--"my boys and I, we saw you running at the Garden [Madison Square Garden, New York, New York]. Yours is a public name. He said, "Now you're just Roscoe Lee Browne." He said, "Okay? Okay." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He said, "Yours is a public name. You get it?" He said just like, and he goes through the paper, and he said, "Just like Margaret Truman." That was the name he came up on. I said, "Oh, thank you, sir." So I get to the door, and I turn around. He said, "Are we all, we all set, kid?" I said, "Yes, sir. Do I understand correctly my new name is Margaret Truman?" He said get the out of here (laughter). He just roared. And I--when I did my first Broadway play ['The Cool World,' Warren Miller and Robert Rossen], I get a, a telegram from him, and it's addressed to Roscoe Lee Browne. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And it's the, the text says, "Dear Margaret, wishing you," (laughter)--(unclear) you, oh, it was just great. And that's how come I'm Roscoe Lee Browne. I just thought an actor should have two names, you know, just Roscoe Browne, but there was that actor. Story_ID: 323525 Speaker 1: What was the first play or film or TV series that you used [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne in? Was that in 1960, by the way? Speaker 2: I, I did use it in, in 'The Blacks' ['The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet]. Speaker 1: Oh, oh, you did use it in 'The Blacks,' okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'm not quite certain, 'cause I know I got the card [from the Actors' Equity Association]. Maybe I had not done yet 'Benito Cereno' [Robert Lowell] 'cause I think I was Roscoe Lee Browne there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But in all of the other New York Shakespeare Festivals [Shakespeare in the Park] I was Roscoe Browne. Speaker 1: Right, right, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I think I was Roscoe Lee Browne. I'm thinking that the first time was 'Benito Cereno.' Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because that's around about the time that Joseph [Joseph Papp] said you could, (laughter) you can get your card. Speaker 1: Now you had Roscoe Lee Browne there, not Margaret Truman, right (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), you can depend on it. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: But you would have loved his face when I said, "Do I have it right, sir?" He said, "Are we straight, kid?" And I said, "Yes, do I have it right, my new name is Margaret Truman?" (Laughter) "Get out of here," and he just roared. He, I mean this great man, big man, this great laugh. Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: And I know he went to the phone right away to tell his friends about this (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Angus Duncan. Speaker 2: Angus. I'm sure it's Angus Duncan. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Now, we're, we're into the 1960s, and-- Speaker 2: And 'The Blacks' is going on and on and on. Speaker 1: Right, it went four years. Speaker 2: That's right, almost five. Speaker 1: Almost five years. Speaker 2: And you know, in between those years, I mean during those years, almost every actor in the play--there were thirteen of us I think--actor would, he might be off in some play, and there were understudies everywhere. And we would just go. I know I left it once or twice. James Earl [HistoryMaker James Earl Jones] left it once or twice. Speaker 1: Do you remember what you left it for? Speaker 2: Yes, one play was starring Alvin Ailey, and that nice woman. No wonder, I said this cruel thing about her, and that's why she won't let me have her name now. She has already died-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --Claudia McNeil. Speaker 1: Oh, right, right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And there were bunches of us; two or maybe three were from 'The Blacks.' Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, not true. They all had been in 'The Blacks,' but they were not from the original company except Cicely. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, Cicely Tyson. Speaker 2: Right. But it was called 'Tiger, Tiger'-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --maybe 'Burning Bright' ['Tiger, Tiger Burning Bright,' Peter S. Feibleman] maybe it-- Speaker 1: 'Tiger, Tiger.' Speaker 2: --had that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It began to be short, shortened to 'Tiger, Tiger.' Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I had left 'The Blacks' to do that. It was short-lived, but it was an interesting piece. Josh Logan [Joshua Logan] was the director. Speaker 1: Right, very famous. Speaker 2: And he understood very little of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He and Claudia had dreadful fights. I walked out of that show. And they came back up. They came out into the streets to get me in, on Broadway, one of those Broadway streets, one of those houses. And I just walked out. I, who really still am not known for temper, but I walked out because he was being rude to some other actors-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --not ever rude to me. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I just-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I'm gone. Roger Stevens [Roger L. Stevens] almost never forgive me, forgave me for it, although I did come back when they came out to get me. And Roger Stevens really did not like it, the way Josh Logan greeted me of such profound I beg your pardons. Story_ID: 323526 Speaker 1: You're doing Broadway-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --but any television of note? Speaker 2: Nothing--yes, some, but they were also the camera three pieces that did not, they were not long-lived. I mean something would happen on a Sunday morning (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: I did with Sarah Cunningham (cough) many pieces. I think Sarah and I were in the same ones many times. She's wonderful. She's the--oh no, they both are gone. I was going to say she's the widow, but he died recently, John Randolph-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --great actor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He played Mitchell [John Mitchell], he in 'All the King's Men' [sic. 'All the President's Men]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay-- Speaker 2: But he's one of the great actors. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I remember saying to Colleen [Colleen Dewhurst] early on, I said, "I keep getting these messages from a John Randolph." I said, "Who is he?" She said, "Oh--." I said, "I, I think it's a petition." She said, "Oh, if he wants you to sign one, sign it. He's on the side of the angels." Speaker 1: Oh, all right. Speaker 2: And I just loved it, knowing that about-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --who John was. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: John died still loving what I called him upon meeting him. He came to pick up Sarah once, and we're down on--57th Street [New York, New York] at CBS. And Sarah said to me, "Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], this is my husband." And I said, "How do you do, Mr. Cunningham?" I thought that was his name. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I thought she was Mrs. Sarah Cunningham, and he was Mr. Cunningham. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Well, he loved it when he told everybody he 'cause he was the famous John Randolph. He said, "This kid, you know, this new actor, who thinks I'm Mr. Cunningham," (laughter). So when I found that out, he just loved it that I always called him Mr. Cunningham-- Story_ID: 323527 Speaker 1: Now we are in the beginning of '60 [1960]-- Speaker 2: And a career is happening (laughter). Speaker 1: And, and a career is happening, 'The Blacks' ['The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet], one of the longest running (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --black plays-- Speaker 2: It was extraordinary. Speaker 1: --in, in history, in fact, is going on. And lead actors in that are leaving and coming-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --back and-- Speaker 2: --and coming back. We all came back when they said this is really the closing, you know, those farewell-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --tours of people like concerts. When they said this is really-- Speaker 1: Was that '64 [1964]-- Speaker 2: --I guess--would you-- Speaker 1: --sixty-five [1965]? Okay. Speaker 2: --"Can we get the whole cast back?" And we all did show up to close it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think Maya [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] also. Maybe not, Maya had married, moved to Africa. But she also did join us when we were, pardon me, performing in Germany, in Berlin I guess, and I think and maybe Turin [Italy]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was one of those two places that those old track aficionados dug up stuff. I don't think I'd ever told. Some of the actors knew that I'd been a runner, but I knew I, I had set a record at some port in Turin in 1951-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in this beautiful red clay in track that was swift. And, and I'd won--I know Harbig's [Rudolf Harbig] record was somewhere else. I think I set a record also for the, the Berlin track. And, and when we were there, they made much of the fact that this actor who's in 'The Blacks' was that runner. Speaker 1: Ah, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so you-- Speaker 2: They made much of it. Speaker 1: --played up that angle. Speaker 2: Yeah. So I think--I know that Maya was with us in, in Berlin and I think Turin. I think she did come back for the last performance. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was Maya, Lex Monson, Charles Gordone-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --who wrote 'No Place to be Somebody,' Pulitzer [Pulitzer Prize], Flash Riley [James Flash Riley]-- Speaker 1: Ah, right, okay Speaker 2: --and Godfrey Cambridge, Helen Martin, [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones, Ethel Ayler, Cicely Tyson, Louis Gossett, Jr. [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.], and Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the original company. Speaker 1: Ah, okay. Speaker 2: The original, original company would have been this one other person, was not Ethel, who played Snow, but it was Abbey Lincoln. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Abbey had a falling out over the phone with the director [Gene Frankel] and producer. And that's not fair to say. Abbey didn't have the falling out. Max got on the phone and, and that ended it. Speaker 1: Now when you said Ethel, did you mean Ethel Ayler? Speaker 2: Ayler. Speaker 1: Right, and-- Speaker 2: Glorious. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I think I told you, or did I, when Max--well, it was the night we were having, were lighting the show. Abbey had never done a play before. I remember Abbey asking me, "Is it always this?" I said, "Tedious, isn't it?" I said, "This is the worst night in an actor's life." I said, "Someday they'll be able to do this in some--." I didn't, I wasn't even thinking that digital would be coming (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --but "some magic wand," I think I said. But it's, you know, it's beat to beat, and they're changing these lights by hand and ah, and you please get up there on that ladder and turn this, put a different lens, a different--what is that paper you put in-- Speaker 1: Yeah, what's-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Gel. Speaker 1: Gel. Speaker 2: A different gel, all of that. Well, so, it's one a.m., and we have an hour more of the show to do. And Abbey said, "Is it always like that?" I said, "Yes, it's the worst night of an actor's life, before you open." Speaker 1: 'Cause you've become a veteran. Speaker 2: No, I'm, I'd been a, I'd been here now (laughter). And so we went to--they said a half-hour break for, get some food. And as you know, we were down on the Second Avenue--8th Street [New York, New York]-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And we scattered (unclear)--Abbey went home. And I did say, I and somebody else did say to Maya probably--Abbey and Maya then were best friends--that she misunderstood. They thought the break was we'd come back tomorrow. And I do remember saying to Gene Frankel or to Sidney [Sidney Bernstein], it is an easy thing of me to assume, even though it's presumptuous of me, because I didn't think about it, in some way I knew I was, I'd been an actor less time than they, but I was the elder. And it occurred to me only, but also I guess it was the character. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was the nature of Archibald for me to want to protect or to tell somebody else don't do this, don't say this to her. And I didn't say don't. I just suggested really rather sweetly: "Please don't speak to her about being professional 'cause she is the most professional of us all here." And they knew that she's this great singer. So they got on the phone with her, and finally one of them said and, "You know, Ms., Ms. Lincoln, it's not really very professional." And Max had picked up the other line, and Max said, "Tell him to kiss your black ass." So Abbey proceeded to say so-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and that was the end of it. Story_ID: 323528 Speaker 1: And the next day at rehearsal it was, indeed, my birthday, and it was gonna be our first preview. I remember six o'clock--no, I mean it, eleven, two, something in the morning--I mean eleven or noon or whatever, Max showed up and said, "You can't sing my music," 'cause he had written the music to the piece that Genet [Jean Genet] had written, "Whistle gentle blackbirds." But, he wrote the music. And so when they gave us a break, an hour, before a half hour, 'cause we're gonna perform for the first time, but it's a preview-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in that hour, Maya [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] and Ethel Ayler wrote the music that now one hears when you hear--yes, they wrote it in that hour, Maya and Ethel. And for, during our half hour, before the curtain went up, they taught it to the rest of us, and we all learned it; simple song, but we had to learn it-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and unlearn the one that Max had, had written for us-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and that we'd been singing all these weeks. And, but Maya and Ethel wrote it and taught it to us in a half hour. Speaker 2: Wow-- Speaker 1: And we sang it: (singing) "We're so gentle blackbirds, dah, dah, dah, dah, de, dum, de, de, dah," (laughter). Speaker 2: Wow, that is, that is fantastic. Speaker 1: 'Cause the music should-- Speaker 2: Ethel and I used to date quite a bit. That's the reason-- Speaker 1: Oh, really? She's one of the great creatures-- Speaker 2: Yes, she is. Speaker 1: --in the world. Speaker 2: She is. Speaker 1: I mean she's one of God's gifts, I mean in terms of woman, womanhood. That'd be woman. I remember telling Ethel once that if, I said, "If the Martians show up, and they will," I said, "they will come straight to me, I promise you they will, and say, 'Show me woman.'" And I said, "I'll point to you," (laughter). Speaker 2: The, the-- Speaker 1: No kidding. You were that Brock [HistoryMaker Paul Brock]. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm that Brock, yeah. Speaker 1: It was (laughter)-- Speaker 2: But at that period, I still lived in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands. The, the, now during this period, there was something else going on that you were involved in and that is the Negro Ensemble [Negro Ensemble Company] was trying to get off-- Speaker 1: Not yet. Speaker 2: --the ground. Speaker 1: Not yet. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The Negro Ensemble, only when 'The Blacks' ['The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet] finished. Speaker 2: Oh, it had finished-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) yes. Speaker 2: --officially finished? Speaker 1: Really finished. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Then the Negro Ensemble really gets--well, they'd been talking about it. But it really got started when we moved out of that theater [St. Mark's Playhouse, New York, New York]. That's where they moved into. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: That was their first theater. And yes, they'd been talking about it, and they'd been having meetings, I think. But they didn't really form it until 'The Blacks' ended. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was as though we in some way either sired or birthed the Negro Ensemble Company. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All of its members had been at some point one of the, playing one of the roles in 'The Blacks,' ex-- Speaker 2: On (unclear) and-- Speaker 1: --except the fellow. Well, they all played roles. I mean James Earl [HistoryMaker James Earl Jones] created Village [Deodatus Village]. Billy Dee Williams played Village. Max Julien played Village. [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks played Village. Lincoln Kilpatrick [Lincoln Kilpatrick, Jr.] played Village. I hope I haven't forgotten anyone. I mean they all came through. For my role [Archibald], I know that Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.] played not only Village, but he played my role. He was originally, although he's always cast, he was originally cast as Newport News [Edgar Alas Newport News]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He was also my understudy. Story_ID: 323529 Speaker 1: --We're coming to the end of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of-- Speaker 1: --the run of 'The Blacks' ['The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And the, where do-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --where do you go next? Speaker 2: Well, I did a-- Speaker 1: You're now famous, of course. Speaker 2: I'm sorry? Speaker 1: You, you are now famous, very famous (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, infamous. Speaker 1: People-- Speaker 2: As this, yes, this actor. Speaker 1: Right, as an actor. That's what I meant. Of course, you-- Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), I know. Speaker 1: --in, in the other three careers you-- Speaker 2: As, as [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne (laughter), yes. He was created, that fellow then. Well, George C. was--directed, was going, was about to direct a play. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was called 'General Seeger' [Ira Levin]. Speaker 1: Now, when you say George C-- Speaker 2: George C. Scott. Speaker 1: --C. Scott, right, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, we used to call him G.C., George C. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I called him mainly George. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Now George. But often we called him G.C. And if, if there was one thing that he wished most of his life to have owned, it was the Detroit Tigers are their baseball team, isn't it? Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And so we decided the usual out-of-town venues would not be where we'd go. We were gonna have our out, our out-of-town tryouts in Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it starred William Bendix and that lovely old actress. By old I mean back in the '40s [1940s] and '30s [1930s], Ann Harding-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, right. Speaker 2: --and Dolores Sutton, and Lonny Chapman, a lot of people. And no role was larger than the role of mine, which was is almost narrative, but he's also in the play. He's called the Corporal. And we--I'm just finding a way to say all of this about--oh, we, oh, everybody in the world knows that if George, George was never, ever difficult sober. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But if he had a drink or two, he might be a little difficult and, and maybe impatient. And as we progressed from Detroit to New York City [New York, New York], where we're were about ready to open, although we had a week of previews, he was less and less patient with Bendix, who would get lost, I think partly because Bendix had not been on stage in umpteen years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think he had maybe had done something here in New York, I think, but he's mainly known as 'The Life of Riley'-- Speaker 1: Riley [Chester A. Riley]-- Speaker 2: --and all those other things. Speaker 1: And Alan Ladd's best buddy (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that, right. Well, he, he was replaced by the second day of our first, the second--in the first week of previews he was replaced by George. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the name of this tryout? Speaker 2: 'General Seeger.' Speaker 1: 'General Seeger,' okay. Speaker 2: Yes, S-E-E-G-E-R, 'General Seeger,' and I played Corporal. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think he was called the Corporal. And after that, oh, came a couple of other plays but one about the time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, before we go to the next, 'General Seeger' had its tryout there in Detroit-- Speaker 2: It did. Speaker 1: --with George C. Pat--George C. Scott. Speaker 2: No, without George playing the lead. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Bendix did play it there-- Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: --in Detroit. Speaker 1: --Bendix played it there. Speaker 2: And George took it over when we got to New York-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --before we officially opened. Speaker 1: Right, okay. When it did open, how long did it last? Speaker 2: Not very long. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: In fact, they thought that it should close. Story_ID: 323530 Speaker 1: I did another play before that one, however, on Broadway. I think it was before that. Yes, 'cause it was my first play-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --my first Broadway play. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: I'd been there once with, it was called something '59 [sic.], because I had done this showcase sort of with Vinnette Carroll of 'Dark of the Moon' [Howard Richardson]. And I played Preacher Haggler, who turned that revival meeting--I mean I looked at Vinnette and she said, "No, darling, darling, please come"--you know Vinnette's voice? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: But I, I said, "Vinnette, no, that's (unclear), can't go down there into the--." "No, darling, it's just wonderful." And so I finally did wade in the water (singing) down wade in the water wade--and down into the--and they all went crazy, and we took that to Broadway for something called Broadway '59, not for any length. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was just a, a moment where they--I keep thinking actually it was done in an afternoon, like on a day that would not be a matinee day. Many other pieces from off-Broadway, whatever, would just be shown and called, they called it Broadway '59. Speaker 2: And the, and 'Dark of the Moon' was the first on-Broadway play that you did? Speaker 1: Except we didn't do the whole play. We just-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --did the, we did the-- Speaker 2: Did it-- Speaker 1: --revival scene-- Speaker 2: Right, okay. Speaker 1: --with Cicely [Cicely Tyson] as Barbara Allen and Clarence Williams III. He was her little, he was her little brother in the play. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Isabel, Isabel who just died, Mrs. Jefferson. Speaker 2: Oh, right, Isabel Sanford. Speaker 1: Isabel was Mrs. Allen-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Cicely's mother in--and that was Cicely's first play also. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: And Cicely loves to tell people. I say, "Cicely, stop saying it. It's not true." She said, "Well, it is true." And she'd been speaking of me. She said, "At the beginning of 'Dark of the Moon' he held my hand to get me through it, and he's been holding--." I can't repeat all that. It's lovely. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 1: It is lovely what she says. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She's dear. Speaker 2: And then you come up to 'General Seeger' [Ira Levin], and that-- Speaker 1: But I-- Speaker 2: --doesn't last too long. Speaker 1: But before that there was another that lasted even, that went just as quickly-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --although I did get great reviews (laughter). It was called--it starred Billy Dee Williams, because it was about some boys or gangs, 'Cool World' ['The Cool World,' Warren Miller and Robert Rossen]. Speaker 2: Oh, 'Cool,' okay. Speaker 1: 'A Cool World' or 'Cool World,' quite different from the movie, although it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --meant to be the same. Billy was brilliant in it actually. I can't think of that little girl's name. I think she's no longer acting who played his girlfriend in it. Harold Scott was wonderful in it, David Downing. They were all kids. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I played Royal Baron, and-- Speaker 2: This was on Broadway? Speaker 1: This is on Broadway. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Robert Rossen was the director. You know, he'd been--what's the thing you do to people when you--blacklisted-- Speaker 2: Okay, right. Speaker 1: --in Hollywood, so he thought he would make another. And he was really quite good. Hilda Simms played my-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --girlfriend [Miss Dewpont] in this play. And, and you can check that one out if one likes to. I, I had great reviews. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Walter Kerr even lied, and when we finally met, I said, "You know, that wasn't true what you wrote. I, I know you complimented me, but--" Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: 'Cause he suggested that there's something terribly wrong with the play. "But then again, Mr. Browne [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] would come back," and so he'd describe another scene. He said, "And then, of course, we couldn't wait too long, and then there was Mr. Browne." And so he had me doing it about four or five times. Actually, I did two scenes I think. Speaker 2: And, and, and what newspaper was-- Speaker 1: He wrote then for Herald Tribune [New York Herald Tribune]. Speaker 2: Herald Tribune, okay. Speaker 1: Or, you know, he did move to The New York Times, but I think it was, he was still with the Herald Tribune. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 323531 Speaker 1: Isn't that amazing when I'm listing those plays because when I get to this other one that we are not talking about yet, they all happened before, that is, this one. Speaker 2: Right, and-- Speaker 1: And--I mentioned 'Tiger, Tiger' [Tiger, Tiger Burning Bright,' Peter S. Feibleman], yes? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And 'General Seeger' [Ira Levin]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And this one was 'The Cool World' [Warren Miller and Robert Rossen]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It had some quality, but what happened to it, we went off, we went out to Philadelphia [Philadelphia] for the out-of-town tryouts. And there is this clipboard brigade who hover around director and producers. And they all had ideas, and they were all deadly wrong. They just ruined this really charming piece; it had real charm. I do recall the only character didn't, they didn't touch this clipboard brigade was mine [Royal Baron]. I--he stayed all the way through as he was. But they kept rewriting these young kids' stuff, and it was just awful, awful, awful, maudlin, I mean maudlin to the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mean it went from worst to worser (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes, maudlin to the point of really thick trickle. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was that bad. And these kids were all quite good. Billy [Billy Dee Williams] was exquisite. He was just brilliant in it. I hate forgetting that sweet girl's name, but I have not seen her name really since then. I think she married and be--I think maybe she got sensible-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --or became sensible. You can't get sensible, can you? Become it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But the 'Dark of the Moon' [Howard Richardson] did, it was quite something because we did at the Harlem Y [Harlem YMCA, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: I wish Vinnette [Vinnette Carroll] still lived 'cause she could really describe it marvelously (laughter) for you. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: It was a great good time. Speaker 2: And when you said was--because I remember the Harlem Y. I know it-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --very well. So that wasn't the largest-- Speaker 1: No, small. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And they kept coming up from downtown just to see this production, bitter cold I remember. The snow had turned to ice. And it was packed every time we did it. We didn't do it every night, but it was packed. Speaker 2: Every, wow. Speaker 1: I mean really packed. Ms. Jean Dalrymple, the great producer, she came. People were bringing people: "You gotta come see what they're doing." Story_ID: 323532 Speaker 1: Now usually when you have an event like that, everybody profits from it, profits, but gets offers for it to come re-tryout. Speaker 2: Yeah, sort of. It was beginning--they were calling us all up often. You know, for me it was will I come to Hollywood and do some of this really authentic (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: --crap, and I wasn't going. Speaker 1: And, and we are talking about early '60s [1960s] now? Speaker 2: Very like-- Speaker 1: Sixty [1960], sixty-one [1961]? Speaker 2: No, be '59 [1959]-- Speaker 1: Okay, what's-- Speaker 2: --'cause you know, I was doing it even while we were doing 'The Blacks' ['The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I think Cicely [Cicely Tyson] and I were in rehearsal. In the daytime we'd come back to 'The Blacks,' and we'd go back up to Harlem [New York, New York] because it was like two or three times a week that we'd perform-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --this piece ['Dark of the Moon,' Howard Richardson]. And of course, we had people coming (laughter), in and out, if I have the timeframe correct, and I think I do. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now we are--you, you are finished with 'The Blacks.' Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you're, you're-- Speaker 2: I go to--I, I, I'd been asked to--I did a play at The Actors Studio [New York, New York]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --another playwrights unit piece by Irene Maria Fornes [sic. Maria Irene Fornes]. Is that her name? I me--Irene, Irena Maria Fuentes? She'd kill me. She lives, and we can find her name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Is it Fuentes? She's Cuban. She's wonderful. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: And so, it was a wonderful piece. Speaker 1: This was following 'General Seeger' [Ira Levin]? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a summer--it was, we were selected to perform. It was a two-character play at the Spoleto Festival [Spoleto Festival dei Due Mondi] in Spoleto, Italy, not the one that--and that one had not happened yet, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the American one [Spoleto Festival USA]. Speaker 1: But this, this was an American play, and-- Speaker 2: Well, she's Cuban American. Well, she's really Cuban, but she wrote this in English. And-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Clyde Ventura, who later became head of The Actors Studio out here, uses a two-character play and redid it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was extraordinary. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you to spell her name for me. Speaker 2: That's what I'm working on. Irene-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Maria (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I-R-E-N-E? Speaker 2: Yes, Irene-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --Maria-- Speaker 1: M-A-R-- Speaker 2: I-A. Speaker 1: --I-A-- Speaker 2: Oh, it's-- Speaker 1: --F-U-E-N- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --T-- Speaker 2: --I don't think it's Fuentes. I think it's something else. I can find that out. Speaker 1: Okay, good enough. Speaker 2: She has a play somewhere going now. I was about to say here in New York [New York], but we're in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], aren't we? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yes, I think she has a play. Irene--I'll just call, I'll just call The Actors Studio and say what is Irene's last name? Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: She would hate that I've forgotten her name, but then I'm old. Speaker 1: Well, and she'll forgive you (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, and we had a-- Speaker 1: Now, that was a two, that, that was a two-person-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --there's two roles in there. Speaker 2: Two characters. Speaker 1: Two characters. Speaker 2: It was marvelous to do. Speaker 1: And the--how, how long did, did that go? Speaker 2: The whole summer. Speaker 1: The whole summer. Speaker 2: Well, not the whole summer, but we're there. I don't know. It's at two months maybe? Speaker 1: Maybe, okay. Speaker 2: Two and a half, something. Speaker 1: And the, and the year is '62 [1962], maybe '63 [1963]? And you don't have to be exact. You can take a guess. Speaker 2: Well, it's, well, she--I'm trying to get the real time schedule when--I hate-- Speaker 1: See, 'The Blacks' was still going on in the early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: 'The Blacks' I'm done with by this time. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: But you see, I know that Colleen [Colleen Dewhurst] had asked me not to, once the play was done in--where did I say? Speaker 1: St. Mark's [St. Mark's Playhouse, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: No, no, when we were doing this play in Italy? Speaker 1: Oh, Turin [Italy]. Speaker 2: No, no, the festival. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Gian Carlo Menotti. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: I, I just said it's where it (unclear) this two-character play-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --with Clyde [ph.]. In Posi- not Positano [Italy]; that's part of, that's another part of Italy--Spoleto. Speaker 1: Spoleto, right, okay. Story_ID: 323533 Speaker 1: And Colleen [Colleen Dewhurst] had come to see it [play by Maria Irene Fornes] and then called me up and asked me not to, if I didn't have to, come back to the states. Would I come to the estate [in Greenwich, Connecticut] that--it'll occur to me-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: A famous Italian-- Speaker 2: That's-- Speaker 1: --producer had given George [George C. Scott] this big estate while they were shooting this wretched film called 'The Bible' ['The Bible: In the Beginning...']. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And it was in all the Italian papers, so we knew it was probably in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], in New York [New York] also, that George is having an affair with Ava Gardner. And so Colleen was in some state of distress and would I-- Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: --so I came to stay there with her and to remind her who she is. Speaker 2: Right, and be a friend. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's what we did for each other. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So I'm thinking, I'm wondering if we've already done--oh no, we hadn't done--so Spoleto [Spoleto Festival dei Due Mondi, Spoleto, Italy] was later. We, we had not done yet 'The Ballad of the Sad Cafe'-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you know, Carson McCullers' great piece that Edward Albee turned into a play. And that was '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: That was 1963? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And the, the name of it was? Speaker 1: 'The Ballad-- Speaker 2: 'The Ballad'-- Speaker 1: --'of the Sad Cafe,' by Carson McCullers, adapted for stage by Edward Albee. Speaker 2: Right, okay. Speaker 1: And it's lovely that Edward wrote this role for me, but I, I did entreat him and the producers. I said, "Of course, I need to work, and I want to work, but why don't we make him indigenous to the South?" And he said, "No, we just love the way Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] speaks. We just want Roscoe." I said, "I promise you this piece will work better if this fellow is from--." I said, "Mrs. McCullers gives you license." I said, "Little Cousin Lyman says ah, he's looking at the swamp that's over there who people from chain gang." I said, "She's giving you license. I can be a chain gang guy you bring to be the swamper in this cafe." And he said, "No, we just love the way Roscoe speaks, and we want Roscoe." Well, we had exquisite reviews and also ones that I suggested that would happen that--I mean my character is not only telling people what they were looking at, I, I would come out to tell 'em what they had just seen, what they're looking at, and then what's gonna happen next. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So we did fix that up. But that's another story, it's longer and rather lovely about George C. Scott-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --his deciding help us, 'cause, which means after that, it was during that time that Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was shot-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: --that particular Saturday we decided to shut down. That's why it was the 23rd. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We decided not to play. We were on stage at a matinee-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Or were we? No, no, he was shot, when he was shot I was being interviewed by Arlene Francis on her radio program. And then we, and we heard he was shot. The play was the next day, and we all showed up. We did the matinee and then canceled the-- Speaker 2: Rest of the-- Speaker 1: --the evening. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: As shows did all over. I was in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands, but there were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was extraordinary. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. All right, that was 'The Ballad of the Sad Cafe'-- Speaker 1: 'Cafe.' Speaker 2: Edward Albee's piece. Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 323534 Speaker 1: What follows that now in your career? Speaker 2: Madness mainly. Well, shortly, not very long after that is when I created, like a year or so later, 'A Hand Is on the Gate'-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which was a, a chronicling and celebration of African American poets and some music. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When it was first done, it was done for the, the New York Shakespeare Festival [Shakespeare in the Park] in Central Park [New York, New York]. We always had some other things that would happen there under the aegis of the, of the New York City--under New York Shakespeare Festival in Central Park. And one summer Joseph [Joseph Papp] asked me if I would direct an evening of love poetry. And I don't think I picked the actors. I think he did. And, and we did. And I remember he was simply amazed 'cause there are always police horseback when things are going on in the park, particularly the plays. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And they seemed absolutely entranced on horseback. And I did invite three living great poets. Well, Joseph said we can get--and I said, "Well, why not Marianne Moore? She's only in Brooklyn [New York]." And he said, "Do you think she'll say--." Well, she did say yes, and she came. And there are two others whom I did not, but they did. His people invited. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: She was wonderful. When it was all over, Joseph said, "That was such a great night. Do you want to do another one of these?" I said, "I love it." He said, "You know, I don't think American white people know anything about, about Negro"--yes, we were Negroes then, yes--"about Negro poetry." I said, "American Negroes don't know a lot about American Negro poetry." He said, "Why don't we do that?" I said, "Okay." So the evening was officially called 'An Evening of Poetry and Music by American Negroes' ['An Evening of Negro Poetry and Folk Music']. It was really one of the most astonishing--I can find you a review of it-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --where these critics really do suggest that it was one of those nights in the history of our nation as well as the theater-- Speaker 1: We want those reviews (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that has such importance. Speaker 1: --to go with what we're talking about here. Go ahead. Speaker 2: And, and Jerry Tallmer of The New York Post, his headline was: "A Hand Is on the Gate." One of the pieces that was in it was a poem by Bontemps. You know, these all-African American poets. Yeah, it was Arna, Arna Bontemps. And in it is the line, "a hand is on the gate." It's called 'Southern Mansions' [sic. 'Southern Mansion']-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the poem, and [HistoryMaker] Leon Bibb read that poem. We were in that cast. Speaker 1: Was this done the same year as the, as the, the, the ballad, you know, the love-- Speaker 2: 'The Ballad of the Sad Cafe' [Edward Albee]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: About two, three years later. Speaker 1: Okay, good enough, so we're, that, that was done in about '66 [1966] or '67 [1967]. Speaker 2: It's about then. Speaker 1: Good enough. Speaker 2: About then. When was the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--when was he assassinated? Speaker 1: In sixty-- Speaker 2: 'Cause he saw it. Speaker 1: --sixty-eight [1968], April. Speaker 2: He saw it, and he just--even though I, mind you, I did, I truly did create the entire evening. Story_ID: 323535 Speaker 1: And I did decide who the actors should be, and going from left to right it was James Earl [HistoryMaker James Earl Jones], Gloria Foster, Moses Gunn, Cicely Tyson, Ellen Holly, [HistoryMaker] Leon Bibb, Josephine Premice, and Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we had four great musicians, one of whom is Bill Lee, Spike Lee's father. And it was an, an astonishing, really an astonishing evening. And when he [Jerry Tallmer] headlined it, "A Hand Is on the Gate," and then said what he meant by that title and what an evening this was, he said in the cultural and something in, culture and political history of this nation. So when we went to Broadway, we used that title that he--was his headline-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --'A Hand Is on the Gate'-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --'cause originally it was called 'An Evening of Poetry by American Negroes--Poetry and Music by American Negroes' ['An Evening of Negro Poetry and Folk Music']-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --'cause I'd never--Joe [Joseph Papp] said, "What shall we call it?" I said, "It's what you said. You said you don't think anybody knows anything about American Negro poetry," (laughter). Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And I do remember that one, one performance in the park [Central Park, New York, New York]. Always at the beginning of the evening in the park, if he's present, Joseph will walk out before a play begins, 'Hamlet' [William Shakespeare], any play; walk out, and they would applaud. They'd recognize him (unclear), "Good evening, I'm Joseph Papp." So I walked out. We all, we come out, and there's music, and we come out. And the ladies are in gowns, and the men are in tuxes. And I would speak. And I said, "Good evening, I'm Joseph Papp," and they loved it. I said, "Before we get into this evening, I, I said my colleagues and I agree that perhaps there are one or two things I should say to you about American Negro poetry," I said, "even to those of you who are not Caucasian." I remember LeRoi [LeRoi Jones] sitting right there. He was not yet-- Speaker 2: Amiri Baraka. Speaker 1: Right, he was not quite yet. And he, and any rate, he--but I did tell them that, I said, "You understand that it's, it's hectic downtown at the offices of the New York Shakespeare Festival [Shakespeare in the Park]." And I said, "There's a piece going on also that they're trying to write now, Gerry [Gerome Ragni] and this kid Jim [James Rado]." I said, "It's got, it's called 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical']." And they were writing it in the same time that I'm putting together this thing. They haven't opened yet, but they're writing it. I said, and so this sweet young lady sitting there next to the real Joseph Papp did ask--she called me up to, to say that I did, I've changed many of the, the order, order of pieces and the names of some pieces, that is to say, took some out but--and no wonder she's confused when she asked me who wrote 'Careless Love.' And I did tell her, "W.C. Handy. Now would everybody look at, at the number 24 or 5 or 6," whatever it was. And they looked down and screamed in hysterics. She had asked me (unclear) and I said, "W.C. Handy." I saw what she had printed, and (unclear) Handy. I said, "I was feeling that Mr. W.C. and Handy never did meet," (laughter). And she went like this and, and broke up laughing because she really thought I did say-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --W.C. dash Handy. Story_ID: 323536 Speaker 1: I was asking you about that period between 1963 and the death of our young American president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] and '67 [1967] when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's around about the time of 'A Hand Is on the Gate.' Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And you were doing, I know you were doing some performances in the, in the park [New York Shakespeare Festival; Shakespeare in the Park] with Joseph Papp. And-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --is there anything else that-- Speaker 2: No, there's nothing-- Speaker 1: --we should know about. Speaker 2: --about that except the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the one evening of love poetry. It was only one evening. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then the 'Evening of Poetry and Music by American Negroes' ['An Evening of Negro Poetry and Folk Music'], that was one evening, and then they were--'Loving It So' [ph.] was another evening, and then there were 'Loving It So' again was another evening. And then-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Joseph went to do something in Wisconsin, a series of seminars. And there were these young producers who wanted to produce on Broadway. They had a house. The 'Evening of Negro Poetry'--and so I said, "Now we have a new title," taken from Jerry Tallmer, the Post [New York Post] journalist's-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --headline. And so it's now called 'A Hand Is on the Gate.' And I called Joseph to ask him, "Would that work? Do you mind if these guys who want to do it?" He says, "No, it's fine, good; get that, get that piece on Broadway." He also, he knew that 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'] was going any minute-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to Broadway. It would be the big hit that it was, or indeed, I think it was already there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it was there. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, now we're at '67 [1967], '68 [1968], and what are, what are you doing? Speaker 2: I'm, I'm in and out of, not hospitals (laughter). I wouldn't go. But Vinnette [Vinnette Carroll]--they've been calling. They were about to open a, a theater here [Los Angeles, California] called the Inner City Cultural Center-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --with that lovely Jackson [C. Bernard Jackson], who found it. And I said, "No, no, no," and then when one day my phone rang in New York [New York]. And they said, "It's somebody who says it's Gregor." I said, "Did he say that?" They said, "Yes." And I picked up saying, how did, how did they know in California that only one person could call and I would think I was a command performance? I said, "Is it really you?" And he said, "Yes." It was Gregory Peck-- Speaker 1: Ah, okay. Speaker 2: --who was on that board. And he knew they'd been trying, and he said, "Let me, let me try; let me call Mr. Browne [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne]." So he called, and I, my way of saying yes was I said, "How did they know?" I had no idea that he was on the board. I said, "How did they know that in all of California there was one person who could make a call, and I would find it a," (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Impossible to say no. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: No, a fear from her king or something-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --of that sort, royal command. He said, "Are you saying you would come do this play?" I said, "Yes." Story_ID: 323537 Speaker 1: Well, the whole tale of my getting there and finally getting to do theater was very funny, but that's longer than I think you'd want. Speaker 2: No, I would like it. Speaker 1: Well, he [Gregory Peck] said, "Why don't we meet you?" I said, "I don't know which day, but I'll be there in time." He said, "Well, the first rehearsal is Monday at 10:00," and this is like a Thursday. And he named the theater and the address. He says, "Do you know L.A. [Los Angeles, California]?" I said, "No, I don't." He said, "Well, then, Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], why don't we meet you at the airport?" I said, "Because I'm not certain which plane I'm gonna take." And I said, "Let me call you when I get in." He says, "Okay, that's good." Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I flew in, got a taxi. I--he turned up Sunset Boulevard, and I said, "This is okay." I didn't know nothing about motels. And we pulled over somewhere quite east of Eden. But any rate, so I'm there. And then I asked the man at the desk--or was it a lady--how I get to this address, New Hampshire [Avenue] and Washington [Boulevard]. And I knew, therefore, it has to be in Harlem [sic.]. So at any rate, when I arrived--I'm due there at 10:00, and when I walk in the door it is 11:15. And I see the looks on all the actors' faces, and I understand them right away, those looks. And you know actors' faces, and I knew only one of them. And their whole look is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which one was that? Speaker 1: --these New York [New York]--I'm trying to think who it was-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --somebody in the play. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I knew Judith [ph.] something. And their look is these New York actors' star time, 'cause apparently they knew my name, and they knew that I was coming. And they knew that it was Peck that got me to show that I had said, "No, no, no, no, no." And they knew that Vinnette [Vinnette Carroll] knew me quite well, but they knew that they--she was with them when being--she was surprised when Gregory called just to give her good tidings that Roscoe's actually gonna come to the play-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --had to play Zeus in, in Jean-Paul Sartre's 'Les Mouches'-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --'The Flies.' I think it's Sartre--Camus or Sartre. It's a great play. But (unclear)--like star time. The only one who walked across the floor to me, of course, was Vinnette and Gregory Peck, walking across to greet me and how was my trip. And my first words were: "About your rapid transit." And they broke out. They were shouting, "He took the bus." He took--and they just loved me from then on (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 323538 Speaker 1: They came running over, because I'd got on that bus, and it could, could have gotten me to Camden, New Jersey from Los Angeles [California] (laughter) in an hour. It went on and on and on, the stops. And then I had to take a transfer and then wait, 'cause it go down Vermont [Avenue], and then they told me the--you walk over this block after--they wouldn't let me take anymore. I decided to rent a car. Ian [ph.]--I can't think of his last name--was a young actor from Canada who was playing Orestes, and luckily, he and his wife and their two kids were living in this same little motel complex that I thought looked quite decent. And later when I found out they're living there, and they'd been here for a little while, I didn't really pick the dregs of the earth. But I did rent a, I did go and rent a car. Speaker 2: Right, and-- Speaker 1: And it was quite an extraordinary time doing that play ['The Flies,' Jean Paul-Sartre]. It was really quite wonderful. Speaker 2: And was this the first time that you had sought--done a play outside of the Broadway (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Outside New York [New York]? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Except in Rome--I mean except in, in Italy. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I'd done a couple of pieces at the, the Spoleto Festival [Spoleto Festival dei Due Mondi, Spoleto, Italy]. And we had done 'The Blacks' ['The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet] over there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yes, I think so. Speaker 2: Okay, so this was a first for you. Speaker 1: Yes, I hadn't even-- Speaker 2: And of course, the film industry, Hollywood, had been calling on you. Speaker 1: And I read the stuff and always-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --said no. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So now I'm here, and they've got me. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I said the first thing I did I think was 'Mannix.' Speaker 2: Ah-- Speaker 1: And I had a great, good time. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they loved it so much they decided call it a two-parter. So they had to extend it...