 Story_ID: 3367 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Mr. [Selby] McCash of your office, sir. Sir, can you give us your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Sanford D. Bishop, Jr. That's S-A-N-F-O-R-D, middle initial D, B-I-S-H-O-P, Jr. Speaker 1: Yes, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born February 4th, 1947 in Mobile, Alabama. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your occupation, sir? Speaker 2: I'm a member of [United States] Congress [House of Representatives]. Speaker 1: All right. And you--you're a member of Congress, serving what district and what state? Speaker 2: I represent the Second Congressional District of Georgia, which consists of approximately twenty-seven counties in the southwest quadrant of the state of Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. What is today's date? Speaker 2: September the 9th, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in my Congressional office at 2429 Rayburn House Office Building in Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 3368 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, 'People' magazine-ish type questions that only deserve a short answer actually. So I'll start off with the first question, it's, sir, what, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food? Vegetables. Speaker 1: Alright, do you, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Green. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Warm climate. Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Somebody else may attribute one to me, I don't know. Story_ID: 3369 Speaker 1: Okay. Now let me ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family, your father's side, side of the family. I'm not going to leave either one out. But I'll start with your mother's side of the family. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Her name is Minnie, M-I-N-N-I-E, maiden name, Slade, S-L-A-D-E, Bishop. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her middle name is Bethany. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: It's May 15th, 1915. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: Salisbury, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Salisbury, North Carolina? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what do you know about her side of the family? How--how far can you--back can you trace them? Speaker 2: To her grand- grandparents, her great-grandparents, I guess. Simon and Annie Slade were both slaves and they were freed in--following the Civil War, married and lived in Tarboro County, North Carolina. And Simon was a businessman. He owned livestock and real estate, and one of the distinguishing features about the Slade family was their, their penchant for education. He donated the first land in that county for education for blacks. And, of course, the Slade family has continued that tradition of supporting education and encouraging education of family members. And one of the other traits of the Slade family was that of taking care of family members whose parents were deceased. That was a tradition that pertains even 'til today. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And yeah, she was born, of course, in North Carolina, the Slade family was in North Carolina. And we've had some, a number of--of relatives on her side of the family who have done, done great things. One of them was a Court of Appeals Justice for the North Carolina Court of Appeals. He was a lawyer and a distinguished judge and, you know, he's now retired. Speaker 1: Okay, is, is there a story about how the family acquired property after the Civil War cause, you know, there was a struggle on the part of black folks to acquire property and--. Speaker 2: He worked, worked hard, and, and sold--bought and sell--sold livestock and with his earnings he bought property and he bought and sold property. He was a businessman. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, did, could, could your ancestor read or write? Was he educated? Speaker 2: Presumably, he could read or write. He could read well enough to sign his name and, and the deed books in Tarboro County, I think, bear his name and signature for the various transactions that he, he was privy to in, in, that area during his life. He bought and sold lots of property and livestock. Story_ID: 3370 Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories that are passed down through the family about, about your, your mother's great-grand parents or, or your grandparents? Speaker 2: I'm certain that there are. I have to really think about it to try to tell you some off the top of my head. Of course, I knew my grandmother. I didn't know my maternal grandfather--I know of him. He was a railroad fireman for the Southern Railroad [sic, Railway], which was a, an excellent job. And, of course, he and his family had unlimited travel by rail. And, of course, you know, they lived in a, a relatively nice home in East Spencer [North Carolina], which is adjacent to Salisbury, North Carolina. There were, I think three children in the family--four children in the family. A son, John Robert, a daughter Lossie, who was named for my grandmother [Lossie Slade], another daughter, Mary and my mother Minnie [Bethany Slade Bishop]. So it was Lossie, Mary and Minnie, Minnie, my mother, being the youngest. And John Robert was the older boy who died, I think, at age thirty-three. Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother tell you any stories about growing up herself that you, that you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, there are lots of stories that I've heard of her growing up. Of course, as I indicated, she had other family members that came to live with them when their parents in other parts of North Carolina passed away. And so they were extended family that were treated like family as a part of the slave tradition. She was a sickly child as she was growing up. She had problems with her eyesight. And she was frail and, of course, one of the things that--she had to wear a patch over one of her eyes because of a weakness or some, some problem with her eyes. And when she was a youngster in school, she was very embarrassed that she had to wear a patch. And so my grandmother made her a nice dark green patch that she wore over that eye. And, of course, when she wore it to school, then all of the other kids started getting patches to wear over their eyes. So that was a little cute story. Story_ID: 3371 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what was your mother [Minnie Bethany Slade Bishop] like, I mean or what, what is she like? She's still alive, and what kind of--what did she do for a living? Speaker 2: She's, she's a retired college librarian. She finished high school and attended Shaw University in Raleigh, North Carolina. Her first year out of, out of school, she went to work at a place called Ellerbe, North Carolina, as a first-year teacher where she met my father [Sanford Dixon Bishop, Sr.], who was also a first-year teacher at Ellerbe. They shared a desk at different times of the day and had various conversation about how the desk had been rearranged when each of them sat there at a different time. And, of course, that ended up--they ended up getting married some time later. She worked there a year and went to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] to library school. And he worked there and then he went to finish graduate school Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], went to Mobile, Alabama where he worked as a instructor of English and Music at the, what was then the Mobile branch of the Alabama State Teachers College. She finished library school and she went to Evansville, Indiana and worked in the public library. And from there she went to Arkansas to Pine Bluff to what was then called Arkansas State [sic, Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical, and Normal College], which was an HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and Universities], as an Assistant Librarian. And, of course, she and my father continued to correspond and they eventually proposed. And she took the train from Arkansas to North Carolina, got her mother and took the train down to Atlanta [Georgia]. And he took the train up from Mobile to Atlanta, and they got married on the campus of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] where he had gone to college. Speaker 1: That's quite a story that they were able to keep their relationship alive, you know, and well, you know, with all that distance and traveling involved. Story_ID: 3372 Speaker 1: Now, he was originally from Mississippi. He was born and reared in Starkville, Mississippi, which is the home of Mississippi State, or you don't want to go to him yet? Speaker 2: Yeah, let's go, let's go on and go to him. What, what year was your father born? This is Sanford Bishop, Sr. Speaker 1: Yes Sanford Dixon Bishop, Sr. He was born in 1910, December 4th, I believe. It's the first week in December. I can't remember his exact birthday. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But he was born in 1910. Speaker 2: Now, what, what about his side of the family? What do you know about his ancestors and, you know, his grandparents or his ancestors going back? Speaker 1: Well, his ancestors were bought on the slave block in Charleston [South Carolina]. This is from oral history from my aunt who was the eldest family member alive that I was able to talk with. And very much like the story of 'Roots.' There was a brother and a sister. The brother was sold off to someone. They were torn apart just as in the movie 'Roots.' And, of course, the girl was bought by a Mississippi planter, who took her to Mississippi. And she became his bed wench. And, of course, she produced--there were two children produced as a result of that. And neither of those children married, but when slavery ended, she married--my great-great-grandfather [sic, great-grandfather]. And, of course, my grandfather was, was a product of that marriage. His name was Thomas D. Bishop. And, of course, he married Molly Robinson, who was my grandmother. She and he both died before I was old enough to know them. Of course, I was born when my grandmother was living. She knew me. I didn't know her. He worked for the Blumenfelds [Blumenfeld & Fried wholesale grocery business] in Starkville [Mississippi]. Blumenfeld was a very prominent family that owned a dry goods store. And the entire family somehow worked for the Blumenfelds. My grandmother cooked and was sort of nanny and cleaned and my grandfather worked in the, at the dry goods store. In fact, he was the, the manager of the store, which was a very unusual thing for a black man to be managing a business. And, of course, my grandfather, you know, was very prominent. He was Assistant Pastor at the Second Baptist Church in Starkville, which was located across the street from the family home, which was 310 Yeates Street in Starkville, which is the home of Mississippi State University by the way. There were several children born to that union. I think there were two that were born--that died as children, but the eldest that I was aware of was my Aunt Sadie. She was the oldest as I can recall. And then there was Uncle Thomas who was Thomas [D. Bishop], Jr., named after the father. Then there was Edward [S. Bishop] who was next. Then there was my father who was the youngest, Sanford. I inquired as to how my father got his name, Sanford Dixon Bishop. And I was told that Aunt Sadie who was the eldest was in college at Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] when my father was born. And she persuaded my grandmother to name my father Sanford Dixon Bishop because she was dating a young man by the name of Sanford Dixon at the time. So my father ended up with the name Sanford Dixon. And I ended up with the name Sanford Dixon Bishop, Jr. Speaker 2: The original Sanford Dixon disappeared in history, right? Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 3373 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the--Uncle Thomas [D. Bishop, Jr.], of course, was a very colorful character. My Uncle Edward [S. Bishop]--now let me see, Aunt Sadie [Bishop] went to Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi] and, of course, she eventually ended up in Mobile, Alabama. She married a gentleman by the name of Taylor Burris. And she worked as head of the black juvenile detention facility in Mobile. And, of course, that's how my father [Sanford Dixon Bishop, Sr.] ended up going to Mobile. She encouraged him to come down to be close to her. My Uncle Thomas was a very elegant man, and he was very active, moved all around, lived around and lived in Chicago [Illinois]. And apparently at some point during my father's childhood, Uncle Thomas got in some serious trouble. In fact, he was, as I understand it, charged with and convicted of murder. He killed his wife. And, of course, it was some time around the Depression. So things were bad anyway, but my father was able with the help of Mr. Blumenfeld to engage the services of Clarence Darrow [attorney] to represent him. And, of course, it took a lot of money and, of course, the family suffered as a result of the money having to go to Chicago while my uncle was in jail. He eventually, after about four years awaiting trial, went to trial. The--he was sentenced for time served, I think, which was about four years, and he was paroled to Mississippi. And they sent him back home. And, of course, as a result of all that he had been through, I guess he had some, some mental problems and was very erratic and he was living at home, did odd jobs, in fact, I think he did construction work, and participated in the building Mississippi State University. But, in any event, he left there and went to Louisiana. And somehow he was involved in a brawl and was beaten. And, of course, by this time, my father had finished college, was living in Mobile. And he had to leave home and go to Louisiana to, to see about him because he was in a coma. He stayed in a coma for a long time, and eventually he came out of it and went back home. And, of course, his--it was believed that he had lost his senses. Eventually, he was committed to the Mississippi State [Insane] Hospital [Whitfield, Mississippi] where he was when I met him. He would come to visit us on furlough. And I never could figure out why my father was always so uneasy when Uncle Thomas was around because he wrote me all the, these nice sweet letters and always gave me a couple of dollars when he visited and was very charming. But I eventually found out all of the sordid details of his past, long after he had died, from a cousin who actually had read the transcripts of the, of the trial. And, of course, also had assisted him when he--this is it. Let me just tell you this little interesting vignette. It's a diversion about Uncle Tom, very charming man. My cousin whose four years older than I am. He's the son of my Uncle Edward. Uncle Edward went to Jackson State University [Jackson, Mississippi], it was Jackson State College then, taught school. He was a school principal in Corinth, Mississippi. Eventually he became Alderman and he became the Mayor of Corinth, where he--which was interesting because that was a town that was predominantly white. But he was a political figure in north Mississippi. And, of course, he was in the Jackson State [University] Football Hall of Fame as were his, his sons, all of his sons played football. That's another tree over there about--we'll talk about. But in any event, Uncle, Uncle Tom was at the Mississippi State Hospital in Whitfield, Mississippi. Apparently, he developed diabetes and they were recommending an amputation. He must have stayed in the hospital for fifteen, twenty years. I don't know how long. But they were going to amputate one of his feet, and he told them that he needed to go fishing to think about it. And so he got his fishing pole and went down to the creek to fish, and never came back--he ended up in Memphis [Tennessee]. And he contacted some of the family members and said he wasn't going back because he wasn't going to have any of his limbs cut off. So he eventually got an apartment in Memphis and the family helped him get settled. And eventually he moved to Corinth, Mississippi where his brother was, where he was the, the Mayor, where he eventually became Mayor. And my cousin would take him dinner in the afternoons. And eventually they--and they would go for a walk. And he was walking down the street and the young ladies would pass by and Uncle Thomas would tip his hat, "Good afternoon, good afternoon ladies." And eventually my uncle told him that he didn't need for him to bring him dinner any more. And it turns out that the ladies that he was tipping his hat to had decided that they wanted to feed Uncle Tom. And so Uncle Tom was a, quite, quite a lady's man. He eventually passed away late in life. I was in college, I believe or in law school when he, when he passed. Story_ID: 3374 Speaker 1: But my Uncle Edward [S. Bishop] (unclear)--there was another daughter by the name of Theresa, Aunt Theresa, whom I knew. I think she was ninety-two [years old] when she passed. And she was sort of the family historian. And I did go and spend time with her and visit with her from time to time. She married, divorced. She never had children. But Uncle Edward did have several children. His oldest was Gwendolyn who attended Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] after graduating high school at Easom High School Corinth [Mississippi] where her father was a principal. And the next was Edward, Jr. who attended Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] who was a classmate of Secretary [Roderick] Paige, the [United States] Department of Education. And then there was Ralph Bishop who was the next child who also attended Jackson State who eventually became a coach at Jackson State, Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], Kentucky State [University, Frankfort, Kentucky]. Ralph died a few years ago of cancer. Then there was another son, Beverly Bishop who also attended Jackson State, who taught school and then went into business. Edward taught school and went into business. Ralph taught school and continued--he taught high school and then he went into coaching in college. Then there was--and was my--Beverly Bishop is in business in Jackson [Mississippi]. Then the final child was Harold Bishop who was, he attended Southern Illi--the University of Southern Illinois [sic, Southern Illinois University] in Carbondale [Illinois] for a couple of years and then he trans--on a football scholarship. Then he transferred back to Jackson State. He graduated from Jackson State. He got his Doctorate from the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] in Higher Education. He was sort of mentored by my father [Sanford Dixon Bishop, Sr.], who was in higher education, who eventually became President of Mobile State Junior College [later Bishop State Community College, Mobile, Alabama] which was the former branch of Alabama State [University] where he had started. And he became Dean. Then he became the, the Director of the Mobile Center of Alabama State. Then it was separated into a junior college to--it became Mobile State Junior College and he was named President by [Alabama] Governor [George C.] Wallace. And then the legislature named the school after him. So it was named Bishop State Junior College. Since that time the school was expanded and it's now Bishop State Community College. But anyway, so Harold Bishop is now, he's a, a Professor at the University of Alabama in School of Higher Education. He lives in Tuscaloosa [Alabama]. Speaker 2: Okay. Did you--do you have some more or did you (unclear)--. Speaker 1: Let's see, the--. Speaker 2: You don't have to name all of them, but, you know, but--. Speaker 1: Okay. Those are all of, all of the, the uncle's children. And, of course, Aunt Sadie didn't have any children. Aunt Theresa didn't have any children. Uncle Edward had five and those are the five I named. My father had one. I'm an only child, and I grew up in Mobile, Alabama. When my father and mother got married, then she moved to Mobile from, from Arkansas. And she became a Librarian at the Alabama State Teachers College in Mobile. And, of course, she worked alongside my father for a number of years. I think he was there in excess of forty and, of course, she retired, I think in 1974. Of course, she's eighty-eight now and she lives in Mobile. My father passed in June 21st, 1981 on Father's Day. Story_ID: 3375 Speaker 1: Now, this is, your grandfather [Thomas D. Bishop] had a interesting situation working for the Bloomingfields--? Speaker 2: Blumenfelds, yes. Speaker 1: Blumenfelds. Yeah, and I was just wondering--now, now that's a Jewish family, no doubt, I would guess. Speaker 2: Presumably. Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wondered if, if--well, I know that Jewish people in the South had to face, you know, discrimination and some bigotry as, you know, and especially in the early part of the century. I think there was the lynching of a Jewish man, I can't think of his name right now, but it was bigger than any lynching, I mean more, more publicized than any other lynching in the South, though they were lynched less frequently, they, you know, they had property. But was there any kind of a cultural exchange between the, the Blumenfelds and, and your family, on a level, you think? Speaker 2: Yes, I would have to say that they were very close, our family and their family. My, my aunts [Theresa Bishop and Sadie Bishop] worked for the Blumenfelds as they were growing up, taking care of the Blumenfeld children and cleaning the Blumenfeld house. My uncle [Edward S. Bishop] worked for the Blumenfelds at the warehouse at the, at the store. He was a warehouseman, really is what he was. And he had lots of people working under him, both black and white. My Aunt Theresa worked in the Blumenfeld home. And my father [Sanford Dixon Bishop, Sr.], when he was a child, worked, doing the lawn at the Blumenfeld house, household. When I was a child, I went to visit my aunt and, of course, my aunt carried me over to the Blumenfeld home to introduce me to one of the Blumenfeld daughters who knew my father and to show that I was Sanford's son. Story_ID: 3376 Speaker 1: Okay, what--give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: Well, I grew up in, in Mobile, Alabama in a segregated time. I attended black schools, lived in a black community, didn't have very much interaction with white people except the few that came into the black community, the ones that owned the corner store. When I was in nursery school, it was owned by the Housing Authority [Mobile Housing Board], and, of course, from time to time, the Head of the Housing Authority, who was white, would come over to meet with the black head who was a Mr. Peters, a very prominent black man in Mobile. So we would see him. But for the most part, my life was separate. My father [Sanford Dixon Bishop, Sr.] ended up being appointed to the Housing Authority Board of some sort. And he would have to go downtown for the Housing Authority meetings and they met at the, the daycare center. I say the Housing Authority, maybe it was the, the Mobile Daycare, I'm not sure. But it was something associated with the Housing Authority and the meeting was at, at the downtown daycare facility, which was run by the Housing Authority. And, of course, I would go down there with him after he'd pick me up from nursery school 'cause the meeting would be like, you know, in the afternoon. And I was playing in the, on the playground with white kids, whose parents were attending the meeting. That was one of the few interactions I had. And I had positive interaction with some of the people associated. There was a lady by the name of Miss Unrue, who was somehow affiliated with the daycare, the, the--I remember her. And I can remember going downtown, shopping with my parents, Christmastime. And, of course, things were segregated. I can remember telling my father that someone called me 'Little Black Sambo' in Sears [department store]. And, of course, he was very upset. And he took me around the store from and wanted me to point out the person. At that point, I was a little frightened 'cause I didn't know what was going to happen, but I can remember in my early years, when I was seven years old we moved from a predominantly black neighborhood to a transitional area from downtown Mobile, on what was then known as Davis Avenue which is now [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr. Avenue] in Mobile, to an area called Toulminville. Toulminville was basically a transitional area, poor to middle-class whites lived in Toulminville. And there was a black subdivision that was built there. And I was--we moved on my seventh birthday. Of course, my parents first lived in the projects, the first projects that were built in Mobile for blacks, Orange Grove Projects [Orange Grove Homes]. When we were--when I was two, we moved to Davis Avenue and lived in a duplex right across from the [juvenile] detention home where my Aunt [Sadie Bishop] had worked. And then when I was seven we moved to Toulminville, on my seventh birthday. And somewhere between seven and ten, the [Ku Klux] Klan got active and I can remember the men in, in the neighborhood getting together and meeting and deciding that they needed to protect the neighborhood from the Ku Klux. And so--. Speaker 1: Now, this is in the mid-50s [1950s], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) '55 [1955], (unclear)--. Speaker 2: Right, the early--yeah about, '54 [1954], '53 [1953], '54 [1954], '55 [1955]. Let's see, now. Let me make sure. I was--in '54 [1954] when I was seven we moved out there, so it had to be the mid- to late-'50s [1950s]. They would block off the streets to our particular subdivision. There were like four main streets that you would have to enter to get into that area. And so they parked cars all night and did watch at the entrance streets from Stanton Road. And the ladies did coffee and sandwiches and doughnuts. And they did a vigil for several months, when there were cross burnings in the area. I remember that very vividly. My--some of the friends of the family were activists. That was Mr. John LeFlore, who was a postal employee who headed up the Non-Partisan Voters League after the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had been outlawed. There was Mr. Alex Herman, who was a, a businessman who was the father of Alexis Herman who was former [United States] Secretary of Labor, White House Public Liaison, Women's Bureau of the [United States] Labor Department. We grew up together. We were contemporaries growing up in Mobile. Her dad, I think took my mother to register to vote. But in any event, it was a segregated environment. Dr. [Joseph] Joe Lowery was pastoring in Mobile at the time. And, of course, I can remember when the air of protest was, was arising and I can remember the beginnings of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], but there wasn't a lot of activity in Mobile. I can remember as a child, our church was downtown, and I was about ten, and I thought it was adventurous to be able to catch the bus home from church. We had a neighbor that would pick me up for Sunday School. And I'd go to Sunday School. My parents would coming to 11:00 [A.M.] service, and sometimes, if I didn't want to stay, I'd ask permission to catch the bus home. And I remember the bus was empty one Sunday morning. So I got on the bus and sat in the front. And the bus driver asked me to move to the back. And I don't know what made me do it, but I didn't. So he drove a few blocks and then he pulled over to the side of the street and got on the telephone, when I wouldn't move. And, of course, I guess whatever, whoever, whomever he talked with told him that I was harmless. So he continued the route. But, of course, I was frightened so I got off at a stop other than my stop, so that he wouldn't be able to tell somebody where I lived. (laughs) But that was just a small seed of protest, I guess, of my life. But I think probably the most--I, I grew up, I guess a regular kid. My, my parents were educated, both were educators, but I grew up in a neighborhood where there were lots of kids whose parents worked for the military base, many of them. That was Brookley [United States] Air Force Base which was a good government job and--. Speaker 1: Brookley? Speaker 2: Bookley. Brookley Air Force Base. Speaker 1: Was it B or--. Speaker 2: B-R-O-O-K-L-E-Y. Story_ID: 3377 Speaker 1: It was closed in the '70s [1970s] , but a lot of the blacks that lived in that neighborhood [Toulminville, Alabama] were employed at Brookley [United States Air Force Base]. And, of course, I grew up with their children. We played basketball, played in the woods, football, wrestle, fought, you know, had BB [pellet] gun wars with the white boys who lived on the other side of the creek in Crichton [Alabama]. We, you know, just a, I guess an ordinary childhood. And, of course, I was active in, in sports in junior high school and high school, played on the football team. I was active in Student Council. Probably the most profound influence on my life was in Boy Scouts [of America]. I was a Cub Scout, and I guess I was always impressed by the Scouts because with the police departments being segregated, there were not very many black police officers. And Mardi Gras was a big thing in Mobile [Alabama]. And they had the white Mardi Gras and the black Mardi Gras. And, of course, the Colored Carnival Association is what the black Mardi Gras was called, had their big events on the Monday and Tuesday, Fat Tuesday and the day before. The schools were closed and the bands were--had a parade down the, the main street, which was Davis Avenue. All of the black high school bands were excellent. And they had floats and--but they didn't have traffic control. And the Boy Scouts were utilized and called in by the police to assist in traffic control. So Cub Scouts with their blue and yellow uniforms had whistles and were directing traffic and the Boy Scouts in their green uniforms and the Explorers in the dark green uniforms--and I just thought it was cool, you know, to be able to stand out and be able to stop traffic and blow the whistle and to--'cause I, I couldn't wait to be old enough to become a Boy Scout. And, of course, the other thing was the first black troop in Mobile, Troop 201, was at my church, the basement of my, my church. And the black Scout executive was a member of the church. He was a Deacon and, of course, that church was very active and it produced more Eagle Scouts than any troop in Mobile, black or white. Speaker 2: Now, what, what was the name of the church? Speaker 1: Franklin Street Baptist Church [Mobile, Alabama]. And I couldn't wait to be old enough to be a Scout. And when I got--turned seven, I wanted to become a Cub Scout. There was no [Cub Scout] Pack out where I lived and so the Scout Executive helped my mother [Minnie Bethany Slade Bishop] to organize one. And I became a Cub Scout at eight [years old]. And, of course, the church being an active haven of Boy Scouts, I could see the older scouts--and particularly, in the summertime, we'd come for Sunday School. And when Sunday School let out and it was time to go for 11:00 o'clock [A.M.] service, we'd see all of these Scouts with their [back] packs and their uniforms, getting ready to get on the back of a truck to go off to camp. And I would just wish that I was old enough to not have to go upstairs and listen to a boring sermon and be able to get on the truck and go off to Scouts, Scout Camp on some adventure. Eventually, I did become a Scout. I became an Eagle Scout, and my participation in scouting familiarized me and, and became a part of my life, the, the values of scouting. You know, the Scout Oath, "On my honor, I'll do my best to do my duty to God and my country, to obey the Scout law to help other people at all times, to keep myself physically strong, mentally awake and morally straight," and then the principles of the Scout Law, a scout is trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous, kind, obedient, thrifty, clean--, Speaker 2: Cheerful--. Speaker 1: --brave, reverent, all of those, all of those character traits, really. And so, we were taught to make that a part of our life. To--slogan, to do a good turn daily. Motto, to be prepared. So that was--those values were instilled in us. And, of course, self-reliance and being able to take care of oneself, being able to sleep in the woods. That and joining the Order of the Arrow, which is a brotherhood of honored campers within the Scouts, which is a brotherhood of public service. And I think that probably planted the seeds for me of public service. And, of course, as a Scout, I had to earn merit badges to move up the ranks, citizenship merit badges, citizenship in the home, in the community and the nation and world brotherhood, which forced me, at an early age, to familiarize myself with the operation of government. And, of course, I became active in the Student Council. I was a leader in the Scouts. And, of course, I was Tenth Grade President, Vice President of Student Council, District Student Council President and State Student Council President in high school [Central High School, Mobile, Alabama]. Story_ID: 3378 Speaker 1: Well, what about grade school? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We, we, I don't want to skip over grade school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What was the name of the grade school you attended? Speaker 2: Well, my first grade was at the [Faith] Lutheran School [Mobile, Alabama], which was a private school, parochial school, religious school, there on Ann Street and Davis Avenue. I was five years old. My parents [Minnie Bethany Slade Bishop and Sanford Dixon Bishop, Sr.] felt I was ready for school, but I was too young to go to public school. So I went to Lutheran first grade. My second grade I went to public school at Caldwell Elementary School [Mobile, Alabama], which was just a block down the street from the college [Alabama State Teachers College, Mobile, Alabama] where my parents worked. Then the third--when I was in second grade, we moved to Toulminville [Alabama], which was, you know, a good distance out, three or four miles outside of town--on the other end of town, I should say. So I was then enrolled at Toulminville Elementary School [Toulminville, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Tollman--? Speaker 2: T-O-U-L-M-I-N-V-I-L-L-E. I think Toulmin was Confederate gentleman--general, if I'm not mistaken. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was Toulminville. In any event, I enrolled in Toulminville Elementary School for third grade. That, the name of that school was later changed to Bessie C. Fonvielle [Elementary School], named after a black woman. But at the time I, I attended, it was Toulminville Elementary. I attended third grade there. Fourth grade was across the street at a new junior high school called Booker T. Washington Junior High School [Toulminville, Alabama]. And there was an elementary side and a junior high side. Elementary grades were four, five and six. And the junior high was seven, eight and nine. So I attended Booker [T.] Washington Elementary [School, Toulminville, Alabama] fourth, fifth and sixth grades. And then Booker [T.] Washington Junior High [School] seventh, eighth and ninth grades. Speaker 1: Okay. Now who are some of the teachers that--or were there any teachers in grade school that really influenced you? Speaker 2: Oh, I had excellent teachers. My second grade teacher was--well, my first grade teacher at Lutheran was a lady by the name of Mrs. Smith. She, I think, was a new teacher. My second grade teacher was Miss Cavaliera Brown, who was an excellent teacher and I've known her just about all my life. And her husband was a member of our church. My third grade teacher was Miss Helen Scott. She was an excellent teacher. My fourth grade teacher was Mrs. Dorothy Raine, I mean Mrs. Josephine Raine. And Mrs. Raine had a daughter who was in my, who was my age. But, of course, she went to another school at the time. And my fifth grade teacher was Mrs. Ethel Gould (ph.), who is the mother to my best friend, Joshua Gould (ph.). And during my fifth grade year, Mrs. Gould developed cancer and she, she died. So we had a substitute for much of that year. My sixth grade teacher was Mrs. Washington. She was a, you know, a good, good teacher. In my seventh grade, we started to change classes. I'm trying to remember who my home room teacher was. I can't remember the home room teacher, but the most--the teacher that had the most influence on me in the seventh grade was Mrs. Gladys Gordon. She was an English teacher. She was also Assistant Principal. And she was a pretty strict disciplinarian. She was a stern woman, but she was fair. She had a son who was a couple years--two or three years older than I. And she lived--her home was across the street, a couple of doors down from us. But she was pretty, pretty tough and, of course, she was always aware of what we were doing. And she challenged us greatly in terms of our, our academic work. My parents were concerned that the schools were not import-, imparting the knowledge that we needed to have. Obviously, we were in a segregated situation. We were getting second-hand books. And there was a lot of--there were a lot of things going on that my parents felt were non-educational, a lot of fundraising and rackets, as my father would come them. But--so he contemplated, they, they contemplated sending me to a boarding school for seventh grade, which I didn't want any parts of. You know, I wanted to stay in public school with my friends. And I, I was friends with, you know, with all--I mean, it wasn't a class kind of a situation because I attended public school with my friends who were from the projects. They were--I had children of doctors and children of lawyers who were my friends. But my friends were my friends, whoever they were or where their parents were. And we'd spent the night at each other's homes and that type of thing. So I, I--where was I--seventh--talking about junior high school. Speaker 1: Yeah, junior high school--. Speaker 2: Yeah. And Mrs. Gordon, I was talking about Mrs. Gordon. She had reading contests, book races where we had to see who could read the most books. And--, Speaker 1: How did you do? I mean--. Speaker 2: --I think I came in second place on the, in the book reading contest. Story_ID: 3379 Speaker 1: You were pretty good--you were a good student? Speaker 2: Oh, I was, I was an excellent student, yeah. And that was, that was--and back then our Principal's name was Dr. Raymond Ramsey Fagen Grant, Sr. He was a student of Booker T. Washington. He was Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] graduate. And our co--our colors at the [Booker T. Washington] Junior High School [Toulminville, Alabama] were crimson and gold, (chuckle) like Tuskegee. Speaker 1: Just like Tuskegee. Okay. Speaker 2: And--but he, he was very big on guidance and counseling. And apparently, he had done a Master's thesis on that. And he believed that he needed to encourage children in the elementary schools to achieve and to think about their career goals. And he, he did that and had people come and talk to us. And he also did a study tracking our progress. And he tracked the classes according to ability also. So they, they grouped kids according to their, their grades. And so each of the grades had a 7, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 for the number of classes in their grade. And everybody knew that 7-1 were the smart kids; 7-2 were the next smartest and 7-3 was--, Speaker 1: Yeah, tracking. Speaker 2: --such and such and et cetera, which wasn't necessarily a good thing, but I was always in 7-1, 8-1, 9-1 and we had a pretty good group of kids. And we all competed and, and pushed each other. And it was a good experience. But my parents insisted that I get the most difficult teachers, the hardest teachers. And since they knew Mrs. Gordon, they, they made sure that she tracked us to the most difficult challenging teachers. And, of course, I finished junior high school and went to, went to Central High School [Mobile, Alabama], which was a--Booker [T.] Washington [Junior High School] was a feeder school, junior high school to the, to what was known as Central High School. Dunbar High School, A. F. Owens--I mean Dunbar Junior High School [Mobile, Alabama], A. F. Owens Junior High School [Mobile, Alabama], Emerson Junior High School [Mobile, Alabama] and several others fed into Central, depending upon where kids lived. And, of course, Central was the, the place to want to go, although it was, it was segregated. I ran for Class President as a sophomore and I, I won. And, of course, I became active in the Student Council at the high school. And, of course, the Student Council Advisor, Mr. Rutland, encouraged me to, to run for District President, which I did and I was elected. And, of course, then I ran for Vice President of the Student Council my junior year, and President my senior year. Then, of course, I ran for State President my junior year also. I had a mentor when I was in tenth grade. And his name was James Rayfield Gavin, III. He was a very bright kid, very articulate. And he was Student Council President at the high school. Every morning he came on the PA [public address] system and gave the morning announcements very articulately, and in the afternoon, the afternoon announcements. And I was so impressed. I wanted to be like him, walk like him, talk like him. And he was a real Renaissance man type. He ran track. He was, you know, at the top of his class. He was Honor Society, Language Society, Drama Club. I mean he was just into everything. So--and the girls liked him. And he was very respected by both the faculty, the Principal as well as the students. And so he was my, my, my role model. And I tried to emulate James Gavin. Story_ID: 3380 Speaker 1: Now, is this the same James Gavin who's now--? Speaker 2: He's the President of the Morehouse [College] School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dean of Morehouse School of Medicine, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's the President of Morehouse School of Medicine, and I had an opportunity to speak at his inauguration. Of course, he was two years ahead of me in high school. He went to Livingstone College in Salisbury, North Carolina where my mother was from. And he ended up at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] to get his Ph.D. in Biochemistry when I was at Emory Law School. So we, our cross--paths crossed again there. But anyway, I was, I was active in student, student government. And, of course, kind of wanted to, to go into law. In high school, my senior year was 1963, '64 [1964]. I was SJ (unclear) President so I was the one giving the morning and the afternoon announcements. And I was in and out of the public address room, in the office. And I was taking American Government from Miss Dorothy Raine. And Miss Raine heard some commotion on the PA [public address] system that sounded like a radio. And she sent me to the office to go tell the Principal that it was disturbing her class. It was a day in November of 1963. And I got to the office and said--delivered the message to the Principal, who was fiddling with the public address system. And he said, "Boy, don't, don't, don't disturb me. Somebody shot the President." And so I went back and gave that message to Ms. Raine. And she said, "Ah, Mr. Mr.--he doesn't know what he's talking about." She continued to teach and eventually, the announcement that [United States] President [John F.] Kennedy had been shot came over the PA system. One of the things we had to do that year was all of the seniors were required to participate in an essay contest sponsored by the local Bar Association. We had to--every, every senior in the Mobile Public School System [Alabama] was required to write an essay on the importance of law in our everyday society. And, of course, you know, I wrote an essay, and mine was chosen as first place winner. And the--I got a cash award and was invited to attend the naturalization ceremony at the federal courthouse, which I did attend. And that, I think, whetted my interest in law. So I decided I wanted to be a lawyer. I knew some lawyers and I talked to the lawyers that came to Career Day and asked them what it took and decided I wanted to, to be a lawyer. And, of course, I went to--I wanted to go to Morehouse College. Story_ID: 3381 Speaker 1: Okay, I want to backtrack a little bit. There's some other sort of benchmarks that, you know, the death of [United States] President [John F.] Kennedy in '63 [1963], but before that, about--a couple months before was the March on Washington [D.C.]. Did you, did, did that, that make a impact on you at that age? Did you, did you (unclear) much--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It was, it did make an impact. I didn't participate in it. I knew that it was happening. And on the day that it happened, I watched the 6:00 o'clock [P.M.] news, and I heard the "I Have a Dream" speech, the clips of it that were played on the, on the 6:00 o'clock [P.M.] news. But that was sort of--it just kind of went past as a news event. I wasn't that focused on the movement until the next year when I ended up at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], where Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had been awarded the Nobel [Peace] Prize during my freshman year. And he came to the campus to receive an honorary degree that Dr. [Benjamin E.] Mays [President, Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] was going to present to him as a Distinguished Alumnus for his accomplishments. And at that point, you know, I kind of tuned into Dr. King. And I was just in awe of him. And I followed his every move and career and every word he spoke and his speeches and his positions on issues, like the war, among other things. Speaker 1: Now, did your parents [Minnie Bethany Slade Bishop and Sanford Dixon Bishop, Sr.] really discuss the [Civil Rights] Movement much around the house cause so much of it was in Alabama, Birmingham [Alabama] in '63 [1963], and--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) There was, there was, there was a lot of discussion--, Speaker 1: --Montgomery [Alabama]. Speaker 2: --about the Movement, but there was not much happening in Mobile [Alabama]. My father was a very--he was very concerned about the plight of blacks. He believed that education was essential and he did everything that he could to foster education. And he hated distractions like the Mardi Gras. You know, all of the schools were closed on Mardi Gras Day, and they were--and the day before. He resisted that. He refused to close his, his, close the college on the day before Mardi Gras Day. And he reluctantly closed it on the--on Fat Tuesday because he said that we don't have time to be playing King and Queen of the Mardi Gras. You know, we need to get something in our heads so that we can do something and vote and, you know. So he was very pro--very much in favor of voting. He was very supportive of Mr. [John] LeFlore and, and Mr. Alex Herman in their efforts to organize and to fight segregation. One thing that happened, and when, when my father--when I was young. I must have been about eight, seven, maybe about six, six years old, six or seven years old, we were riding down Davis Avenue, now [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr. Avenue]. And there was a little boy that was crossing the street and he was hit by a car. The car was driven by a white man. The man pulled over and, of course, my father had to pull over because he had stopped the car in the middle of the street. And he got out, and the little boy was sitting on the curb. You know, He was hurting, you know, sort of feeling his wounds. And the man said, "Are you all right?" And he was about to get back in his car and drive off, and my father yelled to him, "Don't you go anywhere. You know, you need to call the police." And the man said, "What do you have to do with it?" He said, "You know, you--this is an accident. You need to call the police." So we were right across the street from someone's home that we knew. So my father went in and he called the police and told the guy he couldn't leave, he'd better not leave, that he was going to get his tag number. So the police came and investigated the accident. The guy was--I don't know if he was charged or not. Story_ID: 3382 Speaker 1: ...Certain number of boys to have a troop. But the whites wouldn't allow us to go with them so in order for us to get a troop, we had to make up a troop of thirty-five or forty boys from Mobile [Alabama], from Gulfport [Louisiana], from Jackson, Mississippi and from some place in Louisiana and Arkansas. And so they hooked up, so we got a bus and we picked up different people along the, along the road--. Speaker 2: It took that many cities to make thirty-five boys? Speaker 1: Right. Black boys who could afford--whose parents could afford to send them. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And Dr. [Gilbert] Mason was one of the people who attended. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know his son. I met his son--. Speaker 1: And one of the guys from his area was a guy by the name of George Walker. Story_ID: 3383 Speaker 1: Now, the story about the traffic accident--. Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my Dad [Sanford Dixon Bishop, Sr.] was behind this, this car that hit this little boy who was crossing the street and the boy was obviously injured. But the, the white man was in a hurry. He didn't want to stop. And my father insisted that he stop and he insisted that the police be called. And the guy was really irritated about it. Speaker 1: Now, was this a little white boy or a little black boy? Speaker 2: Black boy. Speaker 1: Black boy. Speaker 2: Little black boy. And he was in, on the main drag in the black community, Davis Avenue, now [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr. Avenue]. So my Dad went across the street and, and had the lady who was on her porch to call the police and dared the guy to leave. So the police came and did a report and apparently, he went to traffic court and when they were coming out of traffic court, the man was still angry. And he approached my father and told him that he needed to mind--he needed to have minded his own business. And he struck my father with his fist. My father had on glasses, and, of course, he broke the glasses and knocked the glasses off, and some glass got into his eye. And there was a white police officer who was standing outside of the courtroom who saw the incident take place. So they arrested the guy and charged him. And my father filed a lawsuit against the guy. And I think the, the officer's name was McNally, but the officer testified in favor of my father as to what he saw. My father ended up getting a judgment against this guy for a couple of thousand dollars. I don't know how much it was, several thousand dollars. And, but the guy wouldn't pay. He said he'd never pay. But my father--I can remember every Christmas, my father would take a gift to this white police officer to show his appreciation for his having told the truth in that case. Eventually, the guy tried to sell some property, and he couldn't sell it until the lien was removed because of the judgment. And so he finally paid it off. But that was, that was an incidence where I, where I can remember very vividly my father being activist. And he, he had some very strong feelings about racial matters and political equality and--but he really felt that the way to get there was through education. Story_ID: 3384 Speaker 1: Now, there's a story, you were going to take us back a little bit further to childhood about the Boy Scouts and Dr. Gilbert Mason from Biloxi [Mississippi]. Speaker 2: Yeah, the black Scout executive, Mr. A. J. Dickerson, Mobile [Alabama], had to be in touch with other Scout executives in other parts of the South in order to get a troop amassed so that the black kids could attend the National [Boy Scout] Jamboree. A part of our troop were boys from Mississippi, Biloxi, Hattiesburg [Mississippi], Jackson [Mississippi]. Of course, I had the opportunity to meet Dr. Mason who joined as a Scout leader, as one of the Scout, the Scouters who attended the Jamboree with us in Colorado Springs [Colorado], which was a very interesting trip. We traveled all through the South and we got our way out to, to Colorado Springs. Of course, we were, we lived together in our troop separate from the whites, but the trading post was, everybody--all the Scouts attended that and they swapped negative slides and camp patches and various things at the, at the trading post. And I found that there were, that the Scouts from the South were very, very prejudiced. So it was right about the time that, that they were having the revolution in Cuba and I decided that I would--. Speaker 1: '59 [1959]? Speaker 2: Yeah, this was the '60 [1960] Jamboree. So it was the summer of 1960. So I decided that I would--when I went to the trading post that I would be pretend to be Cuban. And I had, had just a few words of Spanish and I learned how to speak with a little bit of an accent (speaks with an accent). And so I would tell the boys from Louisiana and from Mississippi that I was from Cuba, and that my Daddy [Sanford Dixon Bishop, Sr.] had been kicked out by [Fidel] Castro [Communist President of Cuba] and that I was now living in the United States. And so they would be happy to be seen and to talk with me, and we would, you know, talk together while we were in the trading post. And then, of course, then I'd go back to my troop and laugh, laugh about it. But, you know, as long as they thought I was Cuban, you know, it was okay. If they thought I was a, a black from Alabama, then, no, you know, I was a nigger. So, but, you know, it was, it was an interesting experience to, to see the difference. By the time I got to be a senior in high school and I was State President, one of the perks of being the State Student Council President was that you got invited to the Williamsburg [Virginia] Student Burgesses, which was held at Colo- Colonial Williamsburg [living history museum], which was a student forum of youth leaders from across the country. Each state was entitled to one representative who was the President of the State Student Council organization, except the thirteen Southern states had two. So there was a black one and a white one from each of the, the states in the South. I was the black one. So I had an opportunity to, to fly--first time I flew in an airplane, nineteen six--February of '64 [1964] to Colonial Williamsburg. And, of course, I flew from Mobile to Atlanta [Georgia]. There was a young lady from Macon, Georgia, Audie Schwagman was her name. And she got on the plane and ended up sitting next to me. She was headed to Williamsburg also. She was white. And, of course, we talked about Macon, Georgia. And at that time it was segregated by race and by gender. And I got to go to Williamsburg. I was rooming with two white boys, first time I'd ever lived with whites before. But it was interesting, and we had to debate the issues of the day, the--Southeast Asia was beginning to heat up at the time. We talked about Vietnam and Thailand and there were representatives, student representatives from those countries there, from Uganda, from Africa, and, of course, from the South and the North. And so we got to debate the issues of the day with these other kids. And I got to realize that I was just as smart as they were and it was, it was a very interesting experience. I developed some pen pals with a young lady from Bastrop, Louisiana by the name of Dixie Lynn Rebels (ph.), who was, who was white. And, but we became pen pals, and we would write letters back and forth for a time. But those, it was an interesting experience. But I got to, to see a broader perspective of race relations. And when I got to college, I ran into some of the same blacks that I had met at the Williamsburg Student Burgesses, from Arkansas, from Mississippi, from North Carolina, who ended up going to some of the schools at AU [Atlanta University] Center [Consortium] that I was in the same vicinity with, Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Clark [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. So that was, that was interesting. Story_ID: 3385 Speaker 1: But Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] is another story. When I was a kid, I got to meet Dr. [Benjamin E.] Mays [President, Morehouse College]--. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Of course, segregation was, was, was the order of the day, and so when he came to Mobile [Alabama] to speak, he would stay in the home of a Morehouse grad [graduate]. And, of course, my father [Sanford Dixon Bishop, Sr.] was a Morehouse grad. And I would come home from school as a latchkey child and Dr. Mays would be there, waiting to do his speaking engagement at night. And I got to, to sit there and actually talk with him. And I was very impressed by the man. He was just a very, very impressive gentleman. And when I was ten, we traveled to North Carolina from Mobile by, by car and stopped through Atlanta [Georgia]. My father drove through the Morehouse campus, parked in front of Danforth Chapel, got out, went into and started playing the piano, playing 'Dear Old Morehouse' and looking sentimental. And it just, just really psyched me out, you know. This must be some special place if my tough dad can get sentimental. And he got up from the piano and he went over to John Hope's grave, who was one of the presidents who was buried on the campus. And he looked very reverently over the grave. And he went and looked at one of the buildings, looked up, and said, "I used to live in that room," went over to another, "I used to live in that room right there." And he got back in the car, and we left. But it let--made a lasting impression on me. So when it came down for me to decide where I was going to college, I didn't want to go but one place and that was Morehouse. I had scholarships to every place. And even to the college where he, he was, but I didn't, didn't want to--had to go to Morehouse. And I had a tuition, one year tuition only, but that's where I went. And, of course, glad I did, got to be there for three years under Dr. Mays, got to meet Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. I was SGA [Student Government Association] President there when Dr. King was assassinated. I sang at his funeral, walked in the, in the mule train when his body was borne to the campus at Morehouse for the funeral, got to see all of the dignitaries that came from far and wide to the funeral. But it also kind of shaped my life too. In addition to the Boy Scouts and the Order of the Arrow [Boy Scouts' National Honor Society] and the Brotherhood of Cheerful Service, then I was, I became committed to Dr. King's dream and wanted to know how to keep it alive. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Now, you graduated from high school in what year? Speaker 1: Sixty four. Speaker 2: Sixty four. So you went on to Morehouse in '64 [1964], Fall of '64 [1964]? Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 3386 Speaker 1: Were you aware of the, the voter registration struggle in Mississippi in '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, I was in '64 [1964], '65 [1965] and I followed everything that Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was involved in very, very closely. And, of course, the War on Poverty and, and the, the Kerner Report [Report of the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders, 1968]. The, there was another report on, on poverty in America. All those things--and I was a Political Science major--Pre-Law, but we were required to take Religion so by my junior year, listening to Dr. King, I was torn between whether I was going to law school or seminary. So in my senior year, prior to his assassination, I was, I applied to Crozer Theological Seminary [Chester, Pennsylvania] where he had gone. And I was supposed to have an interview. The President [of Crozer Theological Seminary] came when I was leading a protest [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and I spoke at the new President's inauguration, Dr. [Hugh Morris] Gloster, was succeeding Dr. [Benjamin E.] Mays [President of Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And the President didn't have the interview with me. He just wrote me a letter and said, "You're accepted, you know, you can have a scholarship," whatever. So I was accepted to Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] Law School and Crozer Theological Seminary at the same time and couldn't decide which I was going to do. The Vietnam War was heated up. Seminary was draft exempt, law school wasn't. So I said, "Well, if the Lord really wants me, he'll get me anyhow," so I went to law school, fig- figuring that whenever Dr. King was locked up, he had to call a lawyer to get him out. And I wanted to really use my life and my education to improve the South, plus so many of my classmates and schoolmates had gone to school, gotten excellent educations and gone up North--never came back South again. I just felt like I wanted to make a difference and so I went to Emory Law School. And then I went to--got a job at--got a fellowship with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense and Educational Fund as an Earl Warren [United States Supreme Court Chief Justice] Fellow to do an internship in civil rights litigation, with a commitment to go back South and practice civil rights law. I spent a year in New York. It was a great year. I got to litigate cases with some of the best civil rights lawyers in the country, got to meet with them at least twice a year at a, at a retreat in Airlie, Virginia, Warrenton at Airlie House, traveled around and worked in various offices, argued a case before the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, successfully. It was a school discrimination case with the Atlanta [Georgia] Public School System; worked on cases in New York, in Birmingham [Alabama] and Jacksonville, Florida, Houston, Texas, all over. And then they offered me a job. "No, thank you, got to go back South." And I went to Columbus, Georgia and set up a law practice there. They sent me a letter to go investigate some complaints they had received from the Georgia State Prison at Reidsville from black inmates who were claiming that they were discriminated against. They had filed a motion on their own without benefit of a lawyer, and were about to get kicked out of court. I interviewed the inmates and determined it was a good case. The Legal Defense Fund was willing to support the case if I would handle it, with lawyers and expense money. So I ended up handling a massive class action lawsuit against the Georgia State Prison, which had 10,000, about 10,000 inmates, 6,000 black, 4,000 white, both living in equal amounts of space, segregated. There must have been about twenty different issues, unsanitary conditions, mail censorship, violation of attorney-client privilege, no black, no black counselors, no black guards, just on and on and on. Anyway, some of them were racial issues, some of them were general prison issues, but after litigating for a few months, the judge said, "You know, plaintiffs are right. You need to do something," saying to Georgia, to clean up these conditions. "What are you gonna do?" They said, "Well, you know, the legislature hadn't appropriated the money. It cost $110,000,000." So for four years, we met twice a year and the judge kept asking them, and they kept saying, "The legislature hadn't appropriated the money." So I got frustrated and said, "I'm in the wrong place. I needed to run for the legislature." So I--in December of 1975, I left the court in Savannah [Georgia], went back to Columbus, Georgia and started trying to figure out how I could run for the legislature. Ended up announcing in March, ran in a district that sixty-five percent white, was elected by a few votes. And served in the legislature for six months and finally the legislature appropriated $110,000,000. But then the economy was bad. So from--all through the decade of the '80s [1980s] the economy was bad. The State appropriated the money and they built new prisons to ov--relieve the overcrowding and the conditions, but they didn't have enough money to staff them. Story_ID: 3387 Speaker 1: So after serving in the [Georgia] State House for fourteen years, I ran for the [Georgia] State Senate, served there for two years--reapportionment created the opportunity. I ran for [United States] Congress. I was elected in another district that was about fifty-six percent black population, but forty-five percent black voter registration. I got elected. During my first term of Congress, the Commissioner of, of Corrections who had been there when I sued them, was now back. Zell Miller was now the Governor. He brought this guy back to run the prison system, and they were now, the economy improving, opening these prisons now. So now with two of them that were being dedicated in my district, I was invited to the ribbon cutting of the first one. And I got there, and the Commissioner of Corrections said, he's invited because of his position as Congressman. And we wanted to bring greetings, but he's really here and all of us are here because of what he did in his other life. And, of course, that was a sense of satisfaction. But I learned through that, that I could win a case in court, and it would effect only my clients. But if I passed one good law in the legislature, it would effect everybody in the State of Georgia. And that's when I realized why voting rights were so important to Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. When I was with [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund, I really was there at an important time because the Civil Rights Act of 1964 had been passed, but it had to work it's way through the courts for interpretation so people could understand what they could and couldn't do. And so the, the discrimination--the anti-discrimination provisions for employment, for public accommodations, for housing, for education, and all of--and voting rights, were still working their way through the courts. And by the time I finished law school in '71 [1971] and was at the Legal Defense Fund, they were just now getting the definitive rulings from the [United States] Supreme Court. So it was really a, a very, very interesting time for me to, to have been in civil rights. And, of course, I had established a practice, but by the, the end of the '70s [1970s], the case decisions began to go the other way. And so I started doing a general practice, criminal, personal injury and I was in the [Georgia State] legislature so I was spending a lot of time there. But when I was in the House, I had 30,000 people; in the Senate 116,000. Now, I've got 650,000 people, but if you pass one good law in Congress, you affect everybody in the United States, protectorates and half the world. And so it's a real opportunity for effecting social change through politics and that's really how I got into it because it was a, a way that I was able to make a difference. Speaker 2: Okay. So you, you think it was your, your father's [Sanford Dixon Bishop, Sr.] activities when you were young that really kind, kind of inspired you to get involved with social change? That kind of sparked you or what? Speaker 1: I think that the influence of my father, the exposure to other men in the community who had that type of, of interest. Mr. [John] LeFlore who was an activist. None of the men who worked for the State or for the City or who taught school could be publicly supportive of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or civil rights. The NAACP had been all- had been outlawed. So they formed the Non-Partisan Voters League and Mr. LeFlore headed that up. And so he was always the catalyst in the community, pushing for this, fighting and protesting this, that or the other. And Mr. [Alex] Herman was self-employed. He was an insurance man so he didn't have to depend on the, the establishment to--for his livelihood so he could be more independent. And, of course, ministers were that way also and funeral directors. So these were people who were outspoken and who really went, went forth. And, of course, I was, I was always impressed with those ideas and, of course, Dr. King made a tremendous impression on me. And as a Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate we were indoctrinated Freshman Week that at Morehouse we were expected to be philosopher kings, that we were expected to be somebody to make a difference in the world. And that, you know, people that went other schools, they could be policemen or they could be this and they could be the other, but at Morehouse, you're in the 'Talented Tenth.' And you're supposed to be one of the leaders of the, of the society of the world. And so we expect this of you. I think the quote is that, "Morehouse holds a crown over the heads of her students, that she challenges them to grow tall enough to wear." So I mean that, that was the, it was a thing, you know, I, "I'm a Morehouse man. I got to do something. I got to make a difference," you know, and so all of those things just pushed you to, to, to achieve. Story_ID: 3388 Speaker 1: Okay, now as a young student in Atlanta [Georgia], were you inspired at all the activities of the Center for the Black World [sic, Institute of the Black World], with Dr. Vincent Harding? Speaker 2: Yes, as a matter of fact, my senior year I took 'Negro American Life' from Dr. Harding at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and, of course, following Dr. [Martin Luther] King's [Jr.] assassination, they started the, the Martin Luther King Center for Social Change [Atlanta, Georgia] and the Institute of the Black World [Atlanta, Georgia]. Dr. Harding was Director of both. My first year in law school I had a--I got a part-time job at the Center as an archivist. And my job was to clip news clippings and catalog them on Dr. King as part of the archival process there. And that, in that capacity, I got to meet some of the civil rights stalwarts, John Lewis, Julian Bond, Donald Stone, [William] Willie Ricks, H. Rap Brown [later Jamil Abdullah al-Amin], Stokely Carmichael, Bernice [Johnson] Reagon, you know, Bernice of 'Sweet Honey in the Rock.' Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Right. 'Sweet Honey in the Rock,' right. Speaker 2: And, of course, Bernice had a sister whose name was Mae Frances Johnson. They were from Albany, Georgia where I live now. And I ended up dating Mae Frances while I was working at the Center. Mae Frances was Bernice's sister. Mae Frances developed cancer and she eventually died. But I got to know all of the [Civil Rights] Movement people because they were coming in and out of the Center all the time to see Dr. Harding and so it was a real, really wonderful experience for me during my first year of law school at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia]. So I would leave Emory and come over to the Institute of Black World and the, the Martin Luther King Center, which at that time was located on the campus of ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] in the basement of its library building. It later moved over to the Auburn Avenue, two or three years later. But, yes, I was associated with Dr. Harding, and I worked for him for that, that year that I was, that first year of law school. But the most important thing was it allowed me to meet those, those history makers. Speaker 1: Yeah, he, he knew all of them, you know, well. They, you know, they had some outstanding intellectual exchanges there. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: I knew with that Center being there, you had to be associated with it on some level. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yep. Story_ID: 3389 Speaker 1: You were telling us how, how you were elected to [United States] Congress. Your constituency was, was majority black at first, right? Speaker 2: Well, not really. It was fifty-six percent black population, forty-five percent voting-age population. Speaker 1: Okay, it's a difference. Speaker 2: Yeah, so it was a fairly close district. I was able to get elected. The guy who was the incumbent Democrat [political party] was in, involved in the check scandal, the bank scandal that year and redistricting took away half of his original district. So he had half of his people that were new and he had 619 bad checks. So that was the issue in his, his, his case. I ran against him, and I had a sterling record in the [Georgia State] legislature. And, of course, once people were able to contrast me with him. And then with a, a sizable black population, I got just about all of the black vote, and I picked--I was able to pick up some of the enlightened white vote. So I beat him fifty-seven--I mean fifty-three, forty-seven percent in a run-off. And I had no problem in the general election. I got sixty-four percent in the general election against a white doctor from Americus [Georgia]. But then two terms later, there was a, a reverse discrimination suit filed against the redistricting. So they redrew the lines, the courts did when the legislature couldn't agree. And it was changed to sixty-five percent white again. So then I started having opponents, both in the primary and the, and the general election. But I was able to, to fight them off and to, to win re-election. Speaker 1: Now, this is a tough district. This includes Stone Mountain [Georgia], doesn't it? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. That was Cynthia McKinney's [U.S. House of Representatives, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry, okay. Speaker 2: That was Cynthia McKinney. Stone Mountain is black now. But, no, no. It was tougher than hers because her district, the biggest base was DeKalb County which was really a predominantly black county. It's the, the 'buppie [black urban professional]' county in, in Georgia. And Stone Mountain is in DeKalb County. And the Mayor [Charles Burris] of Stone Mountain is black. And the Mayor [Marcia Woods Glenn] of Lithonia [Georgia] is black. So it's a pretty progressive area now, but my area was in South Georgia, Southwest Georgia. I'm [President James E.] Jimmy Carter's Congressman. And so we got cotton fields, peanut fields, pine trees and, and the--it's a pretty conservative area. But because of when I had the forty-five percent black voter-age population, recognizing that my--I was a moderate, I wasn't very left leaning, if you will. I tried to represent the people who elected me, the people of my district. And, so when the district lines changed, they were satisfied with the representation, and they, they voted for me. Story_ID: 3390 Speaker 1: And you had a story about Columbus, Georgia and you were talk, talking about. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I did [United States Army] Basic Training in Columbus, Georgia at Fort Benning. I was in my second year of, my first year of law school. And I was about to get drafted out of law school. And I was finally able to get into an ROTC Program for people that hadn't had Basic. You could go to summer camp and then you could enroll in Advanced ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] for two years. And you would be deferred, at least for that two years, and then you would get a commission. So I, I did Basic ROTC at the end of my first year of law school at Fort Benning. I said, "Lord, if you ever let me get out of this place, I'll never come back this way again." I finished law school two years later. I ended up getting a medical discharge, went to New York. And the place that they helped me set up my practice was where? Columbus, Georgia. And when we started--I got, I got a college classmate of mine, a fraternity brother who had gone to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] to--we had said we were going to practice law together in Atlanta [Georgia], but since the [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund was willing to help me set up in Columbus, we went to Columbus. And we started a law firm and we got up to as many five lawyers. But I remember the first year we were there, we got a call from a, a family in Americus, Georgia. They came up to the office and they talked to my partner. Their son had been--was in jail, without bail. And he was a sixth grader, charged with arson. The sheriff of Sumter County, which is Americus, Georgia, Plains, Georgia, the home of [President James E.] Jimmy Carter, the sheriff had arrested this guy. He was playing with matches in school, dropped them in the trashcan. The trashcan caught on fire. They called the fire department after the fire had been put out, of course. There was no danger, but the sheriff charged the young man with arson. He was juvenile, but he held him in the adult jail without bond and wouldn't let him out. So my partner called to ask him, told him that was a violation of the law, that he was a juvenile, wasn't supposed to be in an adult jail. He said, "I'm the sheriff. I run this county. You don't tell me what to do. It's my jail, it's my county. I do what I want to do!" Hung the phone up. So we ended up getting a habeas corpus writ [petition indicating that one is jailed unlawfully], forcing the sheriff to release the guy. The sheriff was really, really upset. The janitor in the courthouse was sweeping the floor, and everybody in the courthouse knew how pissed the sheriff was. And so as my partner was walking through the, the rotunda of the courthouse, the janitor said, "You better get out of here. The sheriff is mad. He's gone kill you, he's gone kill you." So my partner runs out and jumps in his [Triumph] TR7 [model] sports car. And he speeds back to Columbus from Americus at ninety miles an hour and he rushes in the office. "Bishop, Bishop, Bishop, got to go, got to get guns, got to get guns, got to get guns! I'm not going back down there with a gun, if I don't have a gun!" So he got me up out of--I was with client. As soon as I got through with that client, we had to go to a gun shop and buy guns. We had--that was in Sumter County. Then there was--the next county to that was Stewart County, another county over. There was a 'Boss Hog'-type man by the name of Sonny Butts. And Mr. Butts had the only liquor store in Lumpkin, Georgia which was a, a city located at Stewart County which was dry [sale of liquor is prohibited]. And there was a black man by the name of Albert Thomas who had a competing liquor store. So Sonny Butts hired these hoods with baseball bats to go into Mr. Albert Thomas' liquor store right before a holiday and bashes all of the liquor in the, in the, in the store so it was that deep on the floor. So he couldn't sell any liquor during the holiday. And his store would be the only one working. So he gets in--he also owned a funeral home. So he gets in this hearse and he drives to Columbus to the distributor to get some extra liquor so he can go and restock his store. Sonny Butts knows what he's doing and he calls the sheriff and has the sheriff to sit at the County Line and as soon as he comes through the County Line, he arrests him and he seizes the liquor and the hearse and charges him with transporting liquor in a dry county, which is the only way he could get to his wet city. So he comes back to Columbus to represent--to get representation because he couldn't get any lawyer down there to representing him--represent him. So we ended up, ended up representing him and getting the case thrown out and, and fast forward, you know, a few years to 19--that was like 1974. Story_ID: 3391 Speaker 1: Fast forward to 1993, nineteen, twenty years later. I run for Congress--Stewart County [Georgia], Sumter County [Georgia], in my district. The support I get from the sheriff of both counties, from the people of those counties is just unbelievable. And the difference between today and then is the difference between night and day. I mean it really illustrates how far we've come. And the most defining moment in my [United States] Congressional campaign in 1992 was when the [William J.] Clinton/[Albert] Gore [United States presidential campaign] bus tour came through south Georgia. I joined them in Columbus at a rally, got on the bus with them and rode down south through Columbus, to Albany, to Valdosta [Georgia] where the tour ended. But between Columbus, Stewart County and Albany, there was a place called Parrott, Georgia in Terrell County. Well, Parrott, Georgia has high sidewalks. It looks like one of those towns in one of the Westerns [movies]. And--. Speaker 2: Vaulted sidewalks, they call them? Speaker 1: Yeah, they're wood. They're like you could tie the horse onto the pole. Anyway, they had roped this off because Clinton decided he wanted to stop there. So they roped it off to have a little rally in this little town of Parrott. And the crowd gathered from, from the county in this little, little area, this little hamlet. And all of us got off the bus, and we were working the crowd. They had it roped off with the yellow tape and everything. And, so I was, I had TV [television] commercials and so I was a recognizable figure. And I was working the crowd. Clinton and Gore were behind me and so as soon as I got to this group, they started, "Mr. Bishop, Mr. Bishop, can I shake your hand, can I shake your hand?" And I was shaking hands, going along the row. And there was a little boy. He was about ten years old standing there. He was black. And behind him were his parents. And behind them were his grandparents. And right next to this little boy was a little white girl. She was about ten years old and behind her were her parents and behind them her, the grandparents. So I, I get there, and this little girl says, "Mr. Bishop, I saw you on television. Can I have your autograph? Can I have your autograph?" So I said, "Sure." So I stop. I reach in my pocket and get a campaign card, turn it over and I write my name--"What's your name?" And I write his name and write my name and I give it to him. And he just gets this big, big broad grin on his face. And the little girl standing next to him, said, "I want one too. I want one too!" And so I reach in, I do one for her. And then the, the little black boy's mother, she says, "That's my son." And the father said, "That's my son." And the grandparents said, "That's our grandson." And then the little white girl's mother says, "That's my daughter." And the white--the father says, "That's my daughter." And the grandparents, "That's our grandchild." And here both of these kids are--their eyes are big. They're so happy that they got this autograph from this person they've seen on television. And they're standing there right together, black and white, three generations. And tears just came to my eyes because I realized that this is what Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was talking about in the "I Have a Dream" speech. And I was right on the cutting edge of, of, you know, making it happen. And it was just, it was just--it was a very, very proud moment for me to feel that I was at that point in history, making history, becoming the first (buzzer sounds) black [United States] Congressman from south Georgia. Story_ID: 3392 Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a, a really defining moment, a proud moment because I realized that, that things had really changed and that I was on the brink of making history, becoming the first black [United States] Congressman from south Georgia, and that I was really about to realize what Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had been talking about in this "I Have a - Have a Dream" speech. And there was, was evidence, proof positive that, that three generations were right there, black and white. And they were supportive of me and encouraging to me. And they were standing there together, you know, grandparents, parents and children. It was just, it was, it was just a really awesome moment for me to realize that, that we've come that far, particularly, when that was one of the same areas where we were afraid to be seen after dark in 1972, twenty years before, when I started to practice law and when my partners had zipped through there and demanded that we get guns to protect ourselves. You know, it was just a, it was just an amazing irony that, that things had changed and were, were, were moving in such a positive direction. Speaker 2: Now, what are some of the major issues in, your district, what have they been over the last ten years (unclear)--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Jobs and a stronger economy, better education, safe communities, free from crime and drugs, a clean environment, affordable and accessible healthcare, strong national defense, all within the context of a balance budget. Those are the issues. The values in that area are, are very simple. God, country, work, family, guns, and not necessarily in that order. Speaker 2: Okay, now, do you find yourself--I guess it, it sounds like a conservative district. Speaker 1: It's a very conservative district, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. And, the--. Speaker 1: It's a challenging district because it's so diverse, black, white, rural, urban, military, civilian, well-to-do and not so well-to-do. We have some of the poorest counties anywhere in the country. And we have some of the wealthiest counties per capita income anywhere in the country. So it's a challenge to, to represent all of those interests in a way that, that's effective. Story_ID: 3393 Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it does seem like it would be a challenge to try to--now, let me--well, how do you approach, having a somewhat progressive background than, you know, representing people that are, in a kind of conservative district? Speaker 2: Well, it's--I have to represent the people who send me. And while there are some basic values of human rights that I will not compromise, there are things that I can, I can subordinate in order to try to keep my eye on the big picture. If, if I don't support certain issues, I wouldn't be true to myself. When it comes to equal rights, racial matters, human rights, yeah, I just have to be true to myself and to, to my heritage. There are some other things that, you know, can negotiable. And I just have to always balance those things at all times when I vote. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There are things, like I said, you know, God, you know, country, work, family and guns. It's a very--it's a 'Bible Belt.' I'm a religious person, grew up in the church. I'm very comfortable with that. I'm comfortable in churches. I'm comfortable speaking from the pulpits of churches. There's nobody that can outquote me with scripture. Because I grew up in the church, it's a part of who I am. It's a part of my, my Boy Scout [of America] upbringing, and the values. Country, we've got military bases, veterans, retirees and people are patriotic. You know, I learned patriotism as a Boy Scout, how to protect the flag. So I mean that, that's consistent with who I am and my, my background. Work, you know, we all believe in hard work and the black community, the white community, everybody is, is for, for working to earn what you, what you should have. And, and all people want is the opportunity--an equal opportunity to work and to, to have a better way of life. Family values are very, very basic in the area that I come from. They were basic in the community I grew up in. Again, citizenship in the home was a part of Boy Scout experience. Family is important there and it's, it abides in the district that I represent. The guns, that was an issue I had to, had to learn to appreciate because I had grown up in urban areas in Mobile, Alabama. I went to school in Atlanta [Georgia]. I lived in New York, moved to Columbus [Georgia], all urban areas. Only when I started in [United States] Congress did I represent rural areas, and I had to learn the values of firearms and the respect for firearms that people in rural areas have. You know, they grew up with shotguns and grew up with rifles. They are hunting. Hunting was a, a way of securing food. There's also an industry in our area, a hunting industry. So I had to learn to appreciate that, but I learned the hard way. Story_ID: 3394 Speaker 1: Yeah, but do you, you support any form of gun control legislation? Speaker 2: Not any more. Speaker 1: None? Speaker 2: (Laughs). Speaker 1: No kind of gun control legislation? Speaker 2: I believe that guns should be in the hands of people who are responsible, law-abiding citizens. I think that as long as they're law-abiding, of sound mind, that they ought to have a right to own a, a firearm in order to--for whatever reason, whether it's to protect them, the families, the business, themselves or for sport reasons. They should have that right. And that right should only be taken away if they have some demonstrated disability, whether it's mental or as evidenced by a criminal record of some sort. I've learned to appreciate that and, you know, that's, that's where I am on those issues now. I had a really big issue my first term with the assault weapons ban, on the issue theoretically and ideologically I was against the ban. But I was persuaded by my black constituents and my urban constituents to support the ban. I caught hell from the NRA [National Rifle Association] when I changed my position on it. And it took me a long time to demonstra--for me to demonstrate that once my district changed, that I was comfortable in supporting the rights of gun owners and gun ownership. And, of course, I, I have really grown to appreciate what the [United States Constitution] Second Amendment right means to the people in the area that I represent. We have quail hunting, dove shooting, deer hunting and we've got plantations where it's a tourist attraction. [United States] Vice President [Dick] Cheney comes down to, to hunt in my district. And, and, you know, that's--I'm not a big hunter, but I can appreciate and understand the culture. And I share it and I, I certainly protect it. Speaker 1: Okay. You know, too with the NRA and assault weapons are really not used for hunting, you know (unclear)--. Speaker 2: But they're also used for collection too. There are people who are veterans who have, who served and fought in Korea, who were in Russia and, and Bosnia and Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf who collect weapons. And they want them for souvenirs or for collection purposes. And, you know, if that's their choice, and they able to--they're of sound mind and, or can keep them safe, you know, that's--should be their prerogative. I don't think the government should be telling them that they can or cannot possess it. Speaker 1: Let's see, now, I have a question that--now, you, from what I've read, you're sometimes are criticized by other members of the [United States] Congressional Black Caucus for being a little bit too, too conservative on some things. I think you and I think there are a couple other people--other Cong- you, you're not the only one, but, but you feel you've really being true to your constituency by--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, I mean, you know, the first art of politics is to get elected and get re-elected. And, of course, each of us comes from a district of 650,000 people. The make-up of my district is different from the make-up of say a district in Los Angeles [California] or in Atlanta [Georgia]. So I have to represent the people who send me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: [Michael] Mike Espy in Mississippi, when he was in the [United States] Congress, he had a district very similar to mine. And his positions were questioned on a lot of issues. But, you know, as long as you remember who sent you, you're in good shape. But the politician who forgets who sends him is in bad shape. It's--I'm reminded of a little vignette that Zell Miller [United States Senate, Georgia] used to always use. He says, "Whenever you see a turtle perched up on a fence post, you know one thing: He didn't get there by himself. Somebody put him there." And those of us who are elected to office have to remember that we don't get here by ourselves. Somebody puts us here. And you got to remember those people. Story_ID: 3395 Speaker 1: Okay, now, the, the flag controversy is another kind of hot issue in Georgia--. Speaker 2: Which flag? Speaker 1: The Georgia State flag and the--there was a--I know it was hot in Atlanta [Georgia], but you don't represent Atlanta. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But, so you kind of stayed out of that, right? Speaker 2: Well, that was a, it was a state issue. And fortunately, I didn't have to get in the middle of it. But it was a very, very burning issue in the part of Georgia that I represent. The Governor, Governor [Roy] Barnes lost his election in part because of it. Zell Miller [United States Senate, Georgia] almost his election as Governor, the first time, because he advocated the change of the flag. There were some very, very deep and bitter emotions involved there. I understand, you know, I'm not a fan of the Confederate flag and, and I didn't, you know, I'm not, I'm not angry that the flag was changed. But I do appreciate and understand the feelings of, of those who feel that their history was, was somehow being, being compromised. I've had occasion to communicate, and I try to communicate with all of my constituents. I received an invitation to speak and to attend the, the convention, the state convention of the Sons of the Confederate Veterans about three or four years ago. I'm sure they sent invitations to all of the elected officials, a meeting in Americus, Georgia at the Windsor Hotel, the same Americus, Georgia where the sheriff wouldn't let the black boy out of jail. Well, I decided to accept to the chagrin of my then District Director, who was white. He said, "You're going to go to that?" I said, "Yeah, I'm going to go. They invited me." And not only did I go, I took a Certificate of Congressional Recognition to recognize their contributions to preserving the history of our area. And when I got to the meeting at lunchtime, I went and I shook everybody's hand. There were about 250 people at lunch. Before I sat down to eat, I went to every table. And having served in the legislature, I knew somebody from every county that they were representing. When I got to, when they got ready to introduce me and announced that I was there, I got a standing ovation. I was the only elected official there, black or white. And then they wanted me to present the Certificate at the Confederate cemetery where they had people playing the fife and the drum, a black guy, they were doing the stuff. So anyway, I presented the Certificate and told them that my history and their history had a common denominator of experience. I was black and a son of the South and they were white and sons of the South, but we looked at our history from a different perspective. But I admired and respect their willingness to preserve their history and to be true to it. And then I did something very, very strange for my District Director who was white. I then started quoting 'Lift Every Voice and Sing' as a part of my remarks. You know, "Stony the road we trod, bitter the chastening rod, Felt in the days when hope unborn had died; Yet with a steady beat, have not our weary feet, Come to the place in which our father's sighed? We have come over a way that with tears has been watered, We have come treading a path through the blood of the slaughters [sic, slaughtered]; Out from the gloomy past where I [sic, till now we] stand at last, Where the white gleam of our bright star is cast." In that last verse, "God of our weary years, God of our silent tears, Thou who hast brought us thus far on our way; Thou who hast by Thy might, led us into the light, keep us forever in the path, we pray. Lest our feet stray from the places, our God, where we met Thee. Lest our hearts, drunk with the wine of the world, we forget Thee. Shadowed beneath Thy hand, may we forever stand, True to our God, true to our native land." And boy, they just burst into applause and gave me this standing ovation. And they were just--and then they had this, this minister who was the keynote speaker who came behind me. And he picked up on what I had said and took some of those words and incorporated them into his remarks about how the South was different from the North and how we had these kinds of values. And we helped people when their barns came down, and we were neighborly, unlike those others, you know. But, but after the program was over, my District Director says, "I just don't believe you did that." But, you know, the words were--were true. They were, they were very applicable. And I, I respected their history, but I tell you, we look at it from a different point of view. And, but they appreciated the fact that I came. And time and again, I've gone various places throughout my district, and one of them will come up and say, "I remember when you came to our Convention. We really appreciated your coming." Story_ID: 3396 Speaker 1: Okay, when you look back over what you've done--now, you've, you've served six terms, right? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: In the, in the [U.S.] House [of Representatives]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What, what would you consider your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I have bought a lot of resources to the district, probably at least a billion dollars in appropriations and grants to help improve the quality of life for the people in our area, whether it's education, whether it's agriculture, whether it's water service for a city that didn't have water. But one of the things that has meant most to me, going back to my civil rights background, was to be able to name the United States Federal Courthouse in Albany, Georgia in the Middle District of Georgia, the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Georgia, after civil rights attorney, C. B. [Chevene Bowers] King. He was the attorney that represented [Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr. in the Albany [Civil Rights] Movement. He represented countless blacks who were charged with crimes or try--charged with civil rights violations over the years. He was a mentor when I started to do civil rights. And when I was elected to [United States] Congress, I was able to get the money to build a new courthouse there that they'd been trying to get for a long time. And once the house--the courthouse was underway, then I was able to get legislation to name it for C. B. King. And that was, that was quite an achievement for me, but it was something that meant a lot to me symbolically and personally because I knew C. B., I knew the contribution that he made in the Federal courts to eliminate discrimination, to implement the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. He demonstrated, by running for Governor, shortly after the Voting Rights Act of 1965, that, that it was something that black people could do now. And he worked and dedicated his life as an attorney to protecting and, and asserting and, and zealously defending those rights. And I mean to me, that was a tribute that was long overdue, and I was really, really proud that I was able to accomplish that. Story_ID: 3397 Speaker 1: ...Control the way history is taught in the country. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Adam Clayton Powell was, he was, he was a, a wonderful, wonderful person because when he was [United States] Chairman of Education and Labor, he started trying to correct that. And that was during the time when I was in college, my junior year in college--. Speaker 1: Now, we, we're talking about the, the traditional view of the Civil War and I think it's the standards by--. Speaker 2: I'm just talking, I'm just talking about black history period, and the, and the, the absence of blacks in the history books that are used in the school systems, the perspectives on all of that. He took that on, head on. He took it on by--he took that bull by the horns, and I did a report my junior year. I was taking an education course on the, the, the (beeper sounds) textbooks. Story_ID: 3398 Speaker 1: Yeah, we, you were talking about Adam Clayton Powell [United States House of Representatives, New York], the advocacy of black history. Speaker 2: Yes, and the advocacy of fair treatment of African Americans in the country's history books that are used in our schools. He was a real champion for that when he was on that [United States] Education and Labor Committee, Education and Labor Committee in the [United States] Congress. I think he chaired that committee. I had an opportunity back in the '60s [1960s]. It must have been '66 [1966], '67 [1967] to really read an article in 'Ebony' magazine, which chronicled what he had done in that regard. My respect for him just, just really, really soared with the way that he took it on and, and made it a part of the Congressional agenda. I was, I was real proud of that. Speaker 1: Do you have any other political heroes? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. [Samuel] Sam Nunn [United States Senate, Georgia] is a political mentor. [United States President] Jimmy Carter is a political mentor. [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] obviously is a political mentor and Martin Luther King was at the top until I met and learned of Nelson Mandela. Nelson Mandela is right up there on the top shelf with Dr. King. He is a tremendously inspirational figure, very historic and I certainly am happy that I had the opportunity to meet him and I'm happy that he had the opportunity to demonstrate to the world that he could endure what he endured in South Africa and come out and not be bitter, and be able to embrace his oppressors and to form a government that was inclusive. The way that he did it was just exceptional and I salute him and respect him. Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: One of my deepest concerns is the plight of the African American male. We seem to be more--in greater attendance in prison than we are in educational institutions. We also suffer from the disparities of healthcare. That's both black males and females, but particularly, the black male. And my concern is that we learn and appreciate the value of education and we utilize it as a tool as previous generations of African Americans have, to elevate ourselves and our people. We've become too selfish and too individualized as opposed to trying to work for our collective good. And I would hope that we can become more unified in an effort to make a better life for all of God's children who are in need of, of a better life. That, I think, is, is, is what, what I would like to, to see for the black community and for the total community. We're all God's children, black, white, yellow, brown and this earth is large enough for us to be able to live together and to work together cooperatively and harmoniously, whether we're Arab or, or Jewish or Christian or, or Hindu, male, female, straight or gay. We should all be able to work together cooperatively and, and in harmony. And I--it is my hope that at some point we will be able to do that. And I would like to use my life and career to make a little more of hope (buzzer sounds), less of fear, better for I having traveled here. Story_ID: 3399 Speaker 1: Is there, is there one particular issue that, that you're looking at in the future that, that is a priority, your, your highest priority at this point? Speaker 2: They're, this--the quality of life issues. And it's not one issue because they're all inextricably intertwined, jobs and a stronger economy, better education, safe communities, a clean environment, healthcare. All of those things go to make for better life, and they all are inextricably intertwined. And we have to approach them, of course, one step at a time, one item at a time, but remember that they're all a part of a, of a mosaic that works together for, to cover us, if you will, and protect us and help us to have a better life. Speaker 1: Do you have a critique of the current administration's policies and how they're affecting the country? Speaker 2: Yes, I'm, I'm very disappointed that, there are so many people that are being left out. There are so many children that are being left behind. There are veterans that are being ignored and neglected. There are communities that are suffering simply because of misplaced priorities. If you take away the resources that are available to help improve people's lives or to create an atmosphere where people can improve their own lives, that's a bad thing and it, in my opinion, is unworthy of public service. I think that we ought to be trying to help the majority of our people to have better lives rather than help a few wealthy people have better lives. And I'm afraid that the priorities that have been set by this administration and that are being implemented are priorities that don't help the majority, but help just a few. And I think that that's, it's, it's immoral, unconscionable and sometimes criminal. Speaker 1: Okay. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a person who tried to use the dash of my life, that is the period between the date of birth dash the date of death, to make the world better, to make it more of hope, less of fear, better because I was here and was able to make a difference. I'd like for people to remember me as someone who tried to help, who tried to improve, who tried to--as my grandmother [Lossie Slade] would say, "Brighten a corner where I was or leave things better than they were when I found them." Whether it's the little part of South Georgia that I represent, whether it's the United States of America, whether it's the world, I hope that through my life, through my service, that I will be able to leave the world better than it was when I came here...