 Story_ID: 203038 Speaker 1: So we do life oral history interviews so it's just a conversation. Speaker 2: Okay, let me do a disclaimer for my memory. This--grey cells are dying even as we speak. So there may be dates and specifics that elude me. So-- Speaker 1: Okay, don't worry about, okay don't worry about that. So my name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer, and Scott Stearns in the videographer and observing is [Burrell's husband, HistoryMaker Thomas J.] Tom Burrell. And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us. Speaker 2: All right, my whole name? Speaker 1: Whole name. Speaker 2: Okay, it's Madeleine Moore Burrell. And Madeleine is spelled M-A-D-E-L-E-I-N-E, Burrell, B-U-R-R-E-L-L. Speaker 1: And Moore is M-O-O-R-E. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'm content with Madeleine Burrell, so-- Speaker 1: And then I'd like to have your date of birth. Speaker 2: 9-10-40 [September 10, 1940]. Speaker 1: And today's date. Speaker 2: Now that's a tricky question. Speaker 1: What is today? Speaker 2: The 24th. The 22nd of April [2014]. Speaker 1: Okay, 22nd of April, okay. And our location? Speaker 2: Is [The] HistoryMakers headquarters. Speaker 1: 1900 South Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois]. And can we have your occupation? Speaker 2: I am retired from two careers. One, the first one as an industrial designer. And the secondly as a marketing communications executive. Speaker 1: And you know the other thing I forgot to ask you, your place of birth. Speaker 2: Brooklyn, New York [New York]. Story_ID: 203039 Speaker 1: And so I wanna ask five People magazine-ish questions, short answers. Can I have your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh dear. Favorite food. That caught me by surprise. Probably healthy soul food. Speaker 1: I think you're a one in class. Okay, favorite color? Speaker 2: Orange, yellow, the warm colors. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Well, it was New Orleans [Louisiana], and I hope it will be soon again. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 2: Favorite phrase. I have to think about that. There are many. Speaker 1: We can come back to that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 203040 Speaker 1: I want to start out by asking you about your parents. Can we start with your father? 'Cause I know you were raised by your mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)], but can we start with your father and what his name, and what you know about him and his growing up. Speaker 2: My father's name is Jerome Tubman Ward. He's deceased. But born in Brooklyn [New York, New York], one of four brothers and two sisters, in Brooklyn, and he was a neighbor to my mother. And so the rendezvous were in the building, on the stair landing where young people would gather and talk and smooch. Speaker 1: So it was a neighborhood romance. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: So can you--do you know much about his family? Speaker 2: Well what was talked about because he was not around, so that whole family was mythical. The thing that distinguished them in that era, is that they were all light skinned and therefore, good looking, as it was put. And my mother on the other hand, was dark skinned and a handsome woman, you know an attractive woman. And so they--all of the attributes that went to the shadeism that existed in the black community favored my father, his family, and penalized my mother and hers. So I straddled the, the fence, so to speak, in the family. But it was a very fine divide, their being, you know, romantically involved, but socially on two different sides of the track. Speaker 1: You're talking about really the color track. Speaker 2: The color, yeah, which was a compelling you know, categorization of one's worth and beauty and all of that. So you know-- Speaker 1: So are you fairer skinned than your mother then? Is that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 203041 Speaker 1: So can you give your mother's, her name and what her year of birth, and what you know about her growing up? Speaker 2: I'm not sure I can recall her exact year of birth at this moment, but I can revisit that. But she was--her name is Constance Dickerson Ward. And then she went on to become a Mosley [ph.] in her second marriage. But she distinguished herself number one, by having this incredibly beautiful voice. And she was the songstress of the community. When anybody got married or when they died, they called for Connie, as she was known. And she was legendary in, in terms of her voice and people thought that that was where her career would take her. But she wound up working for Walter White, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. And then after that, Girl Scouts of America. So advocacy and social activism was something that was constantly a discussion around our dinner table and she made sure that I was exposed to that, had an appreciation for that, was infested, infected with the urge toward volunteerism. And that has remained a part of my DNA, even today. Story_ID: 203042 Speaker 1: Did she [Burrell's mother, Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] talk about her growing up, though? I mean her family, or you don't--I mean I'm wondering family structure, how-where the family is from originally, are they New Yorkers? Speaker 2: Well, I can give you the mythology. We've never really had a genealogical search. But we were a family that evidently was owned by, in slavery, by the Booths, Edwin [Booth] and John Wilkes Booth I think, the ones who shot the president [President Abraham Lincoln]. And so they were always referred to as those Booth boys. And evidently there was a plantation that was left to our family, to my aunt, who was a faithful servant of, and slave of the Booth family. And the plantation was in Richmond, Virginia, in a very prime location and lost to failure to pay taxes, which was usually the tact that land left our community and went elsewhere in those days and times. But the, the--you know I, I cannot emphasize enough the issue of color, of complexion, and there is a photo that I would like to, to put my hands on again that had the freckled side of the family. You know the light skin, freckled, and the darker ones. And they lived in two different mountaintops, and there is a film, there is a, a photo where the dark skinned Booth is pointing to the other hill where those other Booths lived. And the kind of bad feelings and sense of you know, not being accepted or you know, part of the family. That was something that was always on the perimeter of any conversation about family. Speaker 1: So it's one of my favorite subjects, and it's a complicated-- Speaker 2: It is, it is. Speaker 1: --thing that has not been explored, so, so your mother--do you know when the family came to, you know from, from Virginia to New York, to Brooklyn [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: I really don't have a date. But the occurrence was my grandfather [John Dickerson], my mother's father, was a cook in a segregated [U.S.] Navy. And so the Brooklyn Navy Yard was one of the lures to bring Navy veterans to Brooklyn, to New York. And I believe that it was working in the Brooklyn Navy Yard was a thing that brought him there. Prior to that, Virginia, Reading, Pennsylvania was where the family had a farm. And so my family would talk about sending me south for the summer, and it was Reading, Pennsylvania, that was south of Brooklyn. So--but there was a full-fledged farm with chickens and horses and a Pentecostal church next door that had music wafting through the, those wonderful stained glass windows on Sunday, along with the aroma of fried apples and biscuits. So I have fond memories of that place and that time. But you know we lived in a way that didn't give hint to the fact that we were basically poor. But my grandmother [Charlotte Booth] and grandfather had the tradition that's held by a lot of black families, of bringing people up from the South. So our house was a way station and there was always some young person who needed to get on their feet, needed to find a job, needed shelter. And so we had a very big place. And they would come up north to Brooklyn until they were positioned. Some of them would get married, some of them would find jobs. But it was--there was a movie called 'Lackawanna Blues' that spoke to that phenomena and pictured it exactly the way I remember it. You know a, a long trail of people who moved through and my grandmother was the matriarch because she sheltered people, fed them, found them domestic work for the girls or whatever, you know could be had for the guys. Story_ID: 203043 Speaker 1: How many kids in your family [HistoryMaker] Madeleine [Moore Burrell]? Is it you, just you-- Speaker 2: Well, I was an only child. Speaker 1: For how long? Speaker 2: Until I was sixteen. Speaker 1: So you were raised like an only child. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now when did your mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] get remarried? Speaker 2: My mother remarried when I was ten and unfortunately she died right after childbirth of my brother and my sister. So my brother was six months when our mother died, and my sister, these are half-brother, half-sister, my sister was going on two. So in many ways I became the surrogate mother for my brother and sister. Speaker 1: So you are--what, what age are you when your brother is born? Speaker 2: What age was I? Speaker 1: Twelve? Speaker 2: I was sixteen. Speaker 1: Sixteen. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So I had lived the life of an only child (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (simultaneous) The only child. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 203044 Speaker 1: So can you describe your earliest memory growing up? Speaker 2: My earliest memory. I don't know if this is a memory or just having heard this story. But I remember being in my crib and seeing on the wall a picture of a man on a white horse, and then an electric picture of Jesus with the blood gushing and the heart thumping. And those two pictures reside in my memory, on the same wall. And I'm in the crib holding onto the bars and looking at it. I later came to discover that the man on the white horse was Haile Selassie who my grandfather [John Dickerson] revered and there were pictures and articles about how Haile Selassie, Haile is it, Selassie. And the picture of Jesus was the fantasy image that we all grew up with. The blond, blue-eyed Jesus on the cross. Speaker 1: It was electric? Speaker 2: Yes, it was plug in, yes, it was electric. And I--my grandmother [Charlotte Booth] probably put it on layaway until she could, you know, redeem it. But it was a prideful image. And as far as she was concerned, that was Jesus, that's what he looked like. And when she was worrying and troubling over something, she'd plug him--she'd turn Jesus on and you know, the heart would pulsate and the blood would, you know, in all directions. Colored the image, colored the (unclear). Story_ID: 203045 Speaker 1: So what is the household you're growing up in? Is it your [maternal] grandparents' [John Dickerson and Charlotte Booth] household? Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty much. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean my earliest memories, yeah. My mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] was seventeen when I was born, so she was hardly ready to parent and neither was my father [Jerome Tubman Ward] who quickly kind of disappeared from our life until later. A very happy return to, to you know, to me. Speaker 1: So who--give me your grandparents' names. Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was John Dickerson, and my grandmother's name was Charlotte Booth. Speaker 1: So that's the Booth. Speaker 2: That's the Booth side. Speaker 1: That's the Booth. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So what was, what--describe--now which street are you living in, in Brooklyn [New York, New York]? Do you remember the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Oh, did I. I lived around the corner from [HistoryMaker] Earl [G.] Graves [Sr.], who was my babysitter because his mother [Winnaford Colette Sealy Graves] made him take care of, of both me and his sister. That's before he was a Green Beret [U.S. Army Special Forces], mind you. But they--the Graves family, as were all of the families, like surrogate parents, you know. People sat at the window and watched out for the kids, the communal youngsters and older people. But it was Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, New York, New York] at a time when Bed-Stuy was quite the place for strivers to live in Brooklyn. Everyone lived in a brownstone and it was multiple generations, you know. And those houses stayed in the family until gentrification came along and, and dismantled that. But the church, Cornerstone Baptist Church [New York, New York], and what are some of the other--Mount Lebanon [Baptist Church, New York, New York] was another. I went to Dorothy Bostic Junior Academy [New York, New York], which was a prep school for toddlers. It was a preschool when, you know, preschools weren't something that was done. So it, it was very much a middle class community and I was the oddity because I came from a broken home. Everybody had parents, grandparents and in the, you know intact in, in the home. So that was one of those things. My mother had the burden of shadeism and I had at that point at least, the burden of being described as a child from a broken home. Because people weren't divorcing. Speaker 1: You know and what's so fascinating is the--the picture that you brought with you, you know the announcement in the paper and it, you know gives your mother's, you know, name and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and I don't think that was done as a compliment. But that was a scandalous news item, you know, that this young woman had divorced and you know that was not a common occurrence back then. Story_ID: 203046 Speaker 1: What is life like in the Dickerson [Burrell's maternal family] household? Can you describe that in terms of even chores or holidays or daily life? Speaker 2: Well you know I think the phenomena of brother's keeper, you know being our brother's keeper, our sister's keeper, was something that was very much alive in our house. I, I talked about the young people who came up from the South. There was a dumbwaiter in the house and it was I think designed to take garbage up and down, but in our house, it was to take meals. The, the elderly who were shut in and whatnot, a meal was prepared and it went up the dumbwaiter and down as well as gossip going up and down the dumbwaiter on a daily basis. But it was one of those vehicles that kept us in touch with each other. And it was a place where there was always an extra plate on the table. Even if we didn't know who that plate would serve, it was put there with the expectation that some latchkey kid needed a meal or some elderly someone, or some disgruntled family member needed a place to break bread and get some solace and advice. My grandmother [Charlotte Booth] always had the Bible open, ready to quote scripture for any problem. She would go to the page that had the answer, and she would even--she was known to go to the local park and we had some lovely parks in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, New York, New York]. And she would invite home those people who found themselves living on a park bench or sitting, you know, on a park bench without a meal. And she'd bring them home and feed them a home cooked meal and then read the Bible to them for--until they couldn't stand it anymore, or until they got the, the message. But it was that kind of passing the blessing, you know, you know pass the, pass the biscuits and you pass the blessing around the table and made sure that you know, that can that was always on the edge of the counter in the kitchen, that was there to receive donations, loose change for somebody who was recovering from some illness or some kid who needed money to go to school or something. It was a reminder that we had a responsibility for those people in our lives, to pass the blessing. Speaker 1: So when you think back to that house, you lived in that house how long? Speaker 2: Dear, well I lived there-- Speaker 1: Your whole-- Speaker 2: For quite some time because my mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] did remarry, remarry when I was ten. And I was not welcomed to the house of my new stepfather, my stepfather. And again, color played a, a role, a role. Speaker 1: Was he darker skin? Speaker 2: He had straight hair, which is the other pass that one had. So even though we were the same color, he had black, shiny, wavy hair as did his family. So that put them in another category that separated the, the kinky from the straight, the light from the dark. I mean-- Speaker 1: But your mother is dark. Speaker 2: My mother was dark, yeah. And she was not welcome in that house either. And so she didn't bring me with her. So I say that to say I stayed with my grandmother through that. And so it was only a short time that I lived with my mother, actually. Story_ID: 203047 Speaker 1: Take me back to that [Burrell's maternal grandparents'] house and sights, smells and sounds remind you of your childhood [in Brooklyn, New York, New York]. You've talked a few of them, but I'd like you to, take you through each of the senses. Speaker 2: Well you know it's interesting that you ask that, because I've longed believed that our, what do you call the sense of smell, olfactory sense is a trigger for memory in ways that we're really not taking advantage of. I think Alzheimer's [disease] patients might rally in response to certain aromas. For me, I discovered that linoleum was the key to my childhood memories. I can smell linoleum, and that's hard to do in this day and age. But I, I remember discovering that with a sudden burst of images and remembrances, even music, that was of that era simply by the trigger of smelling linoleum. And I mean I was waiting for smell-o-vision [ph.] to happen in the movies and on TV; that's yet to come. But for me it's linoleum, and I believe it's because as a child I played under the dining room table, under the kitchen table. I probably crawled around even before that on those linoleum floors that covered that wonderful parquet that so often came with the--those old houses. So that was one. The other is the, the rich aroma of different foods. Because in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, New York, New York] there was a strong presence of Caribbean families, but there was also the southern you know, leg of, of what that community was about. And we lived in harmony. I mean there was not for some strange reason, there was not the rancor that came with all of the other shadeism and color things. Or if it did, I wasn't privy to it because for a long time I thought I was West Indian because of the close proximity and the food and the cacao and curry goat and all of the things that lived side-by-side with chitterlings and pork chops and you know, candy sweets. So it was a wonderful potpourri of, of cultural nuances, but still it allowed one to celebrate you know, those, those parts of one's history. Speaker 1: You know that's--now what about sounds and what about sounds? Speaker 2: Well in our house, it was either gospel music on Sunday morning, or my mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosely (ph.)] for the time that we were together, was a, an ardent admirer, student, even in some ways, of jazz, jazz and pop. And so it was interesting. I always favored the gospel music because the jazz seemed complicated to me and I couldn't hum it, but I could sing the lyrics and walk behind my grandmother [Charlotte Booth] as she marched up and down the floor, clapping to whatever gospel music she might be listening to. And so that was nice. I mean that was something that set a mood for a home the minute you opened the door. It was either welcoming or you know, interesting. Story_ID: 202499 Speaker 1: Is the church a big part, the Baptist church a big part of your growing up? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: Sundays because the Baptist church-- Speaker 2: Well not just Sunday, I mean it was--it seemed to me every day. My [maternal] grandmother [Charlotte Booth] was a church mother. She wore the white dress with the white handkerchief flowering from her pocket. Smelling salts in hand if anybody should fall out. And the men in the family weren't churchgoers, and that might be a common occurrence. But certainly in our community it was the women who were the devoted churchgoers. And within the church, there were wonderful things, like scouting and choir. I mean those things that occupied our afternoons, you know, and I am forever grateful to what scouting offered me as a, as a child. I was a Brownie Scout, a Girl Scout and then an assistant scout leader. And the kind of lessons and, and morays and cultural you know, traditions and values that were communicated through, not just the, the music that was sung from the choir loft that--which was a whole 'nother message, but scouting and some of the, the usher board and the, the mother's league and the, you know there, there were structural things that had a community that had the church as the hub and the center for what young people did and the launching pad for a great many careers, marriages and whatnot. So the church was really important, even if you didn't buy the whole, you know, book about what Christianity was about. You knew it. I mean you were well-schooled in it and it was a mainstay of what that community was about. Story_ID: 202500 Speaker 1: Now what about elementary school, so where are you going for elementary school? Speaker 2: Well I started out at P.S. 70 on, I think it was Marcy Avenue in Brooklyn [New York, New York]. And P.S. 35 was right next door to us, but it was allegedly the worst and the roughest school in the area, in Bed-Sty [Bedford-Stuyvesant, New York, New York]. So my mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosely (ph.)], who had at this point was working at Girl Scouts of America. Speaker 1: She had started to, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yes well I'm, I'm leaping now to-- Speaker 1: Well you would be six, right? Speaker 2: Well Junior Academy [New York, New York] and then P.S. 70. Speaker 1: So wait, what grade are you in in P.S. 70? Speaker 2: In P.S. 70, that's an elementary school. So I came right out of Junior Academy, which is a preschool. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: To P.S. 70. We all went to P.S. 70. And--but I think my mother wanted, as all mothers do, you know the best opportunity for me. And so she got a scholarship for me to go to the Northfield League [ph.], which was an all-girl, all white girl, prep school. And this, this now--I'm talking about a junior high. Speaker 1: So, so you're in P.S. 70 until junior high, and then your mother gets this scholarship for you to go-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And we're talking really still about, what early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: Fifties [1950s], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Early '50s [1950s]. And the Northfield League was a Quaker girls' school and it was a boarding school. So I went away to Westtown, Pennsylvania, to the Northfield League. And, and I was on full scholarship, but I was the only girl of color among a school of three hundred wealthy white girls. And so my mother's appreciation for that had her going to, I think it was, well A and S [Abraham & Straus] downtown Brooklyn to buy the best that she could afford so that I would not feel inferior going to this fancy-shmancy school. Well the irony is that when I got there, all of the girls wore what little rich white girls were wearing then with their sweaters tied around their neck and pleated skirts and you know, no, nothing extraordinary about their wardrobe. Whereas my mother had spent every dime in A and S to you know, buy me something that would allow me to feel I was holding my own. So the irony is, I was about to say, is that the school wrote my mother a letter saying that I was far too fixated on clothes and that this was a shortcoming that they would have to attend to. And they sent the clothes back to my mother, which was crushing to her. And you know I just think of that and it's something that we still do. You know my husband [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] Tom as you know, wrote this incredible book, 'Brainwash' [sic. 'Brainwashed: Challenging the Myth of Black Inferiority,' Tom Burrell]. And he talks about our need to buy back our somebody-ness. Having come here without any clothes, without any name, without any ties to, to our past. And so I think that buying back our somebody-ness in a clothing store was what she was doing, trying to make me feel like somebody. And we still do that today. Story_ID: 202501 Speaker 1: How could your--how do you think your mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosely (ph.)]--do you think she found out about the school [Northfield League (ph.), Westtown, Pennsylvania] through the Girl Scouts [of America]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So that's-- Speaker 2: Yes, she was vigilant and she found me violin lessons. I had a benefactress, her name was Margaret Presbury [ph.]. And I would go to her house every Saturday morning and have tea with her, tea time. And she would present me, no she--the maid, the, yeah the maid, would present a finger bowl for me. And I had never seen a finger bowl, didn't know what to do with it, but Ms. Presbury taught me all of the refined etiquette that, that a young lady of my age should know. So it was, it was an aberration because I was still living in Bed-Sty [Bedford-Stuyvesant, New York, New York] where the garbage cans were out front and you know, kids running up and down the street. But Saturday morning was a magic time to venture into this other world of Ms. Presbury. And when she died, I got this letter from her lawyer and my mother was ecstatic. "Oh, Ms. Presbury going to leave you, you know, a fortune." And it was Ms. Presbury's hope that I continued to be this--I'd forgotten the word now that she used, but a good girl, you know, that I continue. And so she left me her blessings and all the money went to the other nieces and nephews in her family. But I learned a lot, you know it was a window into a world that I would never have known existed. And my mother peaked it at Girl Scouts of America where she was, quite frankly, one of the only black. For many years after my mother's passing, a plaque with my mother's name on it remained on the wall because she before her death created Hands Across the Sea, which was an exchange program between Girl Guides in London [England] and Girl Scouts in New York [New York]. So it, it was you know to my benefit that my mother was pushy and insisted that, you know, I experienced things that other kids on the block just weren't. Speaker 1: So your mother, even though she had been a teenage mother, you know she had, she, she was striving herself. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: She's bright too, right? Speaker 2: Yes she overcame shadeism with smarts. She was a, you know, perpetual reader. The thing that I, I used to be kidded about by, by my playmates is that my mother would convene these soirees, so to speak, where they would come and they would have debates and argue the, the strategy used in this war or that war or this political thing or the other. And so the, the discussion in our house was very high level, and it was my mother, you know who was a real striver. She had aspirations for me that made her leave taking all the more painful because my brother, my little brother and sister never experienced any of that. Speaker 1: Because--oh because she passed away. Speaker 2: Because she passed away. One was six months, one was two years. And I'd had the benefit of having her for sixteen years. Story_ID: 202502 Speaker 1: So just before, 'cause I'm fascinated about the--you going to school in Northfield [League (ph.), Westtown, Pennsylvania], but what are you spending summers in Reading, Pennsylvania? Is that before that time? Speaker 2: Before, yeah before that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I can date it because of the size of the horse. I had a horse named Dolly [ph.]. And I could hardly straddle Dolly. I had to hold onto her mane. So I was really little when that was happening. And the experiences were rich there because it was a farm compared to, you know, Brooklyn [New York, New York]. And so they were going to show me what farm life was like, you little city slicker. I came with my Mary Jane shoes with the lace around the socks. And they taught me that in order to, as an initiation I think it was, I had to learn how to wring a chicken's neck. And so there I am with my crinolines and my Mary Jane shoes, and they put this chicken in my hand and closed--these are the big boys who did this. And just swung my hand around and when I opened my hand I had the chicken head in it and the chicken was running around the barn--the yard, gushing its life away. And that was my initiation into farm life. Story_ID: 202503 Speaker 1: So what were you like as a little girl? Speaker 2: Prissy. I was a good girl. I was determined to win the favor of those people who I thought would protect me by being a good girl. I thought being a good girl and a smart girl would bring my father [Jerome Tubman Ward] back. That he would, boy, that touched something, sorry. I, I be--I was of the belief that if I was good enough, cute enough, smart enough, that my father would come back. And that never happened. Well it did just before he died, but I'm getting ahead of the story. Speaker 1: Right, right. And he died when? Speaker 2: He died, perhaps it's been a decade now. Speaker 1: So he was, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he was eighty-six when he died. And it's a love story, quite frankly. I rediscovered my father because I was marrying a psychiatrist at the time, my first husband, who said you cannot bring this baggage into this relationship. So you've got to find your father and resolve all of that. And I thank him to this day for that because it had this magical moment where someone knocked on the door and it was my real father, Jerome's wife who said I want to introduce you to, reintroduce you to your father. And she brought my father, his wife. Because she had said the same thing my husband had said. You have to resolve this relationship. So my father walked into my life on the heels of my mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] passing. And this is all out of sync. But at this point I'm living on the campus of NYU [New York University, New York, New York], going to college, having gone back to school after my stepfather remarried. But anyway I, I, I wanted to simply make the point that the love story that I'm, I'm talking about is rediscovering my father and the candor with which he talked about how being a teen father was something he was ill prepared for. And how he regrets having disappeared from my life. So he turned out to be a wonderful grandfather to my son [Adam Moore] when I eventually had him. And that kindled the fires of a, of a relationship that had us deeply loving each other as he was dying. Well even before then, he, he was a widower prematurely. He didn't think--he had married someone seventeen years his junior thinking that as, as [HistoryMaker Thomas J.] Tom [Burrell] likes to say, someone who would help him out of the tub in his old age. But she had an asthma attack and died. But I will forever be grateful to her for giving me back my father. Speaker 1: That's wonderful. That doesn't happen a lot with people. Speaker 2: No, not at all. Speaker 1: Not at all, yeah-- Story_ID: 202504 Speaker 1: --Were you living inside your head sort of? I mean only children tend to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right. Speaker 1: 'Cause they have to create, right? Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah. And I think I was special, certainly to my [maternal] grandparents. My grandmother [Charlotte Booth] always told me that I was chosen, that there was something extraordinary in my life awaiting me. My grandfather [John Dickerson] adored me and would perform song and dance routines with peanut and jelly sandwiches in one hand and a, a hat or a cane or something. And I would sit and just be entertained and adored for all of those years when my father [Jerome Tubman Ward] wasn't there, but my grandparents, and my mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] for the most part, had pretty much gone into her new marriage. Speaker 1: But that's hard though, too. So at ten years old your mother gets remarried. You're staying with your grandparents. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Is it twelve that you're at Northfield [League (ph.), Westtown, Pennsylvania]? I mean do you know the, the, the sequence of things, or at Northfield when your mother-- Speaker 2: I was in junior high at Northfield. I left Brooklyn [New York, New York] and went to Northfield. But not for a long time because the whole incident with sending my clothes back and the persistent responsibility that I had to be a standard bearer for black people. All of the questions, all of the you know, hesitancies and whatnot, had to be explained by a preteen who hadn't figured it out for herself. So my experience there let me know that there was another world like Ms. [Margaret] Presbury's [ph.] world, and Ms. Presbury was instrumental in getting that scholarship for me. It let me know that there was another world with different rules and different experiences that I wasn't seeing in Bed-Sty [Bedford-Stuyvesant New York, New York]. And none of my playmates had had that experience. And so it, it was isolating. And it was--I was very lonely at Northfield. And--but the education for the little time that I was there, was extraordinary. Speaker 1: Now how long were you there? Speaker 2: Maybe two years. Speaker 1: Two years, a decent amount of time, actually. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: To be away cause it's young. Speaker 2: It's young and, and it was very impressionable. I mean I was---when--be--a short time before that, before my mother decided to send me to a Quaker school, she put me in a Catholic school. And that--Our Lady of Victory [School, New York, New York] in, in Brooklyn. And the harsh dictates of Dominican nuns had me spending my afternoons in the stone cellar it was called, memorizing the Catechism [of the Catholic Church] and--because my mother had paid for me to be there and I was the only non-Catholic in the school. So that was--you know it was one isolating experience after the other that had me really bracing myself, girding my loins as to, you know, what was going to happen next. Good intentions, but you know a very lonely and isolating existence for most of that time. Story_ID: 202505 Speaker 1: So you're in ninth grade when you come, and where do you go to school after that? Speaker 2: After Northfield [League (ph.), Westtown, Pennsylvania], I went to Franklin K. Lane [High School, New York, New York] with the race riots in full flout. I mean it was--I thought it was exciting because I got to ride on the subway to school. And it was--I, I guess that was the norm, but it was something out of the norm for me to, to be in this huge school. I mean Northfield had three hundred girls in the whole school, and then you know to be in Franklin K. Lane with thousands of school in that playground, in the yard. But you know I don't regret any of it. I don't look back at, at it without being really thankful for having had those experiences. Speaker 1: So, so what about your friends though at this point? If you're like going, you know to Catholic school [Our Lady of Victory School, New York, New York] and then you're in boarding school for two years and then-- Speaker 2: It, it is one of those blessings that occurred. There was a group of neighborhood girls and we came from scouting [Girl Scouts of America], from the choir, from you know P.S. 70 [New York, New York] or wherever, and the library. There was a crew that spent their afternoons in the Lewis Avenue Library [Brooklyn Public Library, Macon Library, New York, New York] until mother came home or somebody you know, retrieved us from the library. And this wonderful librarian who just, I mean it was our domain. We could, you know, read anything and, and wander the library. And she was a babysitter, quite frankly. And though occasions when--I'm just losing his name, [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] Graves, Earl, Earl would come to the library and pick up, pick us up and take us to the playground or to his mother's house who, you know, would be fixing something for us till our parents came home. So I mean people took care of each other in a way. The librarian, you know she wasn't supposed to be the babysitter, but she was. And Earl, you know did what his mother [Winnaford Colette Sealy Graves] told him, taking care of the little girls. So it, it was--I look back on it fondly, you know. It was safe, there were gangs, but nobody bothered us. But I started to say there was a group, when you asked about friends. There were nine of us. And we called ourselves "les bons amis," the good friends. Well the boys on the blocks called us the "Bony Knees." And so we lived with that double handle for years. And we are still friends to this day. I talk to one who I talk to regularly, the other day, Joan Pennyfeather [ph.] was her name. But because we were only children, girls, nine girls who were only children from middle class black families, there was a bond. I mean a really--maybe as a wet puppy syndrome, but we, we loved each other and did things together. We went to day camp together. We went away to Camp Minisink [Glen Spey, New York] together. So it was a supportive community. And some of these girls came to, to my aid when my mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] died, to teach me how to change a diaper. My brother was breastfeeding. I didn't know what to do. And one or two of them knew that you had to find somebody who had breast milk, you know because none of us knew what to do in that kind of--cause my mother died suddenly. And, and they were there for me. They taught me how to cook. I mean literally taught me how to boil water and how to take care of a house because my stepfather, my mother's husband at that point, grieved so in her death that he never recovered. Story_ID: 202506 Speaker 1: So he [Burrell's stepfather] was in love with her [Burrell's mother, Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] then, right? Speaker 2: This was a couple that would eat holding hands. They would eat with one hand and hold hands across the table with the other. They held hands all the time. They were very much in love. They were the envy, I do believe, of the neighborhood. Because when my mother died, the ladies lined up to take her place, thinking that that would be something that would be there for them too. But he never, he never sprang back from that. Speaker 1: So he never really got over her. Speaker 2: Never did. So my brother and sister lost both their mother and their father that day when my mother died. Speaker 1: So you're saying she--your brother was six-- Speaker 2: Months. Speaker 1: Months. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And your sister. Speaker 2: Was just becoming two, yeah. Speaker 1: And you were, so where are your [maternal] grandparents [John Dickerson and Charlotte Booth] at that point? Speaker 2: They had passed, they were deceased. Speaker 1: So you were really on your own in that way. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: I see, okay. So now where are you going--you said when you came back, so you're in ninth grade, and is that the beginning of high school? Speaker 2: Ninth grade, yeah I guess the-- Speaker 1: And so ninth grade began high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was Franklin K. Lane [High School, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you went there all four years then. Speaker 2: Yeah, just about, yeah, graduated. Yeah, graduated from Lane and years later came back as Principal for the Day, which is a wonderful program. You probably know. And that building that seemed so tall and that fence so high, looked miniscule when I went back years later. Story_ID: 203048 Speaker 1: --From around the world and Hin Supac [ph.] was one who was especially kind to me and she wrote a book and we corresponded for a while. But I don't think I was self-assured enough to think I could sustain relationships with these white people who were world class. You know that's one of the things that I point to when I say how important it is to have a mentor. Because even though I didn't have family members, had I had a mentor, I would have had advice of what, what does one do when you know, you have an opportunity like that and people care about you and are offering to be supportive. 'Cause that happened, that continued to happen throughout my career. There were people that would show up who would think that I was extraordinary in some way and open a door and I wouldn't know what to do, you know, how to go through that door. Whether or not I deserved to be in that room, you know. And a mentor or a grown up, you know, would have been wonderful. So I, I feel strongly about mentoring as a result of that. Speaker 2: That's true. Well I mean you're suddenly thrown into a world that, and you're very young, that you really don't know anything about and it's so different. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean that happens, happens a lot with people. But the thing that--and the program that I must have--I mean that's early for programs like that you know there's a whole series of programs coming later, you know in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: You mean programming-- Speaker 2: You're integrating. You're basically--you're integrating a private school [Northfield League (ph.), Westtown, Pennsylvania] in that way. Cause a lot of times they may have had two slots, you know-- Speaker 1: But it wasn't really integrating. I mean one little black girl from Brooklyn [New York, New York] among three hundred rich white girls. Speaker 2: I know, but they called that integration. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. My mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] twisted enough arms to suggest to them that they needed to look at integration as something to ease into. And I greased the skids, you know. But after I left, they didn't replace me with any other black kids (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now-- Story_ID: 203049 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)], you said she worked. So did she go to work for Walter White after the Girl Scouts [of America] did you say or was it before? I couldn't remember. Speaker 2: Before, before. Speaker 1: So she worked for Walter White before. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was very young. Speaker 1: Now I was just wondering what were some of the conversations around the dinner table that are occurring as you're sort of growing up? Do you remember those kinds of-- Speaker 2: There were words that always resonated. I mean the word respect was the hinge pin for any number of stories, you know, where someone was disrespected, or someone is going to, you know, do such and such because it's a matter of respect. And it was not debated; it was a given, you know that we were deserving of respect. There was one incident where my [maternal] grandfather [John Dickerson] threw the John Hancock [Financial] premium collector down the stairs because he wouldn't take his hat off. And I remember my grandfather hollering after him saying you will not disrespect my, my wife's [Charlotte Booth] house. And because this, you know then the premium guys would come along and mark your book when you paid your premium. I mean there, there was an Ettinger's [sic. Ebinger Baking Company, New York, New York] cake guy, he'd come around and collect money for the cakes. And there was a John Hancock, you know and host of other people who would come to--I guess the druthers were--was to have the assurance of getting cash in hand rather than waiting for people to send in you know, money. But yeah, around the table the issue of respect, the issue of race was ever present. My grandmother would use this term, her good--because she was a domestic, so she'd talk about her good white folks. You know, "I've got good white folks." And she would give the reasons why and demonstrations and these bags of clothes that, leftovers that--cast offs that came home and with her. So my grandfather being a Haile Selassie-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right, devotee. Follower. Speaker 2: --absolutely did not cotton to my grandmother's belief that you know, she had good white folks that she worked for. Story_ID: 203050 Speaker 1: In high school [Franklin K. Lane High School, New York, New York] then, what are your interests at this point? Speaker 2: Art. Speaker 1: Art. Speaker 2: I mean the one thing that we've not touched on which I think really defined my growing up as well as my career, quite frankly, is the fact that I was then and still am today, very dyslexic, severely dyslexic. And so there was a moment in which I was assigned to special ed [education] because I couldn't read. And that was-- Speaker 1: Now this is in elementary school. Speaker 2: This is in Catholic school [Our Lady of Victory School, New York, New York], yeah. Speaker 1: In Catholic. Speaker 2: In Catholic school. Speaker 1: Well what, well what was happening in P.S. 70 [New York, New York] when you were--or no, no-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it was the same, it was the same thing. But I had pretty much resigned myself to the belief that can't read means can't succeed. And so I did not expect to be able to keep up. I did not think that I would have a future; that you know would allow me to keep pace with the way I saw other kids being able to turn pages so quickly and read and understand, you know, right off what they were reading. And so the divine intervention was right there for me because I was blessed with a conspiracy of teachers, white teachers, who concluded that I was too smart to be in special ed. There was something about me that let them know that there was something wrong because I comprehended the, the lessons. I would just draw them, you know, so they encouraged me to draw the homework, you know, do drawings instead of essays. And that was a blessing. And I--Ms. Goldfarb [ph.] is the--was the key conspirator that went around to all of the teachers and said, "Let [HistoryMaker] Madeleine [Moore Burrell] draw." And the red pencils were put aside to allow me to illustrate the lessons in a way that let them know that I got it, I understood what, you know the, the, the substance of the lesson was. So I drew my way through right up to the point where I was competing borough-wide in, in art contests, you know, submitting stuff and, and winning prizes. And at some point a teacher entered my work in something that found its way to New York University [NYU, New York, New York]. And I got a scholarship to NYU for art. And--I mean there were some steps that I'm leaving out, but essentially it was my dyslexia that drove my ability to draw and illustrate and be an artist. And my mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] got me a scholarship to The Art Students League [of New York, New York] on 57th Street in Manhattan [New York, New York]. So here I am, I, I think I was twelve, maybe fourteen, among these adults who were there with their easels and their pallets and whatnot. And I was accepted as a student at The Art Students League. Story_ID: 203051 Speaker 1: How did your dyslexia manifest? Is it just things were, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well-- Speaker 1: --'Cause there're different types. Speaker 2: --one stark thing is when it was--when I was diagnosed. The determinant factor is that I didn't know which end the elephant's trunk was on as opposed to the tail. You know I'd always, when they'd ask me, I would always have it reversed. So I mean that's the classic reversal. But mine also extended to the fact that verticals bowed. I didn't see straight lines and so buildings, the monkey bars, everything that was vertical to me was either concave or convex. And certainly not safe looking. Everything looked like it was going to fall down because of the vertical lines that bowed. And of course I mean with most dyslexics the, the thing that is most challenging is that your eye can't write a word fast enough to be able--so a lot of guessing went. You would see what the first few words were and then you would surmise what that next word might be. And the, the problem with that is that it didn't work with numbers because you can't guess what the number--you can surmise what a word is but you can't guess what the next few numbers are, or how to add them, or that they you know, will even stay still long enough to add. So dyslexia was, was something that plagued me then. Once I understood that it was something that other people had, it lifted a yoke off me because I thought I was slow. I thought I was--I thought I belonged in special ed [education]. I thought you know, there really was something wrong with me intellectually that prohibited me from being able to keep up. So when I found out it was this thing called dyslexia and all these other people had it, famous people, you know smart people, it was wonderful. But I didn't discover that until college [New York University, New York, New York]. Story_ID: 203052 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)]--so you said that may have been the reason [Burrell's dyslexia] you went to Catholic school [Our Lady of Victory School, New York, New York] and then you ended up going to Northfield [League (ph.), Westtown, Pennsylvania]. I was wondering do you remember any special treatment there at Northfield at all--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, loving. It was--they were Quakers. Speaker 1: They were Quakers, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Wonderful, they were wonderful. And I mean there--because it was a school that little rich girls from all over the country came, there was a group of southern belles, little tiny belles, that really weren't that pleased that I was there. And so ribbing and joking and teasing came from that quarter. But then there were others who were intrigued--they had never--they wanted to touch my hair, they want to rub my skin. You know they never really had a black friend. And there were some teachers who were working off their guilts, you know, for what was happening or what was about to happen in the country. And they extended themselves and went the extra mile to make me feel welcome. Story_ID: 203053 Speaker 1: So you go away [to Northfield League (ph.), Westtown, Pennsylvania], your mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] gets married, then you come back. And then you're in high school [Franklin K. Lane High School, New York, New York], but then your mother passes away. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: During that time, and is that your junior year? Speaker 2: That is my senior, yes senior year. Speaker 1: Your senior year. Speaker 2: Junior, yeah, junior/senior. Speaker 1: So how, so who was taking care--you said a lot of friends came, you know came around you and they taught you how to do certain things. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, but are you literally the caretaker for your, for your-- Speaker 2: For the house, yes. Speaker 1: For the house and the two kids? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yes, and the grieving stepfather, yeah, yeah. So I mean my mother died at thirty-six. That frightened a lot of her friends. So people weren't flocking you know, to come and bail out this teenager and these two kids and this grown man who, you know, was nonfunctional. So--but there were people who, who passed through my life, again, just like the school teachers who let me draw. There were people who were there, maybe only temporarily, but good intentions and I don't know what it would have been like you know, otherwise. I speculate sometimes you know how it might have turned out differently, but that's the reality. She died so prematurely that it frightened everybody and so they--I mean it's like if--I, I look back on it and, and wonder whether or not people felt if they showed up, then they would have a responsibility, you know. Speaker 1: To take care. Speaker 2: You know to take--do something for these babies and this man who you know, was again another burden. And so they didn't come. Story_ID: 203054 Speaker 1: So you get in NYU [New York University, New York, New York] anyway and you go. Is that--you're going so, what-- Speaker 2: Well I had the scholarship to NYU in the wings when my mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] died. It was something that you know I was going to be able to retrieve. And actually did, miraculously. Again, they allowed me to put that on hold as I was taking care of my brother and sister. So when my stepfather remarried I was able to go back to school, I was able to go to school. Speaker 1: So, so your stepfather remarried when--you know the year, remember the year? Or do you remember what year you went to school? Speaker 2: I should, I should know this. I can't think of, of the year. That's one of those-- Speaker 1: Would it be like, would it be 1960 at this point or 19-- Speaker 2: A little beyond. Speaker 1: A little bit-- Speaker 2: Beyond. Speaker 1: Beyond that? Speaker 2: Beyond '60 [1960], yeah. Speaker 1: So '60 [1960], maybe '62 [1962], '63 [1963]? Speaker 2: At NYU, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know how old your, your brother and sister were at that time? That might help. Speaker 2: They were just out of nursery school, first grade, second grade. They, you know they were school aged at that, at that point. Speaker 1: So, but all--were all of you grieve--I mean I was just wondering about that period of time. You were all grieving and I mean that's the early '60s [1960s], so you know the Civil Rights Movement is, you know is, is you know starting and all of that and you know. Speaker 2: You know grief is something very interesting. For me it was something that I felt I couldn't afford and so I had this scholarship, I had these babies, you know these youngsters at home. And I was at that point living on campus at NYU and then going on the weekends to be with the children. And I knew this scholarship was a rare gift that I dare not screw up. So even though I was living in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York], I was straight laced and not at all caught up either in the Civil Rights Movement or what was happening in Greenwich Village. I was so fixated and focused on surviving and doing well, and being what my [maternal] grandmother [Charlotte Booth] always charged me to be, and that is a credit to the race. So it--you know the whole civil rights era came suddenly to me. You know the awareness that here I had been busily-- Speaker 1: Well you had other things on your plate. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and it wasn't until [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated that that was, you know, an aha moment, or a wakeup call for me. And just as 9/11 [September 11, 2001] was years later, that you know, there is another whole world that has nothing to do with arts, and you know one's personal aspirations, professionally. But to join the world was something that I did late. Story_ID: 203055 Speaker 1: So what was the NYU [New York University, New York, New York] you came into? Can you talk about that? Speaker 2: The sit-ins had started. There were a lot of police on campus. The classes were auditorium size. It was a very big pond that one had to navigate in. There weren't a lot of blacks at NYU at all. And at that time, NYU owned Parsons School of Design [New York, New York], so I went both to Parsons and to NYU at the same time. And got my degree from NYU and my design training from Parsons. An exciting time, but that was the structure then. And so it left precious little time to be involved in anything else. Speaker 1: Now what are you, what are you thinking you're going to do with your, your B.F.A. at that point? Are you-- Speaker 2: You know what had happened is that I told you about my mother's [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] soirees where people, interesting, interesting people would show up at our house and sit around the table and debate things. One of those people was a chap named Preston Rock [ph.]. And he stopped on his way to the [1964 New York] World's Fair [New York, New York]. He was going to design the IBM Pavilion for the World's Fair. Now this is an African American man in Brooklyn [New York, New York] who was an extraordinary designer. I had never seen--he opened his portfolio and showed us his work. And I'd never seen anything like that and I asked, you know, what is this? What are you? What are you doing here? And he said this is industrial design. And it was at that moment I said that's what I want to do. I mean the images, the--you know that a black man was given that opportunity to represent the United States in a World's Fair based on his designs. I said I can draw, I could do that. Plus I found it fascinating, you know the, the breadth of projects and things that he was involved in. And so it was that--I mean and he was only at the house maybe an hour, but it represented a sea change in what I saw as a possibility for myself. Speaker 1: And was it Parsons or NYU that had the industrial design? Did they-- Speaker 2: Parsons. Speaker 1: Parsons had industrial design. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 203056 Speaker 1: 'Cause I think of industrial design almost between architect--I mean it's-- Speaker 2: Anything that is made, has to be designed. So the industry of design was all inclusive. I mean from a ballpoint pen to the interiors of, or the grounds of a building. So it, it was a wonderful choice for me. The T-square and the triangle was the thing that cured me of my fear of verticals because I had a wonderful professor [at Parsons School of Design, New York, New York], [William] Bill Katavolos was his name, he was Greek. And he said we can fix this. Just put the T-square and the triangle there and you'll see it's straight, it's not bending. And it was changing my belief. Because I believed I think, that everything was unsafe that was tall. And that emboldened me to you know, walk under tall buildings and climb on the monkey bars, where I would never go near a monkey bars in the-- Speaker 1: [Unclear]. Speaker 2: Yeah cause it looked scary. Speaker 1: Plus, didn't you say with your dyslexia that things were-- Speaker 2: Bowed, yeah. Speaker 1: They were bowed. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So this is-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So how is that working then if things are bowed and you have to, you know it's the T-square. Are you able to at that point-- Speaker 2: Well, but it was a shift in my belief, see. Using the T-square and the triangle, I was able to prove that things were straight, they were not bowed. And once I did that enough times, it allowed me to believe that yes, that building is straight, you know it changed my assumption that everything is unsafe or you know, about to tumble, which was one of those things that I grew up with. So the T-square and the triangle straightened things out for me so to speak-- Story_ID: 203057 Speaker 1: Now isn't this an interesting time though, at Parsons [School of Design, New York, New York] and also for industrial design? I mean who are the leaders in the field and what are you learning? And where is the field at that point in time that you're studying? Speaker 2: Well again, I was at the center, I found myself at the center of change, the center of creativity. Because I was recruited from NYU [New York University, New York, New York] by Henry Dreyfuss. And so I don't know whether it was because of the '60s [1960s] and what was happening in the world, but the opportunity to be a junior designer at [Henry] Dreyfuss [Associates] was like open sesame. There again, I was the only person of color, the only female and the youngest. And Dreyfuss was intent on using some of the things that he saw in my work and my drawings to the benefit of his particular contribution to integrating the world, the industry. And so I was being groomed for a, a world that I had never known about before, and nobody on the block knew about. So working at Dreyfuss, there was Raymond Loewy [and Associates, New York, New York] and there was Henry Dreyfuss. Those were the two major industrial design firms in the world, quite frankly. Raymond Loewy was at the top and Dreyfuss was right in second place. And we had a huge space, design studio on top of what--well Bergdorf Goodman [New York, New York]. And there too there was a parade of extraordinary, creative people. And Dreyfuss took us any place where we could learn about things like human engineering. I brought some drawings that depict the, the whole science of man's relationship to industry, to machines, to chairs, to--I designed automotive interiors and John Deere tractors because of human engineering, which was one of the things that was a field that was just burgeoning. Speaker 1: So you're saying that your office was above Bergoff [sic]. Speaker 2: Bergdorf building. Speaker 1: Bergdorf Goodman. I don't know why I'm having the trouble-- Story_ID: 203058 Speaker 1: Can you describe him [Henry Dreyfuss] and how you know what the size of the office [Henry Dreyfuss Associates] was and how assignments were made, or how you worked in teams and-- Speaker 2: Well I started there [Henry Dreyfuss Associates] as a production assistant, and then I became the production manager. And then I graduated to junior designer, and then I became a senior designer. And it was a grooming that happened in terms as I exhibited a skill, they used it. And one of my skills, the, the thing that was damnable for me for so long, my dyslexia became a real boon to me as a designer because I was able to see things more quickly. I had trained myself to reverse words, letters in order to read. And that enabled me to have a keener sense of images and shapes. And so I became the symbol maven at Dreyfuss. The symbols that you see in shipping, fragile, warning, whatnot. The signs on the bathroom door, male/female and the pay phone, the, the little symbols on Singer sewing machines, the various symbols, that was my domain. And that was something that I was particularly gifted with. And so that's a graphic design element that made me unique there and made me valuable. And consequently, I wound up designing the typeface for an earlier ABM [anti-ballistic missile] missile, CRT [cathode ray tube] tube it was called in those days, but a pilot in a, in a, in a plane or controlling a missile, had to be able to read information, readouts, instantly. And so my gift at being able to reverse letters made me particularly skilled at identifying typefaces and creating typefaces that were absolutely clear. Know--without any doubts about what the message might be. I know this gets to be hairy, but you know you never know how you're blessed in ways that one would not see it as a blessing. But my dyslexia got me into NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and made me particularly valuable to clients like John Deere [Deere & Company] tractor at Dreyfuss because tractor cabs are sometimes swinging around backwards. And so the, the farmer, the person driving the tractor has to be able to read upside down. And that's where my symbols and typeface became very important. Fluke; it's flukey. Speaker 1: No, that's fascinating. Okay, there. Story_ID: 203059 Speaker 1: What period of time are you working for [Henry] Dreyfuss? I mean what-- Speaker 2: The '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Sixties [1960s], so are you talking about--just because--no, I have you working for him. Now tell me if this is--this is not right. I have you working for him possibly from 1974 to 1984. Does that--or is that--cause it says ten years as an industrial designer for Henry Dreyfuss Associates and Goretz Industrial [Design, Inc., New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Goretz, yeah. That's true because after--yeah. That document is truer than my memory because I left Dreyfuss to marry. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got married. So that was 1969, and-- Speaker 1: But this says '74 [1974] to '84 [1984]. See I was thinking--no but it could be all wrong cause there's a lot of question marks about dates on here. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay but, but let me ask--well let me ask you this. Do you remember during that time period, what, what projects are Dreyfuss--what projects are coming in? What are the main clients? Because you're mentioning a whole sort of slew of things that go from--you even go to International Harvester [Company; Navistar International Corporation] you mentioned I think? Speaker 2: American Machine and Foundry. Speaker 1: American Machine. Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, snowmobile, yeah. Speaker 1: So you mentioned--so what kinds--what is the staple of clients and-- Speaker 2: Creme de la creme. It, it really--I mean pro--I was a protege of Dr. [Edwin H.] Land, the Polaroid Land Camera, yeah. Speaker 1: Well when did you become a protege of his? Was that while you were at-- Speaker 2: While I was at, at Dreyfuss. And the, the thing--I mean those are the kinds of projects that came through. The first [Boeing] 747 interior I did. I brought some drawings. But Dr. Land was unique. And he wanted me as his protege because one of the challenges he was having was how does one with a camera, an industrial camera let's say, photograph white people who are as white as a sheet and black people who are as black as midnight, without retooling and having some exotic kind of film. So that dilemma was something that he wanted to work on and understand better. And I was the only black one there. But it was something that you know resonated with me because I was taken with the fact that he wanted to get it right, you know. He didn't want black people to just disappear and white people to, you know, just, yeah, not be discernible. So that nuance was what was so intriguing. And so I had the benefit of working at his side as he was developing things that were--like he believed nobody should paint their house, you know the inside. That one's walls should be images of--projected on the walls and then you could change the image as you change your mood. And this was exciting, this was like Disney World, you know for me. And he was going to have projected images on fabric that could be fixed so that you wouldn't have looms anymore. You wouldn't have to dye anything. It would all be photographic. So he was a visionary. Young, charming, brilliant, brilliant guy. Story_ID: 203060 Speaker 1: Now, you know 'cause I've only--I was just thinking that I've only done one other industrial designer, and that was early in the project. And it's a man named [HistoryMaker] Charles [A.] Harrison. I don't know if you know of him, but he worked on the Viewmaster at Sears [Roebuck, and Co.], you know view. Speaker 2: Yeah you click, yeah. Speaker 1: And around that time I had gone to--I think something at DuSable [Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] where there were black industrial designers. But you know at that point in time I haven't done, you know, your--isn't more of a male focused (unclear)? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Yeah, there are very few, well back then very few. There were no black people. But very few females. But I, I think that's probably not true today. Because quite frankly, there is no longer an industrial design industry, so to speak. They don't even teach it under that name anymore. Speaker 1: So what, what has it morphed into then? Speaker 2: Well manufacturers did--didn't see the need to go outside to hire an industrial design firm to design their product. They'd much rather have somebody who was in charge of designing handles, and somebody else in charge of handling, designing doors and yet another person, you know. So it was an assembly of pieces rather than design of a whole product. Today the car even, you know there is not, as it once was with Raymond Loewy [and Associates, New York, New York] and [Henry] Dreyfuss [Associates], where they designed the whole car. Today it's a very segmented, segmented specialty, you know. Oh, Harry does great doors and someone else does great, you know, dashboards. And so the, the committee comes together. And sometimes the product looks like it was done by a patchwork of people as opposed to the art of the, of the product that once was. Speaker 1: So if you would look at the industrial design field, then what are its, what are its main years, then? If you, if you would like from what, from--I mean it def--it started in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: Before that. I mean the locomotive--right after the war. The automobile has always been the pinnacle of product design, industrial design. So after the war the design of the station wagon and the Cadillac and you know, those vehicles that were like a mobile home. You know people invested and lived in their car, lived for their car. And then with those soldiers returning from the war, convenience became a luxury that everybody wanted. And so industrial design really had some interesting and intricate challenges to, to respond to. You know the wife wanted to have her dream kitchen and Daddy wanted to have, you know the car and Junior, you know his bicycle. And so these things then became status symbols that were really heavily invested in. And now it's not. You know it's not approached that way any, any longer. But the heyday I think was right after the war. Speaker 1: You mean World War II [WWWII]. Speaker 2: Two, yeah. Speaker 1: To what period of time cause (unclear) ergonomic design and things like, you know today. Speaker 2: That's a, that's a--well that may be a new and growing interest. I mean sustainable design. I know in Europe one year I was in Germany and sustainable design was what everyone was looking for. You know the reuse, the repurposing of materials. And ecology was not a concern. It was more you know how to--the space program came with a plethora of new products, new materials unlike anything anybody had ever seen, fiberglass, fiber optics, you know. There was you know a field day of toys to play with, work with. Speaker 1: So I--in terms--so you worked for ten years there. Speaker 2: Just about, yeah. Speaker 1: About that-- Story_ID: 203061 Speaker 1: --But you say you got married? Speaker 2: I got married and then was taken out of the mix for-- Speaker 1: --During that time. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: So who is helping with the kids [Burrell's half siblings] this whole time? With the-- Speaker 2: Well my stepfather remarried. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: He remarried, yeah. Speaker 1: And he remarried after what period of time? Speaker 2: Probably four years after my mother's [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] demise. Speaker 1: So that may have been around the time that you actually go back to school [New York University, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Yes it was. When he remarried the next day, you know, I was packing and, and out of there. Yeah, to resume my life. And it was, it was timely, it was, yeah something that--I was lucky that she came along and was willing to take that burden you know, and she was a good friend of my mother's. So--and she stayed, you know the whole time. Speaker 1: Right, even though your father [Jerome Tubman Ward] really was still in love with your mother, right? Your stepfather--oh no, that's a different, I'm getting it confused. That's right. Okay that's right. Speaker 2: Yeah, two families. Speaker 1: Two different families. Speaker 2: Yeah, my dad. Speaker 1: That's right, okay. That's right, okay. Story_ID: 203062 Speaker 1: So now I want to ask this question because the intersection between advertising and industrial design, was that, was there--because at this point in time, the advertising industry is burgeoning. Now were you doing--was the work you're doing more, yeah I mean did you not touch the advertising? Speaker 2: Yeah, advertising was not where I was drawn. Speaker 1: But no, but I'm saying not that you were drawn there, but did industrial design--was industrial design being done with the business and then the business would then turn it over to the--you know they would have another relationship with the advertising industry. Speaker 2: Yeah, very separate, yea. Speaker 1: So there was no intersection between those, those industries at all. Speaker 2: No, not all, no, no. Now [HistoryMaker Thomas J.] Tom [Burrell] might have another view of it or experience with it, but it was people worked in their troughs. You know in their cells. And there wasn't cross-pollination there. Speaker 1: Well the other question I have is how about engineers? In, in [Henry] Dreyfuss [Associates] were there people with engineering backgrounds? Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. And--but human engineering you know, in terms of what is the relationship of a tall person to a tractor as opposed to a slight person, you know and so things would have to be engineered. One of the, the most stark experiences for me with the engineer was the design of the first snowmobile. AMF, American Machine and Foundry was the manufacturer. And this notion of snowmobile was fantastic. That mom and dad and Dick and Jane would get on their snowmobile and go for an afternoon slide down the mountain. But traditionally, the way automotive design happened, you go from sketch, to paper, from you know, paper sketch to paper prototype and then clay and then fiberglass, and then you motorize it. You know you put in working parts. Well in the rush to get this product to market in time for the Christmas, so that mom and dad could, you know have this as a Christmas gift under the tree so to speak, they skipped a lot of the checkpoints that would say okay does this profile provide the kind of safety? You know is it too aerodynamic? Will it fly down the mountain? Will it, you know, sustain turns and whatnot? A lot of that got you know, skipped over. And so we went almost from clay to production and not the prototype testing that happens with engineers. And as a consequence, there were, I won't say casualties, but there were injuries and unnecessary risk taking that happened. And what I gleaned from all of that is that your design could be the most stunning and, and exciting that one could hope for. But it's the marketing people who decide what goes to market. Decide whether or not your design, you know, is good enough or safe enough or whatnot. So in the hands of marketing people, you know this shortcut was taken. And, and that still happens today. You know marketing people decide the--you don't have to test it, you don't have to prove anything out. But anyway, it let me know that marketing was a place to look if I wanted to make an impact. I needed to understand what drives marketing. Story_ID: 203063 Speaker 1: And so I went back to Columbia University [New York, New York] intending to get into marketing as the next notch on my career ladder. But I got involved with writing because I felt I could write about it and I could in so many ways begin to speak directly with consumers about things that they needed to be cautious of, things that they needed to know about these machines and this environment in which they're being placed, you know without any thought about what the impact will be. And in so doing, I was coming out of a marriage where to, to a position where HMOs [health maintenance organization] were just on the horizon. And the whole notion of empowering women as healthcare consumers was something that I found intriguing. So I got involved in marketing HMOs and Mayor [Ed] Koch appointed me to do one of the first hospital-based HMOs in New York [New York]. And it turned out to be in the United States. Story_ID: 203064 Speaker 1: But I--just one thing because I saw that you had brought them. You had helped design plastic-- Speaker 2: Hangers, yeah. Speaker 1: --hangers. So can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Well that was a flukey thing. It was--and I don't know--it was between design companies I think. I was doing some work for Goretz Industrial Design [Inc., New York, New York] which was automotive, and I had left [Henry] Dreyfuss [Associates]. And I'm not, I'm, I'm not sure of the dates. But it was a project that I took on because there was a challenge in the garment industry that was brought to me, that the clothes were arriving wrinkled, and that they had to take them out and steam them and whatnot. And so the notion that clothes shouldn't be shipped in plastic bags, but on plastic hangers, captured my imagination because there were plastic hangers in Japan. And very successfully they were shipping children's clothes. These little hangers with all the ridges and whatnot. And that's extruded plastic, disposable hangers. And so I explored the viability of shipping men's shirts, blouses, a host of things, including children's garments, on plastic hangers. And so you know you sell the garment with the hanger in it. The clothes are not wrinkled. The cost effectiveness, the hanger costs as much as the plastic bag after the fabrication and whatnot. And so it was an instant hit. So I designed thirty-two different plastic hangers, starting with men's shirts. And they're still in the stores. Not only still in the stores, they're still in the world. Around--I've traveled around the world and seen my hangers in some place, some little roadside booth or canopied stall in the Caribbean, in Africa, in Israel. Those hangers survived. Well you can't do away with them, they're plastic. So then that wasn't our concern. But the interesting thing there is that I was so enthralled with the fact that I had come up with this solution to wrinkled clothes being no more. And I was--this was an assignment--this was a, you know, I was an employee. And so all of my patents on the hangers I had to sign away for a dollar. And so although I see them around the world and it brings me great joy to know that they've survived, the same designs you know. And we're talking forty years ago, fifty years ago. And they're there as a testimony to that was a good idea. But they're not mine in reality. Speaker 1: In fact that's what was one of the questions that the researchers asked. They were like, "we couldn't find the patents--" Speaker 2: Right "--you know, for the design." Story_ID: 203065 Speaker 1: Why did you leave [Henry] Dreyfuss [Associates]? If you were being groomed, why did you leave? Speaker 2: To get married. Speaker 1: To get married. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so they were disappointed in that way. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah they didn't want me to leave. But I wanted to have a family, you know. I was approaching thirty, I think so then. And my thought was that I had, had this extraordinary experience at Dreyfuss. Worked on these stellar projects, you know. But I knew nothing about you know what it meant to be a wife, a mother. And I wanted to have that experience, and I did. I have a wonderful son [Adam Moore]. You know I now have a good relationship with his father. And so-- Speaker 1: You said your--who was, who was your husband's name at-- Speaker 2: His name is Austin Moore, yeah. Speaker 1: And he was a doctor you said. Speaker 2: Psychiatrist. Speaker 1: A psychiatrist. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, he's the one who had said, encouraged you to get-- Speaker 2: Get to know my father [Jerome Tubman Ward], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay I see, okay, okay. Story_ID: 203066 Speaker 1: Now the other thing I want to know is--and I'm just trying to sort of provide some context for later. But at what point do you meet [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor and I mean-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Is it later or is it-- Speaker 2: It is very late. Susan--I knew Susan as the fashion editor, well she was the secretary to the fashion editor and then became the fashion editor at Essence. Speaker 1: And so and Essence was started in the early '70s [1970s] I thought. Speaker 2: They were having their-- Speaker 1: It started in the early '70s [1970s] I thought. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972] I think, no, no when? Late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Yes and Susan-- Speaker 1: So you met her then at the beginning. Speaker 2: At the very beginning. At the very beginning. And she was extraordinary then. And when she eventually became the face and the voice for Essence, I was deep into a contract with them to market eyewear for African Americans. Speaker 1: I'm telling you my research is all like (unclear). So you were--by this time are you saying by that time you had-- Speaker 2: I had a company. Speaker 1: You were Moore Creative [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: I was Moore Creative. Speaker 1: Okay so in between are the, the hangers-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, and in between is the marriage and the dissolution of the marriage. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so by the time--so okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I started my company and got a divorce same year, 1985. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: That date I know. So yeah, and then therein started my relationship with Essence, which was a wonderful one. I mean the pride that was felt to have a black company like that on the scene was absolutely inspirational. Speaker 1: So but in between is when you said that you started the writing. You know you-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, right. Speaker 1: And that's when you said that you were taking that approach and that's when you were talking about the work that you did. I had interrupted you to talk about the hangers. But you're married when you're doing that. Speaker 2: Yes, to a physician [Austin Moore] who was along with his colleagues, looking at this phenomena called HMOs [health maintenance organization]. And it was clear that that had to be marketed to women. And in order for one to join an HMO, you had to give up your Medicaid status. And so that was something to be negotiated with women who were the, the healthcare consumer for a family. So one had to talk to and generally it's urban women, you know, inner city residents, to give up their Medicaid card in order to join this thing called an HMO. And so the skill to be able to speak with you know, some sincerity and speak in a, in a cultural script about the realities of, of healthcare and, and what it meant. Available and reasonable healthcare was a battle that was just beginning to be fought. But it was talking to women and through the, the prism of respecting their role as the consumer, you know the decision maker for the healthcare, for the health of the family and therefore the health of the community. It was clear to me that women had more say so than we were giving them credit for. And my feminism came at a, at a good time to allow me to take that on. So Essence Eyewear was a situation where eyeglasses were not being designed for our physiognomy. You've seen people with lines on their temples or pinched nose because we're broader. You know our noses are broader, our craniums are larger. But there were no products on the market. There were no glasses on the market for black people. And so the--at the onset, it was about satisfying a consumer need that wasn't being addressed. Story_ID: 203067 Speaker 1: Talent was plentiful. Risk-taking was the name of the game. Speaker 2: And money was flowing. Speaker 1: Money was flowing, yeah, opportunities. Speaker 2: Especially in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: Money was flowing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So even though the '80s [1980s] had high inflation 'cause with the [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan years. But I mean anyway there was a lot of activity. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So you come into Essence during this time and you form your own firm [Moore Creative, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, and so how are you billing your firm? You're, you're--are you a one, a one person operation really sort of? Speaker 1: Well sole proprietorship, yeah. I had a staff but it was a sole proprietorship. And based on relationships, you know I, I didn't have a business card for five years because I had--because of my experience with HMOs [health maintenance organization], I had hospitals saying do our marketing and you know, we will assure that we'll be a client, and so they were. Bronx-Lebanon Hospital [Center, New York, New York] was my client for over twenty years. Speaker 2: And did you--well I have also, let's see. It was New York Health and Hospitals Corporation [NYC Health + Hospitals]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And then Bronx-Lebanon, I see that also. But you also had other, a lot of other clients and you had the Association of Junior Leagues [International, Inc. (AJLI)], you had the National Urban League, you had Beekman [Downtown] Hospital [New York Presbyterian/Lower-Manhattan Hospital, New York, New York], Anheuser Busch, (unclear) Apollo Theater [New York, New York], the Royal Caribbean [Cruises, Ltd.] and Club Med. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 203068 Speaker 1: So you're enjoying this period of time, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Are you approaching things differently than others because of your industrial design background or you think it's just-- Speaker 2: I don't know that is so much my industrial design background. But rather what I learned from my mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] about being a part of something, being an organizational person, being connected. If not to the church, then to some initiative that had a greater good. And so often I would start off as a volunteer sitting in on something and then they would become a client. And, and that was, that was consistently based on relationships. But then, I mean the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] was--I don't know how I came to be there at the Apollo, but an opportunity to save the theater really, was what it--that was one of the situations. They said be on the committee, save the theater, you know and I came with marketing ideas and initiatives like Buy a Seat, you know. It turned into a substantial and ongoing relation--client relationship. Speaker 1: Well I mean talk about you know who owns the theater at that point and you know the Suttons and-- Speaker 2: You mean when it burned down and the records disappear. Let's see-- Speaker 1: I mean this is an important time period, really, in terms of New York [New York] history and New York black history and all that's gone through. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Cause there's not certain--you know you don't-- Speaker 2: No, Percy [Sutton] had-- Speaker 1: I see [HistoryMaker Thomas J.] Tom [Burrell] over there sort of smiling. Speaker 2: Yeah, well it, it was a, a league of gentlemen who really operated the theater. And I think we took for granted that the Apollo would always be there. And somehow or other it would always be taken care of. But in the attempts to restore it, you know repair it sometimes, to save it. Speaker 1: Well this was a big dream, though, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Percy Sutton has a huge dream. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: He wants to--not only save it, bring it back to its glory days, but it's also the community. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm trying to-- Speaker 2: Right, right. And at the same moment I think he was investing in radio stations and so his loyalties were often, you know, and his aspirations, politically--so it, it was sometimes nobody would say the emperor has no clothes and other times we all rallied around this shared dream of the heyday of the Apollo, and therefore the black culture uptown coming back. But any number of things, you know, aborted that, that dream, drugs not being the least of them. Played havoc throughout the creative community. But the Apollo I think still has a good shot at redefining itself, reimagining what does, what does it mean. [HistoryMaker] Jonelle Procope is extraordinary in what she's been doing for the theater. But I assumed when, when I took it on, that all of these performers who had danced and sung on the stage, would come to the rescue and make sure that this theater that was a birthplace for so much talent, you know, would be there for the theater. And that wasn't the case. Everybody thought somebody else was going to do it. So they struggle, they struggle on even today, yeah. Story_ID: 203069 Speaker 1: I want to take you back though, to the '80s [1980s] in New York [New York]. And the people that you're, you know associating with, the projects you're working on. If you can just share some memories of some of the things that you did when you think about that period of time, about the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Well yeah, I think I was really taken with black theater and the performing arts. The Black Theater Alliance, Garland [Lee] Thompson [Sr.] and [HistoryMaker] Woodie King [Jr.] and--I mean a real host of people who really were the cornerstone of black creativity. I mean the music that was happening on the Lower East Side [New York, New York] as well as Harlem [New York, New York], made for a rich stew of creativity that people, you know, were, were being nourished on. And you're asking me what were some of the product, projects-- Speaker 1: Well I'm just saying when you think about that time period, what things sort of stand out in terms of projects, because-- Speaker 2: For me. Speaker 1: Yeah, for you. Speaker 2: Well one of the ones that was intriguing and rewarding was one of the HMOs [health maintenance organization], Beekman Downtown Hospital [later, New York Presbyterian/Lower-Manhattan Hospital, New York, New York]. It's the first time in life I'll ever have the opportunity to rename, name a hospital, and I named it New York Downtown Hospital. This is more creative. And it was a failing, quickly failing Chinese hospital. It was down in Chinatown [New York, New York] and not at all distinguished among you know, any of the hospitals on Hospital Row that led uptown. So when I took it on, I looked at the fact that it was serving Chinese people, but it was facing--it was right next door to Wall Street. So the first thing I did was change the front door. I put the front door on Wall Street and used the door that faced Chinatown for pediatrics and women's services that you know had, had no cache in the, in the world of hospitals. But in putting the front door, changing the side of the front door over onto Wall Street, I also looked around--Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] used to say "What's in your hands?" They had a closet full of defibrillators and nobody was using them, nobody knew they, they even existed. And so I created this program called Heart Saver, where when the stock market--, and tracked the stock market--when the stock market dropped, we would rush out with defibrillators with smocks that said New York Downtown Hospital. And I had renamed it that because Beekman didn't mean anything. But New York Downtown meant Wall Street. And so we would have the defibrillators there, very visible as people passed or came into the hospital. And it was a bit of a stunt, but when someone during a period when the market was really fluctuating up and down, if someone even looked as if they were faint, we would holler clear and jumpstart them and they'd come back to work the next day and they would hail you know, New York Downtown Hospital saved my life. And we got good press and we were able to--and you'll see in some of the pictures, really wed the hospital to Wall Street. And it became Wall Street's hospital. And that was fun. Working with the Chinese community and all of the cultural nuances they had, was wonderful. You know having things in Chinese when I can't speak nor read Chinese, but graphically making sure that it carried the same weight as English literature and signage and all that one has to attend to for a hospital. That was big fun. Speaker 1: So how long did that project last then? Speaker 2: About two, maybe three years. Speaker 1: Yes, okay and you were able to change it all. Now were you working--when projects like that happen, are you working with the-- Speaker 2: Turnaround team. I worked with--they call in like Ghostbusters. Okay, you got to turn this hospital around financially first there has to be an infrastructure to hang all this stuff on. And so the turnaround team hired me to come in with a marketing concept and a look that would send the message that this is a new place. Story_ID: 203070 Speaker 1: What about your work in the travel arena? You know and how that sort of thing came, the hospitality and (unclear)-- Speaker 2: That's another one of those flukes that just took on a life of its own. I had a friend who lived in Indiana, what is the college town? Bloomington [Indiana]. Speaker 1: Bloomington. Speaker 2: Right, and they wanted me to come visit and spend my vacation in Bloomington. So I said well let's meet halfway. How about we, you know, meet on a cruise? Do, do a cruise together. And so that was agreed upon. And so in the interim they told I think five or ten people, I told, you know, a number of people and the first cruise was twenty-five. And then we had such a good time, we did it again and again and again. Twenty years later, NPN [National Professionals Network] has a history of thousands of people, many of whom are celebrities who have traveled the world together and made for a kind of experience, again for middle class blacks who so often, you know, don't get factored into some of the things that are so important in our community. And like [HistoryMaker Bishop] T.D. Jakes one year said to me, he came with his whole family and said this is one of these rare occasions where our kids can travel and be with other children of means. For black kids, that's hard to come by, you know so often. And so there were babies born, marriages, whole families had grown up over the twenty years. Speaker 1: But you should talk about what NPN stands for. Okay. I was more creative, but talk about--I mean how did NPN--it's--what, tell us what it stands for-(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The National Professionals Network. Story_ID: 203071 Speaker 1: --And how did it [National Professionals Network, Inc. (NPN)] come even into being? Because I was taking--you know when I mentioned the hospitality, I was talking about Moore Creative [New York, New York], but Moore Creative came-- Speaker 2: Well Moore Creative created NPN, quite frankly. I had a partner, William Tedford who still to this day you know, captains the, the cruises. I don't know what the numbers are, but at one point there were on any given cruise, a thousand people. And so we had conferences during the day and at night jazz and music. Pretty much the way the Essence--and [HistoryMaker] Susan [Taylor] was one of those earlier people who came on the cruise, she and [HistoryMaker] Khephra [Burns]. So it was by necessity that we had to formalize it because it grew so quickly. There was such excitement about coming together to have serious conversations and issues dealt with during the day. And then at night it was a showcase for new talent. So it, it was big fun. Lot of work. People travel with a lot of baggage, not all of them with handles. But-- Speaker 1: Well I was on one of--two of your cruises. Speaker 2: And I came across your picture the other day. I was--as I was looking for pictures. I said there's Julieanna [Richardson]. Speaker 1: I mean I had--it was really, you know the thing is is that--in fact you know I think, I think--I'm wondering if that's where I met Mr. [HistoryMaker Earl G.] Graves [Sr.], actually. Speaker 2: Earl was there, yeah he came. Speaker 1: I was on the cruise with--where he was there and Patti LaBelle I think the first--cause she'd gone and off. But-- Speaker 2: She went shopping, took the crew with her. Speaker 1: I think the--when I found--I mean what, what struck a chord and still strikes a chord today, really, is the chance to be around other black people, professionals. And then it had the, you know the seminars were greats and the talent was great and I mean I, I think--cause I'm trying to think. You had a lot of people on that cruise. Speaker 2: A lot of people. Speaker 1: A lot of people on that cruise. Speaker 2: You know what's interesting? My, my graduate thesis at Columbus, at Columbia [University, New York, New York], was called 'The Black Star Line.' And it was a docu-fiction on [Marcus] Garvey and his Black Star Line. Now this is when I'm in grad school. Twenty or more years later, here I find myself creating a black star line where there's first class, mid-ship and steerage. You know and all of the stories that happen in each of the cabins. That's what my thesis was, the notion that we're all in the same boat, but we separate ourselves into these artificial classes. Whereas it's taken on water because some vandals in the basement have poked a hole in the ship. And we're trying to get somewhere and can't understand why we're not. And I had the opportunity to live out the reality of my work, you know both in actually creating this cruise, and in seeing the relevance even today to the notion that we're all in the same boat. Speaker 1: Well that and I also think the notion and you know the, the entities like you and Essence and Black Enterprise that have done that and others. I mean there's Odyssey. It's a gathering together of black people who are black professionals and the chance to commune. That was--I mean that is really-- Speaker 2: Without the presence of media. Speaker 1: That's right. That is what you allowed and to have discussions. So I mean I--you're--it's your thing. But I'm just trying to express that because I think anyone who was sort of touched by the--a lot of deals happened, a lot of community happened. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And then people were able to see things, but-- Story_ID: 203072 Speaker 1: So, but talk about the--how that--you and [William] Tedford sort of came together. How it even--I mean you say it happened, but you say you just started doing it and then-- Speaker 2: Well it was--it--we were dating and I'll be very candid. The challenge that I have, that a lot of professional women have, is that I was focused on my work, you know I was a workaholic. And someone who as he was, and an internist, he was an intern, couldn't understand why are you working all the time? What is, you know, what is this about? And I said well let's turn this, this vacation, this annual vacation into a business, and you run it. And you'll see what it is I'm doing. That's how it started, as a dare, you know. Bet you can't, you know do this and so--walk and chew gum, you know, do this and, and have a life too. Well he did a sterling job of, of really abandoning his, his medical career for NPN [National Professionals Network, Inc.]. I wasn't prepared to do that in terms of Moore Creative [New York, New York], and delighted that he was willing to take that on and it was populated for the first five years with all of my friends. I called everybody I knew, you know to come and be part of this. And so that, that really launched it in style and with a certain excitement that-- Speaker 1: And then, then you--then the relationship with the Royal Caribbean [Cruises, Ltd.] got-- Speaker 2: Yes, right. Royal Caribbean [Cruises Ltd.] is wonderful. I mean they understood how unique an experience this was that we were providing. And that these were people who had a waiting list for first class. We were the only group that had a waiting list for a ten thousand dollar a week cabin, you know. Everybody else was trying to figure out how many folks can I shove into this little cubbyhole. But the demographics was off the chart. In turn people wanted helicopter--wanted to come in a helicopter and you know I mean it was--you name it and it was absolutely a dreamboat. And--but serious business being, being done. One year we had correctional officers from all the wardens, you know, a cadre of wardens and people in, in that industry. Talking about serious policy making and legislative initiatives. People would use it as their think tank. They would come with ideas and say what do you think about this? Kweisi Mfume would do that every year. This is what the organization you know needs to be doing. What do you think? Let's talk about it. And it would turn into a forum. And repeatedly year after year, it provided a sounding board, a safe one. What was talked about stayed on that boat and it allowed people to have discourse with people they respected. Their role models, their heroes would give them feedback and I think it's something we need to have more of. I'm glad you had the experience. Speaker 1: It--I mean I'm telling you. I think it was early days with The HistoryMakers. I'm serious about that-- Story_ID: 203073 Speaker 1: What were you learning, though? 'Cause that's--you know it's different about running and providing you know, having a creative agency and providing that kind of consultancy as opposed to really event planning. Well I won't call it--it's event planning and--but you were doing programming. You were doing pro--what-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it wasn't events. Well that's where Royal Caribbean [Cruises, Ltd.] came in and they handled all of the registration and you know the things that would bother-- Speaker 1: But you did the programming, though. Speaker 2: Yes, we chose the issues, the speakers, and even the talent. I mean one of the things that my [business] partner [William Tedford] did was audition people all year long. I mean that became something that he really took to heart and enjoyed. And so discovering new talent and allowing seasoned talent to come. I mean the [HistoryMaker Mary Wilson] Mary Wilsons and Patti LaBelle and I mean the list is long in terms of who sailed with us [National Professional Network, Inc. (NPN)]. All because they wanted to play to that audience, you know. So as many politicians came because they were testing the water, so to speak, to see how some notion would be received by a room full of decision makers, you know. Speaker 1: So what you're saying though, is you really provided the--it was a bet and you provided the impetus and all the context really started and then to--Tedford, he really got very involved in it. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And, and became--so what happened to his practice, then? Did he really-- Speaker 2: He never had a practice. I mean-- Speaker 1: He didn't. Speaker 2: No, no. He, I mean he made an early on decision that this was what he wanted to do. And so he had a job at a local hospital, I can't remember the name of the town. But this was his calling, this was his life's work. And his notion of it was that it would be a musical cruise. I mean he was auditioning. And so he wanted the music and didn't necessarily see the value in the conference. And I was quite the opposite; I felt the conversation was key and anybody's music could be playing at night. And so that was a constant you know, tug of war there. But I think they both prevailed, you know. But the conversations and the conferences is the take-away that people really found value in and so you know I, I'm pleased at what NPN turned out to be. And a model for many others after us, we were the first. And after that, many more churches and families and whatnot, people attempted--Tom Joyner, we introduced Tom Joyner to Royal Caribbean and [HistoryMaker Bishop] T.D. Jakes. I mean a lot of people tried to do a cruise and did not really have the qual--you know the other standard that was important for me was customer service. And so you know attention to those, those fine things that I'm obsessive about anyway, made it a, a really rewarding experience for people who joined us. Speaker 1: So you did that for you said twenty years? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, for twenty, and then did, did--Dr. Tedford, he stayed with it. Speaker 2: Yeah, this is the twenty-third year. It's still going on. Different--no longer with Royal Caribbean and I think a smaller, a far smaller group. But they've gone to Africa and China. So some exciting trips. Speaker 1: Right, because at that point you were doing the Caribbean, but you also did Spain? Speaker 2: Yeah, we did the Mediterranean, we did Europe, yeah, Alaska, yeah. Story_ID: 203074 Speaker 1: So we were talking about the--because at the time that you're awarded this contract, this is right after you know--I mean is it right around the time [Nelson] Mandela comes to New York [New York]? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, yeah, right. [Rudy] Giuliani arranged a reception and he congratulated me and talked about the Sister City contract, how important it was, Johannesburg [South Africa] is called Egoli and the Apple, and so it was Egoli and the Apple, but it was really raising awareness about the products in South Africa that African Americans at least should be aware of and support. And he had the softest hands of anyone I have ever experienced. I had somehow expected Mandela's hand to be rough and you know, strong, but gentle and soft skin. Yeah that was, that was quite startling. Speaker 1: So what was involved with the contract? What were you doing? What kind of work? Speaker 2: Promoting products in Africa. I did not go to South Africa because it didn't last that long. The idea--primarily they wanted to push South African wines, which are excellent. But there were many, many products. And so there--we created this expo at [Jacob K.] Javits [Convention] Center [New York, New York] to showcase all of the many products that South Africa had. And then in Johannesburg [South Africa] there was someone that was doing American products. But I did the promotion of South African products on this side. Speaker 1: No, I was just thinking 'cause [HistoryMaker Ronald T.] Ron Gault now, [HistoryMaker] Charlayne [Hunter-Gault]--you know him-- Speaker 2: Yes, Ron and Charlayne, yeah. Speaker 1: He has a wine company, wine distribution company. Story_ID: 203075 Speaker 1: So let's talk about your work with the Essence Music Festival and then I want to ask about your work with the [New York] Coalition of 100 Black Women. Speaker 2: The music festival was something that was an opportunity to showcase their product line, that's how I got involved. And so we created music, we did videos about the eyewear and lifestyle and a promotional thing. And simply being at the table talking about how do we promote this event, allowed me to have input and to suggest things that I felt were advantageous for the brand, but also an opportunity to do good while doing well in New Orleans [Louisiana] in terms of contributing glasses to people who couldn't afford and do screenings there, and the [Mercedes-Benz] Superdome [New Orleans, Louisiana] for you know, visual screening. Speaker 1: Now at what point are you doing that work in the Essence Music Festival's history? Because Essence Music Festival is--now it's, let's see, how old is it now? Is it twenty? I don't know the year of the festival. But do you remember at what point you're involved with it? What, what lifecycle is it? Do you remember? Cause I don't have, and I don't have a date, date on either. But I do-- Speaker 2: It was the decade of, I'm trying to remember. Speaker 1: But at this point [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor is still-- Speaker 2: Very much so. Speaker 1: She's at Essence. She has a--does she--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And like the cruises, those things blur you know. I mean year after year doing-- Speaker 1: I, I understand. No, I under--I do understand. Speaker 2: And, and it was-- Speaker 1: I do understand that. But you know what? The thing that, that all represents is an expansion of a brand because the media company is becoming--it's a brand on its own and doing lifestyle things that impact people. It's an extension, I'm sorry, it's an extension of the brand. Speaker 2: The TV show ['Essence: The Television Program'], all of that helped propel those other entities. Story_ID: 203076 Speaker 1: So what about your work with The [New York] Coalition of 100 Black Women? 'Cause the--first there was the 100 Black Men [of America, Inc.], right, and then the 100 Black Women come after that? Speaker 2: Yeah, the 100 Black Men were first in existence. And the coalition is I don't know how many years, what year this represents in the, in the history of the organization. But I was president for four years starting with '96 [1996] I believe. And one of the things that came out of it, I mean I was pleased to be--I was taken with [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson] McCabe. Speaker 1: Jewell. Speaker 2: Jewell. Speaker 1: Jewell Jackson McCabe. Speaker 2: Yeah. She was a rousing speaker and you know a strong feminist and seemed to be able to move to action you know, some of the clubby kind of things that were, were being talked about. But for me the, the, the outcome of that experience was the creation of the 21st Century [Women's] Leadership Center, which was a collaboration of 100 Black Women, the 100 Hispanic Women [Inc.] and Asian Women in Business [AWIB]. Because one of the things that irked me was the use of the word minority. You know that we're a minority and you know, and I would say we are not a minority. I mean starting from where? What's your perspective on that? Let's not allow ourselves to be a minority. If in fact there is a shared interest, we're women, we're mothers, we're wives. There are so many things we have in common. Let us pool our resources, our thinking, our will, and go after some of the legislative policies and some of the corporate schemes that has us dividing you know, the divide and conquer rather than collaborating and speaking with one voice. And so that was a wonderful accomplishment I think, to bring together, you know, three organizations, women's organizations that each saw themselves as getting crumbs and being a minority, to speak with one voice. And that was when Hillary Clinton, who was First Lady, came and cut the ribbon. It was on my birthday. She sang me 'Happy Birthday.' But she recognized, the White House [Washington, D.C.] recognized that kind of collaboration really could be a very powerful muscle to move some of the legislative initiatives that just were stalled. Story_ID: 203077 Speaker 1: Those kinds of collaborations have been quite difficult over the years. Speaker 2: Yeah, they are. Speaker 1: And can you talk about--I mean who initiated it? Because there have been a lot of failed attempts. Speaker 2: Yeah, I initiated it because I, when I took over as president [of The New York Coalition of 100 Black Women], I saw a lot of hurt, lot of wounded women who were angry, who were feeling rejected, marginalized and whatnot. And I saw it as a way of healing some of those wounds by empowering them. It can't be a false empowerment, you have to have some substance to it. And the sheer numbers of the three organizations was you know a, a jumping off point to say that you know we're not victims; we're decision makers, we are able to--and so Verizon [Communications] was wonderful. They darn near gave us a building. Let us use Verizon facilities to create this [21st Century Women's] Leadership Center. And it was populated with computers. And women could walk in, it was a walk-in center, and learn technology. Be able to use a computer to find a school, find an apartment, whatever. We had people who were volunteering to teach women of color. But the challenge was in the collaboration. Collaborations are not easy. Speaker 1: Not easy. Now you--who--the person who had succeeded, I mean that had been before you was Robin Bell Stevens, right? Speaker 2: President of the coalition. Speaker 1: Of the coalition, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Now had she tried to reach out to the, the different-- Speaker 2: No, no, not at all. No, we were--and not just Robin's administration, but there had been a tradition of talking to ourselves. Servicing members rather than the community or beyond you know the, the you know, membership that really were not at risk, really, not the needy ones. But it was a club as opposed to an activist organization. And I pushed hard to you know put action into part of the mission. So-- Speaker 1: So who was head of the Asian Women's Association [sic. Asian Women in Business (AWIB)]? Speaker 2: Bonnie Wong. Speaker 1: Bonnie Wong, and then who was--what about the [100 Hispanic Women Inc.]-- Speaker 2: Shirley Rodriguez Remeneski was her name, Shirley. And I mean it was, and I, I have pictures. It was an interesting experience for us all because it became a battle, very gently for over whose culture was the strongest, the oldest, the most preeminent. And so one had to walk, you know, lightly over those hot coals because Asians, the Asian women's organization claimed everybody, everybody who was Asian who wasn't white or black, you know. So all of the Pacific Islanders, all, I mean you name it. So it was kind of cooking the books when it came to deciding you know who would do what. I mean the Asian community had something like forty newspapers. We have the [New York] Amsterdam [News] and I don't know, the Beacon, you know. Speaker 1: Beacon Journal. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. But clearly the, the experience of African American women in this country is unique. And it's not comparable to anything. But to be able to respect it for what it was, is, really took some doing. So the one-upmanship you know, and then the Hispanic me too-ism that they hated, but it was clearly a pattern that was challenging creativity and originality which is something else that people struggled to have. But we, we did well in terms of coming together politically. You know we were pretty much on the, on the same page with those issues that impacted our families, our wages, our health. So those are the frontiers that we were able to have a united front on. But under the surface there were issues that had not been dealt with-- Story_ID: 203078 Speaker 1: Well those, I mean because really those three communities [African American, Hispanic, Asian]--I mean maybe that could happen in New York [New York]. Those communities don't know each other that well too. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And their history. And those communities are--I don't even know how--so how were you working also within the, the whites, the white--the traditional, I'm sorry, the traditional women's movement? Speaker 2: Well, peripherally. I mean [Florynce] Flo Kennedy and Gloria Steinem of course were people that we looked up to and admired and they were the pacemakers for us, but really didn't deal with our issues at all. So one had to be a feminist and a nationalist in a way that didn't alienate, you know the others. But it made for great kind of revelations. You know you got to know what you really believed in and what you stood for, what were you willing to go to, to bat for. Speaker 1: But what other similarities--did you find more similar or dissimilar with those communities? And, and, and then you all got to--it was the World of Women Leaders. Speaker 2: Women Leaders, yeah. Speaker 1: Conference that you had. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah. There were--the overriding being a woman and a professional woman. But that was a thing because there was also the, the difference between professional women and then, and women who are laborers or you know, whatnot. So clearly the differences were plentiful, but we held fast to the fact that we were all women, we were all mothers, we were all wives, sisters in a way that overrode some of those other fractional things that took us, you know, drove us apart. But it didn't survive. After I left, it didn't survive, unfortunately. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: There are a lot of pressures on those groups from even outside. Everybody's crying out for things. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute. Now Reverend [HistoryMaker Reverend] Dr. Suzan Johnson Cook, was she-- Speaker 2: President after me. Speaker 1: She was president after you, okay and now she's ambassador, right? Speaker 2: Yes I hear, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay I see, I see. Story_ID: 203079 Speaker 1: And then came AARP [American Association of Retired Persons]. Speaker 2: Right, okay. Speaker 1: Which is another-- Speaker 2: Yeah, let's talk about that and then I want to--okay well let's talk about that. Speaker 1: One of the things that happened for me personally and professionally, was the wakeup call that 9/11 [September 11, 2001] gave us all. You know I was standing at a window when the plane went over and, and the room--I, I lived on the [Brooklyn Heights] Promenade right across from the World Trade Center. And so the room shook and I was on the phone telling somebody that I was going to be late to a meeting down at [New York] City Hall, and possibly wouldn't make it. And when the plane hit and all of the aftermath was, you know a riveting kind of force that made a lot of us reassess what we were doing. I looked at, you know, who my clients were, what, what, what was I doing. And then my own personal life. And the, the notion of legacy became something that I felt strongly about. That somehow or other life is not promised. And unless we have prepared a legacy, or thought about what our legacy was going to be, we could miss an opportunity to have a sustainable impact on those things that we say we, we treasure. And so I changed the direction of my company [Moore Creative, New York, New York] to be legacy building as opposed to general marketing. I appealed to CEOs [chief executive officer], people who were decision makers, to assess what their legacy was going to be. Story_ID: 203080 Speaker 1: You were just saying that it [September 11, 2001 (9/11)] made you reassess and what your focus was so that-- Speaker 2: Right, right. And legacy building was where I wanted to take it. I was already dealing with CEOs [chief executive officer] and, and people who were ultimate decision makers, or who had inherited companies you know, who were dealing with decision making that possibly could use a, a new direction or a clarification. There was a moment where all of our civil rights organizations we discovered were--had been found the--during the same era and were having the same challenge of mission. Are those missions--still those mission statements, are they still relevant, you know. And so too with a lot of companies that were created for a time that no longer exists. So what would one as a head of one of these corporations, say to their grandchildren about what their legacy is? And it can be, you know a market segment that they you know, were successful in, in winning. So legacy building became something that I took to heart. I still believe that we all have a legacy. If we don't shape it ourselves, somebody else will. So why not make a decision about what kind of legacy you're going to have, that you want to have? And from day one on the job, if it's in the mail room, or if it's in the boardroom, you know it should be purposeful. Your decisions should somehow or other be leading you in the direction of where you say you want your legacy to be. And so that took me to situations where I was talking about legacy and I, I had talked to any number of organizations about their legacy. And I came to the attention of AARP [American Association of Retired Persons], and they asked me to come in and talk to Bill Novelli and I've forgotten the ad agency that he was with. But he was-- Speaker 1: Novelli? Speaker 2: Novelli, yeah, but it's got a multi--yeah. Anyway you know I talked about legacy and he asked me would I be interested in being involved in AARP. And then I met with, and I said yes because I was heading down that road anyway. And I always admired what AARP stood for. They always were as far as I was concerned, on the right side of the issue. And so legacy in terms of members saying okay, you want a legacy. Come, join AARP and we'll help you build your legacy. Essentially was the, the thing that I believed we could do so that it wouldn't just be wearing the t-shirt and showing up at hearings. But really on a personal level, shaping the legacy of people who had to reach that point in life where they looked at it. Story_ID: 203081 Speaker 1: So being president of New York, State of New York for AARP [American Association of Retired Persons] was a blast. It was a wonderful opportunity. Number one, I didn't have to ask or beg for money because AARP really, especially New York, was well endowed and interested in doing some cutting edge research. They took us to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] where the elder lab [MIT AgeLab] that they have there, smart clothes that tell you when it's time to take your medicine and whatnot. This was all exciting and intriguing and very much in keeping with what the path of my life had been in terms of marketing new ideas and new ways. So AARP is an extraordinary organization and I don't, I don't think people realize that it is the largest African American organization. There are more African Americans who have membership in AARP than any other organization, more than NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the Urban League, the fraternities, it's unprecedented. But it's not something that's talked about, but I'm talking about it now because I think it's important for AARP members of color to recognize that there is an opportunity to really address some of those hard conversations that most organizations don't want to have. And AARP may not want to either, but the numbers there, you know the fact that they count should they choose to. But there are wonderful people at the helm and the membership is very, very clear about what the tasks are, what the issues are and where the organization stands on those issues. And they are the thousand pound gorilla in the room. Because when AARP shows up, they know the muscle that that group brings, you know financially as well as their voice. Speaker 2: It's a very well financed-- Speaker 1: Very well financed and very willing to stand up and speak up when something doesn't go well. Speaker 2: So you did that for how long? Speaker 1: Two terms, I think I was--four years, four years, yeah. Speaker 2: So what, what, what is the large--so you're saying New York State is the largest of the--is New York State one--you said it was, it was one of the better-- Speaker 1: Well endowed. Speaker 2: Well endowed. Speaker 1: And certainly cutting edge in what they do, vocal. I don't know about the numbers anymore. There were two million when I was president. So that was a lot of people to get to know and visit and you know going from city to city throughout the state. It was informing and it was inspiring to see what--how elderly gets interpreted in different towns. Story_ID: 203082 Speaker 1: After that, how soon after that, 'cause you married [HistoryMaker Thomas J.] Tom [Burrell] two years, well no-- Speaker 2: We've been married going--this will be our seventh year, yeah. Speaker 1: So almost--so 2008 I think you marry, right? Yes I think so. Or at least I have it that you married-- Speaker 2: 2008, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Seems like only yesterday. Speaker 1: Big smile, okay. Well how did you meet? Speaker 2: We were set up. [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor had been talking to me about Tom. Clearly she hadn't talked to Tom about me, but I pooh-poohed the idea because I said come on, he's not interested in somebody his age for sure. He had to be having his eye on young things. So, but when she invited us both to her house and it wound up being a candle light and caviar rendezvous, just the two of us, it was clear that this was Susan's way of saying I'm making a match, and she did, and she did. It took and it, it--there was an incredible one-ness of mind. I mean I, I think I fell in love with his, his, his brain, his thinking, his--the integrity around what it was he was striving to do and was in fact doing. And it was so in line with what my beliefs were. So we talked about our failing vision, our failing fathers, our--you know, all of the things that made for candor and an opportunity to really see that we were in the presence of somebody very, very special. Story_ID: 203083 Speaker 1: How soon after do you get married, though? It's sort of a--it became a whirlwind-- Speaker 2: Whirlwind, well so much so that my son [Adam Moore] when I told him I was going to marry [HistoryMaker Thomas J.] Tom [Burrell], he said "Mom, why so fast? Is something wrong with him? Does he have some illness?" So Tom eventually told him yes, it's called aging. So yeah we didn't, we didn't hesitate. But I didn't--we didn't rush blindly into it. I think a wonderful thing about falling in love with somebody you know, darn near seventy at that time, was--is that you know, you know it's the same thing that lets you know good decisions, you know at this stage as opposed to when you were scratching your head twenty years ago. So we knew that this was the thing that would ultimately bring us to the place that we sought to, to be at this stage in life. We were, well I had declared myself a joy seeker, and had decided that in every situation I would find the joy and if it wasn't there, I would seek it out and, and live in a joyous way. You know to be joyful and to be grateful and to be purposeful in, in what I was doing. Think about, you know what I'm thinking about. And I was thinking about him all the time, so it was an easy decision for me. And the thing that really won me over is witnessing his relationship to his mother [Evelyn Burrell] who's going to be ninety-nine this week. Yes. But his tender loving attention to his mother and how they laugh together and they talk together and you know that's something that you don't often to get to witness. And so I said this is a good guy here. Speaker 1: How short a period was it? That's what I want to-- Speaker 2: It was short. Speaker 1: Like how short because-- Speaker 2: A year. Speaker 1: A year, that's not too bad, okay that's not so bad. I mean not that it's bad, but I'm just saying--no because it-- Speaker 2: It was a whirl, whirlwind. Speaker 1: It was a whirlwind. Speaker 2: It really was. Given you know I mean I sold my house, I got rid of my business [Moore Creative, New York, New York], I kissed my grandchildren goodbye and off to Chicago [Illinois] I went. Speaker 1: But I mean, but I mean think about that, picking up when you are a tried and true New Yorker. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean that's the only place you had ever lived. Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah, that was hard. But I was really clear that if he lived in Alaska, I mean I would be there because this was the blessing, you know that I had prayed for, waited for, prepared for, most importantly. So that when, you know it happened, I was, I was able to say yes. Speaker 1: That's a tremendous gift in a, in a lot of respects for both of you. Speaker 2: Yeah I think so, I think so. Speaker 1: So talk about this period of your life then. Because Tom actually had, he had--well no how long ago-- Speaker 2: Well he was talking about the book ['Brainwashed: Challenging the Myth of Black Inferiority,' Tom Burrell] at [HistoryMaker] Susan's [Taylor] house that evening, the contents, those issues that he wanted to address. And so when we got married, the book really was the thing, you know. The honeymoon, the, you know the, the day-to-day task was to get words on paper. And he had a lot to say. He had understood a lot and it was, it resonated with me you know, his observations, his aspirations were right on, on point with what I wanted to spend the rest of my life doing. And so that's what we've set about doing and at the same moment, he sings to me every night, and we had a renewal of our vows that he arranged on Amtrak train because when we married, I had pneumonia soon after and couldn't fly. And so we came to Chicago in a train. So he arranged for us to have our vows renewed in an Amtrak station and Amtrak went all out to give us a honeymoon ride. So it has been you know, a, dream come true, quite frankly, to be with someone who is teaching you something new, you know, every day. And, and that's my experience. I mean he's a fount of information and tireless in his determination to make an impact, you know to address some of those things that he sees are so damaging for us as a people, you know both in relationships and how we show up in the world. Story_ID: 203084 Speaker 1: Talk about the book and the work on the book ['Brainwashed: Challenging the Myth of Black Inferiority,' Tom Burrell] because you worked with him [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] on the book. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And the ideas that he had and how they had started percolating. Speaker 2: Well one of the early realizations is that as he talked about and documented some of the things that we habitually do that we flagellate ourselves for, is not something of our doing, but rather something that was set up. You know we were bamboozled, we were brainwashed and still are, we are the victims of things that has people saying well why are there no black men in families? Well Tom points out because it was forbidden because of slavery and all of the Jim Crow and the institutionalization of slavery, that--and racism, that had black men not allowed to be fathers, not permitted. Not by welfare, not by you know the overseer on the plantation, to be a father. So it's not at all surprising that that is something that even today is reflected in attitudes about is this child really mine? Will I be able tomorrow to have any impact? And for relationships that's, that's still a challenge, you know, and some of the heartache that I saw in the [The New York] Coalition [of 100 Black Women] can be traced back to you know, the burden that women feel they bear because their men have been neutered in many instances in a place where you know, size matters, or wealth matters, or title matters. And we've been stripped of all of that. And so it's, it's, it's been a journey that continues to teach me things about who I am, where I came from, why I feel as I do, you know, what are the issues that I am still struggling with. And unless it's resolved, my grandchildren will--so the Resolution Project came out of that-- Story_ID: 203085 Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So talk about the Resolution Project. Speaker 1: Well the Resolution Project is something where we have identified the fact that the media is the vehicle that continues to deliver these negative images and messages that keep us from fulfilling, you know what any other American comes by naturally. And so the project had its beginnings there with any number of lectures that [HistoryMaker Thomas J.] Tom [Burrell] gave, workshops, conversations. But we took it eventually to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and endowed a program where there are I think four students, five students who had researched goals in terms of identifying the impact of media more so than moms, ministers, mentors. None of that is as powerful and as influential as media. And understanding that has us now looking at how can we help people decode the messages that come at them nonstop through the media, you know with little pings Tom calls them, that assault and bombard our kids, our parents, ourselves on a daily basis. And so much so that now we are not just the target, but we are the deliverer of those messages, those derogatory things that we say to each other about each other, you know makes us an agent of a industry that does not wish us well. And to know that and to be on guard, and to be able to teach our children how to look at media. Not to turn it off, but to be alert and aware of what they're being sold. What's being said about them. That's a yeoman's task, and that's the task that Tom has taken on. And he lectures about it and he continues to write about it and I think 'Brainwashed: Challenging the Myth of Black Inferiority' [Tom Burrell] will be a text that's evergreen. It will be read by our children, our grandchildren and pointed to as a manual, so to speak, on how to overcome some of that stuff. How to deal with it. How to you know, be what the promise, you know, initially was in terms of America of being equal. All men are created equal, that, that was one of the falsehoods that we've built so much and hung so much on. So it is an ongoing work. And it is rewarding when we have situations like Tom and I got on a bus and the driver reached under his seat and pulled out a copy of 'Brainwashed' with post-its lining all around where he is reading. He said, "You're brainwashed." And he's referring to the book that he carries with him daily and is referring back to. And I can't tell you how many times that happened. People use it as a manual. What do I say if? How do I feel about this? You know what can we do about that? It is something that we continue to revisit and, and look at ways we can somehow or other make a dent, wake up you know, some people. Perhaps they're sleeping through, you know some of the assaults. You know to listen to the words and the lyrics. It's not about the beat, it is about the lyrics, you know. And to say it, to sing it, to dance to it, to teach it, you know, is not something that is going to get us, you know, out of this, this rut that we're in. This, this trap that we're in. Speaker 2: So that's pretty marvelous to find love and renewed interest. Speaker 1: Yeah, isn't that incredible? Speaker 2: You know, and a community that both of you have been very much a part of. Story_ID: 203086 Speaker 1: Where would you say you're in your, in this life? 'Cause it doesn't feel like the sunset years at all. Speaker 2: No. Well, we [Burrell and her husband, HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] don't know how to act our age, number one. We both go to the gym on a regular basis and eat very prudently and, and very aware of the gift that we have; each other and a healthy life. And we guard that tenaciously. And we're joy seekers. I mean there is joy in the learning. Tom now is reading masses of books with the technology that allows him to do that despite you know, visual challenges. And so we are enjoying this and, and the belief that there is something that we can do, each of us you know. We don't have to join an organization in order to make a change. You can make it, you know, at the dinner table or you know, in our book clubs or you know in some of the things that we choose to spend our time and our resources on. That we really, if only we could solve the problem of how to come together to collaborate, to trust each other. [HistoryMaker] Susan [Taylor] said something many years ago that still holds true. The most revolutionary thing that black people can do is love each other. And that is still the case, if only. Story_ID: 203087 Speaker 1: What hopes do you have for the black community? And what concerns as you sit here? Speaker 2: I think the concern of a lot of us is what happens to the culture. I mean there is clearly the browning of America that pigment does not necessarily signify one's negritude, you know. It is the keepers of the culture, you know the griots like yourself, who tell the story, you know. Someone has to remind us of who we are and keep a record and hold us accountable and say what you did, that's not who you are. That's not where you came from. That's not authentic. When you hear those lyrics, you know that's what we call our women and our girls you know. That's not how our men dress to you know, be the role model for their son, or talk. So accountability is a challenge. Collaboration is a challenge. But we are also at a place where the, the exception, I've forgotten. [HistoryMaker Thomas J.] Tom [Burrell] has a wonderful way of putting it. The exceptional exception, the person who is multimillion earner, but has a deficit you know in terms of integrity. And we look up to them because somehow or other the wiring has gone haywire and so to be able to distinguish you know, and be able to identify for our children what is the thing that we, we say we are and what we're going to invest in, is a challenge. To not return to artificial rituals and whatnot and names, you know multi-syllabic African sounding names. We have enough names of our ancestors you know who we know, who only a generation or two away, that would, would allow us to embrace who we are. And so I mean there are a lot of challenges, but I, I, I would like to see the optimism that shows itself in some of the new lyrics that I do hear and some of the, the issues that are being talked about. And a, a willingness to be more inclusive is something that we still have to learn, but we see it in our own families that you know we are no longer the little community unto ourselves. But we have to be a part of a global society and prepare our kids to take their rightful place, you know and not just give away our culture and not just bastardize, bastardize our culture, but to really cherish and do what you're doing, you know, in terms of reminding us of who we are. Speaker 1: So you feel hopeful then. Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: You feel hopeful about the future. Speaker 2: And particularly the women. I think black women will be the salvation of America because there is an automatic recognition that black people and particularly the women, are able to see hope when things look hopeless. Are willing to fight when you know a fight is, is called for and I mean there are some young black women today that are extraordinary, absolutely--they're gorgeous, they're healthy, they're wise. And they are fearless, you know. And I think they will carry our families to the next landing. Story_ID: 203088 Speaker 1: --You were talking about legacy and I have two legacy questions. We always end with a legacy question. But I want to ask you the legacy, what you see the legacy of your generation? Speaker 2: Of my generation. Well there are good legacies, and then there are bad. I think one of the things to be cautious about is this sense of entitlement and it goes in hand-in-hand with independence. I'm so pleased that [HistoryMaker] President [Barack] Obama talks about My Brother's Keeper. To return to that kind of thinking, and to say it fearlessly, yes I care about the lesser of us. And grandma [Charlotte Booth] putting a plate on the table and she didn't know who was going to show up to eat out that plate. It's part of that kind of thinking, you know that whatever comes, whoever comes, I'm prepared to be generous of spirit, generous of heart. And that we begin to support our own institutions. That we begin to take the reins in terms of where our leaders are leading us. And, and say the emperor has no clothes when that's the case. And so I think there is room for us to do introspection on a more honest way. One of the things that [HistoryMaker Thomas J.] Tom [Burrell] and I are doing is talking about the fact that we believe that mental health is not, you know, mental, mental illness is not something that comes with the territory or boys will be boys, or after all you know, what can you do about drugs? What can you--but to--and what can you do about depression? And so what we resolve to do is talk about the fact that we both believe in therapy, and we both are involved in therapy. Just like we each have a dentist, we each have a therapist to do touch-ups and to fix things that hurt and to remove things that are rotten and to celebrate the things that are deserving of being honored and lifted up. We keep it too much in the closet. And so to talk about mental health as part of what one should do if they see themselves as a healthy individual, is what we're going to promote and talk about, and hopefully it will be something that will be viral and people will begin to talk about the depression that has caused so much of the violence. The depression that has caused so much of the, the you know, self-degradation if you will. You know, being able to laugh at jokes on us and instead of challenging. Story_ID: 203089 Speaker 1: Okay, I'm going to go back. You didn't quite answer my question about the legacy of your generation. Speaker 2: Of my generation. Well you know many of us-- Speaker 1: 'Cause your generation. I just want to--the generation is you were born, you were born before Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954], but you, you know you come--you yourself come out more of the tradition, but I'm just trying to put that shape--you put it in your own words. But I want you to think about--cause legacy means for when all is said and done, what does something stand for? You know what is-- Speaker 2: What will be sustainable? Speaker 1: Right. So what, what would be the legacy of your generation? Your-- Speaker 2: Well, it, it is hard to get my arms around what your generation is. Because there are segments. Speaker 1: That's true, this segment. Speaker 2: You know there, there is a generation of young black professionals. Speaker 1: I'm talking about your age generation. (Unclear) okay, that's what I'm talking about. Speaker 2: Okay. I, I think-- Speaker 1: You broke a lot of barriers, your generation. Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of firsts and our ability to straddle two worlds in a way that allows for wisdom, and a perspective that our next generation may not have. Because we received our information from many, many channels; the church, the radio, the, the block, the--you know. So our learning happened on many, many levels through--came through many, many doors. My fear is that our children will get their information and their learning from one consolidated, carefully crafted source that will not prepare them to think in a, in a more complex way, you know. There's a spoon fed media that has everybody thinking in a spoon fed fashion. And to kind of have to plant your own and do your own and, and grow your own and be accountable for your own, may not be there as strong for them as it was for us. We believed we could make a difference, and so we did. I'm not sure that this next generation doesn't feel overwhelmed by some of what comes at them and tells them who they are and so they are homogeneous in a way that's almost spooky. But the, the, the differences that we saw and had to learn to live with, made us stronger, made us more tolerant I think in some ways. Certainly made us more interesting. But there's a couch potato mentality that I don't know whether it's the, the technology or the one source media that really blocks out so much of what one needs in order to make wise decisions and caring decisions and you know, informed decisions. So I mean all of the wonderful invention and innovation that came out of our generation has wrought a very conveniently positioned next generation that won't have to stretch, won't have to you know, kind of work too hard at anything in particular. You know but I hope that families don't go out of vogue, and entrepreneurism as we knew it to be. And creativity doesn't have to mean different, you know. But in some way they have a hard road to hoe, is that the expression? Yeah. Story_ID: 203090 Speaker 1: You talked about, you know, your mother [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] never got to see really, as much (unclear) growth when you think about it, right? When she passed, you were-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she was very young and she didn't see it, no, no. Speaker 1: She didn't see anything. Speaker 2: She didn't see anything. I think she prepared me well even in her dying. That made me grow up very quickly and prepared me for some of the hard knocks that came along. But also I always felt she was looking over my shoulder because some of those blessings just showed up and people cared for me, advised me and watched over me in ways that I could not have predicted. I would have hoped for you know, more learned and consistent mentoring, but there are angels watching. I do believe. Speaker 1: But she would have been happy to see your-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so. Speaker 1: You know I mean really think about that. I mean you could have--in, in the--as you were talking about it, you could have been a statistic. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely yeah, yeah. So I think my mother and my grandmother [Charlotte Booth] who told me I was special, you know, told me that there was something special in my--I don't know if she had [HistoryMaker Thomas J.] Tom [Burrell] in mind, but certainly that was one of those blessings that almost is not deserved you know. But he showed up in my life, as did many opportunities, you know to discover how I could contribute, how I could have a meaningful life. And so I'm grateful for that. Story_ID: 203091 Speaker 1: The last question is your legacy. So and this is--I'm asking this question as you were--one of your projects was really to have people look at their legacy. So what do you consider your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, well what I hoped I was preparing for and what I hope will be seen as my legacy, is, has been my ability to touch the lives of other people, especially women. Young women, older women, but to touch the lives of people to help them discover their own legacy, you know their own personal legacy. Because it is giving someone a closer look at what they bring to the world, you know or what in fact is, is valuable and what they do, and what they say. So what I do--with what I did with corporations in terms of asking them what their true legacy will be, is something that I ask young people and people who feel hopeless, you know. Ask them to examine you know, what their legacy is and if they can't, then set about the business of creating. Each day is another chance to build a new legacy. No matter, you know, if you're you know, a captain of industry, you could still have a legacy because doing good while doing well is an honorable legacy to have. And to suggest that that's a doable for each of us is something that I think I'm good at. I'm kind of good at sales. And I can sell people on themselves and what it is--their unique gift is. Sometimes we need help in discerning you know, what's special about me. So I hope that's been my legacy. Speaker 1: So the joy seeker brings the joy to others, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yah. It's like Santa Claus. It's something that you can give and it's, it's wonderful to be able to do that, yeah. Speaker 1: And just one--is there anything else that I haven't covered that you would like to say? Speaker 2: With a dry mouth--I think that what you are doing is important. And the questions that you ask requires that one you know, do a self-assessment. And I think that's a good thing. At every turn we should be encouraging each other to assess, you know, did you really mean that? Or you know what does that mean? And that's on the path of accountability. You know to hold each other accountable for whatever one's legacy you know, might be. But to remind each other of our greater good and who we say we want to be is a very valuable, very valuable thing indeed. Story_ID: 202544 Speaker 1: Okay, '98 [1998], let's see how old was I? I was six-- Speaker 2: So you were fifty-eight. Speaker 1: Fifty-eight? Okay. Speaker 2: I'm telling you, [HistoryMaker] Madeleine [Moore Burrell] you have the fountain of youth. I'm seriously, okay keep going. Speaker 1: Okay. This was a picture taken when I was probably seven, six or seven years old. I had aspirations of being a, a dancer. And it was then used by my son [Adam Moore] as a birthday invitation on my fifty-eighth birthday. Happy birthday Madeleine was then signed by all of the friends who had been gathered to celebrate my birthday. Speaker 2: Is there a date on the back? Speaker 1: Yes, that is--no it isn't. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But this is New York public schools (unclear) creative. Speaker 2: Right. Mentoring was something that I love to do and I did both in public school as this picture shows, and there are some other examples of young girls and children that I mentored. Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's sideways. Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. My grandson Addison [ph.] who is nine tomorrow, and my granddaughter Mia, Mia Moore [ph.]. Isn't that a beautiful name? Is six, and they are the loves of my life. Speaker 1: You know and then Tom's [Burrell's husband, HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] mother [Evelyn Burrell]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you've got a granddaughter and mom-- Speaker 2: Right. Mother's going to be ninety-nine [years old], yeah. This is a picture of, of me with Hillary Clinton on my birthday, and this is the day she sang me 'Happy Birthday' and cut the ribbon for the World--the Women Leader's Center [sic. 21st Century Women's Leadership Center]. Speaker 1: In New York [New York]. Speaker 2: In New York. Speaker 1: When you were president. Speaker 2: When I was president of The [New York] Coalition of 100 Black Women and founder of the 21st Century Women's Leadership Center. These are my two partners, Bonnie Wong, Asian Women in Business [AWIB], Shirley Rodriguez Remeneski, president of the 100 Hispanic Women [Inc.], and at that point I was president of The New York Coalition of 100 Black Women, the founding chapter. Speaker 1: And that is the dais for the World of Women Leaders conference and Hillary had just sung 'Happy Birthday' to me because it was on my birthday. And we had the members of World of Women Leaders organizations there, Bonnie Wong, Shirley Rodriguez Remeneski and I'm not sure who that person is in the middle, a PR [public relations] person. Yeah. Speaker 2: Here is another example of mentoring. This was one of my recent and very successful ones with the Waldorf Astoria [New York]. There were six girls who were given mentoring scholarships to finish their college career, and then jobs at the Waldorf Astoria as concierges. Speaker 1: That's my son and me at his wedding. He married a wonderful girl, I wish I had a picture of her, Tegan [ph.]. And now this is Adam Moore at, on his wedding day with his mom. Speaker 2: This is me and Diana Ross flanking Robin Bell-Sevens when I was president and Diana Ross was a guest to the coalition. Speaker 1: That's a coup back then. Speaker 2: Yeah. This is another group that I mentored. This was an example of the necessity to mentor parents and teachers, as well as the girls. So each girl had a parent and a homeroom teacher. And we were in, I think it was the Adirondacks [Mountains] for the weekend and we had candid conversations and a lot of mentoring and healing went on. Speaker 1: That's my wedding invitation. Actually not invitation, but announcement. Hear Ye, Hear Ye. I married Tom Burrell, so it's both our names and the date and a little card was created. Now what's so great about this photo is that they were taken independently, but it looks like we are together. But we were at the same age and that photo just let's everyone know we were destined to be together. Speaker 2: It does, look. Speaker 1: Well the back shows all of the titles of our favorite love songs. Speaker 2: And this is one of our very few wedding pictures, the day of our marriage. And clearly a banner day for us both and we were married by my son who's an ordained minister, in Tom's daughter's apartment, and that's what that is. Speaker 1: That is an NPN [National Professionals Network, Inc.] group shop. Suppose that had been a selfie. But that is one of the incidents where we had--I don't know how many, but close to one thousand people on that cruise. And it was a stellar roster of stars, [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height is in there and, gosh I can't see that well from here. But anyway it, it is a formidable gathering of leaders. Speaker 2: Yes, that's a two page spread from, I don't know what magazine, but we advertised in Essence, Ebony and Black Enterprise. And this shows "We know a leader when we see one," was how we marketed this extraordinary experience. And these are some of the people, the celebrities. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis, [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And that was my promotional piece, my first promotional piece. Nobody else is more creative is what we said. And that talks about our clients and the like, and that's me. Speaker 1: That's one of those famed human engineering drawing for the various kind of seats that Henry Dreyfuss Associates was working on for tractors, airplanes, automotive, office, you know, you name it. But that was the way we made sure that every dimension was in keeping with the factors, the human factors that came into play. Story_ID: 202545 Speaker 1: It's called the goose neck, that's a skirt hanger. And they're still around, that's what's so great. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is when Tom [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell]--okay Tom this is in Germany, or world's best--no that's New York. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Tom was getting an award and he's holding it. World's Best Work was the name of it. Speaker 1: And this is-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: These are the matchmakers, [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor, [HistoryMaker] Khephra Burns, [HistoryMaker Edward] Ed Lewis, Tom and I at our wedding, the day we were married. Speaker 2: This is a trade ad for Essence Eyewear, Trade magazine, two page spread. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Essence, yeah. In Essence I not only designed the product, the, the actual glasses, but I did the copy and the ads. So "See Yourself in Essence" has the reflection of people-- Speaker 1: Essence did a special issue called Wisdom of the Ages, and I was at age sixty-three, singled out along with Denzel Washington, [HistoryMaker Bishop] T.D. Jakes and Halle Berry. And so it, it said something about each of us and how wisdom over the ages, ages, ages is relevant. Speaker 2: And this is a picture that I love. It's my father [Jerome Tubman Ward] and his wife Judy and me on one of NPN's cruises. Speaker 1: And give your father's name again. Speaker 2: Jerry Ward and Judy Ward. Speaker 1: This looks like a family gathering. Speaker 2: That is indeed a family gathering at my house in Brooklyn [New York, New York]. And it is multi-generational and a wonderful period in our lives as family. We're all there. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my daughter-in-law, which I didn't realize--this is a Christmas card from my family showing my son, his wife Tegan, my son Adam Moore, his wife Tegan Moore. My grandchild Mia Moore and Addison Moore wishing a Merry Christmas to me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: "Tom Burrell Honors His Wife" was what the headline says, and it also shows the picture of a bench, park bench that Tom dedicated to me and the inscription says--what does it say, Honey? "Take a Seat"--Central Park [New York, New York]. I was a member of Central Park Conservancy and so they allowed us to have this wonderful party there. And part of the celebration was the dedication of a bench that says "Have a seat for stand--sit down for a stand up woman." Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: Yeah, "A sit down place for a stand up lady." And that's Central Park garden. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: There are a couple of these. Leona Helmsley thanking me for thanking her in the rebuilding of the black churches in the South that were destroyed. She was on her way to prison, but she stopped to really try to help the--rebuild the churches that were destroyed. Speaker 2: That's part of the redesign of the Chinese hospital [Beekman Downtown Hospital], which I named New York Downtown Hospital [New York Presbyterian/Lower-Manhattan Hospital, New York, New York]. I also designed their ambulances and this is one of them. And I am standing there between Chinatown and Wall Street with this new ambulance that was about to be introduced. Speaker 1: Singer sewing machine, it's one of the products that I designed while at Dreyfuss. And it was a, a beautiful, beautiful design, actually. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: And that's my--yeah. My mother's [Constance Dickerson Ward Mosley (ph.)] wedding picture, and also a notice of her divorce decree with all the incidentals mentioned. But my father was quite handsome at seventeen, no he was nineteen and my mother was seventeen in this picture. And I'm told that I'm in there somewhere too. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Story_ID: 202546 Speaker 1: And this is the award-winning bestseller 'Brainwashed: Challenging the Myth of Black Inferiority' by [HistoryMaker Thomas J.] Tom Burrell, a best seller on Amazon for many, many months. Speaker 2: The "New York Influentials" is an article that the UN [United Nations] magazine [UN Chronicle] did. And I think there were the 100 most influential New Yorkers and I was in that number. And so that's a distinction that was nice to have. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: An article that said a pocketful of hangers--pock, pocket. No, a closet full of success or something. Speaker 1: ((OFF CAMERA VOICE)) Speaker 2: Yes, that's the article. Since we have the hangers, I don't think we need this, do we? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: "Her plastic hangers led to a closet of business success." And that's the [New York] Daily News. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Does it have a year on it? I can't see that. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Okay. These are products that I worked on, the pay phone, phone booths of all sorts, there are three different versions. One can't find phone booths anymore, and handsets is what they were called. These were all designs done at [Henry] Dreyfuss [Associates] and my graphics and sometimes my profiles, are on there. Speaker 1: And those, wait if you turn the page back. These are logos. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: Again, these are Dreyfuss products, Singer sew--sewing machine and all its many iterations and the human engineering that's involved in sewing machine design is on some of the drawings that we, we did. Clay--from clay to prototypes is what this describes. Speaker 2: And that's ABM [anti-ballistic missile] prototype of the, the--where the CRT [cathode ray] tube is, how the, the pilot, the person at the wheel, how close they are to the screen. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: At the computer, yeah so it just show--again, it's human engineering. How close does one need to be in order to correctly see and read information and for a dyslexic to say no, that's not close enough. That was pretty cool. Speaker 1: That's cool, that's cool. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: Okay, 'Industrial Design, Volume 5' by Henry Dreyfuss Associates. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: That's-'Henry Dreyfuss Industrial Design,' "The Man in the Brown Suit" was what he was called. But essentially this is another roster of products that Dreyfuss Associates turned out and here's my John Deere [Deere & Company] tractor. I don't--how do you--how-- Speaker 2: So John Deere in Moline, Illinois was-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Moline, okay, and the evolution of the tractor controls and the rotating cab tractors are a mainstay of most rural communities. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: What were you--what is it--the--he introduced you to the--cause this is almost like the-- Speaker 1: The T-square triangle, yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: Okay. That's just a blueprint for a mold design, you know, for a hanger. The mold maker, yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: That's 1965, so--I'm sorry. This is a mold design of the, the extruded hanger had to have a mold made for it and this is the, the artwork, the schematic that you give the mold designer to make a hanger. And this hanger is called Gooseneck. Speaker 2: There is one I'm hopeful that you can do, and that was the one of the interiors of the plane, the airplane interior. It's tissue and it's frail. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: It's a, a 11/16/1966 [November 16, 1966], and it's a American Airlines' [Boeing] 747, the upper level, Airbus. Speaker 1: And this is 707, a schematic for the lounge area. And it was at Henry Dreyfuss, American Airlines was our client. Speaker 2: So do you know what your position was at this time when you were doing these schematics? Speaker 1: Designer, just, yeah just a designer. It was a very small group, yeah, yeah there were seven of us...