 Story_ID: 16703 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer. And I'd like to have you start off by stating your name and spelling it for us. Speaker 2: Carol Moseley Braun, C-A-R-O-L, M-O-S-E-L-E-Y, B-R-A-U-N. Speaker 1: Okay. And give today's date and your date of birth. Speaker 2: Today is the 17th of March, 19th of March, 2002. And we are in Atlanta, Georgia. 2660 Peach Tree Road, Northwest. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: Sixteen August, 1947 [August 16, 1947]. Speaker 1: Okay. And your profession? Speaker 2: I am a professor; I'm a consultant; I'm a lawyer. Story_ID: 16704 Speaker 1: I'd like to start out by asking you about your mother [Edna Davie Moseley] and her side of the family. I'd like you just to talk about, you know, what you know. Speaker 2: Well, my mother came from a family that very much considered themselves, if you will, Southern gentry, in that they owned property. In fact, we still have 300-something, something of the acres of what was originally, I think a 600-acre farm in Alabama's black belt. You know, that's where the black soil, the soil turns black because of the alluvial deposits. So I used to think it referred to race. It doesn't, it refers to the dirt. In any event they--her great-grandfather--had bought this property at the turn of the last century and the family lived on it for three, two generations before part of the family migrated north. Speaker 1: Do you know anything else of the tradition of the family or the history of the family? Speaker 2: In what regard? Well, you know, they were "colored" in those days. Well, just that they were landowners. They had sharecroppers who worked for them. In fact, I have a picture you've seen and someone once asked me, "Well, are these sharecroppers?" And I kind of laughed because people don't think of black farmers as having sharecroppers, but they did. They had sharecroppers on the land. My great-grandmother exported things worldwide. I gather, she primarily sold nuts and seeds. But they sold them all over. She was an international businesswoman before, I guess, the term was coined. She ran--. She was kind of the matriarch of the family in large part because my great-grandfather died, I gather, relatively young. He must've been in his forties when he died. But in any event, for the rest of her long life, she ran the farm, collected the rents, saw to it that the businesses were maintained and the like. There were a series of lynchings in Union Springs, Alabama, which is where the farm was, in 1911. And frankly, I don't know, it's funny, part of the reason why what you're doing is so important is 'cause a lot of that history people just didn't talk about. Once something that kind of horrific had happened in their lives, they just didn't talk about it again. And I know that there were lynchings in that town and so the family--part of the family--left and went to Chicago [Illinois]. And then they went back, my mother's family, went back to Union Springs, that's how it was my mother was born in Chicago in 1922. But it looks like they went back and forth between Chicago and Union Springs, Alabama, in that period. Her father, my grandfather [Thomas Davie], served in World War I, in France. The Army sent to me recently, fairly recently, a service medal that he was entitled to that had never been given to him while he was alive. And so between him going off to the war, World War I, and then when the Depression hit [1929], I gather, he may have worked, and my aunt told me about him working in Tennessee or somewhere, with the CCC [Civilian Conservation Corps], or whatever it was. Between those things my mother's side of the family had essentially abandoned the land and had abandoned farming and had set out in another direction altogether. She described her early years, other than being on the farm, as being harsh and in the sense that they didn't have a lot of money with my grandfather being gone and then disabled and the like. She lived on 35th and Giles, and I gather that's where she and my father [Joseph John Moseley] met. Story_ID: 16705 Speaker 1: Can you talk about your father's side of the family, what you know about it? Speaker 2: My father's family came from New Orleans, originally. My father [Joseph John Moseley] was born in Chicago, but his ancestors, his family, were from Louisiana. And they were musicians, as far as I can tell. My grandfather [Wilson Moseley] had his brother, he was one of five boys, five children--. And in fact, there's a book on the history of jazz that has a picture of my grand-uncle in it playing with one of the early ragtime bands at the turn of the century in New Orleans. But they were primarily musicians and entrepreneurs. My grandmother [Elizabeth Grant Moseley], my father's mother, had a grocery store that was at 40th and Indiana, I think. It was under near where the el used to go in that area. So she had a grocery store there. So they were entrepreneurs and musicians. And in fact, my father played seven different instruments. The thing that impressed me the most about him for all of his skills that I didn't at the time growing up think was all that extraordinary, I was really impressed by the fact that he was ambidextrous. I thought that was really cool. But he played seven instruments, he spoke several languages, he was just, you know, kind of an all around Renaissance man. And that really related to his marriage to my mother [Edna Davie Moseley] because they grew up in the same neighborhood. This is in the days of segregation in Chicago and so, you know, income differences were not all that much of a barrier to people interacting. And they used to joke that the kids in the neighborhood used to call my father Little Lord Fauntleroy because he was so indulged by his parents and his mother, particularly, when he was growing up. And they did not have the kind of financial difficulties that others had during the Depression. So my father grew up in relative ease in terms of finances and the like. But his parents divorced and so he was raised, I think in kind of a bizarre, not bizarre, but in those days you didn't have broken marriages that much and so the idea that he was shuttled between his mother and his father was really, I think, traumatic for him. Speaker 1: Did your parents ever talk about how they met except they met around 35th and Giles? Did they ever share that with you? Speaker 2: No, they knew each other in school. That's all. Story_ID: 16706 Speaker 1: You're the oldest, right, of four kids? Can you give your siblings' names and their order, you know, their birth order? Speaker 2: Well, I'm the oldest. My next, my brother Meredith John Moseley, is deceased now. My sister, Marsha Marlene Moseley-Kerman is a lawyer in Chicago. I think you've met Marsha. And my younger brother, Joseph John Moseley, is a cop. I should say he's a detective. Speaker 1: Now, what is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: My earliest memory? We lived at--. When I was born my mother [Edna Davie Moseley] and father [Joseph John Moseley] owned a big house at 208 East 41st Street. And it was one of those Victorian-type jobbies that had several levels. And my grandmother lived there for a while; my aunt lived there for a while. And we always had relatives and people living with us and coming in and out of this house. They even had tenants because, again, pre- the dissolution of the black belt in Chicago, housing pressure, housing was very much in short supply in the black community. And so that was the development of what they call the tenements and the kitchenette apartments. So I remember that we had a kitchenette apartment in the basement, what would be the basement of the house that I was born in. And so the people who lived there, I consider to be relatives growing up as well. I reckon that's about the--. I mean the memories of 208, and they're very vague obviously, the memories of those early days are about the most vivid. My grandmother and grandaunt bought one of the mansions at 19th and Prairie that had been, I don't know if it was a Field mansion or whose mansion it was, but they bought one of those places. And I have a recollection of going in there and being terrified because it was so cavernous on the inside and I was afraid to go upstairs because it just seemed like there were all kinds of, you know, the monsters were obviously up there. But I have a recollection of that. I have a recollection of going up--. We used to go up in the summertime to Cassopolis, Michigan, which was kind of a quasi-resort area because, again you recall, the blacks couldn't go to a lot of places. So there were areas where they really would set up their own little summer houses and the like, and so we would go up to Cassopolis. Speaker 1: What other aspects of your family life would you like to describe? You know, whether it's around just home life, just share some, you know, memories. Either home life or school or--. Speaker 2: Well, my mother worked outside of the home and this was, again, still pretty unusual when I was coming up. My mother was a professional woman. She was, in those days they called themselves medical technologists. Yes, medical--. She had a title. But in any event, and that was very--. But it's now developed obviously and it's all mechanized. But she was a medical technician in the days when they actually did experiments, you know, pregnancy tests on rabbits, that sort of thing. So the fact that she worked outside of the home, I think, had a big impact on my growing up. We moved from 208 to 76th and Prairie, into what is known as the, you know, Chicago's "bungalow belt," when I was probably seven or eight. And that was a very, very--. I have very vivid memories of that period because it came as part of the whole integration movement. I mean as people began to move out of the ghetto, out of the black belt into integrated areas, the Chatham Park Manor area where we lived was cutting-edge, if you will. It was also very suburban and, you know, we were joking the other day about how we would sleep out in the backyard in a tent and we'd go chase rabbits down the street and we would climb the mulberry trees and make pies and I mean all kinds of things that kids do or did in those days. Except that it was in the context of a community that was in racial transition. I do have a memory at my first grammar school at [Martha M.] Ruggles [Elementary School], of having to hide under the desk because some toughs were roaming the street and throwing rocks in the windows of the school. Again, the school was just beginning to integrate. But those are my earliest memories. Story_ID: 16707 Speaker 1: Can you describe what sights, smells, and sounds reminded you of your childhood? Speaker 2: I have a sense that the community at 208 [East 41st Street] was very busy, very bustling. There were people all around and all kinds of people. And it was a mix and a range of people in and out of our home that really kind of defined that time in my life. It was just a very active place and, again, I didn't know it was unusual at the time, but we always lived, or at least my experience was, living in an integrated community, in that my parents' friends, particularly with my father [Joseph John Moseley] in music, so white people would come to our house. My mother [Edna Davie Moseley] worked with whites, with everybody from--. We'd have Jews in the house; we'd have Japanese people in the house and this is right at, you know, following on the heels of World War II, so we just had a very eclectic group in my family life. So it was never, even though it was in the black ghetto, our home was very integrated. And so that really kind of, I think, made things different for me later on because the rest of the white community was not as alien to me as it was to many other black people my age because I had come up in, again, in my little world, it had always been really an eclectic mix of people of all races and creeds. My father used to make it a point of taking us around, we were Catholic, this is another segue. We were Catholic because my grandmother [Edna Roberta Davie] on my mother's side, even though they were from Alabama, had converted to Catholicism, I guess back in the teens [1910-1920]. My grandmother [Elizabeth Grant Moseley] on my father's side, was Catholic by birth because they were from Louisiana. So, you know, growing up Catholic, black Catholic, was a different kind of experience than the black Protestant experience. But in my father's case, because they were fallen away Catholic, basically my parents were not real active church-goers, except they wanted to make sure we had a religious education. So my father would take us--take me and my brother [Meredith John Moseley], who's now deceased--to different places of worship after mass every Sunday, went sometimes on Saturday even. So the result was I got a chance to learn about different Protestant ethics, different Protestant churches, and traditions. As well as, you know, everything from--. We went to synagogue as a child. I went to a mosque as a child. We went to the Vivekananda Society as a child, so everything from the Hindu and Muslim to Jewish tradition, the Buddhist tradition. I mean we really kind of made the rounds in religious circles. But again, looking back, given the kind of eclectic background, that was not as unusual as it might have otherwise. It didn't seem unusual to me at the time. Now I look back and I recognize how extraordinary it really was. Speaker 1: And it was extraordinary for the black experience. I mean, what do you think made your parents, as a couple, sort of so forward-thinking? I mean, I'm just saying that it's not the typical story I hear coming out of--. Speaker 2: Well, my father was really more forward-thinking than my mother was. Although, in an interesting kind of way, her relatives were more forward; she was the more conservative of her family. So my mother and my grandmother stood out as the conservative elements in her family. My mother's sister and her brother were forward thinking, if you will. I mean my uncle was a jazz musician and so I grew up, this is going to sound like I'm bragging, but this is the truth, I grew up knowing John Coltrane and [Thelonious] Monk and Gene Ammons was his best friend. So that whole group of jazz musicians at that time, related to my mother's side of the family, and they were people with whom I was familiar, maybe just because they were around. In terms of my father, he was an only--. Well, he wasn't really, he had a stepbrother who was being raised by, and he's now deceased, but my uncle Burton was raised by his mother. So my father and his stepbrother didn't grow up together. But his family, again, were musicians, were part of the whole arts, very, very heavy in the arts. So my father patronized art shows and was, you know, very much committed to that whole intellectual tradition and considered himself, you know, a Renaissance man. I mean that was more how he saw himself than anything else. He was never as prominent as I think he wanted to be in his life. I mean, I think if anything, he may have been a little frustrated, a lot frustrated by some of the failings and failures in his own life. But he was intellectually very much an inquirer and so as a result, again, I had exposure to the labor movement early on. I mean, I remember going on labor pickets when they were picketing the streetcar worker issues. And that sounds like it's before my time, I mean, I was very, very small, but I remember union organizing meetings. I remember going to early, what would now be called civil rights meetings. I met Anna Langford, whose name is familiar to you; she was the first black woman elected alderman in the city of Chicago. I couldn't have been more than ten or eleven years old when he took me to Anna Langford's office because he wanted me to meet her. There was, what was the name of the woman, the judge? What's the name of that--? How quickly they forget! That's why what you're doing is important. There was a black woman, a judge [Edith Spurlock Sampson], who was also very prominent and my father introduced me to her. So again, in my life, women didn't stay at home. Women went to work, which is what my mother did. They were lawyers, they were alderman, they were in the arts, they sang and they, you know, they did all of those things. Speaker 1: Do you know how your father had picked up the languages that he spoke? Speaker 2: (Shakes her head.) Speaker 1: Okay. The other thing, you were saying that when you moved up to the Chatham area, that that was a whole different experience, and I'm wondering why? Was it just because it was sort of suburban-rural? You know, it was not so much urban and you know--? Speaker 2: It was very suburban compared to where I had lived. And instead of people on the streets and in the alleys and a lot of activity, there was nobody on the streets, except the kids who were playing and most often than not we'd be on our bicycles in each other's yards, or you know, traveling around or whatever. So it was just a very different atmosphere. Story_ID: 16708 Speaker 1: What were you like, Carol, as a young person? Were you quiet? Were you introspective? Were you fun loving? I mean, what was the young Carol like? Speaker 2: Probably a lot like the old Carol. No, I mean it would take other people to describe that to you. I know how I've always felt about myself looking out, but in terms of how I was perceived by others, I've come to realize over the years that there's a chasm between the two: how I see myself and how I'm perceived have almost nothing to do with each other. But be that as it may, I always saw myself as someone who--. I was never as social as I would have liked to have been. And I know that may sound strange, but I had always wanted to be more embraced by the in-crowd, or any crowd, not necessarily the in-crowd, but to be more of a joiner and more of a person who could identify as being part of a group of people and it just never happened, even today. Speaker 1: So were you a reader? Did you live inside your head a little bit? Speaker 2: I lived inside my head a lot. And I was not as much of a reader as an explorer because as it turned out, it took years before we figured out, that I was dyslexic and so I had difficulty reading. And so I would use other means to try to absorb information. And so I spent a good deal of time just kind of ambling around museums and places like that. I used to play hookie in the museum. I'd not go to school and go to the museum, one of them, you know, we've got a lot of them in Chicago. I'd go to the museum. And I discovered that, you know, you could amble around in the museum in the daytime and nobody would say anything because they would just think, you know, it's just another kid with some school group. So I'd amble around. And I contribute a lot of my early education and the sating of my intellectual curiosity to the museums of Chicago. Story_ID: 16709 Speaker 1: You went to [Martha M.] Ruggles Elementary School, right? What about that experience? Were there any teachers that influenced you, that had a mark on you during that time? Speaker 2: At Ruggles the name that stands out, and I don't know why, but the name that stands out was Mrs. McKinnely. But I gather Mrs. McKinnely was the person who everybody related to. But you always felt special. She was out of that tradition of the black school marms who were very disciplined and demanded excellence and inspired and encouraged their charges as opposed to--. Although she was very intimidating, she was very intimidating just by her person. But at the same time, she was more inspirational than intimidating. And because she held such high standards, you wanted to reach them. You wanted to get her approval. And I don't know anything about her background except--. Oh, and then there was Mrs. Church, even before Mrs. McKinnely. Now, Mrs. Church I can really talk about because Mrs. Church, Vivian Church, she lives in Hyde Park now still. She was my second grade teacher and this was at Henry Horner School, because remember, I told you we moved when I was about eight. And I started school early, by the way, I forgot to mention that. I started grammar school when I was four instead of five and that's how that happened, this remains a mystery, but in any event, I started school at four. And so Mrs. Church was my second grade teacher and I was smaller than most of the kids because I was younger really. And I was getting picked on and they were not being nice to me and Mrs. Church would take me in at recess and put me on her lap and just kind of snuggle. And it wasn't until I was running for state representative and I was knocking doors and she--. I knocked on hers and she opened the door and I went, "Mrs. Church?" And she said, "Carol, my goodness." And she remembered me because I really bonded with this teacher. And I remember she left school, she left at the same time I left to go to Ruggles because she had gotten married and she was going to start her own family. And I can remember being so mad at Mr. Church. How dare he take our teacher away? We were furious, I mean literally. If a bunch of kids could lynch somebody or tar and feather them, that's what he was up for because she was really very special as a teacher. And I've maintained contact with her over the years. Speaker 1: Now, Ruggles went up to eighth grade, right? And then you went to high school at where? Speaker 2: [Francis W.] Parker [High School]. Speaker 1: How did that happen? What was the decision that you were going to Parker and how--? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that it was a decision, I think it just happened. Going to Parker was part and parcel of Chicago's school integration wars. And I like to tell people--they talk about forced busing--that I was bused to avoid racial integration. I lived six blocks from [Emil G.] Hirsch High School, walking distance, and Parker was half way across town, 68th and Story. So I had to take two, and on a bad day, three buses to get to high school. Story_ID: 16710 Speaker 1: You were saying that you were, you know, this was sort of reverse busing. You were having to take--. Speaker 2: I think it was reverse busing. I mean, you know, [Francis W.] Parker [High School] was a good school. You know, I got to Parker when it was a good school still, and so it hadn't had a chance to decline, as had been the case with all too many of the inner city high schools. And in fact, I attribute the fact that I'm considered to be a good writer--. I'm a pretty good writer, not great, but pretty good writer, and I know for a fact that a lot of it came from the rhetoric in the classes that I took at Parker High School. So, you know, you were still able to get a good education at Parker, but it was in the throes, again, of this whole racial transition and by the time I got there it was almost entirely black; it had transitioned already. So Parker was a black school at the time. It sat on a campus though with [Woodrow] Wilson Junior College and with the grammar school, so it was a really neat arrangement. You had a grammar school there and then the college and then the high school and they all kind of related to each other, which was really good, I think, for the educational environment, the atmosphere of the school. So I don't have any complaint about going to Parker High School, in fact it was a good thing that I went there, I think. But it was still three buses away from home, as opposed to being able to just walk six blocks to school. And that was because they had redrawn the boundary lines to take our block and the blocks, I guess, west of King Drive, out of the school district for [Emil G.] Hirsch [High School], which had very few blacks at that point. Speaker 1: And what year is this? Speaker 2: This would've been, okay, let's see, I graduated '60, 1960. Story_ID: 16711 Speaker 1: You said that your parents, also, their marriage was falling apart. I'm wondering what impact it was having on you too? Speaker 2: A lot. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there things that you sort of threw yourself into or do you think you were distracted? Speaker 2: Well, no. Because my parents' marriage was falling apart and because my mother [Edna Davie Moseley] was working also to keep the family and hearth and home together, I wound up with responsibility for my siblings. And so I had to play surrogate mother and run the household. So all of the domestic stuff fell to me. I mean all of it, from grocery shopping to meal preparation to laundry to making sure the kids' clothes were ready for school and all of that, discipline. Even Marsha [Marlene Moseley Kerman] tells a story, and you know, in hindsight it's really a horrible, horrible story, but it was one of those situations. Marsha tells the story that she did something and I put her on punishment by putting her in the corner and I forgot that she was there and so she sat in the corner for, like, six hours, until my mother came home. Well, maybe it was less than six hours, but anyway, she sat in the corner all day basically until my mother came home. And when she discovered Marsha was in the corner, Marsha was just, you know, beside herself because she said, you know, she'd been there all day long and it was my fault. Well, anyway, I mean I really to this day, feel very bad about having done that but, you know, you can only do so much with a fourteen-year-old or a fifteen-year-old, you know, and I was ahead of the, you know, again, still ahead of the time, I graduated high school when I was sixteen so I would've been, you know, I was very young. Speaker 1: Was there anyone else who--your grandmother or anyone--that you were going to for some solace or something? Speaker 2: Yes, my grandmother [Edna Roberta Davie], my mother's mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Would she console you in any way or was she counseling you or, you know--? Speaker 2: No. I'll tell you something, consoling and counseling were not concepts they really understood. I mean, you know, you're talking people who were as stoic and as long-suffering as you're going to find. I mean, you just didn't complain about stuff. You know, you just did it. You just did your duty and those kinds of--. But, at the same time, my grandmother was very nurturing because I would run away. I used to run away from home all the time. So I would run away from home and it would always be a trip to my grandmother's house. And then when I got there, you know, she'd feed me and make chicken and dumplings or something and put me to bed. And, you know, after I got over whatever it was that was bothering me I'd, you know, I'd go back or they'd come get me, or whatever. But yeah, it was a very consoling environment without overtly being so. Speaker 1: So you were really in many ways a typical maybe older child where there was a lot of responsibility, or you know, even more responsibility heaped on you at that time. So you had to be organized and sort of disciplined in how you did things. But my question is, was it assumed that you were going to go on to college? Was that assumed in your family? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And there was no thought of you being held back or anything once you had sort of started on the track you were going, fine. When did you get diagnosed with dyslexia? Was that much later? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 16712 Speaker 1: So you graduate, what are your thoughts at that point, you know, when it's nearing graduation? Speaker 2: I didn't know what I was going to do or where I was going to go or what colleges even. And then, frankly I'll tell you, just by the top of the grace of God, I mean, my parents had divorced by this point. By the time I graduated, in fact, my senior year was when the family absolutely fell apart. My mother [Edna Davie Moseley] moved us back to my grandmother's [Edna Roberta Davie] house, which was on 41st and Berkeley, which was in the heart of the ghetto at that point. And that was a very traumatic period for all of us. It happened between my junior and senior year. My younger siblings, Marsha [Marlene Moseley Kerman]and Joey [Joseph John Moseley], it was really traumatic to them because, again, all they had known was this suburban existence. They had no idea about people, you know, on top of each other in tenements and what the ghetto was like at all. My brother [Meredith John Moseley] and I were better able to adjust, but unfortunately, I mean he wound up getting all caught up in the gang life and the like and it was a slippery slope for him. For me it was yet another one of those traumatic periods to live through and I got through it, obviously, but at the same time it was still a very, very difficult time for all of us. Speaker 1: Did you have a lot of anger at that point? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't anger. We were coming out of a very abusive situation. My father [Joseph John Moseley] turned very violent. I really don't like talking about this a whole lot. But in any event, he turned very violent, you know, with guns and the whole nine yards. So it was really scary and we were all kind or running for our lives at that point. So the fact that we were at my grandmother's, for me, was not a problem. I mean, I was happy to be there. For my mother and my other siblings, it was probably more of a traumatic break than anything else. Story_ID: 16713 Speaker 1: Now school--how do you make the decision in the first place? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't exactly, it kind of chose me because I did not, and this gets to the point, I mean it wasn't like I got counseling or anything like that. The University of Illinois was there and they offered me a scholarship and so that's the school I went to. I started down in Champaign-Urbana. It was the isolation and all the things we'd gone through really didn't set well, so I only stayed in Champaign-Urbana for about six months, if that long. And I dropped out and got a job, got a really good paying job as a matter of fact, working for the Chicago Housing Authority. I was a community and tenant relations aide. And everybody who's ever been one knows what that means. It meant that you went around and you serviced your--. You did everything from serving five-day notices for people to move out of the projects to, you know, taking notices around and just interacting with the tenants. It turned out to be a wonderful, wonderful blessing, however, not so much because of the money--because I was getting a good salary for those days--but because I wound up being an assistant to a fellow who had initiated one of these enrichment programs when Lyndon [B.] Johnson started his "War on Poverty." There was funding for programs to uplift, you know, poor kids out of the ghetto and to give them additional education and tutoring and whatever. Well, they enlisted me to work in that program as a director, even though I was, like, not much older than the kids who were in the program themselves. And it turned out to be really a turning point in my life. Larry Hawkins headed the program up and he's--. If you haven't had a chance to talk with Larry Hawkins you should. He's now at the University of Chicago with what they call Office of Special Programs. He was a coach. He was actually a fairly famous basketball coach at Carver High School at the time and he hit on the idea of coaches being role models and leaders for young people. And his theory, simply stated, was, you know, instead of trying to get young people to come into a classroom, why don't you go where they are and appeal to them based on what they want to do. And all kids want to bounce a ball or play some kind of sports or some kind of games and that provides a coach with an opportunity to educate, to identify, to help direct, to do all of these things. And so he combined that concept with the notion of the enrichment program that was being funded, like I said, through the Johnson administration, and came up with this program for Chicago Housing Authority, and I just lucked out and was a director in it. And we took the kids, you know, to museums in the city and we took them to the Art Institute [of Chicago] and we took them to plays and we took them--. Some of the kids that were in my program had never seen the lake. They lived in Chicago and had never seen the lake. So we took them out of the ghetto, out of the projects, and exposed them to the larger community, the larger world around them. And at the same time they were getting the exposure. Hawkins's group was doing things like basic tutoring and literacy and the like, so they were getting it on both sides. And it was such an exhilarating experience to see people, you know, it's like watching people come alive. And that I, almost by osmosis, I guess, I got the message. And that was when I decided I really needed to go back to school. Add to that that the first set of riots broke out that year and I was told by my supervisors that I was supposed to go to my tenants with my hard hat on and tell them, you know, there's a riot going on outside, please tell Johnny not to go out. Here I am in the middle of the courtyard hearing bullets whizzing by, I'm like, wait a minute, something's wrong with this picture. And of course, all my supervisors had left. I mean, they had all just gotten in their station wagons and gone home and left it to me and a few others to go out and tell people, "Don't go outside. There's a riot." It's like, wait a minute. So after the riot experience, between those two things, I was sufficiently motivated to, you know, whatever school would take me, right? Happily, the University of Illinois wasn't too mad at me, so they took me. I went back to U of I and finished up at Chicago Circle [Campus]. Speaker 1: You're how old at this point? You're like eighteen or seventeen? Speaker 2: Seventeen. Speaker 1: Are there other things you learned about people during that experience, that you felt working CHA helped you later? Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you something. One of the things that I think has been an interesting aspect of my life has been the fact that I am genuinely comfortable at a wide variety of social strata. I grew up in an environment in which neither class nor gender nor race, were considered to be limitations. We'll start with that, which is unusual because most people started with, you know, here are the precepts, here are the concepts about what you can and cannot do because of the body you're born into. Well, I came into, you know--. My whole early part of my life was all about, was almost counter-cyclical to all of those assumptions. The experience with CHA as well as, particularly coming right on the heels of the experience of moving back to 41st and Berkeley, okay, from the suburbs, all that, what that did was make me able to function in the ghetto ghetto ghetto, as well as among the middle classes, who were the bourgeoisie. You know, I used to call them the people who sat on top of the garbage cans (laughter) but you know what I'm saying, with that group, as well as with the people who thought about policy and policy implications of all of that. And so in answer to your question, I think that the fact that experience and the CHA was motivating for me on a number of different levels both in terms of my understanding of the larger social challenges for the community as a whole and as well as in terms of my own personal growth. Story_ID: 16714 Speaker 1: So U of I [University of Illinois, Chicago Circle], were there things that formed you in that second experience? You know, did you start getting politically active during that--? Okay. Speaker 2: I actually did. And unbeknownst, I mean I wasn't thinking about it like that, but that's what happened. I wound up with Professor Twiley Barker, a black professor at U of I, challenged me with both carrots and sticks. That is to say, I took Professor Barker's class in government and he gave me a B and I was really annoyed because I thought I'd done really well and I then signed up for another course because I was determined I was going to get a better grade than that. But he was out of the Ms. McKinley school, that generation of blacks, very disciplined, very tough, you know, didn't suffer foolishness, but he was a model. And then I had a Professor [Peter] Knausse, who's now deceased, but he was white. And I really, really bonded, if you will, with him as well as Dick [W.] Simpson, the alderman, you know, the congressional candidate. Dick Simpson was one of my professors at U of I. And I could name other names, but those three stand out particularly. But that is to say that the experience, because of the personalities, I got drawn more and more into the study of government and political science and economics and that sort of thing just because that's where my interests were leading me. And I even wound up standing for student government. I was elected secretary of the Action Party. In fact, there's a fellow, Tony Podesta, is a big time Washington mover and shaker. Tony was the president of the Action Party and I was the secretary of the Action Party. Debbie Benjamin, Debbie Souter, now lives in Switzerland, Debbie was the treasurer, maybe. In any event, we've all stayed kind of in touch with each other after all these years. And Tony jokes that we could start a congressional group from the Action Party because there were three congressmen that came out of the Action Party, three congressmen and one senator and Tony, out of the Action party at the U of I Chicago Circle. So that's kind of a little funny inside joke. Speaker 1: So what was your party? It was just a party for student government, right? Speaker 2: Student government, yes. Yes, we were the insurgents. You know, those bums aren't doing anything for you, vote for the Action Party, we're going to reform student government to make it more responsive to your needs. And that's what we caught ourselves doing. Speaker 1: Now, this is the mid '60s [1960s], right? And Chicago's going through its own sort of change and turmoil, in its own way, I mean, part of the national landscape. Were you influenced by any of that or--? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. And again it gets back to the statement you asked about how did I see myself. Unfortunately, or fortunately as the case may be, I always wound up being part of whatever it was going on kind of on the periphery of it at the same time and moving in and out of all these different circles. The '60s [1960s] was particularly an active time because my father [Joseph John Moseley] had introduced me to democratic politics, the electoral politics. He had been involved with some of the earliest candidacies in Chicago of blacks who were on a civil rights agenda. You recall that the civil rights imperative and political office were almost parallel tracks in the black community. I mean the black politicians were notorious for their conservatism in terms of social change. They were the ones who really were expected to maintain segregation and all of the aspects of it. Whereas a generation developed in the '60s [1960s]of black politicians who joined with the preacher-led civil rights movement and so they started to come together. And my father had worked in the campaigns of the people early on from Charlie Chew to there were some others. Gus, I don't know if Gus Savage ran in those days, but in any event, some of the earliest black independent political movements, he had been involved with. I had, well, it wasn't until later that I met [Richard H.] Dick Newhouse and got into electoral politics myself. But during the college years I was very, very interested in, I mean, I was in part of the movement. And, you know, I was on the fringes a nationalist. That is to say, I mean, I knew Fred Hampton, in fact I just talked to Fred Hampton's mother this last weekend. But I knew Fred Hampton from college and so when he got killed that was a very traumatic kind of thing for me. I knew a lot of the Black Panther Party members and I was, you know, and some of my best friends were Panthers and so I was involved with that, kind of on the edges of that liberation movement. I had marched with Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and the reason I never joined the Panthers was that I was very committed to non-violence. I had marched with Dr. King when he came to Chicago. I was yet in high school when that happened, and so had been committed intellectually and emotionally committed to non-violence and to non-violent social protest. So I never joined the Black Panthers because they represented the, you know, "pick up a gun and shoot the pig" or whatever and that just was not part of my own ethic or my own philosophy. So I had friends who were, and remember, this is the early part, the Vietnam War had started and so I got very much involved in the antiwar protests. So yeah, I was, you know, they called us bippies, black hippies. I was baking my own bread and the whole nine yards, natural foods. I was an environmentalist before we got started calling it that, I mean, I did all those things. Story_ID: 16715 Speaker 1: So what were your thoughts about what you wanted to do and be and except, sort of, saving the world? Speaker 2: Saving the world was the, yeah, save the world. After that, I was clueless. Speaker 1: What did you end up doing after that? Speaker 2: University of Chicago. Speaker 1: Right. But I'm wondering, see, you say, "Well, I didn't know what I wanted to do." Speaker 2: I didn't. Speaker 1: But how did you end up going to--? Speaker 2: I just kind of--. I'm telling you, these steps, things just happened. The opportunity just opened up and it was like, oh, that door looks interesting, maybe I'll go in there. We were sitting around playing cards at the [University of Illinois] Circle Campus where the students, the Peer Room it was called, and one of the fellows playing cards was filling out an application for the law school entrance exam. And I said, "What's that?" And he said, "Oh, this is an LSAT application." I said, "What's the LSAT?" So he told me and I said, "Oh, give me one of those." So I filled it out. And the exam was being given at the University of Chicago, which was in the neighborhood. So I went and I took the exam. I'll never forget, they were protesting the war, and I was sitting there, even though I was very much anti, but I was really annoyed, it's like, "Well, couldn't you all protest some other day when I'm not trying to take this exam?" And I'll have to tell Bernadette Dorn that story because she was leading the protest and she was climbing up a flagpole outside the window where I was taking this exam and I was thinking, like, "Oh, come on." But anyway, yeah, I took the exam at U of C, which then led to the conclusion, like, well, okay, I'd wanted to go to law school at that point since I was taking the exam, but I had too many ties and responsibilities and it just would've been difficult for me to leave home. So I applied to the University of Chicago. It was the only law school I applied to. Speaker 1: And what were your thoughts about what you wanted to do? Speaker 2: As a lawyer? Clueless. Speaker 1: But were people counseling that this would be a good thing to do? Speaker 2: Oh, you don't know; I didn't tell you. My father [Joseph John Moseley] had gone to law school. Okay, my father had dabbled in becoming a lawyer and he didn't because, you know, the demands of his family and what not. And my grandmother [Elizabeth Grant Moseley], his mother, I remember for years, blamed my mother [Edna Davie Moseley] for the fact that my dad had never finished law school and had not become a lawyer. And those were the days when you could really read for the law, if you wanted to, still. But he never finished law school and my grandmother continued to blame my mother for that. So there was some precedence in that regard, but he was not around to encourage me to go to law school at that point. They had broken up and he was living in California at the time. But in terms of what kind of law I wanted to practice, I just knew I wanted to save the world. I mean I, you know, I really didn't know what specifically I would do with a law degree, except that it was a way that I could save the world and probably earn a living as well. Story_ID: 16716 Speaker 1: What was the U of C [University of Chicago] Law School experience like? Were you prepared for it? Speaker 2: Again, yet another instance of being on the periphery, there were eight, I believe eight black students in that class at the U of C, out of however many countries there were. And so we were minority, and being a woman, a minority within a minority again. I think that year had more women admitted to the law school than had ever been there. So again, by virtue of being both, you wind up being both part of but then not part of both groups. I mean black women have a unique situation in that we are at once part of both women's issues and organizations and identified as a group with women, we also have group identification because of our race as well. And there's a professor Kimberly Crenshaw out of Columbia [University], a young woman who talks about what she calls the intersectionalities of race and gender and that it becomes one and one equals three or two and a half or two and three quarters. It's not exactly the same thing as being a woman, it's not exactly the same thing as being just a black, it's something else when they come together. And so that was kind of the position that I found myself in at the U of C. And so when the first BLSA started, I started the first Black Law Students Association in Chicago at the University of Chicago, we could fit in a phone booth, there were so few of us, but we all started our own organization. I remember what had happened. Sonya Menshikov was the professor who really did kind of mentor me, I always felt, as a student. And I remember she said in this very deep voice, "You know, you are first a University of Chicago law student and then a woman and lastly a black." And I said to her, "But professor," I said, "that's not how the world sees me. They see a black first, and then a woman, and then a University of Chicago law student, if they get that far." And so that was the dilemma. But you know, I got through the law school. I met my husband in law school, Michael [Braun]. I was having a heck of a time with tax. Wally Blum, who you probably know, a very famous tax theorist and professor, and it was supposedly a really tough course and I was having a heck of a time with it, I mean I was just clueless. And a friend, Esther Larden, said to me, "Oh, Michael Braun says he thinks you're cute. And he's on law review and he's in your tax class, you might go talk to him." So I thought, "Hmm." So I went to Michael and I asked him. I said, "Well, you know, I'm really having a hard time with tax, would you be willing to tutor me in tax?" And so he said yes and so we started off studying tax and we fell in love and got married. Story_ID: 16717 Speaker 1: You know, you got with Michael [Braun] and fell in love and the rest was sort of history. When did you get married? Speaker 2: We got married right after law school, actually. We got married on my birthday in, let's see, August of '72 [1972], August of '72 I believe, it might've been August '73 [1973], or August of '72. But Michael, you know, I mean, it was an interracial marriage and so that had its own issues. Speaker 1: So what were those issues? Speaker 2: What were those issues? Well, let's see. Michael was from, literally, a white Anglo-Saxon Protestant background and had no previous, no real experience really, with black people at all. He used to tell the story, his mother would tell the story even, about how he was traveling in Europe--he was in France when the riots broke out in the United States--and he wrote back to his parents castigating them, like it was all their fault, that this was happening. And he grew up in Westfield, New Jersey, in a very suburban kind of environment. And so while on one hand those are the things that distinguished us, at the same time, we shared the same interests and we liked doing the same stuff, you know, whether it was just exploring old houses. Michael's hobby was wood working and carpentry. And so I learned about that which fit with my interest in architecture and construction issues. And so we wound up just hitting it off on a lot of different levels. And his mother had a problem with us getting married. My father [Joseph John Moseley] had problems with us getting married, because my father considered himself to be a race man, even though he was, you know, eclectic, if you will, in terms of his relationships. So, on those two sides there was real opposition to us getting married. My mother [Edna Davie Moseley], of course, just wanted me to be married. My mother didn't like the idea that I was, you know, sexually active, or getting that way, and not being married to the person. I mean this is, what can I tell you, I said we were black Catholics. So when I got to the point I was getting mature she was just anxious for me to get married. And Mike's father--. Actually one of the things that turned things was that after we had a little incident in which his mother really, really put me off and I was going to leave Westfield, and it was going to be probably the end of our relationship, at that point, I mean, Mrs. Braun and I really clashed, and Mr. Braun came and said, "You know, my son loves you very much and if he loves you, I love you. And I hope you understand that Mrs. Braun is just being protective of her son, that's what mothers do. But if you will just be more forgiving and open to her, I'm sure you'll find she's a lovely person also, blah-blah-blah." And it was that speech and that conversation that made the difference. And I hit it off with Michael's sister, Shelly, we became really good friends and so we got married. Story_ID: 16718 Speaker 1: So here you have two young law school graduates about to, you know, go on with their lives and what were you doing at that point? What job did he [Michael Braun] end up doing? Speaker 2: He decided that he didn't want to go work for a big law firm. This was actually a point of contention between us because Michael really is just very, very, very smart and a very, very good lawyer. And for reasons that related, really, to his decisions about his life, he decided he was not going to get out into the hustle and bustle of trying to make partner track and all the rest of that. He worked for a lawyer, an individual lawyer, who had a kind of a business trial practice, almost a solo operation. There were twelve people maybe in the firm, but really it was a one-man show. So Michael had started clerking for this person and then went on and joined him in a partnership kind of situation after graduation. And so while he made a nice living, it still was not the A-track that my own ambitions would have seen him get on. It could be that Michael had the best idea though, because at this stage in life, you know, he's taking it easy and doing what he wants to do and spends half his time in the country house up in Michigan. But that was his decision. And I originally wanted to--. Right out of law school I turned down an offer from a big firm. I mean, I accepted it and then I turned it down when I changed my mind. But be that as it may, I wound up working for a firm that I thought was going to do community work. And in fact, that was what made the difference. I'd gotten an offer to work for a big law firm and Allison Davis, who is still a good friend. Allison came and said, "You should come work for my boutique firm because we're going to be doing things in the Woodlawn community and doing some community action." And I always felt that I had a responsibility to give back and that for me just to go and get on the A-track would have been to demonstrate an ungratefulness, really, about all the blessings I had received. And so I went to this smaller firm to go and do work in the community. But it turned out that it was just a smaller firm that was a smaller firm. I mean, Allison was interested in housing development and so he was off, really, in another kind of direction than I thought. So I didn't work. I worked for Allison for about not quite a year, it was about eight months or so. And then went to the U.S. Attorney's Office. Story_ID: 16719 Speaker 1: A friend of Michael's [Michael Braun] came to dinner and he was saying, "Oh well, you know, they're hiring over at the U.S. Attorney's Office and why don't you look over there?" And I was ready to leave Allison's [Allison Davis] office anyway and so I did that and the U.S. Attorney turned out to be a real turning point for me. Speaker 2: And can you explain why? It was a good experience for you wasn't it? Speaker 1: It was wonderful. It was wonderful. It's cutting-edge again. There had been only been a single person of color in the U.S. Attorney's Office traditionally, that is from the beginning of time, just about. And there was one man--. There had been a black woman in that office years ago and I don't know if it was Jewel Lafontant [MANkarious] or not, but I didn't know her. And then there was a man, Archibald Lassine [?], Bryant Gumbel's uncle. Anyway, Archie was the black in that office. And Jim Thompson [James R. Thompson] had just come on as the new U.S. Attorney and was looking to integrate both in terms of gender and race and so I was hired. Let's see, who else? Walter Jones was hired, later Marianne, oh, how quickly we forget, she's a good friend too, Marianne Jackson, was hired. And we were the three blacks. And then he hired five women. So this was, you know, real revolutionary stuff going on in the U.S. Attorney's Office because there just hadn't been black U.S. attorneys, or women U.S. attorneys, for that matter. And it was a wonderful experience because I was less interested in doing the criminal stuff, but the civil work was wonderful because it gave me an opportunity not only to go to court every day--I was in court and on trial all the time, I mean, every day, that was just kind of standard; you got ready, you went up to Federal Court every day--but in addition to that I got a chance to do policy in ways that came, redounded to my benefit years and years later. I handled a case when President [Jimmy] Carter, then President Carter, tried to reform health care systems. And the result was I got my feet into health care policy and those issues in ways that still serve today, that obviously they served very much by the time I got to the senate. But they continue to shape and influence, you know, my activities in that area. I did environmental cases--water cases--having to do with the Calumet River, and so cutting edge of the environmental movement and the issues in terms of clean water. I did cases in housing, both housing discrimination on the one hand and the fast foreclosure issue that HUD [Housing and Urban Development] had. So, I mean, the kind of cases that I got--. And even on the criminal side, I wrote and worked on writing the brief in the first RICO [Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations] act case, they were racketeering and organized crime case. I was joking with Mrs. Hampton the other day, when I saw her this last Saturday, because they had asked me to come and work on the Fred Hampton case, and I remember telling the U.S. Attorney that there was no way I would represent the U.S. Government against Fred Hampton's mama. I didn't care if they wanted to fire me, I just wasn't going to do it. And so I didn't do that case, you know, even though you didn't get a whole lot of latitude to pick the cases that you were going to do, it made a difference to me. It also made a difference because being in that environment I got a chance, I mean, all that stuff about COINTEL-PRO and what J. Edgar Hoover did to the civil rights movement--. I mean, I saw original documents, so I know from first-hand experience that it was not only true, but alive and well and there were even individuals in Chicago who were informants or whatever, who years later when I met them or saw them, they had no idea that I actually knew what role they had played in Dr. [Martin Luther] King's whole thing, okay? So, I mean, I got that kind of insight. It also gave me, however, a wonderful, wonderful discipline in terms of the practice because the training that we received in that office prepared us for handling litigation from the simplest to the most complex and those skills, you know, you don't lose them. I think one of the secrets of my ability to get as much done as I, knock on wood, have a reputation, I hope, for doing, both in terms as a legislator and otherwise, is a function of the fact that it was the discipline and organization from the training I got as a U.S. attorney. Speaker 2: And the other thing, just in context, this is the time where Jim Thompson [James R. Thompson] is developing a reputation that's going to lead to him being governor, right? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Essentially. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: And so also for you it's all that what Allison Davis's firm didn't, you know, you're on the front line sort of. This is sort of a dream job for you in many ways, you're learning as a young person. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: How long did you work there? Speaker 1: Four years. Story_ID: 16720 Speaker 1: We had our first child, Mathew [Braun], and our only child. And so I stopped working for a while to be a stay-at-home mom. In fact, it was so funny because Judge [Hugh] Will--. I was, again, all this is all new and cutting-edge. I would go to court and I was very pregnant. Well, you can imagine in federal, I mean this was like brand-new stuff, you know, a pregnant woman coming to court and what is going on here? And so Judge Will used to joke about, "Tell the bailiffs to get the water boiling." I'd stand there like this, but I stopped to have Matt and didn't, obviously, go back. Speaker 2: Was that a hard decision to make at that time? Women had worked so hard to be in positions and sometimes, you know, those were sometimes difficult choices. Speaker 1: They were, except that Mike [Michael Braun] and I had been married, let's see, at that point Mike and I had been married for six years and, yeah, six years, it was time. I mean he was delighted. I was, I've got to tell you, I was a little unsettled in the sense that it truly got in the way of my career. I mean, there's just no question about it. At the time there was an informal competition for who was going to be the next chief of the Civil Division, and I lost in part because I couldn't, I mean obviously, I couldn't function. So yeah, it was a career-stopper, but I was happy with it I thought at the time and was a chance to, again, be a stay-at-home mom, to see what that was like. And I must say, I enjoyed it. I mean, I found things to do and I honed my cooking and domestic skills and that whole part of me. I mean it's like letting the other part of your brain function for a while, even though I was learning to be a mommy was tough, you know, things like baby spit-up, you're--what do you do now? Happily, I had my mother [Edna Davie Moseley] and then my aunt actually came up, so I had the support system to help me deal with all of that. Story_ID: 16721 Speaker 1: But I didn't stay at home as long as I'd expected because I wound up standing for a state office. Speaker 2: Now, how did that decision come about? Speaker 1: Well, again, it was yet another one of these things that kind of happened in that in the early part of my staying at home, the community had organized around stopping a golf driving range, stopping the [Chicago] Park District from doing something in Jackson Park. And again, I mentioned being my environmentalist kind of things, well, naturalist can be added to that because this was going to get rid of the bobolinks that nested in Jackson Park. And to me this was a big deal because, you know, the fact that we had bobolinks to begin with was important and the fact that this golf driving range was going to destroy their habitat was horrendous in my opinion, so I joined the pickets. In fact, I still have a picture marching, you know, save Jackson Park, so we marched to save Jackson Park. And as it turned out and we lost. But as it turned out, some of the people who were involved with that remembered me when our state representative retired and so they suggested that I stand for the state legislature. Speaker 2: Now, who was the one you were going to be replacing? Speaker 1: Bob Mann [Robert E. Mann]. Speaker 2: Bob Mann. And you said you had also gotten to know--. Speaker 1: Dick Newhouse [Richard Newhouse, Jr.]. Speaker 2: And this was a new time, Dick Newhouse was the prototype of sort of independent--? Speaker 1: He absolutely was and I hope that as you do HistoryMakers, if he can still be interviewed, I don't know. Speaker 2: He refused. Speaker 1: Well, you know, he's got Alzheimer's. Speaker 2: Right. And I talked to him on the phone and I thought I had him and then he said no. So, I tried really hard. Speaker 1: You know, you might want to call, his wife's name is Kathy. Speaker 2: Because I'd really tried. That was like almost a year and a half ago and he sounded fine. But people said he would go in and out. Speaker 1: Yeah, he goes in and out. And tell her that I suggest that you speak with her. Because I hope that history doesn't get lost, because Dick Newhouse's influence really even transcended me. He set up something called the National Clearinghouse of Black State Legislators and that was the first national bank, literally, of information about what was going on in the different state legislatures. It was a place where black legislators from across the country would communicate and stay in touch with the others. And so wherever you go, particularly that first generation of blacks that held elective office--. Remember, you had this huge gap, you had reconstruction and then nothing, then the repression of the following period and then there was this new group that came in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s] and Dick Newhouse brought those people together. And he brought them together in a context that brought the civil rights dimension and imperative to their conversations. So even where you had black legislators who had not done anything on civil rights, the clearinghouse would communicate with them about, well this is going on in Indiana, this is going on here and it helped to inspire their activism. So I mean it was very important. And so anyway, Dick had--. It was funny, the irony, of course, was that I had been an understudy, I had written speeches my last year in law school for Dick Newhouse and he paid me, I mean it was a paid job. I wrote speeches for him, or did research for speeches. And so I was an accolade of Dick Newhouse's and there was a group of young people who just kind of hung around him. But when I ran for office, he didn't support me the first time. He supported his law partner 'cause it was a race in which there were ten candidates and everybody told me I couldn't win. A matter of fact, one guy in particular came and said, "You know, the blacks won't vote for you because you're not part of the Chicago machine, the whites won't vote for you because you're black, and nobody's going to vote for you because you're a woman." And it was, like, okay, well, that seems like enough inspiration. So that was when I threw my hat in the ring because they said I absolutely couldn't do it. And as it turned out there was another woman, Barbara Flynn Curry, who's now the majority leader in the Illinois house, Barbara was running and me and eight black men. And the eight black men all picked on me. They all targeted me. And I used to get angry, I was like, wait a minute, you know, if you're just targeting the woman in the race, what about Barbara? What about her? Well, anyways, so it was a hard fought thing and a really knock-down, drag-out local campaign and I came in first. Speaker 2: You came in first. That's wonderful. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So this was, you said this was your second, you said--. Speaker 1: My first. Speaker 2: Oh, you said that he supported, who was Dick Newhouse supporting? Speaker 1: Eric Graham. Speaker 2: Okay. You've got a lot of firsts then like this. Yes. So you take everyone by storm and surprise. Speaker 1: Right. And they call it Year of the Woman because both Barbara and--. Barbara squeaked by, in fact because we had multi-member districts in those days. I was criticized, the Lani Guinier situation--wrongly, so I thought--because it never got to the point where I could do anything to help Lani Guinier because, as it turned out, our state had the very system that she got in trouble for advocating. Okay? We had multi-member districts and cumulative voting in Illinois, at least at that point. And that was how I was elected under that system the first time. And so it was me and Barbara Curry elected. Previously, it had been Lew Caldwell [Lewis A.H. Caldwell] and Bob Mann, so Lew Caldwell remained mad at me for many, many years on the grounds that I had taken the black seat and Barbara Curry had taken the white seat. But in fact, Barbara didn't know that she won until--. I mean, she'd gone off on vacation thinking she'd lost and they recounted the votes and found some more votes and announced that she was the winner. So when Lew lost his position, Bob Mann retired, Lew Caldwell lost to Barbara Curry, but he really thought I'd beat him. Speaker 2: So here you are you're how old at this point? You're a young mother, but you're thirty? Speaker 1: Thirty. I was thirty-one. Speaker 2: Okay. And this is 1978? Speaker 1: '78 [1978]. Story_ID: 16722 Speaker 1: And so you go to Springfield. That must have been an eye-awakener though? Speaker 2: It really was. I was blessed though because my seatmate and then later roommate was Ethel Alexander. And Ethel came out of the bowels of the Machine. I mean, her father was a Machine state legislator, okay? So she knew all about the politics and all about the Machine dynamics and who's on first and all the personalities. I was absolutely clueless about all that stuff, but I knew the policy. Not just from law school, but from my time in the U.S. Attorney's Office. So we used to have a joke that she saved me from the Machine and I saved her from the IVI [Independent Voters of Illinois] because I would, you know, I'd say, well, you know, this is what's going on with this and so she didn't just have to vote blindly or vote just the way the Machine told her to vote on things. She was able to vote the more civil rights imperative because of the information I gave her. Similarly, when there was a mine field that the Machine laid out there, she was able to warn me that that's what was going on. And so it was a nice symbiotic relationship. Speaker 1: You know, that's an interesting thing because we've done this project so I know all the people you speak of. But that goes back to your background of really knowing, you know, being able to deal with different people. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: You could have taken a little more elitist approach to. Speaker 2: You know, I want to tell you something, I really think that's been one of the secrets. I mean it seemed like a hard thing at the time. I'm backing up now, but can you imagine taking a sixteen-year-old girl who had been raised in an environment of, you know, my next door neighbor was a physician, the neighbor across the street was a chemist, I mean all these professional people and listening to, you know, classical music and the arts and the ballet and the whole nine yards and then putting her right in the heart of the ghetto. And it could've been traumatic except that it wasn't so much traumatic as it was a learning experience for me and a good one. And a good one. I mean I made friends, I mean genuine real friends from that time in my life. And so the ability to leap from social group to social group, particularly for somebody who's an outsider in all of them, it's been perfect in that regard, you know, and I hope, knock on wood, it doesn't lead to isolation over the long haul. But, you know, it's been really very helpful. Speaker 1: Now, you served the legislature how long? Speaker 2: Ten years. Speaker 1: Ten years. Now, that was in a time when you became very much a part of the independent political movement there. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And also the forming of the [Congressional] Black Caucus, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. What are the things that you are most proud of that happened during that time? And what do you think was forming you as you were cutting your teeth? Speaker 2: Well, I think that when I left, the legislature had a resolution passed that referred to me as the conscience of the House. And because of my--. Remember, you had multi-member districts, so you had more people, you had 177 people in the House of Representatives at that point. Every district had both Republicans and Democrats in it, so it was more bipartisan, the environment was less partisan, not more bipartisan, but it was less partisan than otherwise. And so that meant that I could and did relate to people on both sides of the aisle, which turned out to be just kind of a critical piece of my whole legislative program. I have always worked without a whole lot of--. I mean I'm a Democrat, but I've always been able and, frankly, anxious to build bipartisan coalitions, so that's the first thing. One of the most important early, early steps and reflections of that was when I was able to get a cost living increase for welfare recipients. They had not had an increase in ten years at that point. It was something Bob Mann [Robert E. Mann] had done year after year after year and always failed. And nobody told me, because I wasn't part of the Machine, they didn't tell me that the way you passed bills was you went and you got the Machine leader to pass your idea or your bill or, you know, you went to them and they said yes or no and that's the way you did it. So I thought that I had to go and ask every legislator for their vote. So I remember we had, I wish I had saved it, we had these ballot sheets and out of 177 people, I went and talked to 159 state legislators on both sides of the aisle. I'd literally go out and say, with my U.S. Attorney's Office training, I'd go in with a folder and I'd say, this is how many people are on public aid in your district and how many are aged, blind, and disabled in your district and this is what it'll mean for you. And I started lining up the votes. And everybody had expected the bill to fail and lo and behold, when it was called and we made our arguments, it goes up and it passed. I mean, it made state news because it was, like, whoa, the House just passed this cost of living increase for public aid recipients, which meant then that it had to be on the governor's agenda, because he would look like Scrooge keeping people at these, literally, starvation living subsidies that hadn't been changed in ten years. And the cost of living, you know, in those days had gone, particularly after that inflationary bubble that we'd gone through--. I mean poor people were really hurting. So I passed it and it was just one of these glorious, glorious victories. Two stories. Susan Catania was a Republican who had worked with me on the Republican side and working on the bill. And I had gone around again, because I didn't know how to do it, I'd just gone and talked to people as I could find their time without necessarily knowing a whole lot about these individuals. Well, one of the people I tried to persuade was [A.] Webber Borchers and Webber was one of these far, far, far right-wingers from the Champaign-Urbana area of the state. And I remember trying to convince Webber to support it and he had the welfare Cadillac excuse and this that and the other. Well, when it was over and the victory and the votes went up on the board, Webber who was on a cane, hobbled over to my desk and said, "Ms. Braun," he said, "I didn't vote for your bill," he said, "because all I could think about was them welfare cheats in my district buying lobsters and steak with their food stamps." He said, "But you know, I almost did because you're the second nicest colored lady I've ever met. Now, the first nicest has worked for us for thirty years, but you're the second nicest colored lady I had ever met." Susan was standing there, she turned green. She was, like, oh, my God. But I mean, Webber had actually been convicted for spying for the John Birch Society, I mean he was that far out there, okay? So this was like a huge compliment. I was flattered by it. But you're the second nicest colored lady. So that was one big victory. And then of course, the second big victory that I really am proud of is when I sued the Democratic Party for race discrimination on the reapportionment and I won. Story_ID: 16723 Speaker 1: I mentioned the Welfare Reform bill last time. I mentioned the reapportionment lawsuit, which was a real step because everybody said I was taking my political career in my hands by suing my own party for what it had done in the reapportionment effort. But as it turned out I was able to draw on the contacts I had made in the U.S. Attorney's Office, because the lead person in that was Tom Sullivan from Jenner & Block [LLP] and it was really serendipity that I even ran into Tom and he agreed to take the case, and brought the resources of that huge trial firm behind it. And so I think, I mean I know, there was no way we would have won that case had it not been for Tom Sullivan and Jeff Coleman and the support that we had at Jenner & Block. So that was one set of linkages. The other was that when I won the reapportionment case, instead of going back to political oblivion, I went back in the situation in which, you know, even my enemies took note that I had had the heart to go in there and to do that. And Harold Washington was elected mayor shortly thereafter and so I became his choice to be his floor leader in the Illinois legislature as a result. So instead of damaging my career it provided a boost and I became assistant majority leader under Harold Washington because of it. A third thing though, that I think is less often appreciated about my time in the General Assembly, that came to have real relevance when I ran for the United States Senate, was the fact that I had a chance to develop relationships with so many southern Illinoians, so many down-staters. And so my down-state colleagues, when I got ready to run for statewide office, became really a network of people who could, you know, vouch for me, could speak about me in terms of my capacity, my character, my vision, and all of those things. Because when you're in the legislature and particularly in the days before the cutback amendment--before the legislature was changed--you really did get a sense of the heart of the other person, of where they were coming from, of what their rationale was, and you came to recognize that everybody's got a story and every community has its own issues. But you can always, in my opinion, find grounds for consensus if you just look hard enough for it. And so that training and those networks really proved to be invaluable when I got to the senate, well, in getting me to the senate. Story_ID: 16724 Speaker 1: Now, was there anything that was disappointing about the experience there? In Chicago, there's the perception people don't even know what happens within a General Assembly, you know, people think of aldermen. But was there anything that you found that you did not like, or, you know, it was time to sort of move on? Speaker 2: Well, it was time to move on, I mean, in my opinion. When I attempted to run for lieutenant governor, that was part of the motivation, just to get closer to home. Because by the time I ended my career in Springfield, I had divorced and I had a young son [Mathew Braun] and I really wanted to spend more time at home in Chicago than back and forth to the legislature which is, you know, down state, 300 miles. I mean, there was a three-hour trip, no matter how you cut it. So it was a pretty long commute to work and so that was the difficulty. But other than just the geography and road conditions, which became very important, no, that was a great training ground and even today, the state legislatures are really the most important part of our system of governance and so you learn a lot about the relationship between local government and national government. What I later came to understand, however, that I didn't understand at the time, was really that people really do separate out different ponds, if you will, or areas of activity. You've got people who focus in on local city politics and the alderman and the ward committee men and the local politics. You've got other people who deal and dabble in statewide politics. You've got other people who dabble in national politics and even there they divide themselves between the people who follow the presidential and the people who engage with the Senate and the people who engage with the House, not to mention the folks that hang around the foreign service circles and the international community. So you have these different communities and I think that I expected when I got to the senate it would be an easier transition, that the skills from the state legislature were fungible and that it would be no real problem transitioning from the state level to the national legislature. Story_ID: 16725 Speaker 1: What went into the decision, though, for the Cook County Recorder of Deeds because that was an in between jobs, right? Speaker 2: Yes. That was, I mentioned I was trying to get back home because of personal and family circumstances and I had attempted to stand for lieutenant governor. In those days, the lieutenant governor ran separately in the primary, but you were tied to the gubernatorial candidate in the general election. And I reckon that if I could win the nomination for lieutenant governor in the primary then, you know, I would be tied to whoever was the governor nominee and it would just be, you know, either the Democrats would win or not, but I'd be part of the ticket. And I got blown out of the water by Harold [Washington], which is another story. But I had gone to my down-state sources and talked to all my friends about their support and had gotten enough votes to be nominated as lieutenant governor on the Democratic ticket in a slating session. But the gubernatorial candidate didn't want me on the ticket and went to Harold. And even though Harold had given me his permission, if not blessing, and I use that word because he had said it was okay to do, but he was underwhelmed, if you will, at the concept, but he'd given me permission to do it, but when it came down to a real possibility that I was going to be slated for the lieutenant governor he just said no and sent Tim, what's his name? Speaker 1: Tim Evans. Speaker 2: Tim Evans, sent Tim Evans over to the slating session to pull off the requisite number of black committeemen. So here was the anomalous situation of a black woman candidate for lieutenant governor and it was the blacks who abandoned my candidacy. They went to executive session, and it was the black committeemen who abandoned me and some of the down-state committeemen like to remind me of that story. You know, "I was the only one stuck with you," and they'll tell that story how they stuck with me during that slating session when some of the blacks pulled off. So the result of that was that I went back to the legislature for the last two-year term. And I was going to leave politics altogether and I had arranged to join a law firm. It wasn't a done deal, but it wasn't 89 percent there and I mentioned to Bobby Rush over coffee one morning that I was going to withdraw and that was the end of my political career and you know, it's been a nice run but see you all later. And Bobby made the point, "Oh, no, we can't lose you. You know, you're too important, you've got too much skill," da--da--da--da. "I'll talk to the mayor about it." So he had a conversation with Harold and the next thing I knew I was being called down to City Hall to meet with the mayor. You know, one always went when those kinds of calls came forward. And I went and met with Harold Washington and he said, "Bobby wants you to run for clerk of the circuit court. I've got a better idea, I think you should run for recorder of deeds." And my first response was, "Well, Mr. Mayor, I thought we already had a recorder of deeds?" And in fact we did. I mean this guy was perfectly happy in his job. And Harold said, "Oh, no, he's going to do something else." Well, unfortunately the poor guy didn't know this yet. So it was like another, Lew Caldwell [Lewis A. H. Caldwell] case. I mean he blamed me forever for taking his job. I didn't take his job, you know. But anyway he's now a member of the Metropolitan Sanitary District, so they gave him a spot, but that's how I became recorder of deeds. Speaker 1: So really the lieutenant governor was the first time that you had really lost, so that was disappointing the way it happened? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It was a black male sort of female thing too, or Machine, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was all of those things. It was all of those things. And Monica Stewart, who you, I think you said you interviewed Monica--. It was really funny because Monica was helping count the votes and helping to organize that lieutenant governor campaign and, of course, I lost, and they wound up slating Aurelia Pucinski for lieutenant governor. And the LaRouche's--Lyndon LaRouche's party--won in the primaries and so our governor candidate would've been stuck joined at the hip with a Lyndon LaRouche person, and he refused to run with that person. So the Democratic Party ticket was doomed as of the primary election. And I'll never forget Monica called me up. She was screaming on the phone. She called me up first thing in the morning when the reports were coming back about this disaster at the polls and she said, "There's cosmic justice. There's cosmic justice. They blew you out of the water but now look what they've got." So that's how that happened. Speaker 1: Because it is that whole interesting dynamic between, the black female, the role within the political party, you know, and black males. Speaker 2: We're trying to explore that as it stands. Speaker 1: But anyways, so well, was that disappointing though? Because you said here you had really been in the trenches with Harold and I know Monica also had her disappointment too, with the women's commission. But, you know, here's our first black mayor and you guys--. It's not just that, it's that you had already been in the trenches down in Springfield. Speaker 2: And it was a huge disappointment and, you know, hurt feelings. But I tell you, if you can't handle hurt feelings you shouldn't be in politics, I mean it's just that simple. And so that was one of those learning experiences. It just was what it was. The mayor had his own view of who was going to be on the ticket. The party leadership had their own view of who was going to be on the ticket and it related to a bunch of other interests, you see. And that's the other thing about it: inevitably it comes down to interest. And while I would have appreciated more in the way of explanation, and conversation, and communication about what it was that was really going on as opposed to just kind of this cold shoulder and, you know, get out of the way. At the same time, you know, in hind sight it was what it was supposed to be from his perspective. Story_ID: 16726 Speaker 1: Were you running against, was it Rose, who was the one who didn't know he was--? Speaker 2: Didn't know he was what? Speaker 1: When you said, you know, I was going to be slated--. Speaker 2: Oh, Harry [Bus] Yourell. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right. He's been in there a long time, right? Speaker 2: Yes, he had, but not as long as the guy before him. The guy before him, whose name I'm blanking on now, had been recorder of deeds for like forty years and he basically died in office and then Yourell took it. And he had been there for a good little while. I had actually served with Yourell in the legislature before, so I knew him, which is why I kind of asked the question, "Well, don't we have a recorder of deeds?" And like I said, Bus was mad at me because he just knew I had taken his job, but it wasn't my idea, it really was not. I'd never thought of county-wide government. And of course, that was another first because you'd never had a black person, much less a woman, elected county-wide to anything for that matter, but particularly executive office. Speaker 1: And put that in context because Harold [Washington] was now starting to build his whatever. Speaker 2: His political base, that's exactly right. Speaker 1: Political base and expand beyond the aldermen because he had been fighting for so long. So I just want you to sort of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, he called it the dream ticket and he considered this part and parcel of his effort to consolidate his position in county government. He had been elected, had fought that entire first four years against the [Edward] Vrdolyak 29 and the people in the city counsel who were not interested in his independent, more to the point, his black agenda. And so he had won those battles, in the main, and then he'd gotten reelected. And so given that he was prepared now to go forward with a slate of people who would represent his political ideology, and his position, and prominence as leader of the Democratic Party in Cook County, so he's branching out into the county and he put together what he called the dream ticket. And that consisted of me, Aurie [Aurelia] Pucinski wound up running for clerk of the circuit court, Joe [Joseph] Barrios was the first Hispanic, he was elected to the board of tax appeals. Who else? Me, Aurie, Joe Barrios, I'm blanking. But in any event, it was a racially, ethnic, gender balanced ticket county wide. And he announced the dream ticket, gave one of those classic Harold speeches about it being a dream ticket and then he died. Speaker 1: He didn't serve for a little bit? Speaker 2: No, no, he died almost right after the dream ticket was announced. I mean it was like within a month of the launching of the dream ticket, Harold was not with us anymore. And it was, like, really, I mean, like, whoa. Speaker 1: Oh, so that, so all that mayhem sort of happened afterwards, but you still ran and won, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you know when Harold died exactly? What month was that? I thought it was September. Okay, I was going to say September. Speaker 2: Late fall. And so the election then was November. The slating would have been--. I'm trying to get the dates together here, because there was a campaign. We'll have to look up the timeline on that, but I know that Harold did not live long enough to see me get elected to that office. Okay? And I remember being, just obviously horrified. Speaker 1: But do you remember then the whole thing that happened between Gene Sawyer [Eugene Sawyer] and--? Speaker 2: Gene Sawyer and, yes, vividly. Speaker 1: Where did your election fit vis a vis of that? Speaker 2: I believe I was already recorder. Speaker 1: You were already recorder and then that whole--. Speaker 2: No, no, that couldn't be, that wouldn't be right. Speaker 1: Something is wrong, something--. Speaker 2: You're right. Time-wise, maybe I was still in the state legislature? Speaker 1: So if the state--. Speaker 2: Right. So it was late '87 [1987], then, right? I wasn't recorder yet, I was still in the legislature. Speaker 1: So then primary was in the spring? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and then you were elected in the fall. Speaker 2: And the general was in November. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So Harold died before the general election, before the election actually happened. Speaker 1: So your whole election really occurred in this whole process of all this mayhem with Tim Evans and all of that? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I remember, as an outside observer, that there was attention thrown to the office just because you were the first black female, because otherwise people didn't even know what the Cook County Recorder of Deeds Office even did. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 16727 Speaker 1: But how did that whole, you know, all those machinations that occurred around that and the split and all that stuff effect you? Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting. I'm going to back up to state legislative days. One of the other things that inspired me to want to leave the state legislature was that historically the system majority leaders had been people who really called the shots and really carried the mayor's agenda and they dealt with everything from strategy to the detail of what was in the bill and the like. Harold [Washington] had a different model when he became mayor and instead of empowering the majority, his floor leader in that regard, he had a whole staff of intergovernmental relations people. And so you had Jackie Grimshaw and Tom Coffee and a group of people who worked in the mayor's office who thought it was their portfolio to determine the mayor's legislative strategies. So there had been a tension on that level, obviously, we still worked closely together and I still did--. I mean they couldn't do the floor work. But there was really a tension there and it's, like, you know, my attitude was I'm not looking to get turned into any kind of functionary here. So, you know, adios, I'm going, I need to go home anyway. So that was all of that. So then when the mayor died, those people were still very much behind the movement to put Tim Evans in the mayor's seat, even though the ostensive dean of the city council and the person who was by law next in line, Gene Sawyer [Eugene Sawyer], needed their support. And so I found myself once again at odds--. I mean this is called being an independents independent, or independent of the independents, right? I was at odds with those people because I thought what they did was wrong. And even though I liked Tim Evans and personally we were friends, at the same time I felt that they were undermining this guy who was in line to be mayor, and with the kind of divisiveness and division, that they were really more interested in promoting their own agenda than anything having to do with the larger issues of the civil rights movement. Speaker 1: And what is your commentary on what ultimately transpired. Speaker 2: What ultimately transpired was that they shot themselves and shot our community in the head, is what they did. I mean it was horrendous. And the result was Gene Sawyer went into office as a weakened political figure. He was no great orator to begin with, but a good guy. And you know, he'd come out of Machine politics but he'd always been supportive. In fact, if he hadn't have been as supportive as he was of the civil rights agenda his community wouldn't have tolerated it. So Gene Sawyer was on the right side, right page in terms of his politics, but he just was not their guy. And the result was that they fought him. And all the hysteria, and the histrionics, and all the chaos after the mayor's death meant that he went into the office already weakened and ready to be beat and that's exactly what happened. Story_ID: 16728 Speaker 1: You assume office at the same time that Gene Sawyer [Eugene Sawyer] assumes office and you then start to try to make some changes and sort of get your hands around what the Cook County Recorder of Deeds Office is, right? Can you comment on that? Speaker 2: Yes. Well, the first thing, because the office had been so moribund for so long, I convened what I called the blue ribbon committee. And I still have a bound copy of the book, there were eighteen members, so I need to find at least another one, just for posterity. But I had a blue ribbon committee come in and look at the office and make specific recommendations for change. And they did that. And these were people from the private sector, some of whom were in the real estate industry, some who weren't, people who used the office. And I proceeded to reform the office, down to--. I ran into a woman, just this weekend in fact, who said, "I work at the Recorder of Deeds Office and people still talk about what a great employer you were. You were the first person to put their paychecks in envelopes." And I had to just mention it because when I got there they would stand up in line while somebody handed them their paychecks, just the raw check. And it was, like, what? This is ridiculous. So I had people's checks put in envelopes and given to them and not--. Well, apparently that one little reform has resonated over the years in the Recorders Office. I also went to the state legislature and had the Torrence system of land registration repealed. My title was Recorder of Deeds and Registrar of Torrence Titles. So you held two titles. But the Torrence system had not worked and even though, theoretically, I think it was a pristine and a system that could have been wonderful in terms of keeping track of land ownership, at the same time, it was so cumbersome and they didn't have the technology yet to do it properly and so it was a bureaucratic mess that everybody who had property in Torrence hated. So we proceeded to and we got rid of the Torrence system and it's been phased out over time. And so there's some properties still in Torrence now but in another, you know, twenty years, all of that will have turned over and it'll be out. So that was another one of the recommendations, another one of the improvements. A place where I got stymied, I attempted to computerize the system because, and this is two commentaries, right? The first was the books in which land records were kept. You could almost see the changes in our civilization looking at the books because the early records were this beautiful florid, almost calligraphy handwriting, just uniform and gorgeous. And then by the time you got to World War I it began to show some change. By the time you got to World War II it was much more precise and less the flourishes were all gone. By the time you got to the 1960s people were writing every which way and by the time I became recorder you could barely read the stuff. So it was like we sure had to put some computers in here because in another few years you won't have a clue about what's going on. And so I wanted--. Then, of course, with the computers, the way it was set up the county essentially outsourced a lot of the operations to other people who were making a lot of money off of these free county records. And I didn't think that that was right, either. So I attempted to computerize the office and ran into a roadblock because the County Board wanted to put their guys in. And this is kind of an Arthur Andersen story, which is why I'm shedding no tears over what's happened to them with Enron, okay? Because the blue ribbon committee had recommended that we computerize so we went to the whole RFP process and had a competition for the contracts. And Arthur Andersen, along with a fellow, Jim [James] Lowery, who's the minority partner on a bid that was made by Arthur Anderson to computerize the office. Well, the newspapers got a hold, particularly this one reporter who made his life's work to try to discredit me, got a hold of the fact that Lowery was the minority bidder on the contract that I had proposed to the County Board. The County Board had put thumbs down on it and this reporter took the opportunity of those things happening to write articles about how, I don't know how many articles, but anyway, he wrote an article that said "Carol Moseley Braun is trying to put her crony in as the computer contractor for the Recorder of Deeds Office." So I was sufficiently annoyed about this, I mean obviously I was, you know, you don't like to get negative press and this was in the days before I knew what real negative press was. But anyway, I was really upset and I remember calling over to Andersen, because it was a clean a deal as you could get, and I called over there to talk to the managing partner who, theoretically, had signed off on and was part of this whole thing, and the guy wouldn't return my phone calls. And then I got to his second or third in command, whatever, and I said, "You guys have to step up to the plate and tell," I think it was the [Chicago] Tribune at the time, "tell the Tribune that you were part of a four-square process in which there was a selection panel and everything else." "Oh, okay, we'll get to it." Never said a word, let me twist gently in the wind. So there I was with egg on my face and Lowery looking like he was, you know, doing something untoward and the Andersen people sat back and just kind of dodged the bullet altogether. Story_ID: 16729 Speaker 1: Anita Hill came along, is that how we? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Anita Hill didn't come, Clarence Thomas came along. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry, Clarence Thomas came along, that's wrong, that's right. Speaker 2: And there were two different things and--in fact, I'm still trying to get the research--when Thomas was nominated by President Bush [George H. Bush] to the Supreme Court, I was leaving the Recorder of Deeds Office. This is toward the end of my ten-year tenure. I was going into the private sector again. I had lined up a job with a law firm, you know, and was ready to go in that direction. Story_ID: 16730 Speaker 1: I was invited to appear on that 'Chicago Tonight' show that John Callaway was hosting to talk about the President's nominee for the Supreme Court. George [Herbert] Bush, Sr had nominated Clarence Thomas and I knew, just because of my involvements in, you know, the legal community, I knew that Thomas had a very, very, right wing, antediluvian record on civil rights. He had been [Ronald] Reagan's point man in dismantling the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] and stopping a lot of the progress that that agency had represented. And the idea that he would take the position held by Thurgood Marshall was just more than I could take. And so I went on the television show, and I've never been one to mince words, and so I was probably less than diplomatic, as I am being right now. But anyway, less than diplomatic and talking about this particular nomination. And the result was the phone started ringing even as the next day and people saying, "Oh we think you're just wonderful. We think it's terrific." This is when the letter from Murphysboro happened. I got a letter, no, no, no, the letter was later. So I started getting phone calls telling me what a great job you did on the Callaway show, da-da, da-da, we think it's terrific. So then, of our two senators, Paul Simon and Alan Dixon, Simon was very clear early, that he was going to oppose the Thomas nomination. Dixon equivocated and Dixon had a record of supporting certain Repub-, the President's nominations all during the Reagan years. But also, as a very conserve-, what we call a Reagan Democrat. I mean, he supported President Reagan more often that not on just about everything and yet had, you know, obviously maintained his position as senator for the whole state of Illinois. And I just thought that it was an error for him to support Thomas's nomination. So then there was one other television program that I did, and this one was with Susan Getzendanner, and Susan and I were now talking about the Thomas nomination. And following that, there was some beginning talk about if Dixon won't commit, you know, maybe we're going to have to run someone against him or threaten him or at least scare him a little bit. Lo and behold, Alan Dixon voted to confirm Clarence Thomas, even though the women in Illinois had been, you know, really anxious that he not do so and calling him right at his office. I'm skipping ahead actually because before that happened, the Thomas nomination happened in two parts. The first part was just on Clarence Thomas and on his record at the EEOC. And then there was a recess in the proceedings that went on for about two weeks. And, it was during that period that the Anita Hill revelations became known. And so then we had this whole period which Anita Hill was on television and the Senate hearings were being televised. People were looking at the Senate for the first time and not seeing anybody that looked like them, paying attention to the process, and the proceedings, and to the power that these guys had. Story_ID: 16731 Speaker 1: During that period, some people had started to say well you know, maybe you could think about just giving [Alan] Dixon a scare and saying you're gonna run against him if he votes for Clarence Thomas. I didn't, frankly, at that point, really take it all that seriously. It was just the thought that was kind of protest politics at that point. And then as Anita Hill's testimony went on, the women, as you know, became more and more enraged really about not just what had happened to her, not just the sexual harassment that she had experienced, but the fact that the members of the committee just didn't seem to get it that this was a major economic issue for women. And at the time, I remember having conversation after conversation that most professional women who have worked in the workplace had had some incident of sexual harassment. Everybody had a story of, you know, the boss who, you know, touched their breasts or their back or their legs or something, or who, you know, asked them out for dates or whatever. So this was something that resonated with women across the board. And the fact that there were no women in the Senate. Well, there were two at the time: we had Nancy Kassebaum on the Republican side, Barbara Mikulski on the Democratic side and that was really it. And so the fact that the Senate was 98 percent rich, white, and male, and that there was nobody reflecting the rest of America there who could even explain it to them, what was going on, really infuriated a lot of people. When the vote came, in spite of all the opportunities from the women in my state, Dixon voted to confirm Clarence Thomas. And it happened in kind of almost serendipity, again--. It happened that he did so on a Thursday, I think the vote was on a Thursday evening, we're checking this, either Thursday or Friday. But whatever happened, his office was closed for the next two days because of the hot weekend, and then there was the Columbus Day holiday. So he went either three or four days--I think it was either three or four days, it could have even been five, I think four is right--in which his phones weren't being answered at all. And you had women from all over Illinois calling to protest and their phone calls were not getting answered at all. So that just poured salt in the wound and exasperated the anger at the vote that he had made. And so at that point, I was still recorder of deeds and I got a letter from a man in Murphysboro, Illinois. I finally remembered the name of the town, Murphysboro. Murphysboro is down in far southern Illinois. And this person had apparently done some business with the Recorder of Deeds office. Remember, this was an office that before I got there, the term right before [Harry] Bus Yourell--. In fact, ten people who had worked in that office had gone to jail under federal indictments for taking bribes. So it was an office that had been rife with corruption, had been just a bureaucratic nightmare to get through. The employees were dispirited and disheartened. The public hated using it. It was just a bad situation. Anyway, so this guy wrote and he said, basically, "I've used your office many times over the years and I have to tell you I've never seen it work as nicely as it does now. The people are actually friendly and they are nice and they won't take tips and dat, dat, dat", he went on. And he says, "I think you should run for Senate." And so I really--. The letter became a real comment because it was like, wait a minute, I got people down in Murphysboro, Illinois, saying I should run for the Senate. There must be something to this. At the time there were two other women who were interested, kind of. Marge Benson, Marge Benton, who had been involved in Democratic Party politics, and who was a wealthy woman in her own right, Marge was flirting with it a little bit. And then Susan Getzendanner was flirting with it a little bit. But as it turned out, because I was a person already in an elective office, I had the constituency base from which to move immediately into a campaign. And so, even though, at the time, like I said, there was more protest politics than anything else, we started our little campaign and that was the beginning of it. Story_ID: 16732 Speaker 1: What is interesting about this is that you have made great strides in the [Illinois] General Assembly for women's rights and the right of women in politics and the women's movement within politics. And then the women's movement really sort of catapults you and it surprises people, husbands. So can you talk about that because people switch parts, I mean, you know, you've got to, you, there was a train moving. Speaker 2: Well, you know, the women's movement, I think, took breath and life out of the Civil Rights Movement. I mean, it was really a hand off. The Civil Rights Movement had gone on through the murder of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. But by the time Dr. King was murdered, the antiwar movement had begun to take precedence at that point. Remember, Dr. King had gone back to start organizing janitors around economic justice issues because the war had taken up and the women's' movement was really just beginning. I've never been ashamed to refer to myself as a feminist. I mean, to me, it's just as natural as saying I'm black. I mean, that's what I am. I don't have a choice but to be in favor of my own personhood. And the notion that some how or another I would be limited by either my race or my gender or, for that matter, even economics and class, is something that just was an anathema. It just was not part of anything that I was raised up with. And so even though it' s often seen as defying expectations, I guess it depends on what expectation you start out with. It just never occurred to me but to do the best job I could at whatever it was I was in. I did things along the way that, again, related to and addressed issues that affected women, that affected black people, that affected poor people across the board. I mean, if anything, I've been more of an advocate for the poor than anything else. And over the years--. When I was recorder of deeds, I mentioned about giving out the checks in envelopes. There was another thing that actually got me some political criticism. Now, compared to some things I've been criticized about, it's not so bad, I guess. But anyway, I was criticized by some politicians because I implemented a program where people could take off work and get paid if they were going to go to school and see about their kids' grades. If they were gonna go pick up a report card or go to a parent-teacher conference, they could do so on recorder of deeds time and still get paid for it. And I remember one guy, "Oh, she's wasting the taxpayer money." But it's like, duh, you've got working mothers down here. How else are they going to be able to handle their kids' interests if this is the issue. So this is before Family Medical Leave took place. We had school leave in the Recorder of Deeds Office. When I was in the state legislature, backing up, one of the bills that I worked real hard on, never was able really to pass, but it did eventually pass as a rule by HUD [Housing and Urban Development], nationally. And that was--I don't know if it passed; I take that back, it may have passed eventually--the prohibition against discrimination in rental housing against families with children. Because I, again in my own experience, had gone through a time when my mother [Edna Davie Moseley] and my father [Joseph John Moseley] broke up, we wound up moving in with my grandmother [Edna Roberta Davie] down on 41st and Berkeley in large part because my mother had such a hard time trying to find an apartment that would take us. You know, here's a woman with four kids like, oh no, go away. So, when I got to the legislature my attitude was, oh no, that's not right. And you shouldn't be able to discriminate against somebody just because they have children. Now if the kid's an ax murderer, that's something else. But just because you've got children, that's not right. So these kind of life experiences were reflected in my legislative record. And I've always been an activist legislator, as you know. I'll tell you something, I'm gonna make a speech here for a second, but that's what I believe the system is supposed to do. And that's why I believe integration of the Senate, integration of the different levels of government is so important. And when I say integration, I don't mean just race integration, but gender integration, economic integration. And the reason is that when you have people in positions of power that come from different constituencies that make up the polity, make up the community as a whole, what you wind up doing is, if you are stirring the pot a little bit, you get the benefit of different experiences, different perspective, and different points of view. And once you get the benefit of everybody's perspective and points of view, you make better policy, because the policy then is more reality-based. The policy then has more of a basis in the life experiences of the people who are being governed. So I saw it as part and parcel of what I was supposed to do, to be, again, not just a woman but an activist for women's rights. Story_ID: 16733 Speaker 1: There were actually two campaigns. The first campaign that happened--. Well three really, three campaigns when you think about it. Because the first one is in the early months before January of 1991. And, again, we have to get the dates together on when [Clarence] Thomas was confirmed. But right after Clarence Thomas was confirmed to the Supreme Court my campaign kicked off. And it was a ragtag group. We had gone and just asked people to contribute ideas for my announcement speech. It was just really a fledging effort, is being kind. I don't know when Jesse Jackson's birthday is, but whatever month it was, I had gone out, just as I had gone to see Harold [Washington] about Lieutenant Governor, I went to see Jesse Jackson before I wanted to launch a political campaign, particularly as at that point in time, both Susan Getzandanner and Marge Benton were still looking at it. But the women of the National Organization for Women, NOW, had decided that I was going to be their candidate. In fact, the woman who was the president of NOW at the time had been my campaign manager when I ran for state rep; Sue Purrington is her name. And Sue had gone from being my campaign manager for the state legislature, now she was president of the National Organization for Women. Once NOW lined up behind my candidacy, that really kind of closed the door on the other two women who were looking at it. So I started off, I had a woman named Chris Long who was the campaign manager; Bill Taylor, who was my deputy at the Recorder's Office was the deputy campaign manager; Helene Colvin, who recently died, was the press secretary. We had a small little group and I went out to Washington because we really didn't have anything going and Bill Taylor knew these people from Trippi, McMahon & Squier which was a political consulting group out of Washington, D.C. So he arranged for me to go to Washington to meet with the Joe Trippi his group. And they said, "Well we're going to try to get you to some meetings with some of the national groups," and Jesse Jackson being among them. So Jesse had been too busy to see me in his office but his office said, "Oh well were having a party for Reverend Jackson. You can go to his birthday party." So I went to his birthday party. I told him what I was looking to do. The same kind of situation as Harold, he gave his permission without necessarily his blessings. He said something like, well you know it's going to be tough to do but if you want to do it, I don't have a problem. Okay. It was one of those. I met, or became reacquainted with Kgosie Matthews at that party, as Kgosie had been a Jesse Jackson person and traveled the world with him. I told Kgosie and Frank Williams, who is Jesse's press guy, what I was looking to do and they both went yeah, right, knock, knock, knock. Everyone was kind of laughing at the campaign at that point. But Kgosie really did kind of take it a little more seriously and he said, "Well you know, if you get to New York, call on me." So I did and that resulted in him bringing a guy who was a speechwriter on to help me write my announcement speech because I hadn't announced yet. I was going to make sure I crossed all my T's first. So I made the announcement and we got a little campaign going and it was going nowhere, I mean, it was just dead in the water. And the holidays were coming upon us and I'll never forget, it was one day that was just critical in all of it. Helene had scheduled me to have a press conference with Quentin Young and a bunch of doctors around universal health care. This was scheduled for the exact same time that Bill Taylor had scheduled me to speak to some steel workers out of the Union Hall on 98th and Commercial, which was to happen at the exact same time that Sue Bess, my secretary, had invited all of the recorder of deeds from around the state to come and look at what we had done with our systems. So I had a bunch of recorders of deeds traveling to my office, which was at the exact same time that I had told Kgosie Matthews that I would go to lunch with him because he was leaving the country. He was going back to South Africa. I'll talk about that another time. But anyway, he was on his way back to South Africa. So he stopped in Chicago and we were going to have lunch. Well, I cancelled the steel workers; I just couldn't get out there. I was running from the press conference with the docs back over to the office to give cookies to them and show them the latest set of machines and then back over to the docs, and then back over. So I'm running across the street trying to do this dual appointment and just getting actually exhausted. And I'll never forget, and I need to look up the woman's name, because there was a Republican recorder of deeds who joined up with Kgosie, and the two of them essentially trailed me as I went back and forth to the--. And so when by the time I was able to have lunch it was close to three o'clock in the day. And I was exhausted and wiped out. The campaign was not going anywhere. And I'll never forget, We went over to Marshall Fields because it was too late to get lunch anywhere. So we went over across the street to Marshall Fields and sat where they have a little soup place and sat over a bowl of soup. And I, and I said to Kgosie, "Well, you know, I'm gonna call a press conference tomorrow and announce that I'm dropping out of this campaign. I can't do this." And he said, "Well why not?" I said, "Well, you know, I don't have any staff." Bill Taylor had just announced he was gonna be slated to be a judge so he had to leave the campaign. Helene had just developed MS [multiple sclerosis] and so she physically couldn't function. And Chris Long, who was my campaign manager, had just announced she had to have heart valve replacement surgery, so she was going to have to leave. So I had no infrastructure. We had all of $300, if that, in the bank. And this was supposed to be a statewide campaign. It was just a joke. And rather than continue to participate in that joke, I was going to call and end the campaign. And Kgosie looked at me and just grinned and said, "Oh no, you can't do that. You can't do that. You know this is too important to our people. This is too important to the diaspora." By way of background, Kgosie's grandfather had been an author of the South African freedom charter and was a noted intellectual who was very much a part of the de-colonization movement in Africa generally. But, specifically in South Africa he had been a colleague of Nelson Mandela's and at the end of his life became the ambassador from Botswana to the United States. Kgosie and his father, who was a lawyer with the World Council of Churches, had spent his adult life raising money for ANC [African National Congress] and for the freedom movement in South Africa. So he had all this stuff in terms of power, politics in South Africa and African politics, generally and now Kgosie was saying to me, oh no, you can't drop out. You know, you've got the responsibility and duty to do this. And, you know, I talk about being black and Catholic. I mean, you start telling me what my duty is and all of a sudden, you know. So it was like, okay, I started to feel a little guilty that I was shirking my duty by saying I was going to pull out. But then I said, "But wait a minute. You don't understand. I don't have a campaign manager. I don't have a deputy campaign manager. I don't have a press secretary. I've got $300 in the bank. And unless you're gonna come and manage this campaign, I'm out of here." And I said it more off-hand kind of a joke than anything else because I really had never thought of Kgosie in that particular role and certainly hadn't asked him to do that. I remember he looked at me very strangely and he pulled out of his briefcase a cell phone, and that was early enough that the cell phone is like this big, right? So he pulls out this giant cell phone and dials a whole bunch of numbers and calls his mother, as it turns out, in South Africa, and who is expecting him. And said, "Well, Mom I won't be home just yet. I'm gonna stay in America and help a friend." And with that he said he would come back because he was shutting down his apartment in New York and this, that, and the other. I later discovered he was, you know, breaking up with his girlfriend in Detroit. She's from Detroit. But anyway, he had things to take care of and announced that he was going to come back by the first of the year to pick up the campaign. And that's what he did. Story_ID: 16734 Speaker 1: His [Kgosie Matthews] only involvement with Chicago politics had been again, through and via the [Jesse] Jackson operation, but he did not know Chicago politics. But you know, again, he is a political analyst and he's just a very smart man, so between analyzing the numbers and looking at the demographics of the state--. I knew a lot of the political people statewide. And so working together a general strategy was developed. And it was a strategy, frankly, that called on me to--. I mean, it was more of a grassroots people kind of campaign than I think our state had seen in a very long time. It paid attention to southern Illinois. You know, places where people didn't think that I could get any votes just because of racist assumptions really, that the people in the southern part of our state wouldn't vote for a black person. Well, what the first campaign showed me was that if you asked them for a vote they just might. And in fact, they did. I mean I got votes in counties in which it was never anticipated that a black could win. And the result was that it was a three-way race because a fellow by the name, Al Hofeld ran in that primary, also. And Hofeld had made a point that he had the money. In fact, he had come to my office to visit me to say, "I think you should drop out because I'm gonna be the candidate because I'm prepared to put five million dollars of my own money into beating Alan Dixon and you don't have the resources to do it." And so I said, "Well, I may not have the resources but I can get the votes." And so there was nothing contentious about it, but that was just the reality. So Hofeld ran; Dixon ran, the incumbent, I ran. And Hofeld spent so much of that five million dollars beating up on Dixon. He made Dixon very vulnerable. Dixon's vote split between him and Hofeld. Anybody who was mad at Dixon but didn't want to vote for me voted for Hofeld. Okay? And the result was that I got the most votes and won the primary. Story_ID: 16735 Speaker 1: You won the primary, that's sort of a big deal at this point. Speaker 2: It was a huge deal. It was huge. And in fact, Patty Murray later said to me that, and I don't have these statistics, but apparently the women candidates that were running in that election all got a huge boost in their respective campaigns as a result of our primary victory. Illinois' primary is among the first in the country because we are March. And so we had an early March primary and that then meant that women who had primaries in April, May, June, later on in the year, also, their numbers go up. So Patty told me that her numbers went up twenty points following my nomination. Again, I have no verification of that, but the fact is that everybody reported--everybody meaning the women candidates--a real bounce in their numbers, because now people saw--. Well hey, if this little black child over here in Illinois can do it then why not, fill in the blank. And that made a difference. Story_ID: 16736 Speaker 1: Comment briefly about what you thought the critical elements of that first primary campaign were? Speaker 2: You know, it kind of goes back to that joke that I told you about when I ran for the first time for the state legislature. You know, the blacks won't vote for you because you're not part of the Machine. The whites won't vote for you because you're black, and nobody's going to vote for you because you're a woman. And in fact, people voted for me for all those reasons, instead. So it just kind of turned itself around. And that's what I found in this election. Women voted for me, Democratic women, Republican women. There was a great deal of crossover, both in the primary and in the general, among women voters. Black voters, in the main, not all, I mean, [Alan] Dixon had a following and [Al] Hofeld had a following. In fact, talk about disappointment, my feelings were kind of hurt because a woman I had known for a number of years wound up doing a commercial for Al Hofeld. But I later found out that he had done some case and won her a bunch of money. But whatever, it just still hurt my feelings. So it wasn't automatic that blacks were going to vote for me either. But I did, obviously, get a huge turnout in the black community and a big vote in the black community. If anything, the black community was the most skeptical, just based on not thinking that it could win something like a Senate primary. I mean, you know, you had to encourage black people: go to the polls; this could really happen. In terms of Democratic voters, particularly once there was a democratic primary, and that's where Gary LaPaille, frankly, as, as a chairman of the Democratic Party in Illinois played such a critical role, because it was LaPaille's leadership that which I know Dixon blames him for it--It was LaPaille who said, look, we've got too many elements of our own base, both Hofeld and the trial lawyers and that North Shore crowd, and me and the black community, and Dixon in southern Illinois, all going at each other. It was not in the party's interest to slate a candidate. And so there was a quote, open primary, with nobody slated. So it was like a toss-up ball. Well, if you've got a jump ball in that kind of situation, like I said, the person who gets the most votes wins and I got the most votes. Story_ID: 16737 Speaker 1: Yeah, in '98 [1998], what I call the revenge of the [Alan] Dixon people, the fact is that I lost. In '98, even though I was out-spent three to one, I lost narrowly. Now for all the noise around that election, you look at the numbers, I lost by less than 100,000 votes. But that 100,000 votes we lost in southern Illinois. I did not have the same vigorous campaign in southern Illinois. My opponent was hammering me in southern Illinois and there was still some people in the Democratic Party in southern Illinois, who were sufficiently annoyed that I had beat their Democratic incumbent, that they stayed away from the polls in droves. So that's where I lost that election. And in a presidential, you see, they could do that because you don't have the top of the ticket to worry about. In a presidential election, of course, there's a Democrat running for president, people are going to come out to vote for that presidential candidate and that will generally mean they'll vote for the senator as well. When you don't have that and the senator is the top of the ticket, it's a different kind of a dynamic and again that's part of what I ran into in '98. Speaker 2: Now what do you think, from the primary where you're like, you're--the dark horses come, you know, poom, and the general election, is there anything you might have done differently or responded differently to things? Because there was issues, you know, the mother [Edna Davie Moseley], there were things, there was, you know, we're starting to see politics in general sort of get to the, you know, very personal issues, some personal attacks--. Speaker 1: Well, it was attacks from the minute it looked like I was a serious candidate. The thing with my mother, the most unfortunate thing about that was that I think that shortened her--. She died shortly thereafter. I think it really did take a toll on her, more than it did on me. I mean, I almost could care less in terms of politics. But, you know, here was this upright tax paying, God fearing, very, very, conservative straight woman being made out to be a welfare cheat. And that was just devastating to her. It wasn't true; it was proved not to be true. There was never anything to it but, the old tissues of lies and whatever. But the fact is, because I was so new on the political, the national political scene, it was an initial impression. And so it helped start to create a set of impressions that I think I never really was able to fully rebound from in the time that I was in the Senate. And it was terrible. It was terrible. It was a very, very traumatic thing for my family. Story_ID: 16738 Speaker 1: Well, understand, the things, my mother [Edna Davie Moseley] didn't happen until October. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was right before the election. Speaker 1: That was the October surprise in my election. And it was such an October surprise, I mean you're a lawyer, right? It was a situation in which I had no legal interest, culpability, or anything. It was like why are you talking to me about this? But that was a function of not fully appreciating the, what's the word I'm looking for? Not fully appreciating that so much of politics is about image as opposed to substance. And so it had nothing to do, really, with the substance of anything. My mother had not done anything wrong. I had not done anything wrong. But the images were painted around that situation that looked like she was a welfare cheat and I was trying to cover up for her or was part of causing her to be a welfare cheat. However it got spun, it was a very, very, negative kind of a thing. And that started in October. And when that started, it was funny, because I had a conversation at the time with my press guy. And he was saying, "Well, we've gotta respond to whatever it was," he said, "or were gonna look up and find the press will turn on us." And I said to him, "Don't you understand? They already have." I mean, it was almost a visceral type of thing. I could just sense that the press had ignored me in the primary, glorified me over the summer months--it was the campaign from, you know, Ms. Smith goes to Washington or whatever--and then when the October surprise came, then they proceeded to try to demonize. They got on that stick and they just wouldn't let up. Speaker 2: And that continued even after you were elected? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: So talk about that. There were the issues of going to Africa, you know, all those issues that came about and you said, "I would have looked at things different. I would look at things in terms of image." But I'm just wondering how you felt going into it. I mean, wondrous, incredible high, you know, the first black, female senator ever in the history of the United States. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But I'm just wondering what's happening in your mindset. Speaker 1: I have a different mindset about it now than I had then, obviously. I guess in those days, I was always really perplexed and confused why I wasn't being treated like everybody else. You know, I mean, I was looking to be a legislator. And again, this is part of the pond lesson, you know, that having been a state legislator, and an effective one, etc., etc., I just knew that some of that good will, reputation, history, experience, whatever, would translate over. Number one, that there would be enough people on the national scene who would have some sense of what kind of a legislator, much less, what kind of a person I was from my Springfield days. Well, wrong. Absolute disconnect. I mean, I could have started off having been a cleaning lady. And, you know, cleaning lady, frankly, in part was some of the imagery that was out there. I mean, the stories about, you know, working single mom. When I first got in the Senate, the [Chicago] Tribune Magazine did a thing and I'm standing up in front of a desk. The picture on the front of the little magazine cover has me standing in front of a desk and I've got on a scarf. I think I may have been wearing the same suit, or close to it. But anyway, letters that came in later: Carol Moseley Braun, who does she think she is? She's standing there wearing an Armani scarf with a Waterford crystal biscuit jar on the desk behind her and I know how much those things cost. How can she afford that? So the notion was that I had come out of abject poverty or something, out of the bowels of the ghetto, and catapulted myself based on stolen campaign money into this position of prominence. I mean, all the negative images were set loose. And, again my state legislative work, all that time, all the effort, none of that mattered at all in that regard. In terms of what I would have done differently, again, it had to do with manipulating the images more than anything else. And I could not understand why I was looked at to be a symbol, why I was being looked at to be a role model, why I was being looked at to be, you know, Oprah goes to Washington. Oprah got mad at me for saying that, actually, but anyway, I shouldn't say it again. But, why those things were, those expectations were not being met when as far as I was concerned, I had been elected to be a legislator. And the whole idea was that I was gonna go Washington and I was gonna participate in the legislative process, and I was going to pass bills, and I was gonna initiate legislation, and that that was all that I would be required to do. And nothing could have been further from the truth. Speaker 2: Now you said you did have your agenda. You got a plum assignment. Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: You got to talk about--. Speaker 1: I got a plum assignment and I got more bills passed. I mean, I'm really proud of my legislative record. If anything, it does show that my priorities weren't too far off because I did what I set out to do as a legislator. But even the plum assignment--I was the first woman in history to get a permanent seat on the Senate Finance Committee--and if you read the clips from the Chicago papers they made it sound like some down and dirty, low-down, backroom Chicago smoke-filled room deal. I mean, literally. It kind of, you know, she manipulated her way with some backroom politics onto the Finance Committee. They couldn't even celebrate that. It was astonishing. So I found that even my victories were diminished, were not celebrated. And the things that were even marginally on the edge, a lot of--. For months they wrote that I had failed to show up for Senate orientation. There's a picture of me on the front page of the New York Times that says woman senator is at senator orientation. I was not only at senator orientation but I am on the front page above the fold in the New York Times and yet they kept saying that. I went to Africa, you mentioned that. Everybody else went on vacation. I had just had almost a year of campaigning. And so, when I went off after the election on the post-election two week holiday, which is kind of standard, you know, it was a big hairy deal in my case because I wasn't supposed to do that, I guess. Speaker 2: I can say, I thought there was a difference in reporting, as time went on in Washington D.C. where you were, very well respected and in Chicago there was still a lot of mud-slinging. Speaker 1: Well, it stayed that way. The Chicago press just stayed absolutely brutal. And, you know, maybe if I'd gotten reelected it would have changed. But whatever, that's just the way it was. Story_ID: 16739 Speaker 1: What are you proud of, the things that you accomplished? One, you took on Jesse Helms and the whole issue. Can you talk about that? Speaker 2: The Confederate flag. Speaker 1: The Confederate flag, right. Speaker 2: It's funny because you never know what people will remember and the things that stand out and how or why. That was a situation in which I unexpectedly had to take on Jesse Helms around the renewal of the patent for the Confederate flag. And I say unexpectedly because the bill had been part of a patent bill that Strom Thurmond had for the fat drug, the fat substitute, olestra. It was the olestra bill. Tucked in there was a renewal of a patent on the Confederate flag. So when my staffer brought it to my attention, I said, "No. No, this can't happen." And so I went to the committee chairmen and told them all I can't sit here and let this happen. And of course some of fellows all went home a-humming and a-humming and I didn't realize why they were so intimidated. I didn't realize it was that big of a deal, to be honest. This is called fools rush in or something. Why? How could this be a debate over patenting a Confederate flag? So I won the battle in committee. And then lo and behold, Jesse Helms takes it to the floor. And I went out to the floor. We were in the middle of a debate about choice, in fact, in the Judiciary Committee. And I ran over to the capitol, you know, just beside myself, how could this happen to me in one day. You know, I gotta fight on choice over here, and then I gotta fight on the Confederate flag over here. Actually, it was pretty symbolic if you think about it, choice on the one hand, race on the other. How many more aspects have we gotta take: have somebody take up something about short people? But anyway, so I get over there and there's Jesse Helms and we have to start the debate, and I'm kind of handling in dry lawyer tones about why this wasn't necessary, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And I lost. And when I lost, I was like horrified. Like, how could you guys vote for a flag that represents slavery and enslavement and all the ugliness of the Civil War, and I mean, come on, and that's when I say well I'll just filibuster. No you're not going to do this. And so, it was in the course of that filibuster that the Senate had really a--. Pat Moynihan [Daniel Patrick Moynihan] called it an epiphany. In many regards, I guess it was an epiphany but for the Senate it was truly one of those transcendent moments in which debate actually mattered. In the main, debate doesn't matter in these times, because staff does it all. You go out there and give a speech and a story. But this was actually a debate. And it was a debate on one of our nation's most sensitive issues, race, from the only black person that had the right to be there. I mean, I was the only black person in the Senate. And given that there had only been two in the century, you know, small wonder these conversations haven't happened a whole lot in our nation's highest legislative body. So it was an extraordinary debate under extraordinary circumstances and one that really touched such a nerve that at the end of the day, when it came, I think I had seventy-six votes or thereabouts. Everybody felt good about it. And that was with the possible exception of Jesse Helms and maybe one or two others, everybody felt good about that victory. And Judge Heflin [Howell Heflin], who was the Senator from Alabama, got up and said, "My grandfather was a general in the Confederate army. But it's time for our country to move on. We've got to put this behind us. And I support her because of blah, blah," and he gave his speech. And that was one of those things that just kind of began to turn minds, and change minds, and change hearts. And people voted and it really became, again, the symbolism of it was that the Confederate flag doesn't get a patent but obviously it resonates so much more deeply in terms of our national consciousness, that it's turned out to be one of the shining moments of my Senate career. Story_ID: 16740 Speaker 1: What do you think that you learned from the Senate that was much different than any other local experience that you had? I don't know, maybe this is more in the House [of Representatives], you know, the Congress, the people feel disconnected like they were a big fish in a small pond and they go to Congress and it takes so many, many--. They feel disconnected. But that's not your experience though, you did not have that. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: In fact I remember in banking that you made some very important--. Speaker 2: I did, in fact. Again, my legislative record is the aspect of my Senate tenure about that I am the most proud. I mean, both in banking and regards to health care issues, because on the Finance Committee, of course, you did health care as well as social security. I did work for women's pensions and for retirement security issues. I mentioned being on the Finance Committee itself was just astonishing, the trade stuff that I got a chance to do. So I was able to function as a legislator, in addition to the whole crumbling schools initiative, which we coined the phrase "crumbling schools" in my office as a way of talking about the educational infrastructure in facilities. But again, if you look at my state legislative career, there really is an extension of that into the United States Senate. I mean, a lot of the stuff that I have talked about even down to and including the welfare reform. I was one of the people who voted against the [Bill] Clinton welfare reform even though the whole idea of reform welfare was so popular. But I knew enough about how the system really worked to understand the problems. And the states are still trying to fix problems coming out of that bill. I just yesterday, in fact--this is digression--got a thing, last week, about how the bill allows the states not to give assistance to the children of women who have been convicted of drug crimes. Well, you know, you talk about family values, what kind of sense does that make? So you break up a family because a woman has been convicted of a drug crime? That doesn't make any sense. But it's that sort of stuff that's having to be fixed on a state by state basis now. So all of these things, whether it was in welfare or in international trade--. I did a lot of stuff for my farmers. I say my farmers, but you know, Illinois is largely agricultural state. And I thought, because I saw my job as being primarily that of being a legislator, I was going to make sure that the interest of agricultural Illinois was attended to as the interest of urban Illinois. And so, I got soybean loan rates put in place that made a difference to those farmers. They call me the ethanol queen because of the ethanol legislation that I helped to pass. The fact that I signed on to ethanol I think made a difference in the way some people thought about it and looked at the issue. The emergency relief for farmers--. I did a lot of work, I mean, a lot of work on farm stuff. To the point that I made some lasting friendships, I think. Even today when I said I was gonna try to restore my great grandparents farm in Alabama, the head of the Illinois Farm Bureau called me and said, "Well we're here to help ya if you need some help." I really got excited about, you know, issues of what happens with the Mississippi River and the kind of levees we have, and the waterways and transportation, the subsidies for people to use mass transportation to go to work as opposed to their cars. I mean, I put that into the transportation and the IST bill so people can, hopefully, incentivize mass transportation and alternative transportation over, you know, the carbon guzzling, carbon emission, car. So there's a variety of things that fit in my reputation in environmental issues, my work in farm issues, my work in trade issues, you know, because I studied trade and done some trade stuff when I was in the State Legislature. All of those things carried over into the Senate. Story_ID: 16741 Speaker 1: Now, it's time for you to campaign for--. You say three campaigns, so this is 1998? Speaker 2: No, no, it's three campaigns just getting to the Senate. Speaker 1: That's right, so--. Speaker 2: You see, that gets to be important though because, I even read in the newspapers somebody saying, oh well Carol Moseley Braun getting elected to the Senate was a fluke. I won a primary election and then a general election, back to back elections. Now you can have a fluke once, but two back to back flukes sounds to me like purpose. And so, I really think it's important in terms of talking about this that I had to win two elections to get to the Senate, not just one. And when I say three campaigns, I refer to the Chris Long campaign and the Kgosie Matthews campaign for the primary and then the campaign of the general. So it was three in that regard. Speaker 1: Okay, but now you're up for reelection and you know this is all part of sort of a [Bill] Clinton legacy campaign, Democrats and such have to come back to your home turf. I mean, you know, the importance is also on the home turf. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so I'm wondering what the whole strategy was that you embarked on, because it appeared on the outside that people got on late. Speaker 2: Oh, they did. I had been beat from one end of the state to the other. The press coverage had been so consistently negative that I had to, literally, go back and stomp for and win every vote, every supporter. Add to that, issues, and this get to the whole stereotype issue, I think, but things like votes that I took that would enrage parts of my constituency that they forgave everybody else for. For example NAFTA [North American Free Trade Agreement], that's very controversial. When I campaigned, I told the unions that I was gonna support NAFTA, in my little brochures and stuff I told them I was gonna support it because I'm a free trader in that regard. I mean, that's where the conservative economics comes in. If anything, my whole political thing was kind of backwards. I'm very, to use the term liberal, on social issues but more conservative on economic issues. It's always been that way. Okay, so here I am this kind of novel politician, who told unions I was gonna support NAFTA. When I did support NAFTA, they were madder at me than they were at Bill Clinton whose initiative it was. And so I would make the point, well wait a minute, Paul Simon supported it and you're not real mad at him. Bill Clinton, it's his idea, you're not real mad at him. Then why you so angry with me? And that had to do with expectations, I think, more than anything else. I couldn't do enough to overcome a lot of that. There's just a lot of anger, a lot of disappointment in terms of expectations, which again, one wonders what some of those expectations were or could have been. But in any event, by the time I got around to the '98 campaign, I'd been so beat up I was really disheartened, I think. I don't think I really had the heart for that kind of campaign. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I really don't think I had the heart for--. I work hard. No, no, and this goes back to the duty calls etc. because even though at one point, I think I got pneumonia in the middle of the campaign, I made it a point to continue to work the kind of long hours that a campaign requires, in spite of it because I've never wanted to look back and say I've given anything less than 100 percent. Story_ID: 16742 Speaker 1: You say you really didn't have the heart for the campaign. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, in fact, I had even, and this is the part that Dr. Harris doesn't even know, by the way, what I'm about to say now. I had considered resigning midway through my Senate term. And I had gone to my friend Tom Sullivan who had been the lawyer with me on the reapportionment case, I've mentioned Tom before, and asked Tom for a legal opinion about what would be involved if I just quit. And he came back and the answer was that the Republican governor would get to appoint a senator. I just didn't feel like I could do that and turn control over--. The Republicans already had control of the Senate so it would just have been another vote, but at the same time it would have meant that the Senate would have had no black people in it at all which, of course, is the way the Senate is now anyway so it wouldn't have made that much of a difference. But that was the first time, I think, in my life I was just really ready to just give it up and just walk away from it because it was that kind of brutal. It was really horrible. Speaker 1: So you got so close, even though you had those thoughts of giving up, you got 100,000 votes short of victory. So how does that feel at that point? Speaker 2: I must tell you that I felt vindicated. I was really grateful. I mean, I lost but I lost under the most honorable of circumstances, that is to say narrowly and out-spent three to one. The fellow who beat me spent almost 20 million dollars of his own money. So it was a lot of money involved, a lot of money put into the campaign that I could not meet even with the fund raising assistance. Hillary [Rodham] Clinton was wonderful and if anything, she stepped up to the plate to really jack up some of the people who were playing, who were, you know, "I don't think I want to support her because she didn't come to my chicken fry or she didn't do this for me," or whatever. It was a lot of what Gerald, was it Ford? No, Spiro Agnew came up with the term "nattering nabobs of negativism." So there were a lot of nattering nabobs out there and it was all very negative and it was just a very nasty, negative climate of opinion around my reelection effort. And at some point you're no longer frustrated by it. I mean, I was beyond frustration. I just kind of said okay, fine. You know, if I'm not doing this the way you want it done then go find somebody else. Speaker 1: So was it that time that you thought, "I'm gonna not do politics anymore?" Because, you know, this has been a thing where you say I'm gonna quit, I'm gonna go into private practice. Speaker 2: Right. Well, I wasn't exactly sure what I was going to do but I didn't want to lose. Let me start out, you never want to lose, and you never want to lose an election. I never lost an election, except the lieutenant governor, which is a slating, so the election that didn't happen, right? So you don't want to ever to lose an election and I've never been a quitter. So those things were really up against me, but at the same time, my heart had been broken. I mean that's a very womanist way to explain something. But really, it had been so negative, so nasty, I had been the target for so much ugliness, I was just tired of it and not defeated exactly, but just I didn't want to have to go through that. I would have liked to have won and frankly, if I would have won reelection, one of the things that I inspired myself with was the notion that if I win reelection then a lot of this will stop. Well, there was never any guarantee of that, really, but that was how I kept myself going, that they'd just stop hammering me. But it took the little old lady who came to me after and said I tried to tell you, I tried to tell you, you can't do like they do. Story_ID: 16743 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your ambassadorship, how that even came about and what the whole--. Speaker 2: Well, I like to say I was an ambassador to paradise for two years and it came about after I lost the reelection to the Senate. I really was kind of floundering and didn't really know what I was going to do. I had worked on school construction issues so I went over and worked with the US Department of Education on school construction, a little bit. But clearly I was gonna have to strike out on a career path. It was Hillary [Rodham] Clinton who suggested the ambassadorship to New Zealand because the incumbent ambassador had been there for longer than really his term. And the APEC [Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation] conference was coming up. I probably jinxed it myself in one way because I was saying, "Oh this is wonderful. I get to go to New Zealand in time to be part of APEC." Well, the guy on the other end wanted to be there for APEC too, since he had done all the work. So it wound up being a year-long hiatus between the time that I lost reelection and the time I actually got off to New Zealand and was confirmed by the Senate. It was about a year, with machinations back and forth, this guy trying to stay in place, and this, that, and the other. But the real thing came with Jesse Helms, and this is my, you know, Jesse Helms, my worst enemy, my best friend, right, because he didn't want to call my nomination. So this kid reporter from Roll Call wanted to talk to me. I wouldn't talk to him. He then went over to the Senate to speak with Jesse Helms. Helms, in addition to running over the kid's foot with his wheelchair, told the kid, "I'm not going to call her nomination 'til she apologizes for what she did on the Confederate flag." Well, that was like the best thing he could have said because the whole country went, "Gasp." The sense of outrage in Washington was so overwhelming about the Confederate flag thing that Jesse Helms was forced to call my nomination. Then when he called it, he said, "She's not going to get confirmed because she's got all these ethical clouds hanging over her, all this stuff that had been written about in the papers," that you referenced a little bit. And so, he called the hearing, with like a two week period of time and then sent out subpoenas to every entity in Washington that would have had any dealings with me whatsoever. So the Justice Department, the Internal Revenue Service, the Federal Election Commission, the White House, the Senate Ethics Board, everybody got subpoenas from Jesse Helms about their dealings with me. But it turned out to be a really good thing because his subpoenas exonerated me more than I ever knew, than I would have ever been able to do on my own. I have never been fined or anything, had any sanction for any of my conduct at any level of government. But I was particularly pleased to find that with the FEC, Federal Election Commission, they had dismissed my case. They had closed down the case looking at how we were spending campaign money. But they just closed it down. It wasn't like okay, we found that you didn't do anything wrong and so we're going to close it down, they just shut the thing down. It wasn't until Jesse Helms subpoenas came back, or the answers to his subpoenas came back, that I discovered that they had shut it down because they had done this 100% audit on our campaign finances and all they couldn't account for, things spent on the campaign, was $311.28. So, I would never have known $311.28. And all that noise you heard around campaign finances came down to $311.28. Okay, thanks to Jesse Helms this is now documented history. They had made a big deal out of me being under investigation by the IRS. And thanks to Jesse Helms, the documents came back and what it revealed was, because I had always been very meticulous, obviously, about paying taxes--. You don't go from being a US Attorney and not pay attention to this stuff, right? Anyway, it came back out of the Justice Department, two sets of correspondence which are priceless. The first one was that the agent had proposed that they initiate a grand jury to investigate me because and I quote, she campaigned, she reported $31,000 in cash contributions in her campaign. But she campaigned in areas where people don't have checking accounts. So she had to have collected more cash than that. That was the first letter. So this goes up to justice, and the Justice Department kicks it back, and says, "Have you lost your mind? No, we are not taking this case." So this agent, who had now hounded me and gone and talked to my neighbors and talked to Carol Marin at the TV station, and everything else--you remember, you were in town--so then he writes a letter, which I actually have a laminated version of, that said to a supervisor when she was expressing how angry he was the Justice had said forget it, and he said and I quote, "If they is smart nuff, N-U-F-F, to get elected, they is smart nuff to go to jail." Okay, so this is the second letter that came out of the IRS. So when this stuff came out what we saw was this picture, this crazy IRS person, these investigators, I mean, I was investigated by the western law. They were poring over my personal accounts, my family's accounts, I mean, everything, one investigation after another. And $311.28 was what it came down to. So when that happened, Jesse's colleagues who might have been inclined--. Trent Lott and pals, even Strom Thurmond abandoned Jesse. Okay, the Republicans all voted for my confirmation. I got a ninety-eight to two confirmation as ambassador to New Zealand. They did not want to open up that garbage can and have a big race debate around me going into a presidential--. I'm only speculating on this part, but you see my point. They didn't want that stuff to be a big noisy argument in the public. And so they voted for my confirmation along with my Democratic colleagues and I was confirmed and within days I was out of here. Story_ID: 16744 Speaker 1: What was the experience in New Zealand like? Speaker 2: Fabulous. Ambassador to paradise. I had two titles, much like I was both Recorder of Deeds and Registrar of Titles. I was ambassador to New Zealand and I was ambassador to Samoa, so I had two countries. But it really was more than that because of the historical relations New Zealand had: responsibility for Antarctica, and the Cook Islands, and a number of smaller islands. So my portfolio extended from South Pole to the tropics. That's a picture of me in the South Pole over there, as a matter of fact, standing at the geographic South Pole. In fact, when that picture was taken I went from the South Pole to Rarotonga which is in the Cook Islands, which is very tropical. And I was joking and I said my poor body didn't quite know what to think having gone from negative thirty-five to ninety degrees in the shade weather in the space of a week. Speaker 1: So, what are you proud of that happened during your time there, because you were even saying earlier you worked harder. Speaker 2: I worked really hard, but it paid off and I've made some life-long friendships, which is very important to me. I was able to get around the islands in a way and really campaign for the United States and that's what I did. And a number of commentators in the New Zealand press were very nice to me, I mean, down to the--matter of fact I had made a joke out of the fact that I said the editor of the biggest newspaper comes to my parties and writes nice things about me so I know something is going on here. But I had really good relations with the Kiwis while I was there, as well as with the heads of state and the communities and constituencies in the various islands. And that was an important thing because the islands had not really gotten a whole lot of attention from us before whether it was in Samoa and the Cook Islands, it really doesn't--. And I even started an initiative which I'm afraid has probably fallen through the cracks and I haven't been able to do anything about it now that I'm out. I may try, once I really get myself reestablished. And that was there were a number of people in the Cook Islands and in Samoa, but primarily in the Cooks, who were descendents of American servicemen during World War II. Because you know the war in the Pacific was fought and we staged a lot of our operations out of those islands, out of New Zealand, out of the Cooks, and Samoa, and Fiji and the like. So, all those battles happened there. And so as will happen, some of the GIs had children and those children are entitled to U.S. citizenship, but they'd never been afforded an opportunity to get it. And so I attempted, before I left, to get the State Department to take up the cause of making sure that those U.S. citizens were given their passports and have their citizenship confirmed. And in my view, it would just really further strengthen relations between the United States and the South Pacific, but I fear that that initiative probably has gone by the wayside since I left. Story_ID: 16745 Speaker 1: I'm just wondering where you sort of see yourself or what things that you haven't done that you would like to do. Speaker 2: Well, I don't really know where I'm going to wind up. I really enjoyed my teaching experience and I really liked that aspect of academia. And so, I'm right now looking very seriously at academia. Past that, I really don't have any concrete or specific plans. There are a number of people back home who want me to run for everything from mayor to--. They wanted me to run for governor, I passed on that. And now they're talking mayor and they're talking about a run for the Senate again. And I haven't closed the door on those things but I haven't decided whether I want to jump back in that particular fray, so. Story_ID: 16746 Speaker 1: How have I changed? Well, I think I'm less of a Pollyanna than I was, that's part of growing up. I think I'm more pragmatic, I hope I'm more patient, I hope I listen better than I did, to other people. I hope that I'm more considerate in my judgments and less spontaneous. I don't mean to say that in a negative sense but I think that there is a lot of spontaneity that really bordered on a kind of arrogance that I could save the world in the way that I saw fit and there were no barriers or limitations that I couldn't overcome. I still believe that there are no barriers that I can't overcome if I have a mind to, but I think I approach them more cautiously now. Speaker 2: When you look at the United States today, it's a different United States than you experienced as a child in lots of respects, although you talked about your multicultural experience, but that's not my question. My question is more when you look at the United States today, what are your thoughts about this country and its political direction? Speaker 1: I am very pleased that our country has moved in the direction of being more tolerant of differences than it was at one time. And I'm very pleased, also, that some of the limitations associated with one's station in life have been overcome. That neither race nor gender, nor circumstances of one's birth have the same impact, the same limiting force that, at one point in time, they might have had. Having said that, I'm very concerned that the opportunity that was available at one time no longer exists. And the income equality is widening so that we really are recreating a class structure in this country that in ways it had never known before and that's very, very troubling to me. Young people don't see themselves as having all the opportunity in the world just based on their own initiative, and hard work, and grit, and determination that they can make it. They don't believe that anymore and that's rational on their part. That's troubling because that's not what the vision of this country was. I am concerned, also, that we have developed a politic that supports this reemerging new class structure that says wealth is given to the deserving and if you're poor it is your own fault. There is that mindset in America now that I find to be very, very troubling and very problematic. Story_ID: 16747 Speaker 1: What are your hopes or concerns for black people? Speaker 2: Well, I think the challenge for black people, in the United States is that we are a minority in this country. And you start with a notion that, just in pure numbers, African Americans are still a minority. Having said that, I hope that we can become, on the one hand, fully integrated into this society at every social and economic level without reservation, but at the same time hold on to those aspects of our history and tradition, who we are as a people that gave us the ability to survive under the worst and most adverse of circumstances and, hopefully, will give us the basis upon which we will thrive in the future. It almost sounds like double-speak in a way because it suggests you want to become integrated but you want to do it on your own terms. You want to do it as who you are without having to give up any aspect of your personhood. I was very impressed with the fact that the Maori in New Zealand, have been able--. The Maori are New Zealanders, and the whole community celebrates the uniqueness of Maori culture, the aspects of Maori culture that distinguish it. It's something that's taken as a point of pride by every New Zealander no matter their ethnic or racial background. I hope to live long enough to see the day when America comes to that point, where the contributions of black Americans are celebrated, where black people feel as comfortable about their own background, that they can celebrate the victory over repression and white Americans can celebrate the contributions of black Americans. When we get to that point, I think we will have really, really reached a point that an awful lot of struggle has been directed toward. Story_ID: 16748 Speaker 1: I want you to talk about your son [Mathew Braun]. You know, family has been very important. Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. We are very close and the truth is Matt's father, Michael [Braun], has been involved in Matt's life all along. And so it's almost ironic at this stage. I mean, we're still a family even though Mike and I have been divorced for more than 15 years now. We spent Thanksgiving dinner together this year out at his place out in the country. The year before that they had Thanksgiving dinner at my house. The woman that Michael subsequently married was always nice to Matt when he was little. So, I've got no bones to pick with her, either. So it has worked out probably as well as any broken home could work out. Mathew is wonderful. He is a computer scientist. He graduated with an engineering degree, in computer science I believe. And he is right now working for a private company in Washington D.C. He's a systems engineer and I don't know if you know computers, people speak different languages, right? So I asked Matt, what does a systems engineer do? And his answer was, "Mom, we create solutions." Oh sure, what's the problem. So anyway, that's what he does, he creates solutions as a systems engineer. He's twenty-four now, and he's just having a ball. He's a great kid, a great young man and I love him, love him madly and I'm very, very proud of him. Story_ID: 16749 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I've always loved what Thurgood Marshall had inscribed on his tombstone. It says "I did the best I could with what I had." Story_ID: 16750 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Collard greens. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring time. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Mountains. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I did the best I could with what I had...