 Story_ID: 88750 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for the History Makers. The videographer is Mr. Scott Stearns, observing is [HM] Mr. Vernon Jarrett. Sir could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Paul H. Brock. Paul, P-A-U-L- H. B-R-O-C-K. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 10, 1932, place of birth is Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: What is your occupation sir? Speaker 2: My occupation at this time is media consultant. Speaker 1: And you have been a producer, involved yourself in many projects? Speaker 2: Exactly, journalist for a lot of my life. I work for my spy organization called the, "NSA," National Security Agency. Speaker 1: You worked for the Tony Brown's Journal? Speaker 2: I worked for Tony Brown's Journal, Benjamin Hook's at the NAACP, and the Democratic National Committee as the deputy director of communications. Speaker 1: All right, I just wanted to establish that. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Occupation, you know, you can say, "Oh, that's who he is." Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Okay. Speaker 1: Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is--good question, today's date is May 14, 19--I'm sorry, let me try that again. (laughter) May 14, 2003. Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at the headquarters for The HistoryMakers 1900 S. Michigan Ave. in Chicago, Illinois. Story_ID: 88751 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five "People" Magazine-ish questions that I'm compelled to ask you. They just require a short answer. The first one is-- Speaker 2: All right, I'm going to forgive you in advance. Speaker 1: --(laughter), the first question, sir, is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is sashimi and followed very closely by sushi. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I do, deep blue. Speaker 1: All right, now do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I think I do, and I would say May, early June--late May, early June is my favorite time of year. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The answer to that is no because I suspect if I ever had a chance to get there and enjoy, I would like around the Savannah area to the Sea Islands around that area; and I've never really had an opportunity to really enjoy that. I've been there but only in working conditions. So I have a hunch I would enjoy it if I had a chance to experience it. Speaker 1: That seems to be the most African part of America at that. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: The Sea Islands. Speaker 2: Sea Islands. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I can't say I have a favorite because I can't remember any that I use a lot right now, so I guess the answer really to that question should be no, I don't have really favorite saying or phrase. Story_ID: 88752 Speaker 1: Okay. Let me ask you about some family history. How far back can you trace your family? Speaker 2: I can trace my family back to Mount Vernon [Virginia], [President] George Washington, who family member [West Ford] worked there at Mount Vernon as a slave [sic, West Ford was a slave of John Augustine Washington at the Bushfield Plantation, he lived at Mount Vernon after George Washington's death], was allowed to go home every night for some reason; and at the time, in the will when George Washington [sic, John Augustine Washington] passed, he was to be set free. Unfortunately, the will was changed when George [sic, John] got sick, and to that he would be set free when Martha [sic, Hannah Bushrod Washington] passed; and when she passed, he was set free. He came back in the 1840s after George Washington brother--George Washington's kids had practically destroyed Mount Vernon and he acted as a consultant for them, refurbishing it. And he died the following year, in 1847 [sic, 1963]. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: I thought you were going to ask that, and I'm gonna have to deal with him before I get out of this chair. And it's terrible that I don't remember his name because we have a family whose small town, and the main street is named after him, and one of my cousins is the chief historian for the area, and also on the Virginia State Historical Society. Having said all of that, it won't come to me, but this interview is over, it will. Speaker 1: He doesn't have the same surname as you? Speaker 2: No, he does not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He does not. Story_ID: 88753 Speaker 1: It's remarkable to have that kind of story and to be able to remember or have that past alone. So many people know nothing about that. Speaker 2: Exactly. I have done that for PBS, Virginia PBS station with a friend of Vernon's [HM Vernon Jarrett] and mine, and we actually went there and did it with the daughters of Mount Vernon [Mount Vernon Ladies Association] and shot it right there. The-- George Washington's family has been talking my cousin, who is the Northern Virginia Historical Society and the State Historical Society about bringing all of this out because more and more appears that this was George's child and most of the historians are saying, "No, it was his brother's child" because they were both at this camp at the same time that this slave woman became pregnant. Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So my family has been fighting against it coming out and making it public. And, of course, I think the [President Thomas] Jefferson story was making all the headlines at that time, so we're not sure what is happening. Speaker 1: So this gets more intriguing by the minute. Here, so you have an ancestor that may have been actually related to --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --oh yeah, in fact, there, at Mount Vernon-- Speaker 1: --George Washington. Charles, Charles Washington, is that his brother? Speaker 2: Charles, yes [sic, John Augustine Washington]. This cousin actually has a museum. Mount Vernon sits off this Mount Vernon road, and behind there called, they used to call in those days, "Muddy Hole." Today, it is called, Gum Springs, [Virginia] and this cousin runs the Gum Springs Museum where all of that history, the maps and showing how George came up to meet his brother and spend a few days there. This child was conceived during that period, but you can't say it was definitely George or the brothers because both of them were at that spot at that time, but it's all there for historians to see. Speaker 1: It somewhat argumentative. Of course, George was the president, he would be the founding--he would be the father of our country. He couldn't have been him. Speaker 2: Exactly. So now they maintained he could not conceive children. Speaker 1: Any children? Speaker 2: Right, that's what they're saying. Story_ID: 88754 Speaker 1: So are there any other stories that come, any stories then--if you go back that far, are there not, you know, stories-- maybe an anecdotes from around the 19th century around some of your ancestors, and--? Speaker 2: My grandfather, my mother's father [Hamilton Gray], came-- gathered there [Gum Springs, Virginia] in, what was it? 1860. My mother's mother [Carrie Gray] was already there. He came up from Culpeper [Virginia]; and he started a land business, making sure that other freed slaves had land that they could hold onto. Built the first church in that town. This is about ten miles below Alexandria [Virginia] and started a society so everybody else could own their own, and he had quite a bit of land. We have an annual family affair, which you're invited to, by the way. It's always the Saturday before Labor Day and the-[HM] Vernon [Jarrett] has been to it a couple of times. The--I think I lost--oh, I was talking about--and that history is all there, and that's one of the things I've should have sent you because I have another cousin who is a history buff, and she has done a family tree, and researched all that history. Speaker 1: So can we say your family then was basically free--you know, ever since the ancestor [West Ford], the George Washington ancestor? Speaker 2: Yes, that part. Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- They were not enslaved during most of the 19th century? Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. The slaves on Mount Vernon who were not free are buried there, so they were given very honorable burials I guess, but this one young man was never asked to stay overnight on Mount Vernon and went home to Muddy Hole, which is now Gum Springs. That's where-- Speaker 1: --Special treatment. Now, this is an ancestor of your mother or father, I forgot? Speaker 2: Mother [Virginia Estelle Gray Budd], that's on my mother's side. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 88755 Speaker 1: Are there any other stories from your family from the Reconstruction or any of that time period that they were doing? Your mother's [Virginia Estelle Gray Budd] side had land apparently? Speaker 2: Right, they had land. Speaker 1: What about your father's [William Brock] side? Speaker 2: On my father--well, on my father's side, I know they were--they weren't from my father now--they were not from Virginia, and I can't remember much of how I met him to remember. I may have been 13 or 14 the first time I can remember talking to him, and I was brief, so I don't know a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I do know he had brothers and sisters in Detroit [Michigan] and so forth and that's all. Story_ID: 88756 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay, tell us about your mother, first, then your father, but I'll ask you about her first. Can you give us her full name and spell it for us and give us her date and place of birth? Speaker 2: Sure. My mother's full name was Virginia Estelle, E-S-T-E-L-L-E, Virginia because of the state name, named after the state, Gray, G-R-A-Y. She later changed her name when she decided that folks were too country and she went to school, junior high, in Washington, D.C. and became Estelle Virginia Gray and went to high school in Washington. She was the youngest of eleven children. Two died very, very young, and they ranged brothers were the merchants of the town, inheriting that entrepreneurial spirit from their father [Hamilton Gray]. And when I came in 1932, my mother's mother [Carrie Gray] was already dead. She had passed in the '20s [1920s], and I would go down and meet and enjoy my grandfather, my mother's father. And, of course, I had a lot of cousins because most of them stayed right there in Gum Springs [Virginia] and most of them had very large families themselves. My mother only had one child. The next youngest child had two children and so forth. Having nine, ten children was not an unusual thing in the family. Speaker 1: Now, what was your mother like and what did she do for a living? Speaker 2: My mother wanted to be a nurse and always tried to get that training. I think I was born unexpectedly in 1932, which interrupted what her plans were after graduating from high school, Armstrong High School [Armstrong Manual Training School], but she finally did get that nurses training. Then in the late '30s [1930s], she began working for a company called, "The J. R. Watkins Company," it was a Canadian [sic, Minnesotan] company; and I mention that only because it was unusual in the '30s [1930s] because they hired people based on ability and paid no attention to the color of their skin, this J.R. Watkins Company, where I guess people all over the United States and Canada bought products, J. R. Watkins liniment was renowned around the world. Speaker 1: Now known as "Watkins Products." Speaker 2: Watkins Products, right. In 1939, she started working for them. She had been trying to do nursing and there wasn't a lot of work; as you know, we were coming out of a depression very, very slowly; and that's when she got the job working for the J. R. Watkins company, going door to door selling these various products. And the assistant manager of the Washington, D.C. office was a man by the name of Edward Donald Budd. I know that was one of the questions I had asked, and it's just coming to me what his name. He was the assistant manager; and, of course, they had white and black sales people working for them. And he took a liking to my mother and they started seeing each other. He had a car. There weren't many people in my neighborhood who had a car, or there weren't many people who had a radio. And there weren't many people who had a telephone. We had all three; and so everybody congregated at my house to listen to this radio, to use this telephone, and so forth. Story_ID: 88757 Speaker 1: They [Virginia Estelle Gray Budd and Edward Donald Budd] eventually got married. World War II came along. And there was a younger man in the New York [New York City, New York] office who had to go off to war, and they asked my father to go over there as a full manager. Which he did and we went to New York. I went to Frederick Douglass Junior High School, there in New York, P.S. 139 it was called at Lenox Avenue 139. And over at one corner, on the corner of Lenox, and-- I'm sorry--that school was-- P.S. 139 was between 139th and 140th on Lenox Avenue. My woodshop teacher was Countee Cullen's brother. Countee Cullen lived over at 139th; and, of course, he was married to [W.E.B.] DuBois' daughter; and DuBois lived in an apartment building right on the corner of 139th; and I give you all of this because, as a I kid, I used to play in the elevator in that building and W.E.B. DuBois lived in apt. #1. And he spent a lot of time chasing us out of that elevator. My father was a great reader of "Crisis" magazine, and read a lot of the communist, at that time, material, but they were the only ones making sense to a lot of educated African Americans. Speaker 2: Now, what you're saying is extremely important. I just want you to know I hear what you're saying because this is a historic part of Harlem [New York City]. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: You're right down the street from the Harlem Y. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: Anatole Biaz [ph.] was the director, the county--Harlem branch, New York Public Library would later be named after Countee Cullen. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: And become the Schomburg Center [for Research in Black Culture] was started above that. And there is much going on in that area. Speaker 1: The Renaissance was just --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Charles Sifford's place was-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --was right around there. I mean there is so much going on around that area. Speaker 1: Exactly. And we're all in this neighborhood. We lived at 55 W. 140th Street, which was between 5th Avenue and Lenox, but if you walk to Lenox, at 140th, a few doors to your right was the Savoy Ballroom. Out of my mother and father's-- stepfather's bedroom, I could look directly into the Savoy and see everything just as if I was in the Savoy. You know, I could see what drinks what people had. I could almost read the menu. That's how close we were. On the other corner, I guess that would be the southeast corner, there was a bar; and I can-- I think the most amazing thing I can remember was Lucky Millinder, around noon every day, he would just stand out front until 6:00 or 7:00 at night. And zoot suits was just coming in, you know, doing the --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Who was Lucky Millinder? Speaker 1: Lucky Millinder was a very well-known band leader, did not get to the acclaim of Duke Ellington but very close to that kind of a claim. Speaker 2: He stayed right around New York more than, say, Duke did. Speaker 1: Yes. Duke, by that time, had moved downtown when his wife [Edna Thompson] cut him up. She caught him with another man. He was living on Sugar Hill. And-- Speaker 2: She-- He caught her with another man? Speaker 1: She caught him with another woman. And she cut him up and a very deep gash across the check, and Duke moved downtown. He never gave up the apartment. In fact, Billy Strayhorn lived there when he first came to New York up on Sugar Hill, Amsterdam, but he moved downtown. They allowed him to live in a hotel, I think it was around 47th street between 7th and 8th or Broadway and 8th, or 7th and 8th I guess would be up that high; and he never moved back to Harlem for the rest of his life. He was person who played at night, and spent almost all the rest of his time to himself. And there were a lot of places in New York and some of the other major metropolitan areas as long as you didn't go out and advertise you were living there. In other words, if you didn't bring too much color to the neighborhood, they could put up with you doing that. And that's what they did with Duke Ellington, but he always kept that apartment in Sugar Hill and a number of people who lived up there in that apartment. Speaker 2: That's an interesting story. Story_ID: 88758 Speaker 1: Are there any more anecdotes about [W.E.B.] DuBois because we don't, you know, he is a figure that--? Speaker 2: Not for me because, to me, he was always that guy who chased us out of the elevator. We couldn't play in the elevator. Speaker 1: What kind of person, what was his persona like just from a child's point of view? Speaker 2: From a child's point of view, he was just a neighbor who wanted to keep that building clean. And apartment #2, one of my good friends lived, a fellow by the name of Biang [ph.], who later I understood was teaching at NYU [New York University in New York City, New York], and then my other closest friend was a guy who lived on 140th on the 200 block. And he was a relative--distant relative of Billie Holiday and his name was Alfred Holiday. And down in the 200 block, we would see--that's where Lionel Hampton would be seen all the time between 7th and 8th avenue was the 200 block of 140th. And these were my buddies as we were growing up. There were other people, of course. Sammy Davis Jr. later came along at P.S. 139 and so forth, behind us. I hated because going down to 125th Street to go to a movie, you'd get robbed, you would get a gun stick in your back and so forth. The gangs were just beginning to come along, the Sabers and the Slicksters, and they would make wooden guns and fight with those guns. Speaker 1: What they called "zip guns?" Speaker 2: Zip guns, right, right. We were good kids. We might do something in the elevator or something, but-- Speaker 1: This is Harlem in the '40s [1940] and early '50s [1950] I guess? Speaker 2: This is the Harlem of the '40s [1940] for me. Again, I really did not like New York. I came from a small southern town. It didn't remain that way but prior to World War II, Washington D.C. was a very small southern town with greenery and over-hanging trees over every street. And New York had all this concrete and gang members and so forth. I got stabbed in the back in junior high school by one of my good friends, throwing a knife at someone else and got me. He rushed to my aid. Speaker 1: That's kind of the song of ballads and stuff. You're stabbed in the back by your best friend. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, and I can remember when Richard Wright's, "Black Boy" came out, and we had an English teacher, Mr. Diamond, I believe his name was, telling us that he wanted all of us to read this book; and I was excited about it. It was a black man who had written this book, and it was being acclaimed by everyone. And the next thing I knew one of the gang members had beaten Mr. Diamond up because he had used he had referred--used the word "Black Boy," even though it was the title of the book, it was demeaning. Speaker 1: Yeah, people, in those days, not too long ago I guess, would fight--if you called them "black--" Speaker 2: Exactly. Exactly. They wanted to be negroes-- Speaker 1: --or colored. Speaker 2: --or colored, right. Speaker 1: You called them, "black," they would fight you. Speaker 2: So with all good intentions, they had beat him up because of that in trying to introduce this--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --good intent. Speaker 2: Those were the things I remembered, but I never liked New York because of all of that. It was a strange place to me because of all the cement and so forth. And though I enjoyed looking in the Savoy [Ballroom], listening to the music, it was still a metropolitan area that I was not used to, and wanted to get back, and at the end of World War II, when this person came back to take the job back, heading up the office there in New York City, they offered my father [Edward Donald Budd] the head job in Washington, D.C., so right at the end of the war, we were ready to go back. Story_ID: 89880 Speaker 1: Yeah. Well tell me, so your father [Edward Donald Budd] is reassigned to [Washington] D.C. [after World War II]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But I want you to talk about your childhood a little bit, I guess a more focused--kind of more focused question. Okay, can you tell me about the sights, sounds, and smells of growing up throughout the neighborhood? Speaker 2: What ages are you talking about? Speaker 1: When you were smaller I guess. Now, -- Speaker 2: Five? Speaker 1: Now, you didn't --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Five. Speaker 1: --until you were? Speaker 2: Come to think of it, there's a lot of the story--let's go back to, when we came home from the hospital, I know my mother [Virginia Estelle Gray Budd] had moved in with her sister, who had lived in Washington [D.C.] for a little while. She was a much older sister. So we lived with her and then, of course, she had to work; and she was able to--I don't use it in a derogatory manner, farmed me out to a couple who loved, loved kids. They lived in a placed called Brandywine, Maryland, Mr. and Mrs. Brown and they came to Washington once a (unclear) because they had a store, the only store in Brandywine and Brandywine is a thriving community these days, but, at that time, the only store that anybody could buy anything, white, black it didn't matter, was their store. So prior to being old enough to go to school, I lived with them. They came up once a week, they had a house on 9th and R Street, 917R and they would come up and collect the rent from the people who lived in the house and do all of that, shop and get all of the things they needed for the store and drive back down to Brandywine. I can remember, prior to school, having a little snowballs stand in the summer, where I sold snowballs to people. Then, of course, people coming in the store. We lived as one family. People needed goods, so they didn't think of what color the Browns were as long as they had their favorite chewing tobacco, or pipe tobacco, or cigars, and whatever there. That was until I was five years old. Speaker 1: Okay, so you lived in Brandywine, Maryland? Speaker 2: In Brandywine, Maryland with this family, Mr. and Mrs. Brown. There would be times, you know, I would see my mother and she would take me to Virginia; and the thing I remember most about that, since we were Washingtonians, was we would get on the bus on Pennsylvania Avenue, heading toward Virginia, we could sit anywhere we wanted to on that bus, but the bus would go several blocks--12th and Pennsylvania Ave. was where the bus left from even today-- we'd go just several blocks; and that bus would just stop, and you had to get off and get on back of the bus. And then it would go on through Virginia and so forth. That seemed so strange. I wasn't offended by, but I think I just found it so strange, and beginning of my--you know, segregation makes no sense whatsoever. It's more trouble than what it's worth for any party, either party. Story_ID: 89881 Speaker 1: Anyway, then I got to an age where I was going to school. And we lived in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.]. This was during that period before my mother [Virginia Estelle Gray Budd] married my stepfather [Edward Donald Budd], lived in a house a block from where George Washington Hospital is located now, right on the same street and everything, and many, many-it was-- Georgetown, in those days, was considered basically a black area. Duke Ellington was brought home from the hospital and lived there and grew up there. We had an outdoor toilet and everything; and what we paid rent I'm sure were just pennies, but I went to an elementary school called Briggs [ph.] Elementary which is where the State Department [U.S. Department of State] sits today and there were times when I played hookey from school and went over to see them build this airport, which is now Ronald Reagan [Washington National] Airport. Of course, that was built in 1937 [it opened in 1941]. Speaker 2: It was first called, "National Airport." Speaker 1: National Airport, right, uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay--well, family moves to New York [New York City, New York], and we already talked about that basically? Speaker 1: Right, I'm talking about--this was '37 [1937], then in '37 [1937] was when I moved to a place called Corcoran Street, and two doors from where [HM] Julianne Malveaux lives right now, in fact. I found that interesting; and that's where we lived until we moved to New York. Story_ID: 89882 Speaker 1: When we moved back from New York [New York City, New York] in '45 [1945], we moved into a new suburb--well, it was southeast, but a new housing complex over in southeast, where well-to-do blacks lived. In fact, we lived next door to [Leonard] Lenny Ford, a football player with the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], later when on the Cleveland Browns [in Ohio]. And that's where I started growing up, went to junior high. I wanted to get back in touch with all my old friends. I was so happy to be back, and most of them had gone to Shore Junior High and so traveled half way across the city just to go to Shore Junior High and I went to Armstrong High School [Armstrong Manual Training School], thus maintaining the contact with these old buddies. Speaker 2: Okay, so you actually went to high school in Armstrong? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: I graduated from Shore. Speaker 2: That's one of the oldest--is that the oldest black high school in D.C., Armstrong Manual Training School? Speaker 1: I'm thinking not for some reason, but I'm not sure. Speaker 2: Okay, Armstrong High School. Story_ID: 89883 Speaker 1: Now, I wanted to ask you about school, but first I wanted to go back and ask you about your father [Edward Brock], your natural father, he wasn't really a part of your life growing up? Speaker 2: No. No, I saw him for the first time, I was living at Corcoran Street [Georgetown, Washington, D.C.] at that time. I was evolving into teenage and I was desperate to get some toy that simulated flight thing, and my mother [Virginia Estelle Gray Budd] wasn't about to buy it for me. And I just made a concerted effort to track him down; and he gave me the money to buy it. And once I bought it, then I was satisfied with having that brief contact. So the contact was made. You always want to know who your father is, but I think almost equally important to me was having the money to buy this simulated flight training thing. Speaker 1: So you met him when you were about thirteen? Speaker 2: Yes, I was about thirteen. Speaker 1: What was his main? Speaker 2: He was well-to-do, and I can remember different instances where he tried to give my mother money to try to take care of us. She was a very, very, very stubborn lady. I think I answered--I think that his name was Edward. It wasn't. It was William Brock, I take that back. It was William Brock. He had an office right on the corner of 11th and U, where the Kazbar [ph.], I think it's called Kazbar now and it's a jazz club there. And what he did was he cleaned embassies. He was a business person, who did a lot of cleaning for the embassy, so he was independent. Speaker 1: So he had a crew that he would send to clean these embassies out? Speaker 2: Right. And his offices and where he lived was on the second floor, but he owned some property on the fifth floor too because the one lady who had a beauty shop later told me he owned that shop there on U Street, 11th and U, going down to 10th and U to where Garnet-Patterson [Shaw Middle School at Garnet-Patterson] is. Speaker 1: All right, so you never-- did you ever have any other contact with him other than that one? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. I heard he had gotten sick, and I did try to see him because I was concerned about him. This was after we came back from New York. And for some reason, it never worked out of course to go see him. Speaker 1: It's unusual, you know--well, you look at today's values and women expect men to give, you know, and the law makes you. And here was someone trying to do-- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --trying to do the right thing. Speaker 1: --to do his obligation (unclear) trying. It is unusual for these days, for us to. Speaker 2: I can remember I was living in a very, very small room, which was really right across the street from where Shore [Junior High School] is located now and the building is still there; and it was just a small room, much smaller than this room, and we had our milk out on the sill because that's how you kept things like that cool, cold and my mother showing me that she had like thirteen cents. And I remember him coming to the door, and them talking and I had no idea what they were talking about and her angrily saying some things to him and slamming the door, and for some reason, I know he was trying to offer her some money. We had a bathroom that was shared by everybody in this huge building and everything else, and she would not accept it. Her pride would not allow her to accept it. And even when I was a grown man, my mother had that pride and determination, you know, once she had set her foot to this the way things were, that was it. You could not move her. Story_ID: 89884 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about school. How did you like school? How did you do in school? Speaker 2: I would say average, not as well as I could have. There was no one to really push me. And it was strange because my mother [Virginia Estelle Gray Budd] had pushed herself in school, but she never pushed me in school. I had a next door neighbor, one of the people I am closest to even today, whose father was alcoholic. He got sober once a year for the month of December. He was a master cook and he could get that job every December, but the rest of the time, he wanted to just stay drunk, but even when drunk, he wanted to know what we were reading, my person, friend, who is my best friend today, and what I was reading, and he stayed on his about read, read, read. He had come out of family of educators and so even though he was an alcoholic, and we rarely saw him sober, even drunk, he stayed on us about reading. And all of his children did very, very well. My best friend became one of the chief purchasers for the Armed Forces, purchasing agents for them and retired, and-- Speaker 1: What were your favorite books? Speaker 2: My favorite books--when I went to New York, this best friend got me a subscription to "Wee Wisdom." That was to make up for the loneliness up there and not knowing anybody. And so I usually read this "Wee Wisdom" that I got once a month two or three times, but I also had started reading the "Count of Monte Cristo," [by Alexandre Dumas] you know, I was very, very interested in those books, great Dashiell Hammett, and we became-- would share those stories and go over the different things. The Perry Masons, read everything on those, and all of this when we were in elementary school. There in Washington [D.C.], every week, we went to the library, The Carnegie Library, which is the largest-- was the largest at that time, and we exchanged our books and brought home other books to read. So, the classics, in answer to your question, the classics and then the great mystery novels, Dashiell Hammett and the Perry Masons, that was an A.A. Fair, which was a pen name that several other detectives, that whatcha call him [Earl Stanley Gardner], who wrote the Perry Mason. Why can't I think of his name? Speaker 1: Raymond Chandler? Was it Chandler? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: I can't think of it now. Speaker 2: Okay, but anyway, that was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were you influenced by radio at all since you later become involved-I mean radio was something that was big in the '40s [1940s]-- Speaker 2: Absolutely-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --And in the '30s [1930s], and, yes, I was influenced, and that's what made me want to write, and I started writing when I was still in high school [Armstrong Manual Training School], and didn't get anything published, no, but-- Speaker 1: Were you trying to write novels? Speaker 2: I was trying to write short stories because I was not--I was reading a lot of novels, of course, but I was also reading a lot of short stories, and they had all of these pulp magazines had contest where you could send in stuff, and I was constantly sending in stories to them. Story_ID: 89885 Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you were in grade school or high school, did you have any mentors, any teachers who were a mentor to you? Speaker 2: In grade school [Briggs Elementary School in Washington, D.C.], there was a gentleman by the name of Mr. Smith, who we all admired in that he was tough but fair; and looking back, I would say that the greatest influence was that he didn't exhibit any fear and he didn't take any shortcuts with us. And as much as we may have resented getting caught at some things by Mr. Smith, that's what we wanted. In those days, all of the teachers in Washington lived in a certain area, and they lived their life through their students doing extremely well, so they worked very, very hard, whether we're talking about Benjamin O. Davis or [HM] Ed Brooke or Paul Brock, it didn't matter, if that person did something that they were gonna proud of, they worked hard. That was their life, making sure that they were the best that they could be. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had dedicated teachers? Speaker 2: Very, very dedicated, and they were always there in the neighborhood. A lot of the problems, some people have said, are that we lost, integration, we lost so many people to the suburbs and so forth. Our people were right there in the neighborhood. And I should mention to you that there was Bishop [Stephen Gill] Spottswood--at a very early age, while I was in elementary school, he took myself and my best friend, who lives in Los Angeles [California] now, under his wing, "Listen, do I have to whip your little tails. I want you here for the play for the church." His church was John Wesley [John Wesley African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church in Washington, D.C.], and little did I know that he was a national figure. He was the first African American to be the chair of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] board [in 1961], the first African American. They had never had an African American in that position before. And during that period, my only thought was not crossing him and so always being there in Sunday school, and if I was designated to being in that play, being there, not getting caught not there, and chasing after his two daughters. Next door to him was Reverend [Earl H.] Harrison, and-- who built Shiloh Baptist Church and his son, Lemuel, who is a minister in Detroit [Michigan] these days, was my best friend there--best friend at school I would say because we were in the same class until I graduated from elementary school and went to New York [New York City, New York]. There were other people like this, the Halls, Richard Hall, who owned a huge pig farm, out in the Ellicott City area of Maryland and when I was old enough, I would ride on the truck and we would pick up people's garbage and dump it and then carry it out to Maryland to these pigs and so forth and so on. I guess the point that I'm trying to get over is that there were well-to-do people in that neighborhood. There was a doctor, and I didn't realize that one of the top African American doctors, in the city and his daughter taught in the schools and she was my art teacher in both in junior, and later she got transferred to Armstrong High [Armstrong Manual Training School], and there at Armstrong High. So all these people were right there--in the neighborhood. Story_ID: 89886 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you get involved in high school [Armstrong Manual Training School] activities very much? I mean, were you like the social type, the popular type? Speaker 2: We had a youth group and it was called, "The Yadrutas," Saturday spelled backwards, and it was well known around the city, and one of the people in Washington [D.C.], most famous social place, was a thing called, "Colonnade," [Lincoln Colonnade] which was right under the Lincoln Theater and this was a good friend of mine, Coates [ph.]. His dad ran that, plus ran a newspaper called, "The Gayly [ph.] News," not the Daily News-- Speaker 1: "The Gayly [ph.] News." Speaker 2: Yes, and it was distributed in all of the black theaters that we could go to. Speaker 1: That's in, that's-- those were the days when "gay" meant happy. Speaker 2: Happy, right. Speaker 1: Exclusively. (unclear) Speaker 2: Exactly. Exactly, exactly. But as a teenage group, we held the first dance for the teenagers in this placed called the "Colonnade," this shining temple where grown ups went and did their thing and so forth and so on. So I was very much involved in that social group, the Yadrutas Club. And I think that was my main social activity because of number of people from an elite part of the city--you know, I lived in the inner city because by now my father [step-father, Edward Donald Budd] had decided to leave [J.R.] Watkins [Company] and open up a delicatessen across the street from Howard University [Washington, D.C.], so we moved over top of the delicatessen and it did well because we fed those students there at Howard and so forth and so, but that was right there in the heart of the city, right across the street from Howard University, and by then, elite blacks started moving out to the edge of Washington D.C., a place called, "Capital Heights," "Capital View," I'm sorry, Capital View," and Pearl Bailey and new her husband who was a guy, who was the leading real estate person, the Kingstons [ph.], they built out there, and all of these kids were in this club, they lived out there. So several of us--so in joining that club, we sort of got in with that group of elite kids. Speaker 1: Okay, you had some sort of adjunct (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say so. The-- they were very, very well off. General Hunten [ph] lived out there a few doors away from the lady who was the sponsor of this group, the Yadrutas Club, and so forth. One of the parents--whenever Joe Lewis would come to town, Joe Lewis would come by the house and want the father to play golf, so he was in that sort of elite group. I told you about my friend, Coates, Jimmy Coates, whose father had the Gayly [ph.] News and this Colonnade, this big, beautiful dance hall, I guess you could call it, that was the place if you were going to do a really plush affair and so forth and so on. Story_ID: 89887 Speaker 1: Now tell me, what was your--so your favorite subject was--was it English, was it composition? Speaker 2: I would say, so strangely enough, my favorite subject was Chemistry because I loved my Chemistry teacher in high school [Armstrong Manual Training School] and I had the-- excuse me-- there was an affinity I had I could do that better. Before graduating, I became fairly proficient in math, and I have no idea how it happened or why it happened, but you would think that someone who loves to write would do well in English and I still have trouble with English. Everything I write, my wife [Virginia Embrey-Brock] majored in English, so I just pass it on to her and let her do all the correcting, and half of the stuff that she is correcting for me, I have no idea that I'm splitting a verb or something like that, so I just leave it up to her. So I did not do--I did not do well in grammar, but I did well in creative writing if you don't consider all the split verbs. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 89888 Speaker 1: Now, on verge of graduation from high school [Armstrong Manual Training School], what were your prospects? Speaker 2: Of where I wanted to go? I knew I wanted--the prospects in Washington [D.C.], your lifelong dream is to get out of high school, go into the government, spend thirty years in the government, retire and set back until you die. In those days--those were the--almost everybody worked for the government in a GS1 or 2. Or if you were a really, really top, you'd be a 3 or 4. That would be the most that you could hope for. My--I was very good at chemistry, understood it well, it came to me naturally; and so I wanted to find out what area of the government I was going to go into. Most people went--African Americans went into the post office of course. And so I sat down to take a look at how do I become an analytical chemist as I looked at the requirements throughout the government? And that's how I decided that I would major in Pharmacy. Story_ID: 88768 Speaker 1: So that's how I chose my major as pharmacy, and for two years, I went to the Howard University School of Pharmacy [sic, Howard University College of Pharmacy in Washington, D.C.]. I decided I wanted to do something, and my mother [Virginia Estelle Gray Budd] told me that "If you do this, I'm not paying your way through college," and, I talk about how stubborn she is, I've inherited it, I said, "I'll just pay my own way," that was my response. Speaker 2: She didn't want you to major in Pharmacy? Speaker 1: Oh no, she didn't mind me majoring in Pharmacy. This was a trip that I wanted to take before I started working to get my money together to go to college that fall. And I took this trip, came back, tried to work that summer, and even though relatively there were jobs for blacks in Washington [D.C.] at that time, it still wasn't good. And by the time fall came, I'd saved enough money to pay for my tuition but that was about it, and so about October, or maybe it was November, I didn't have any money. And I wasn't going to my mother and father and asking, although he would slip me money, my stepfather [Edward Donald Budd]. He was always on my side. I started work as an usher at the Lincoln Theater, the very famous Lincoln Theater there in Washington D.C. Speaker 2: It's near Howard, isn't it? Speaker 1: It's not that far from Howard, right. It's over at 13th and U Street, and it's now a national landmark, there. Mainly, not the reason, but it's next store to Ben's Chili Bowl, (laughter) Anyway, I went to work as an usher there, and it was hard work. I think it was something like 40 cents an hour and that wasn't getting it, but by December, they were looking for people at the post office, and I managed to get on there. And I worked at the post office through the end of January and that was enough to carry me through that year I mean because the money was that good. Speaker 2: Okay, we're talking about 1951? Speaker 1: We're talking about December '50 [1950] and into '51 [1951] yes. The next year, I managed to get on at one of the drug stores and before the school year ended and just had enough money going for me; and that was the year they decided that only the highest grades would be deferred from the draft. And I took that crazy test to see if I could be deferred and didn't get deferred. I had a choice of: do I wait and let them draft me, or do I go into the [U.S.] Air Force? And I went into the Air Force. Story_ID: 88769 Speaker 1: How did you find the [U.S.] Air Force? What was that like for you? Speaker 2: Discipline was always--marching to someone's else tune has always been a problem for me most of my life whether it'd be my parents' tune or some sergeant or officer's tune, so it was difficult for me, but then they had put me down to be put in Fort Sam Houston [San Antonio, Texas] because I was going to be a pharmacist in the Air Force. And they-- when I got my orders, I was sent to a radar school in Biloxi, Mississippi. And that was very, very disappointing, but I stuck it out and went through that school, and by the time I had finished that school, they had decided my administrative skills were even better, and they sent me to a place called Watertown, New York to be assistant to the sergeant major, a place just on the other side of Watertown, where Camp Drum [sic, Fort Drum] is located. And that's how I spent the rest of my career. I got out early. My father-- stepfather [Edward Donald Budd] died, and the dean of the Howard School of Medicine [sic, College of Medicine], Dr. Lawler [ph.] wrote a letter saying that I was needed at home, and they gave me an early out. And I came home and started working in the store, and of course, I needed some income, although I was living at home, and heard about a place called the National Security Agency, and went to work for them. Speaker 1: Now what does the National Security Agency [NSA] do? Speaker 2: Well, depending what year, last week, they were in hot water because some transmissions had gone out on Iraq. What they do is monitor all foreign transmission to gather intelligence. That's one of our chief intelligence gathering agencies. And at the time I was with them, we weren't even allowed to tell people we worked there, and I remember being at a family meeting, seeing my cousin. I said, "Oh, what are you doing?" She said, "Oh, I'm working over at the State Department." She said, "What are you doing?" I said, "I'm working with the Army," and both of us were lying, and we both worked for the National Security Agency, but anyway, I worked for them; and ended up--we were some of the first, there were four of us, civilians hired. Before that, everyone who worked for them was either Army, Navy, Air Force or whatever, so we trained these service personnel as they came out of the service and went into the service like we'd train them on decoding and taking-that's, we had a fax machine. That was the first time I had ever seen a fax machine, but it was as large as this room (laughter), you know, with vacuum tubes in it. And then they trained me in Russian because I had to look over all these transmissions coming from Russia to see what-- Speaker 1: So you read Russian? Speaker 2: I learned how to read Russian enough to look for some key words, and once I found those, then they went to this person. We had a computer as large as this entire office complex that the air conditioning in it was as large as this room that we would run everything to, trying to find these key words on these transmissions. Whenever we went some place, we had to take a person. If I went to the dentist, for instance, I had to take a key member of the staff with me in case they gave me some laughing gas and I gave up some information. We had some people go off to Russia and so forth, and everybody was in trouble then because that meant that the codes that we knew how to break would be revealed and so forth and so on. Speaker 1: So people actually defected to Russia? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, absolutely. Story_ID: 88770 Speaker 1: The thing that upset me, I think, is we trained all these people, these people--I think four African Americans were hired. They didn't hire anymore African Americans, and so we were training people to replace us in these positions and then they later became our boss. And there was great resentment, and then one day, I just said, "I'm leaving all of this," and I did. I decided I was going to open up a photofinishing business in St. Thomas. And by that time, also, I was married and the marriage wasn't going well. In fact, I was physically sick from nerves in the marriage. That's how bad it was going. The doctor finally told me what I had to do. And I didn't want to do it because by then I had children, and I love my children. And but, finally, I had made up my mind I was going to the Virgin Islands, I was going to get a divorce, I was going to open this business, and start a new life. Speaker 2: What year is this? Speaker 1: This would have been 1960 and that's what I did. That's what I did. Speaker 2: Now, had you been paying attention--I guess you were paying attention to the Civil Rights Movement and all the activity going on? Speaker 1: You know, I don't think I was. No, the answer is no. That was not a big issue. What was a big issue was my not moving up. We had been--at the National Security Agency, even though they were putting people over us, we were working at higher grades than most African American in any agency--federal agency. We were doing very, very well there, so we were earning decent money. The problem was, and my supervisor later told me this after I came back to the Virgin Islands and I went to an affair, he says, "I always had the impression that you resented us." And I said, "Well, I can tell you, Joe, at this time, I did. I did." I was sensitive enough to know that I was being treated unfairly. And he was just beginning to understand this at the place, but anyway I went down for a vacation, decided I loved it. I told them I was quitting at the end of the month, and they laughed, thought it was a joke, and sent me off to an advanced training, a session in Russian. Right after December 31st, I walked away from it. Story_ID: 88771 Speaker 1: Okay, well, what did you-- now you went to the Virgin Islands [St. Thomas]? Speaker 2: I moved-simultaneous-- Speaker 1: How did you, I mean did you have some connections over there already, or how did transition? Speaker 2: Yeah, a good friend, this was a guy that was hired at the same time that I was at the National Security Agency, we were both civilians there--the only civilians--right after the service. He had just come out of the service, I had just come out of the service [U.S. Air Force] and so forth and so on, and we had become very close friends. And he met a young lady from the Virgin Islands, and they got married, and he asked me to be his best man, and I was. Then they wanted me to come down to the Virgin Islands to see this paradise, and I went down there and loved it, even though I fell on a banana stalk and drove it through my leg. So we came back limping, blood poisoning and then telling them I loved it so much, I'm leaving the National Security Agency. Speaker 1: You had a banana stalk right through your leg? Speaker 2: Yeah, because the way you cut it, you cut it at that angle and it makes it very, very sharp; and at the end of the year [1960], I left the National Security Agency. And in February, I moved down. After three months down there, I just could not take it without my kids, and I came back and made a deal with my wife; and she gave the kids to me to take care of. And I took them back down, and I was happy. Speaker 1: That's unusual. It hardly ever works out like that. Speaker 2: And at that time--yes, that was very, very unusual. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So how many children do you have? Speaker 2: Four. Speaker 1: Four. And you had all four of them in Virgin Islands? Speaker 2: I had three of them there, and then when I moved back from the Virgin Islands, I found out the fourth one had not been living with my wife. I thought she was, she was the young one, the baby. And so the kids said, "Daddy, you got to get Lisa." So I asked my wife about it, and found out that my wife had sort of given an aunt custody of that one, so we went and got her. And from that time on, she lived with us-- Speaker 1: That's something. Speaker 2: and the four children. Speaker 1: All right. So how did they like the Virgin Islands? Speaker 2: Oh, they loved it. Story_ID: 88772 Speaker 1: But you asked about the Civil Rights Movement, and that's what made me decide I had to come back. I had people coming down, and by that time, I was in television. I started off by working with IBM, by the way, because they would never would grant me the license to set up even though I had all the training from Kodak and was Kodak certified, they would never grant me the license because the system used too much water, and in the Virgin Islands, or any of the--they don't have any water. They have to bring their water from Puerto Rico, buy it, or either rain. That's the only way they have water. Speaker 2: There is no ground water. Speaker 1: There is no ground water whatsoever. So they would not grant the license because the system used too much water in the processing. Speaker 2: You had to use different baths? Speaker 1: Exactly. Exactly. And about that time, IBM was looking for someone to open their office for them and to be sales and everything down there for them, to be their person. I went applied for the job. I got the job immediately, and so I was the IBM office person there in the Virgin Islands, and I had to go to Puerto Rico once a week, and I got additional training, and this and that, and so forth and so on. One day, when my New York manager was down, we went to the radio station and the general manager told us that the person who did jazz on Saturday night, who was an American from Florida, he had quit in a huff, and he needed somebody to replace him. And I said, "Boy, I sure would like to do that." He says, "Do you have any experience?" I said, "No." He said, "Well, we'll teach you." My manager said, "As long as Saturday night is not going to interfere with anything during the week, you can take it." And I took that job. I got so good at it, that they offered me a full time job, and I left IBM because I thought radio was cool. Being ambitious, I started a TV guide where I sold advertisement that paid for it and gave me an additional income stream. And one day, the general man-the same general manager who had hired me, general manager--by now, I'm working six days a week there at the radio station and he said, "you're going to have to make a choice between giving up your TV guide or staying with this station because you're taking ad revenue out of our pocket," and he said, "I'll give you a day to think about it." I went to the television station there on the island--the only one we had, we were an ABC, CBC, NBC affiliate, and told the owner what-- the ultimatum I had been given, and that I needed a job. He hired me right then and there, so I did not have to give up my TV guide. Story_ID: 88773 Speaker 1: I went to work. I was a Saturday anchor for the television news [in St. Thomas]. We didn't have Sunday news. I was-- did all of the editing because you don't use the same commercials in St. Thomas that you would use in a show in New York. It might Rinso, but Rinso was also owned by Lipton Tea, so you'd throw in a Lipton Tea commercial, run the show, take out the Lipton Tea commercial, and put back the Rinso commercial in there and ship it back to New York. And I also did the, created and started a jazz show on this news station that had just started there. The heirs to-- some of the heirs to the Spearman [ph.] fund had come down, and they had opened this new station. So I had to do also on Saturday night. I did the Saturday night news at 6:30 and then had to be finished with everything, put away, and be down at the radio station, which was down at the Hilton, down the hill. The television station was on top of the hill. The Hilton was down below and then I did the Saturday night jazz show from eight until midnight at the radio station. People who came to the island heard that, saw me on television, and they kept saying, "Well, if you ever come to New York, you've got a job," people from NBC and so forth and so on. Story_ID: 88774 Speaker 1: And one day, we were listening to the radio, and the-- [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was getting ready to cross the Edmond Pettus Bridge [in Selma, Alabama, 1965], and the kids were looking very concerned. And I asked them if they knew what was going on, and one of them replied that they thought the police were beating those negroes. That didn't sound right to me, and I asked, "Well, do you guys know any negroes?" They looked at one another and thought about it for a long while, and the I believe my oldest son said, "Dad, I believe I know one," and he named a friend of mine who had an afro long before they became popular in the states, but that was the only one they could think of. I knew--you knew, I had many friends, many multicultural friends, but the fact that they didn't know that they were negroes, I knew it was time for me to leave the Virgin Islands, and right after that, that summer, I left and came back to New York. I'm going to my friends now to see if they're ready to hire me at NBC and so forth and so on, and they wouldn't return calls, and I finally got a job part-time at Westinghouse at WINS there in New York, and was doing only part-time at KYW in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And after about two years, I got a break. They interviewed me, the general counsel of ABC had or was starting this program "Wide World of Sports" and he wanted me to be in then. And he set up an interview, and supposedly they were hiring me. They said, "Oh, you're hired, don't worry," but they never brought me to work. And I recognized it was a rouse. Speaker 2: Was that Barry Frank or somebody by that name? Speaker 1: I'm trying to--you mean the people who interviewed me? I can't remember for some strange reason, I cannot remember. I know they--every time I'd go there, "Okay, we're going to bring you to work in three weeks." Three weeks would come and go, never happened. Finally, I just got tired of running around, just doing radio work I could pick up. Oh, by the way, at that time, I had gone back to doing typewriter and office sales for an independent company in New York just to supplement my income. I was teaching English. That's where I met the wife of the general counsel of ABC, and I realized I wasn't going to get that job even though they were saying I had it; and I got an offer from Smith-Corona to come Washington [D.C.]. And I took that job, and went home with my kids. Speaker 2: Was that a sales job? Speaker 1: Yes, a sales job. I was given the major federal agencies, Howard University. I mean they made the deal so sweet, and I knew I could make much more than I could part time at Westinghouse and no time at Wide World of Sports with them making excuses, so that's what brought me back to Washington. Story_ID: 88775 Speaker 1: When did you get your next opportunity to be on the air? Speaker 2: The--In Washington [D.C.], the PBS station is WETA, and they wanted to have a radio station just like in New York, channel thirteen, and WNYC, and they were staffing for this brand new radio station that they were starting [it started in 1970] and I went applied for the job, and I was given the job of news director there for WETA radio, which is still one of the number one stations in the Washington area. And that's--I was doing-I was the news director, doing news five days a week, Saturday and Sunday. I was doing their classical music show and sort of jack of all trades. And when this-- they came up with this idea of doing an NPR [National Public Radio], I thought I was first in line to be news director for this new network coming on the air, NPR. And when they called me for the interview, I had taken a couple of days off, and I got dressed and was wearing my dashiki and everything, and I'd grown a little beard and so forth. And it took me years to find out what went on when I went for this interview, but I scared them to death at the interview. And I should have known that. Speaker 1: Now, you were involved in cultural organizations or anything at that time? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Just dashiki and all that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean that consciousness was coming. Speaker 1: People don't talk about that much, about why they started doing that. I remember the time. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know. Those who watch this tape may want-- like what were you thinking at the time? Speaker 2: My thinking was that I had grown up in an era, where I was--and people don't admit this--where I was almost ashamed to be an African American; and with that consciousness, I began to realize that we're a lot of things that we can be very, very proud of. And so that consciousness brought me to a point where I was proud to be an African American. And I expressed it through that dashiki and I had a little beard and so forth, and there are some pictures in there with beard and so forth. And so when they called me, I was at home mowing the lawn, and I took quick bath, and so forth, and started getting dressed, and wanted to be comfortable because they knew me, knew my work, my boss, the general manager of both the television and the radio station, was pushing me very heavily for the job, so I thought it was a matter of just showing up. So showing up in a dashiki and a beard and so forth was-- didn't seem to me would be a problem because I still believe that these people wanted to be fair, that integration was coming, I'd learn to speak properly and so forth and so on. I still believed that I would be judged on the merits of the thing. Speaker 1: Okay, what year is this? Speaker 2: This would have been 1967 I believe; and I want to think that over again [NPR was started in 1970]. Story_ID: 91463 Speaker 1: Okay, so you thought this, getting this job [news director at NPR] was going to be a piece of cake, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought Fred Flaxman--I thought, you know, he was 100 percent behind me. He thought I was the perfect person for the job. He was one of the guiding figures in setting up this new entity National Public Radio [NPR], and so I thought it was a piece of cake. He had said, you know, "I'm in." Speaker 1: So you didn't get it. How did they tell you? They just called you and say "you're not it."? Speaker 2: No, they never did. They just put another person into that job. It was actually two years later, I was talking to a person who was working there at NPR, and when he found out who I was--I was doing a show actually back to WETA--I had moved to WHUR, the Howard University station, as news director, and was doing a show out of a restaurant, in which we did an hour, debating issues with the customers in the restaurant, and it was add-on WETA. That was the only thing I was doing on WETA because I had moved over to WHUR. Speaker 1: WHUR now was quite a force in those days. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: It had tremendous programming. The music that was played --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --the music. Speaker 1: --eclectic from all generations of black music. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: You would hear Malcolm X speeches, [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], other black figures, intellectuals on the air. Speaker 2: I left WETA only on the condition that they would allow me to do one hour of news and black stations didn't do news in those days, and they agreed that I could do one hour of news. And once we were doing one hour of news, the public was demanding more. And then I got people--one person in Pennsylvania who wanted to cover the [Philip] Berrigan Trial [Harrisburg Seven trial in 1971] in Harrisburg for a newspaper there, "The Harrisburg," paper and I got him to just do something, just reading it from there of what happened that day. Following that or during that period, Wounded Knee started [South Dakota in 1973], and then we started doing every day a report from there. And then the [HM] Angela Davis trial started [in 1972]. And I was running out of time, so I had to two hours and then later three hours, and that's what we did. I had a person out there that every day of the Angela Davis trial, every day the Wounded Knee, the siege there at Wounded Knee, we had a report, and Walter Cronkite and all the rest of the national correspondents would call in to see what had happened and to see whether it was something that they might want to put on their show. Speaker 1: That's right because time is a critical factor here in new-- broadcast news. It does not get that much time, a story-- 30 seconds and then it's off to another story. Speaker 2: We also had a philosophy that if this was a story--for instance--the Vietnam War was going on, well you knew they were gonna cover the Vietnam War, so we never had a story on there, unless it was some story that we knew the national networks were not-- was not going to cover. We always had an alternative prospective to everything that wasn't going to be anyplace else, so we were able to go to three hours, and we stayed at three hours until I left. Story_ID: 91464 Speaker 1: Now can you give me a "for instance" about an alternative prospective? I know I heard stories--Max Robinson out at ABC used to change the scripts sometimes I've heard when they asked him to talk about "terrorists" in Zimbabwe. He called them "freedom fighters" on the air. He would get in trouble. Speaker 2: Oh, Max stayed in trouble because of things like that. He supported us though at [W]HUR and of course we're going into the period now when we're looking to start the National Association of Black Journalists, of course the Washington Association and then the National Association. Speaker 1: And this is the period of time where black professionals are uniting in all the professions is when the African American Police League is formed in '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: The firefighter is formed. Speaker 2: Exactly, under tremendous resentment from the powers. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: When we announced the formation of the National Association of Black Journalists, the Philadelphia Inquirer said we were racist. Twenty years later, exactly twenty years later, they are hosting the twentieth year of the National Association of the Black Journalists. Things change. Our first elected treasurer of the National Association of Black Journalists was an anchor out of the CBC affiliate in Toledo, Ohio, and she went back home with the great news, we formed an organization and I'm the new treasurer--national treasurer--of this organization. They said, "Do you want to be on air or do you want to be the national treasurer?" They made it very clear to her that they were firing her. And so she had to give that position that she had been elected to. There were many people who quietly joined and never put their name out there. There were some people here in Chicago [Illinois] who were afraid to get their name out there. Some people who strongly support the organization today, but at that time, it was a tremendous danger to get involved in this. I may be skipping ahead-I'm not sure--but I think I'm-we're at the right place. I'm talking about 1974, we had a Washington Association of Black Journalists. And what made me think of it was I was making enough money to support my kids and myself but not to get an organization started. And, of course, almost all of it came out of Max Robinson's pocket and [HM] Maureen Bunyan's pocket who was a Chicagoan also. They committed themselves financially to support it. When they sent out the initial letters to ask people to come to Washington [D.C.], all of that was paid for by Maureen Bunyan [HM] and Max Robinson. Speaker 1: Now-- Story_ID: 91465 Speaker 1: See, now, Max Robinson is a Chicago [Illinois] figure that we know in this town, you know, before he died, he-- there was some controversy about him always. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, what kind of person was Max Robinson? His brother is the famous Randall Robinson. Speaker 2: Exactly. Exactly. Max had his problems. He could go into a very deep depression, and he might climb into bed and stay there for a week, ten days, not move, but he was brave about who he was and what needed to be done. And so therefore, he would take chances once he thought he could get away with them. Sometimes he would get put down so hard that he would go into those very depressive states, but he was there and he believed in helping and reaching out, and that we needed an organization such as the National Association of Black Journalists. Speaker 1: Now, is it [HM] Maureen Bunyan? Speaker 2: Maureen Bunyan. Speaker 1: Now who is she? Speaker 2: Maureen Bunyan comes out of Chicago also [sic, New York City, New York]. Father was a professor [sic, her father, Arthur Bunyan, was an electrical engineer]--I'm gonna have to ask Vernon what school it was and so forth--and she came to Washington [D.C.] and was a very pretty face. And at that time, you had to be a certain color to get on air and so forth. And Maureen was just a hard, hard worker, very, very shy, but she came to me one day and just said, "What can I do?" And I didn't know what to say because she was a famous personality at that time, but then, on her own, she just started moving over and moving chairs and so forth and so on. The night of the founding--the founding meeting--following the founding meeting of the National Association of Black Journalists, Maureen was moving chairs, picking up chairs, and getting things ready along with Dave Dinkins [ph.] and people like that to prepare for a banquet that we were having for Baldwin that night. Speaker 1: James Baldwin? Speaker 2: James Baldwin. And then--and we didn't have any money by the way, but nobody knew it. We had gone around and taking money out of everybody's pocket. And then she had to fly out of there because I remember it was December [December 12, 1975], so, therefore, Dinkins got her to her car safely. He walked her to her car. And she went on air just minutes--got back to her station just minutes before to do her work there. The point I'm making is that she had that full commitment to the National Association of Black Journalists, not just going into her purse and pulling out money for stamps and all these other things you need but actually working, moving of chairs and all the other things you do when you're preparing for a special event that night. And sometimes these are the stories that don't get told. She was strong supporter, and many people who are members of the organization today, who did not come out that day, but Max, Maureen and [HM] Vernon Jarretts of the world were there and their media outlets simply had to deal with them because they were going to make a statement. Speaker 1: Yeah, it would have been hard to do this without, let's say, the status of somebody like Max Robinson, not to mention the money he contributed. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And, at the time, I guess, one can argue that he had the top position in the black media-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --as co-anchor of the ABC Nightly News [sic, World News Tonight] with Peter Jennings. Speaker 2: Exactly Speaker 1: He was the only black co-anchor on the national newscast. Speaker 2: At this time, though, he was the anchor of the CBS affiliated in Washington, D.C. This was before he went to ABC, but he paid for it--and, I mean people don't forget, and when they feel that you should be saying this, or should not be joining this group, or should not be an advocate for a certain position, they may not try to punish you that day, but they don't forget, so it's important to have someone with the courage of a Max Robinson and a Maureen Bunyan, and many others like Vernon Jarrett. There is a gentleman that a lot of people don't know about, Ray Taliaferro, who has been on the air for ABC for twenty-seven years, and he has been speaking out on these issues until last night, and contributing money. Story_ID: 91466 Speaker 1: We haven't gone past the founding of the mutual black network, now have we? Speaker 2: No, we haven't. At the founding of the National Association of Black Journalists, I had left WHUR for one reason, money, because I had been offered--I had been doing a show for them called, "Black Voices," for the Democratic National Committee. In fact, the Watergate burglars broke in past my radio disk. That's the way they came in that night. And one day, they came to me, and they said, "We're looking for someone to fill this, a deputy director of communications because I was working as news director of the radio station of WHUR, said, "We're looking for someone to fill it, and we're ready to offer him a fairly good salary." And I said "How much?" They told me and I said, "Can I apply?" And they told me, "Yes, you can have the job," and that's when I left the job at WHUR. You can give so much and then you feel a little burnt out. I was coming early in the morning and staying late at night, and there is only so long that you can do it; and I think I was ready to leave. I had an intern at that time, Maurice Williams was his name. And the deal I cut, I wanted to bring Maurice with me as an intern. I also had another intern at that time, people know him here in Chicago, [HM] Barry Mayo, and so all of them came to the Democratic National Committee with me as interns. And Maurice Williams--Barry Mayo was very important. He was like a son to me. Speaker 1: He is now president of W, I think, GCI in Chicago? Speaker 2: He was. He sold all of that. He is a multi-millionaire now and consulting to various stations all over the country, but Maurice Williams was also very, very important because at the founding meeting of the National Association of Black Journalists, he made sure everybody had coffee and donuts, and orange juice and so forth--and at the luncheon part--because it was an all-day meeting. And at the luncheon affair, he made sure everybody had a sandwich and a Coke or Pepsi or whatever. Story_ID: 91467 Speaker 1: That was in December of 1975. He [Maurice Williams] graduated from Journalism school in June of 1976. He went to work for WHUR that fall, became the Washington City Hall reporter, lead reporter for WHUR. And one day [March 9, 1977] coming back from lunch with one of the city councilmen, named [HM] Marion Barry, did not realize that the entire Washington, D.C. City Hall had been taken over Hanafi Muslims, and they had occupied the building. And when he stepped off the elevator, he startled one of the guards, and the guard turned around and fired. The first shot hit Marion down, Marion Barry. The second shot hit Maurice Williams, killing him instantly. Maurice Williams, to this day--we're talking about 1976 [sic, 1977]--to this day, remains the only African American journalist killed in the line of fire. The Gannett Foundation has honored him and now I'm hearing from the leadership of the National Association of Black Journalists, that they're going to honor him also. Speaker 2: That was a bizarre and ironic kind of incident I remembered from those days. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: The Hanafis had--they took over the Jewish Embassy [sic, B'nai B'rith International headquarters] in D.C.? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And they said they were going to kill someone every hour until they got their demands met, which was the release of certain Hanafi prisoners-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --who they felt were being wrongfully held by the government. Speaker 1: Do you remember who did the negotiation? We've mentioned him just a few moments ago. Max Robinson. Speaker 2: Max Robinson, okay. It's kind of sad. A lot of people speculated that they would not kill someone once every hour. Sure enough, they didn't. They sent away for a man's medicine and they weren't-- they really weren't that terrible. Speaker 1: No, they weren't, but they were trying to get a point across. Speaker 2: Yeah. Being startled by a black journalist, they shoot and kill him, you know. It was really-- Speaker 1: --ironic-- Speaker 2: --ironic and strange. Speaker 1: The person that does that really suffers the pains of that wrongful death even today. Speaker 2: The Hanafis were under incredible pressure themselves. The leader's family had been killed by the black (unclear). Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: (unclear) under Nation of Islam. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. The other thing was, if you remembered, Kareem owned a house there. Speaker 2: Abdul Jabar. Speaker 1: Abdul Jabar and this group broke in and killed a number of people; and you remember me telling you earlier doing this narration of how Reverend [Stephen Gill] Spottswood, who was the first African American to be chair of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and my interests were in those two beautiful daughters of his; and one of the people who ran up to try to stop that was the younger daughter. So these things--so, that was--and I always have to always get that because I miss Maurice and the fact that we have not honored him yet is terrible. Speaker 2: It's glad-- I'm glad you told us more about him because many people know the story, but don't know who he was, and they don't know his name and they don't know what he was doing. Speaker 1: He was sort of the invisible man, but all of those founders-they got sandwiches at noon, and coffee and donuts, that morning because of Maurice. Story_ID: 91468 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how does Mutual Black Radio come in? When does that come in the story? Speaker 2: That comes in also in the '70s [1970s]. I mentioned I had gone to the Democratic National Committee. Later, this was after the founding of the organization, I was offered the job of vice president for news and operations of Mutual Black Network at that time. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that came into existence in the early '70s [1970]? Didn't it? Speaker 2: It did. Speaker 1: '73 [1973]? '74 [1974]? Speaker 2: '74 [1974. sic, 1972] and Rory, and I'm going to think of Rory's last name in a few moments because he came out of Chicago [Illinois] again, was doing commentary "One Black Man's Opinion," and then he was doing it out of Birmingham, Alabama was there, but they didn't have much of anything else. And I was (unclear) to fill it out and get it running well. During those years, we went through a lot, but we also started getting into real news. Ethel Payne, I hired her to go to Africa with [Henry] Kissinger that had never been done before, and she came back with tremendous news stories, and Ethel was still living here in Chicago but still fulfilling that task. Speaker 1: The news on the Mutual Black Radio was unbelievable. I mean it was detailed, and it was-you could actually-- for once, there was a news broadcast you could listen to as a black person and addressed really your needs and in terms of what you wanted to know about a news story. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And it was global in scope, not just African American news, but news from Africa, the Caribbean. Speaker 2: And people who once were getting news that they needed for their survival, news-- information is power, so they had to have that. Speaker 1: So this is a continuation of what you had at [W]HUR? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: WHUR already had that reputation too. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Then here you have Mutual Black Radio. Speaker 2: Although I will say our affiliate here, we paid more money than any other affiliate in the country, they felt-they would-- we had to have Chicago in the loop. No advertiser is going to buy if Chicago is not in the loop, anymore than if New York [New York City, New York] is not in the loop. So the best deal that we could get here was that they, would do, would play the advertisement, but they were not going to play the news here; and they did not. Speaker 1: What was the affiliate here in Chicago? Speaker 2: I believe that was WBEE. Is that located in Harvey [Illinois]? --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yes, right. Jazz station out of Harvey. Speaker 2: Now, jazz station. Speaker 1: Yeah, mostly jazz. Speaker 2: Okay. I think they were playing rock in those days, but they felt to interrupt it with news would interrupt their programming to their detriment. They were not the only ones--there was an affiliate in Charleston, South Carolina that was the same one, WPAL. Speaker 1: Yeah, mostly it was jazz mostly from '76 [1976] on it was all jazz. Speaker 2: Right. So-- and we have a lot of stations that feel that way today. I mean they're playing rock, and to do a decent news show, they feel we'll interrupt their programming and will make them lose. Speaker 1: What do you mean by rock, it's probably what we would call urban contemporary? Speaker 2: Urban contemporary. Speaker 1: Not the long-haired rock. Speaker 2: No. --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It's funny how the terminology has changed over the years. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What we would call, "Rock-n-Roll" would be Chuck Berry, and now it's the--I don't know. Speaker 2: I don't know either. That's why-- that's why you find all the talk shows now relegated to the A.M. stations, and the advantage of the talk shows, of course, is that they have a dedicated audience, but you have the numbers on the F.M. station with music. And I believe it's what is hurting us a group, as a culture more than anything else. Story_ID: 91469 Speaker 1: Now, as a news director in-- for something like Mutual Black [Network], was it difficult to pull together reporters that would cover as much information as you all covered? Speaker 2: It was and very expensive, and that was a problem that we had. We didn't pay that much for all of these stringers at the various stations but even that small amount that we paid them was a financial drain on us, so it was very, very difficult, very difficult. Speaker 1: And yet the need still remains for something like that --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. And we'll get there one day, but people have to understand that we're not just selling people talking heads, we're selling power, survival; and once we begin to realize that we have to have this information to survive, then we may turn away from the music a little more often. Speaker 1: All right. How long were you with Mutual Black Radio? Speaker 2: Three years with Mutual. Story_ID: 91470 Speaker 1: And is there a story from the Democratic National Committee, you know, that you need to tell us? I kind of skipped past that. Speaker 2: The-- we did-- That was a period when, again, that new consciousness was beginning to infect the black community nationwide; and so it was a period when the black leadership in the democratic--first of all, [HM] Vernon [Jarrett] and I met at the Miami Beach [Florida] Democratic National Committee [sic, Convention] of 1972. I had managed to get some of my reporters down--we didn't have a budget for it, so I took these-- money that had been set aside for pencils and ink pens, and I got our reporters down there; and I tried to cover it. Shirley Chisholm was running people who we'd heard about, but not nationally, the [HM] Julian Bonds of the world, the Maynard Jacksons of the world and so forth, and the [HM] Basil Patersons of the world. And this was a major turning point at the 1972 convention. Speaker 1: Yeah, the 1972 convention, that was the most liberal the democratic party ever got, I mean-- Story_ID: 91471 Speaker 1: We were talking last time I think about the Democratic [National] Convention of 1972 [in Miami Beach, Florida]. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your role in that? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a historic convention in many ways. I was a news director for a station in Washington, D.C., a radio station in Washington, D.C. WHUR-FM and we somehow scrapped the bottom of the barrel to get a couple of reporters to get a couple of reporters to that convention to cover it for our Washington D.C. audience. We went to Miami [Florida], and at that convention, of course, it was historic for a number of reasons. A) It was the convention where Shirley Chisholm announced, threw her hat into the ring and ran for president, of for the presidential democratic nomination at that convention. It was the convention where a number of African Americans wanted to play a pivotal role in that convention because they knew they held a certain percentage, a very important percentage, of that vote that the Democrats were gonna have to depend on. And so people like [Robert] Sonny Carson went down, and they were urging their people to get out and vote in New York City [New York]. And some of the other civic leaders, grassroots leaders, gang leaders in various cities, including Chicago [Illinois], Los Angeles [California] were going to urging their people to get out and vote, to take part in that democratic process. We were down to cover it for-- George Wallace was one of the people down for that democratic convention. I remember that well because one of my reporters who was Trinidad was not aware of George Wallace's previous reputation; and looking for him one day, I couldn't find him and there he and George Wallace were just having a great pow-wow and enjoying themselves. And I think I was very, very surprised at that moment, but most important, I think, besides Shirley Chisholm trying to run, the Maynard Jacksons and the [HM] Julian Bonds, trying to get the black community from all over the states--the United States to pull their power together behind a candidate was very, very important. The black vote was not promised to any one individual, not even Shirley Chisholm and they wanted--the Julian Bonds and the Maynard Jacksons of the world, the [HM] Basil Patersons of the New York, the Charles Evers of the Mississippi and so forth, they wanted to negotiate with the power structure there at that convention to get the very best deal that they could of the recognition of the power that they had and what they brought to the party. And, of course, George McGovern was a leading candidate at that convention, and eventually, of course, did win the nomination. Speaker 1: McGovern is described as the only honest man in the senate at one point by one of the Kennedys (unclear). Speaker 2: I was not aware of that statement, but it's certainly an excellent statement. How true it is, I have no idea, but I do know that once he was on the verge of winning that nomination to get him over that final hump, Charlie Evers forced McGovern to deal with African Americans at that convention and that we wanted a piece of the pie, we wanted the chair of the Democratic party. And McGovern was not going to give that up, but, finally, the negotiations came down to the vice chair and they looked at some names and finally they settled on the name of [HM] Basil Paterson to be the vice chair of the democratic party, and, of course, this was as high as any black had come. Story_ID: 91472 Speaker 1: Now, [HM] Basil Paterson was from what state? Speaker 2: Basil Paterson was from New York State. He had a very, very lustrous career, preferred working from the background, but, for New Yorkers, was well, well known. Later, became deputy mayor of New York. He ran against [Nelson] Rockefeller. He and the former Labor Secretary, I don't want to say Goldwater. I want to say--I can't think of his name, but they ran for governor and lieutenant governor. Basil Paterson actually-- Speaker 1: Arthur Goldberg. Speaker 2: Arthur Goldberg, thank you. Arthur Goldberg ran-- running for governor and Basil Paterson ran for lieutenant governor. And although Arthur Goldberg lost very badly to Rockefeller, Basil Paterson upheld him throughout the state on that issue. Basil Paterson was also secretary of state for New York in a later administration there, but because of him occupying the seat of deputy chair of the Democratic National Committee and he would not be compromised, very, very honest, deliberate bright man and was well-thought of by everyone from every spectrum of Democratic National Committee. The Democratic Party took to the 1976 convention [in New York City, New York] the largest number of African Americans in the history of the party, where they represented over, I believe, 29% of the delegates at that 1976 convention. And that was a direct result of Paterson and other allies. George Brown who headed the Black Caucus getting the party to recognize the importance of the black vote, and doing a delegate selection plan where various states had to have a certain percentage of the delegates of African Americans, a certain percentage of them had to women and so forth, and strangely enough they called it a "quota system." And, eventually, the following year, after the '76 [1976] convention, people worked to change that around because quotas were illegal, so they said, or bad for the party. And then it became goals and time tables of what they were trying to do, but not since 1976 have blacks managed to achieve the number of delegates to a convention in 1976. And that was all drawn up as a result of the 1972 convention there in Miami. Speaker 1: In '72 [1972], the country is going through a couple of different backlashes, I guess, in a sense. The liberal serge and the Democratic Party resulted in the nomination of [George] McGovern. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But he got crushed at the polls against [President Richard] Nixon, and that being the conservative backlash in the U.S. And then in '76 [1976] though, the momentum from '72 [1972] carried [President] Jimmy Carter over-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --and the failure of Nixon's administration. Speaker 2: Exactly. McGovern did scare a lot of the party regulars. They saw him too far to the left. And the '72 [1972] convention, which Nixon won the election, they were able to paint McGovern very radical, the same way later, the democrats were able to paint [Barry] Goldwater into that same corner. And the American public, they don't want their politicians, or a majority of them don't want their politicians too far to the left or too far to the right. And so when you can win that battle of painting an opponent too far either way, or extremist, then you are in a good position to win an election. Story_ID: 91473 Speaker 1: As a media person, and a consultant in media, do you think black people are pretty much the same as the rest of America; in that regard, they don't want their leaders too radical? Speaker 2: Oh absolutely. African Americans, of course, they have their things that they stand for because they've been through some experiences that a majority of white Americans have not been through. And so therefore, they stand on certain liberties, and freedom and ideas that some of the others may not only because they have experienced the negative side of those ideas. A great example, almost every African American recognized in the O.J. Simpson case when a person was a bad guy, the bad L.A. [Los Angeles, California] cop and so forth, and they recognized it immediately as opposed to white American just could not imagine a bad cop. --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: A bad cop-- Speaker 2: -- a bad cop. So it's your life experiences that give this insight. And that's what we bring, and that's why it's important that we always be at the table in making these decisions, whether you're talking the University of Michigan Law School [Ann Arbor, Michigan] or a medical school or Democratic or Republican National Committee. That input brings a little bit different perspective to the whole equation. Story_ID: 91474 Speaker 1: And so after-- following '72 [1972], of course, as you say, was a complete disaster. The American people turned against [George] McGovern--turned their back on McGovern; and, I believe, McGovern carrying on two states, so picking up the pieces following 1972, there were people who came into the Democratic National Committee who had to, knew that they had the job of moving the party a little back to the right. It had gone too far to the left, they felt, but, now, you had several commissions there that were determined to get a fair representation of women and minorities there in the party as delegates to help guide the party. And I could remember the delegate selection committee, [Robert] Bob Strauss would be naming those people, but you had Labor, you had Hispanics, you had blacks, you had women, all looking over his shoulder, and he had one final spot to name on this delegate selection committee, and the women were saying, "No, that spot should go to a woman." Blacks were saying, "No, it should go to a black." Hispanics were saying, "No, we want somebody from the Hispanic community to go there." Labor was saying, "No, we don't have enough seats on this and it should go to Labor." And Bob Strauss, in his wisdom, was able to find someone who was half Hispanic, half black and a woman out of the Labor movement in Los Angeles to fill that spot. So he was a very crafty politician and was what the party needed at that time in its history. Story_ID: 91475 Speaker 1: Now, I don't know if we talked about the hostage crisis with WHUR on camera or off camera last time, but HUR went through a little crisis there with the-- Speaker 2: --we certainly did. There came a time, of course, when the Hanafi Muslims did take over a large segment, took over City Hall in Washington D.C. and took over one of the Jewish organization offices downtown [B'nai B'rith International headquarters]. I had an intern who had helped me with establishing the National Association of Black Journalists [in 1975]. His name was Maurice Williams. He was a student at the time we-helped us establish the National Association of Black Journalists, this was established in December of 1975. Maurice Williams was a student at Howard University's School of Journalism [now School of Communications] at that time. He helped make sure the founding members coming in to vote on putting the organization together that they had coffee and donuts and all the other things you had for breakfast, and had lunch, and Cokes, and so forth, and Pepsis and sodas, and whatever we served for lunch. And that night, James Baldwin was our chief fundraiser that night and helping me put that fundraiser together on that founding day of the-- putting the organization together. Maurice Williams graduated the following year of 1976 from school. And because by then he was getting a reputation of a persistent, good student, he was hired immediately by WHUR. By that time, I was at the National Democratic Committee as an employee, deputy director of communications and given the assignment of covering of City Hall. In April [sic, March] of the following year, now we're talking about 1977, Maurice Williams was his regular beat. He had an office there at City Hall in Washington D.C., not realizing that there had been a takeover by the Hanafi Muslims, he had gone to lunch and that's when the takeover took place. Returning from lunch with getting on an elevator with a security guard, a reporter from the [Baltimore] Afro [American], a city council member by the name of [HM] Marion Barry, who was on the city council at that time, and Maurice all got on the elevator, not knowing the particular floor there in City Hall had been completely taken over by armed gunmen. When they stepped off the elevator, a startled guard, not realizing what was going on, seeing one man get off in uniform and three others, he immediately opened fire, wounding Marion Barry very, very badly, killing Maurice Williams, and the other two managed to escape without being hit, the reporter from the Afro American and the security guard. Maurice Williams became the first and only African American journalist to die in the line of duty; in the line of duty, of course, he was on duty. He was the WHUR reporter there on duty. He has been recognized the Gannett Museum and a number of other organizations with something, a plaque in his honor. When you go to the museum, you will see this. What has distressed me for a number of years is that the National Association of Black Journalists has chosen not to recognize him in some sort of formal way, and this is something they are promising to correct if not this year, then next year. And Howard University, while recognizing him, has not sought to honor him with a scholarship or some other means. Story_ID: 91476 Speaker 1: Let me backtrack a minute and talk about Watergate [Hotel in Washington, D.C.]. You might have a Watergate story because that was during your years at the WHUR. Speaker 2: Yes, I was at WHUR but I was also doing a nationally syndicated radio show for the Democratic National Committee. It was called, "Black Voices," and my radio studio, where I worked three or four hours a week that I had to be down there to put that show, was where the Watergate burglars came in through. Speaker 1: This was in 1974, when you're talking about, right? Speaker 2: Yes, we're talking about 1974, and we were at the Watergate obviously at that time. The Democratic National Committee was located there at the Watergate. They came in through that entrance, and that's most of the story that they did come in through there. A later part of the story when I went to work as deputy director of communications for the Democratic National Committee, the DNC felt they owed the guard who discovered that. I'm trying to remember his name. Speaker 1: His name was Frank-- Speaker 2: --Frank Wills, yes. Frank Wills, who discovered that, had never finished high school, so the Democratic National Committee wanted to make sure that he got a good education; and they were willing to put the dollars into that effort. And I was given that assignment of getting Frank enrolled into high school. I took him to Armstrong High School [Armstrong Manual Training School], which is my old Alma mater in Washington D.C., and he was going there trying to finish there. Unfortunately, he never did, other things distracted him, and he ended up going back home to South Carolina and dying at an early age. Speaker 1: He had sort of a-I know there's an article on Jet Magazine about him being in pretty bad shape in South Carolina. Speaker 2: Well, financially, he was in very bad shape, and the DNC wanted to help with that, but a part of helping him was that he had to be in school, and so when he left school, that sort of cut off some funds. And, of course, there were always people approaching Frank as I maintained contact with him--approaching him with various ideas, you know, movies, books, this and that, you cooperate here; and none of those things came to fruition. Speaker 1: He was a sort of hero in a way by just doing his job. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Absolutely. He was absolutely a hero because had it not been for Frank Wills, possibly the burglary would have never been aborted in progress. He was the one who found the tape on the door. That's where they were supposed to escape from, and he removed that tape, which cut off their escape, so they were trapped. By that time, someone had called the police and they were responding, and here were these guys were, this carefully laid out plan and their escape-- Speaker 1: The CIA agents Speaker 2: --Exactly. All of their route had been cut off by the one little simple act of Frank seeing the tape on the door, and saying, "This is not supposed to be here," taking the tape off, and going about his business. So sometimes fate chooses its heroes; and I think that's what it did in Frank's case. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 91477 Speaker 1: Let's see. Now, well we're up to '76[1976]/ '77[1977]. Speaker 2: Right. And I think we've gone through the founding day of the National Association of Black Journalists. We're up to '76 [1976] [President] Jimmy Carter, who was disliked a great deal, of course, at the Democratic National Committee. His one real friend there was Hamilton Jordan, and-- but the powers of the National Democratic Committee were really looking for someone else other than Jimmy Carter to carry the Democratic banner in the '76 [1976] election. Speaker 1: He seemed to come out of nowhere. I mean he was governor of Georgia, but on a national scene, he seemed to come out of nowhere. Speaker 2: Well, he did. He did come out of nowhere, but what's more importantly without the support of any of the party stalwarts. What he did though, he had one of-- in my opinion, of course, he was a very close friend of mine; and therefore, I may be overstating a wee bit, but I think Hamilton Jordan was one of the smartest political strategists ever to come along. And I think because of Hamilton Jordan, laying out of a plan that did not require the usual making friends with the party stalwarts in each one of the states and going shaking their hands, and doing their bidding, and making promises to them, the usual regulars or power brokers in the various states around the country, they went through another plan. There was a gentleman by the name of Ben Brown, state legislator from Georgia, who, on his own, started going around to the various African American sororities, fraternities, and other well-grounded African American communities and talking about Jimmy Carter, and urging them to come out and vote for Jimmy Carter. Remember the ground work had been laid. This was going to be the largest number of African American delegates in the history of the Democratic Party just as it was going to be the largest number of women delegates in the history of the Democratic Party. So most of the front-runners were not really used to courting these people. They were used to courting the power brokers throughout the country; and then the power brokers delivering--and then the power brokers delivering the votes from their various communities. And somehow Hamilton saw it was going to be different this time, and so people such as Ben Brown, I did a little of it, and not because of any special loyalty to Jimmy Carter, but more of a special loyalty to Hamilton Jordan, I went around and met with some people, such as [HM] Maxine Waters in Los Angeles [California] and a few others. And Jimmy Carter came to the 1976 convention with a very strong base. Everyone else there who came were depending on the power brokers. Jimmy Carter was depending on those individual delegates that he had already courted, Ben Brown had courted and a number of other people had courted. So that was a very, very special convention there in New York [New York City, New York] that year [1976] because Jimmy Carter had that very strong base, made up of minorities and women. And that's where he started from, and though they had some candidates running that felt--or were depending on, I should say, those power brokers in the various cities, the Daleys of Chicago, a number of people in Los Angeles and New York and so forth and so on. The overwhelming odds and numbers were with those little people and they banded together, the Congregational Black Caucus, for instance, got together and they saw their best interests because Carter and Hamilton Jordan were ready to deal and to say, "We'll make a commitment to this if you will deliver your votes to us," as opposed to depending on a power broker to do that. Story_ID: 91478 Speaker 1: Do you consider this the, I guess, the best use of the black vote in a campaign in the 20th Century? Speaker 2: I would have to say so. I haven't seen anything as successful. Now, there have been certain things done to make sure nothing else will be as successful of course, but I've also seen people caving in to demands by those people that they should perhaps be fighting for. And so I do consider it and there are a number of reasons why of course. With women, Hispanics, and blacks, Native Americans sticking together--and Labor--working together, for a large part, we were able to find a candidate who articulated our best interests and Liberals of course. And they came together and were able to put a candidate to office. Now, we'll go into the story of why Jimmy Carter disappointed a lot of us over that, but the strategy was good. Story_ID: 88792 Speaker 1: Just to ensure that people know who we're talking to, I'm going to slate it again. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm an interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Paul Brock, B-R-O-C-K, P-A-U-L, and I'm the subject of this HistoryMaker interview. Speaker 1: Yes, and what's today's date? Speaker 2: Oh, today's date is Sunday, June 8, 2003. Speaker 1: Right. Where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at my home at Upper Marlboro, Maryland. Story_ID: 88793 Speaker 1: Okay. Let's continue. You were talking about [President] Jimmy Carter and why things didn't go the way they should have. Speaker 2: Yes, what we're talking about is Jimmy Carter bringing together a coalition that no one else had ever brought together. Hamilton Jordan deserves a lot of the credit or most of the credit I should say for this strategy that was a winning strategy, as you may remember that 1976 election was extremely close between Carter and [President] Gerald Ford, and, so-- but that strategy was a winner in the end. And African Americans, Hispanics, women, Liberals all expected Jimmy Carter to be their president to pursue a lot of the policies that they had articulated and believed in. Instead Carter moved to the right once he was in office, thinking as a lot of presidents have, even [President John F.] Kennedy was thinking in those terms if he had to run for another term, that once you're in office and once you are president, you have to move to the right to bring those along who voted against you, so that they will vote you in the next election. I'm not sure about that strategy. I think people vote for you if you can bring them over to your strategy or thinking and we-- well that's another story. Carter moved to the right. He alienated most of the civil rights group, including the NAACP. We had some terrible, terrible battles quietly behind the scene and then openly. Speaker 1: What were some of the issues that were fought about? Speaker 2: Well, some of the issues was the actual Civil Rights Movement and some of the laws that we felt needed to be passed, and some of the issues that the president needed should be putting his weight behind and instead was taking a more of a centrist or middle of the road stance on, the same with women; of course, the women's movement, first quietly and then openly rebelled against Carter, Hispanics, blacks and Liberals. And the final straw, I believe, was the invasion of Iran. You may remember that. And when he invaded that country, these groups turned against him. Speaker 1: That was during the hostage crisis. Speaker 2: That was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --I remember the hostages were being held. Speaker 2: Exactly. Exactly. Speaker 1: He decided to try to rescue them, and it was a fiasco that some claimed that the Republicans-- Speaker 2: --encouraged. Speaker 1: They call it, "The October surprise." Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: He thought he was going to get in there and instead (unclear) trapped and he couldn't. Speaker 2: And, of course, when those sand storms blow up--of course, America was not going to repeat that mistake again in this last war in Iraq, but the sand storms did the whole operation, and it was an utter failure. And Carter was ridiculed and his ratings just plummeted as a result of that. Story_ID: 88794 Speaker 1: Still with [President] Ronald Reagan coming on the scene--there was another thing also. As we approach the Democratic National Convention [New York City, New York, 1980], we had [Edward] Ted Kennedy who elected to run against [President Jimmy] Carter. Because Carter had deserted that left base that all Democrats need to win, Kennedy got involved in the race, and was running against Carter. Carter managed to hang on, going into the convention. He had a slightly, but Kennedy was gaining and was holding a very strong base. In the end, though, Kennedy saw that he could not overtake Carter and could not deny him the nomination. It's very difficult at a nominating convention to deny a sitting president the nomination, and so he was not able to do that. By the way, Carter had openly rebelled against blacks going into that convention, and blacks made no secret to discuss disappointment with him, and that they really wanted to have someone else lead the party. Story_ID: 88795 Speaker 1: We probably need to talk about specifics around that. I know one sore spot was the dismissal of [HM] Andrew Young as a U.N. [United Nations] Ambassador. Speaker 2: Yes. By that time, I was at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. [HM] Benjamin Hooks had become executive director of NAACP. It was following one of our conventions, NAACP conventions. I was in Chicago [Illinois] at the time and [HM] Vernon Jarrett was able to reach me and said that they needed me back in New York. I went back immediately, and we pulled together the African American community to see what we-- how we were going to respond to-- we considered it a crisis because Andy Young was our highest profile African American in an administration, and what he was trying to do, we felt, was the right thing. Our sympathies lay within. --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: For those who are watching this later, what was that? Speaker 2: And that was--Andrew Young wanted to open up a dialogue with the Palestinians on a peace initiative, thinking that opening this dialogue, we could get a peace agreement that would be in Israel's interest and in the Palestinian interest. And, of course, once--because the policy-[President Jimmy] Carter had articulated a policy of no discussions with the Palestinians, they looked at that as Andrew Young had violated a part of the Carter policy, and he was fired. All of us knew that if it had not been for Andrew Young coming over to Carter in '75 [1975], Carter would not be president. Remember the '76 [1976] race was just that close; and so Carter had forgotten how he had gotten to the White House, but I think there was an arrogance there, a quiet arrogance, that said, "I've bought enough people over by moving to the right, and I've bought enough people over that I can win regardless," so he felt comfortable in firing America's highest profile Carter administration appointee who was Andrew Young. We were very, very upset about it. As I remember it, we met there at the NAACP Headquarters, 1790 Broadway. Every African American leader--national African American leader-organizational leader, let me put it that way, was there. Every major newspaper was also there. I had to keep them pinned up in an area to keep them away from this discussion because they wanted to discuss retaliation against Carter, how they should respond. One thing they were going to do, they were going to respond--they had made up their minds about. There was not one face there that was not very upset by what Carter had done. There had been the small betrayals they felt Carter had engaged in, but now this was one that they were not--it was something that had been building and now this was one they were not willing to put up with and so they wanted to retaliate. That was the mood of that meeting. In the end, they came out much softer than they went in, but still there was a strong retaliatory statement against the president of the United States and portrayed the firing of the Andrew Young as a betrayal to black people in the nation. Story_ID: 88796 Speaker 1: Are there any other issues that black people felt betrayed on, I mean specific things? Speaker 2: I was trying to remember them, myself. There were a number of civil rights initiatives that we felt, not only betrayed on, but they we had to speak up on as the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and we did speak on them. As I said, [President Jimmy] Carter was moving toward the right--toward the center from the left that had got him to the presidency; and most of those on the left, felt betrayed, very much as many people did in the 2002 mid-term election when Democrats were voting to support the [Iraq] war, and so that split. We had a number of news conferences, and I'm trying to remember a specific issue, and I can't, but we held a number of news conferences as the NAACP, speaking out about this betrayal by Carter and supporting those conservative forces. As you know, the Democratic National Committee made up not only of Hispanics, African Americans, and Liberal--especially Liberal women and so forth, but there is also a conservative, Southern conservative element, and that element was still very strongly with the party in 1979-'78 [1978] and so forth. You did have people running, such as Jerry Brown and--I'm just trying to think of some of the others. We did not have a black candidate running that year, but even they were pulled from the left--the Jerry Brown left, let's say, you know, to closer to the middle of the road because Carter had moved so far to the right. And then you saw [President] Ronald Reagan come on the scene and he made no bones that he was going to the far right, the extremist right if you will. You remember he announced his campaign in Alabama with the Ku Klux Klan in attendance, although he says he didn't need it, but I can remember that election year as it came up. We went over to Detroit [Michigan], the Republican National Convention and I spoke to a number of the people with the Reagan campaign and I can remember one of them saying, "Well, if you do that, you're going to lose a black vote. He said, "We don't need the black vote." And I could remember as if it were yesterday. They clearly felt they could do this without the black vote, without the Hispanic vote, and without the Liberal women. And that's the way they pointed their campaign. By the way, that was the year [1980] that [HM] Mr. [Benjamin] Hooks spoke to both national conventions. He spoke to the Republican Convention that year in Detroit [Michigan], and then later spoke to the Democratic Convention in New York. Many people thought Mr. Hooks had been a Republican, but instead he was not. He was a Democrat, appointed to the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], of course, by a Republican or who helped him get that appointment, Howard Baker, but the FCC has x number of Republican seats and x number of Democratic seats. And he was appointed to a Democratic seat on the FCC. Story_ID: 88797 Speaker 1: In terms of Democratic politics, what role did you play in the campaigns of [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson? Did you any role in those campaigns? Speaker 2: Well, the Jesse Jackson campaign was the election year of 1984 [and 1988]. Yes, I did. I was living in California at that time, working to get a number of films done. One of them was the Charlotte Forten ["Charlotte Forten's Mission"] story; and [HM] Maxine Waters asked me to be responsible for the California communications and public relations direction there for the campaign. And when Jesse came out- Jesse Jackson came out to California to do campaign, I sort of took charge of that by being in that position. And later, when his wife [Jacqueline Brown] came out, they asked me to travel with her to make sure that reporters didn't get into any other areas except campaign areas. That was the year, by the way, that Jesse Jackson had strong support from the Asian Pacific community, especially from the Chinese in San Francisco [California] and Los Angeles [California] and from rednecks in Northern California, especially around the Sacramento [California] area. I went up there to work out the deal where Jesse was going to speak. And they were totally in Jesse Jackson's corner, but when they came into the meeting--when they came in these heavy boots and these shotguns in the back of their truck, it sort of shook me up a little bit, but they were strongly in his corner. And that was also the year that many people were worried about the seriousness that people were taking with the Jesse Jackson campaign. There were Jews coming over. There were many whites coming over to the campaign because he was articulating some things that none of the other Democrats were articulating, certainly none of the Republicans were articulating them. Story_ID: 88798 Speaker 1: And that was the year [1984] that it was revealed--in fact, one of the Washington Post assistant metro editor, [HM] Milton Coleman, was questioned about that. He happened to be in New Hampshire, covering New Hampshire election. And a reporter trying to do a story on [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson], and it was clear it was not supposed to sweetheart story; it was going to be a story that would find something very, very, very negative. They made no bones about that. And they're asking Milton whether he knew of anything. At that time, Milton Coleman was being mentored basically by Bob Woodward and Bob Woodward got himself on a ringer in a story that had cost The Washington Post a great deal to settle a suit with, I believe, it was Shell Oil. Anyway, Milton was fearful of his job at that time, and he had not only been involved with Bob Woodward, was one of his mentees, but also had been Janet Cook's boss, and that had embarrassed Ben Bradley. --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Janet Cook is the reporter for the --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Janet Cook was a Washington Post reporter who did a number of stories on a supposedly, young, pre-teen crack addict, named Jimmy; and there was some skepticism about the stories by [HM] Marion Barry and a Washington Post, who is still a "Washington Post" columnist, Courtland Milloy. Ben Bradley was backing Janet Cook to the hilt, in fact, to the point where he put her name in for a Pulitzer Prize and insisted that she needed to get a Pulitzer Prize for this great reporting. As it turned out, she had made a lot of it up-- almost all of up, I should say; and when that information came, of course, Ben Bradley was no longer taking credit for it, and he placed that credit on Milton Coleman. So Milton Coleman was hanging on by his fingernails at that time and hoping to get back in the good graces of The Washington Post and save his job. He gave them Jesse Jackson and said Jesse had referred to the Jewish Community in New York as "Hymietown" at one time. And, of course, they ran with it, and they hit the headlines and became national news and Jesse spent a lot of the campaign denying the charge. In fact, Gerald Boyd, who has recently been in the news a great deal was there for that interview. It was Gerald Boyd, and Jesse. Those were the only three there, and Gerald Boyd, and Gerald Boyd had said two things, (a) He did not hear this statement of "Hymietown" and (b) that Jesse had asked to go off the record and for the interview to be backgrounder, which meant that you could not report. Those are the ethics of reporting, and Milton had agreed to those conditions to get this interview. So anyway Jesse spent most of his campaign denying the charges and when he came to California, which Los Angeles, of course, has a very heavy Jewish population, and many of them were really have Jesse's hind. Luckily, you had a lot of Jewish community members there who thought that that should not be the thrust of the campaign and were supporting Jesse. I had one person on my staff who wrote a number of articles defending Jesse, and there were several Jewish organizations that defended him on this. Story_ID: 88799 Speaker 1: We went onto to San Francisco [California] that year [1984] for the Democratic [National] Convention, and [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson] said, "Let's do one big speech, make this thing work." We did that and, most of it, Jesse putting in most of the ideas on something that was called, "a computer" in those days. It was as big as this room, I think, but we were able to go in and change things and to pull it together because no one was to know about this speech. None of the press members were to know about this. And, there at the convention, I think Jesse Jackson gave one of the most important speeches and most moving speeches of his entire career, in which he asked for forgiveness if they had been offended by anything he had said, and that it was much more important to move on in this campaign to defeating someone who was going to be scourge of everyone in that room, and, of course, [President] Ronald Reagan was going to run again. That was also the year in which the former vice president [Walter] Mondale was one of the stronger nominees in that race, and Jesse Jackson, of course, was so close and carried so much of the vote in that hall that you had to pay attention to him, you had to. Speaker 2: Now there's-- I know there's been-- earlier this week, we interviewed [HM] Ronald Walters and other people, and how they-how people-Jesse Jackson had a committee of people feeding information--feeding information about the issues, and he was able, in his own imitable style, to cut him, you know, at the convention and elsewhere. Did you play a role in that in terms of --(simultaneous)? Speaker 1: --as far as feeding him issues? No, I did not. I mainly--I headed the press convention, press office for the Jesse Jackson campaign, and I reported directly to [HM] Alexis Herman, and, of course, Jesse had a number of people around, including Albert Nellum, Alexis Herman, people such as that around him. Issues people came through them, through that group. Jesse has a magnificent mind, something like you've never seen before, and he is able to grasp all of those things, just pull them into something and regurgitate to an audience; and that's what he did. And that's why he was so impressive. And I think, easily, half of the Jewish delegates sitting in that audience that night decided that that was enough--that it was time to move to defeat a common enemy. They were not--there were some more rabid delegates there that did not want to let the issue die. Story_ID: 88800 Speaker 1: Now [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson] ran a year after Harold Washington won the Democratic-the mayorality in Chicago [Illinois], a huge victory in the city does not have the black majority. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Inspired by that, I suppose, he was inspired somewhat to run because of that. Though his candidacy was able to cut a lot of issues, a lot of people thought he had a chance to win actually. Was there a way--I mean, how-- what the thinking about how to sell him to the American public to get him the votes that he ordinarily wouldn't get? Speaker 2: There was a very straightforward strategy as I remember it. That strategy was to lay out issues in a way that nobody else was. Candidates almost naturally cautious, you saw it then, you see it now; and a candidate who comes out and proposes and deals with issues in a very different way, will get a lot of attention. That's what we're seeing with Howard Dean now, for instance. That's what we saw with [President] Jimmy Carter in '76 [1976] and that's what we saw with Jesse Jackson in 1984. He was making proposals that none of the other candidates wanted to go near. It doesn't mean that they didn't like those proposals. It just meant that they were afraid that they were afraid to go there. And as a result, we were winning converts every day and especially in minority communities, as I said the Asian-Pacific community, the Hispanic community. They were all very strong Jesse Jackson supporters, and no matter what those opponents did, no matter how they tried to scare those supporters with different stories whether it'd be the "Hymietown" remark or that he was having adulteress affairs, because long before [President Bill] Clinton, they were talking about adulteress affairs with Jesse, and that was part of the reason they had me break off and go with [Jacqueline] Jackie Jackson because reporters wanted to get into, "Have you ever seen your husband on an adulteress affair?" Did you ever do this or that, and so forth. And I was there to make sure those questions--specifically to make sure those questions did not get to the forefront--that those questions dealt with the campaign. Story_ID: 88801 Speaker 1: Well, do we want to talk about films now, the productions, the activities with American Playhouse. Tell us how you got involved in that. Speaker 2: It began when I was with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I was doing a series that each year would keep track of the entire national--NAACP National Convention [Highlights]. And we would broadcast it through a number of the really PBS stations at that time. The first year, it went to about seventy-nine stations. The second year, I was able to get Carl Rowan to narrate the four-day, five-day series. And it became very popular. I was--the second year, I went with a company out of Miami [Florida] and talking to the producers there--actually, let me just retrack just a little bit. During that period, some of the people from Hollywood--the guy was married to--George Stanford Brown. George Stanford Brown and [HM] Bernie Casey and several other people, [HM] Robert Hooks was one of them, met [HM] Vernon Jarrett and I out there--I forget why were out there in Hollywood and said there was a film--TV film-- coming out called, "Beulah Land," and they had approached George Stanford Brown about directing it, and he had read the script and refused to it, but he had allowed Bernie and Robert to read the script, and they were outraged. They had homosexuality among the white and black slave children on the plantation. They had a guy who had worked his up in the underground railroad up to Canada but missed the mistress back in Georgia so badly, that he worked his way back down to the underground railroad to be next to her as a slave rather than to be free in Canada. Lesley [Ann] Warren--I think they had already cast that part and Dorian Harewood was to play this escapee to Canada. Speaker 1: Did he play it eventually? Speaker 2: He certainly did. He certainly did. The emancipation day was portrayed as a day where all the slaves were down on their knees, crying and begging the "Massa" not to put them off the plantation because they would rather slaves there because "Massa" had been so good to them and so forth and so on. Anyway, it was awful--the script was awful. And we approached NBC--I talked to Mr. Hooks about it and he had said that this was something that he wanted to get on, and he had put me in charge of that project. And we approached NBC about sitting down and having a meeting with the producer to sort of change that revisionist history. And he met with us about two hours, and Hispanics gave their complaints, and the blacks gave their complaints and so forth and so on. They finally stood up, and very disgusted with all of us. This was a gentleman who had won a couple of Image Awards for a police show that he had done, a series that he had done at one time. And he had also been a producer of--I don't know if you remember "The Onion Fields," but he was also the producer of that, and he just said, "I'm sick and tired of it and I've wasted too much time. If you want to do a different picture than what I'm doing, then you go make your own pictures," and he stomped out to the embarrassment of NBC and all of us of course, because some of us, of course, I traveled from New York, but going back to New York, I was thinking about what he had said, and I said, "He is absolutely right. He is absolutely right. We should be making our own movies, but how do we get there?" And so on preparing for the NAACP Convention series that year, I talked to the producer who had wanted to get into movies. He was from the PBS station there in Miami, and he said, "We are looking to do something like that. Why don't we join forces?" And I said, "Fine, let's go ahead and do it." Story_ID: 88802 Speaker 1: And we started looking at places where we could raise money. We raised some money, and we got someone to write an initial script on Denmark Vesey. We put together a panel of historians, some from- well from all over the country. Speaker 2: Who were some of the historians? Speaker 1: [HM] John Hope [Franklin], of course, was on there. Frome [ph.] from Columbia was on there. Eric--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Foner. Speaker 1: Foner. And I'm trying to think--I think he's at the University of Massachusetts now. There were about eight, but well-known historians. Speaker 2: Blassingame? (unclear) [John Wesley] Blassingame? Speaker 1: Blassingame was on there. Boy, that's interesting that you should bring up that name. Blassingame was down there, a gentleman who lived down here in Washington [D.C.] over at--I don't remembered where he lived at 43rd and Connecticut Avenue but I remember his name, but they were leading historians, black and white, who would help us select the stories that we were going to do. And we select eight stories, and set up a company called, "First America." And we did a contract with American Playhouse, and the first of those stories was Denmark Vesey. Speaker 2: Now, what were the eight--do you remember all of the eight of the proposed projects? I think three were done, right? Speaker 1: Three were done, and at moments, I could remember what the fourth was going to be. A gentleman from Virginia who set the example of when the United States first decided that black slaves and white slaves were not equal, and that was a very, very important one simply because prior to that, they had been trying to form a union and indentured servants and black slaves to form a union whereby they could oppose some of the harshness in those days, especially in Virginia, but really all over. I can get that information, of course, for you, but I can't remember. Speaker 2: Okay, that's just --(simultaneous) - that's good to-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --to survey of what else you did because you did like three of them. Speaker 1: Right. The first one we did was Denmark Vesey ["Denmark Vesey's Rebellion"] and we went out to Los Angeles [California] and everybody was excited by the project. We- Samm-Art Williams, of course, did the script. Story_ID: 88803 Speaker 1: Now Denmark-- what was the story of Denmark Vesey? Speaker 2: Denmark Vesey was a slave who had won the-- that came to this county, South Carolina, won the lottery and was able to buy his freedom. Slaves were able to buy their freedom in those days, and got his name, of course, from Captain Vesey who was the slave master or the ship master who brought him over to this country. Denmark also did well as a business man in the city of Charleston [South Carolina], and we find out through the story that the majority of African--or blacks in Charleston during that time were free blacks, 1820. And the-- he has earned enough money now in business to go to the people--he marries, he has a son. The son is born into slavery. The wife is in slavery, so he attempts to buy their freedom, and the owner refuses, the owner at that time, to sell her, and he says, "I will never sell one nigger to another in life." And regardless of how much money he offers, that refusal stays there, so this leads him to--even though slaves, Saturday evening, could go wherever they wanted to--were free to go into town, or they were in town just to go to the countryside, just report back on Monday. They had a lot of freedom, relative freedom, they were still being oppressed. They could be mistreated, and there was no law to prevent that, and Denmark Vesey was able to find a hard core of people who resented those things to rebel and so they put together a rebellion of mostly those slaves who worked in the countryside and the rebellion was very, very short-lived because it was reported. And there are different stories as to who it was. We're talking about Morris Brown was there at Charleston at that time with the only black church there, and it could have been Morris Brown because he was concerned about them closing down his church, where all of the free African slaves went, and that he had a dislike for Denmark because he felt that Denmark was a rabble rouser and a troublemaker. There are other thoughts on who the informer may have been, but there was one thing that Samm-Art Williams found in his notes there on Denmark and that was Denmark Vesey advising his co-conspirators that do not trust those slaves who accept gifts from their masters because they will turn us in. To make a long story short, that was the story, Denmark Vesey was hanged along with others of his co-conspirators. His son escaped--slave son escaped to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], where he worked on-- formed the A.M.E. Zion church there, and that was the story. Speaker 1: That-that-- This production ["Denmark Vesey's Rebellion"] was well received. Speaker 2: Well received, it was well done. Story_ID: 88804 Speaker 1: I'm trying to think of the director-- Speaker 2: Yaphet Kotto, I think --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yaphet Kotto played Denmark Vesey. [HM] Bernie Casey played one of the sidekicks who is won over by him. the governor of South Carolina, who had a very, very lax policy and was under political attack for having this lax policy, then, of course, following the rebellion, had to tighten up all of that. Speaker 2: I remember one feature of the story that many of the master's men, the master's footmen and butlers were involved in it, and they couldn't believe and said, "After all I've done for you!" Speaker 1: The gentleman who died who was in the comedy--what was the comedy where the former football player knocks off the horse [Blazing Saddles]-- Speaker 2: Cleavon Little. Speaker 1: Cleavon Little played the governor's trusted servant, and told Cleavon and gave him a rifle and said, "If any rebellion occurs, I want you to protect my family with your life. I trust you," and he gave him a gun. And of course, he was a part of that conspiracy. The failure by the Charleston [South Carolina] community to understand the thirst for freedom by these slaves was what did them in because in order for them to go to church and sleep at night, they had to convince themselves that the slave community was happy in their circumstances and that they were better off, and that was the only way, and so everybody had bought into that. Speaker 2: Okay. Now that won an award? Speaker 1: It did. Actually, at the Image Awards, it garnered eighteen nominations and won more nominations than any other film in the history of the Image Awards has ever won. It was nominated for Peabody [Award]. It did not win. It was nominated for Columbia duPont Award [Alfred I. DuPont-Columbia University Award]. It did not win. So there were a number of awards and recognition. It was the San Francisco Filmmakers-- Black Film Award for the year, and there were several other minor awards that it won. Speaker 2: Okay, now-- Speaker 1: And so they were anxious to give us more money for the next film. Story_ID: 88805 Speaker 1: The next one was the "Solomon Northup Odyssey," [sic, Solomon Northrup's Odyssey] right? Speaker 2: Exactly and that-- [HM] Gordon Parks was to direct, and he and I had a big argument over who was going to play the part. I had a guy in mind, Terry [Carter]--I'll think of his name in a minute, but Terry was Sergeant Bradshore [sic, Sgt. Broadhurst] in the McCloud's series and he seemed perfect because I had read up a lot on Solomon Northup, and I'd seen where he had turned slaves in. He did everything he could to make sure he lived through this terrible experience of being put into slavery, and that he could live to get back to New York. And he totally caved into the system. He was never a hero. I'm not saying I would have been a hero either, but just saying that he never took any chances that would endanger his livelihood or his life. So I didn't see a big, brave man playing that role. It had to be someone who was very, very concerned, even subtle concerned about their own skin. And I knew Terry could do this role. He was an excellent actor, but Gordon was enamored with this actor who played him "The Voice," and Avery Brooks was his name. Avery had never acted before. Speaker 1: Not in a movie, right, because he was a drama teacher of something like that? Speaker 2: He was in a drama class, and he was teaching, but he had aspired to be on stage, but he had not done any work, but he had a terrific voice, and Gordon really fell in love with that voice I think, so the way the role was played was, he was always-- almost as if he was in command of everything, which I did not agree with, but Gordon just found a way to make the story very believable and heartwarming and an understanding of slavery. Speaker 1: As someone who saw it a long time, it seemed to be a strong piece, but you're saying it's historically inaccurate. Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. That's exactly what I'm saying. He managed to stay alive, not playing the kind of role that Avery Brooks projected, but he managed to stay alive for eleven years until a representative from the state of New York, a member of Congress, was able to-- they were able to find him and where he was, and they forced the state of Louisiana to give him up since he was not in reality a slave, and come back. He was brought back to Newburg, New York and eventually wrote the forward on Harriet Beecher Stowe's second book. Speaker 1: He wrote his own story too. Speaker 2: And he wrote his own story, an autobiography ["Twelve Years a Slave"]. Story_ID: 88806 Speaker 1: Now, how did that one ["Solomon Northrup's Odyssey"] do in terms of critics and awards and so forth? Speaker 2: That did very well--in Chicago [Illinois], I believe it won the Blue Light--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: "The Black Light Film--" Speaker 2: The Black Light Film Festival Award and I remember [HM] Gordon [Parks] going out to that. It was a small award in Washington, D.C. and a number of other places. What--and I shouldn't say this probably on camera, but what we were doing, we were--the money that we had to spend on production, we were trying to get a foothold for the rest of our films, and one we had spent in working with the Universal Pictures, who had indicated that they might be interested in funding the rest or at least putting some partial funding toward the rest of the series that we wanted to do. And as a result of that, I moved out from Ohio, where we were building the African American Museum [in Cleveland, Ohio] to Los Angeles [California] to work to getting that project through and just a couple of weeks--two weeks before, for some strange reason, they killed that program. Lou Wasserman killed that program. And so we were struggling along--you know, this friend of mine, Terry [Carter], who I wanted to play that part, he allowed me to use office space in his office. We got Jim Brown to help us. Jim Brown went to Richard Pryor and Richard wanted to put some money in it and some of his people talked him out of it to making a Superfly movie, in fact, the producer of the thing that became so popular with [HM] Melvin Van Peebles was one that put the kibosh on it. I think Jim Brown grabbed him against the wall somehow, physically, threatening physical harm, I'll never forget, because Jim believed in the series, and he wanted to see it go forward. There was another person out there who was advising people at--that wasn't Universal. I'll think of it in a minute, but one of the other studios, and he was able to convince his boss, African American--able to convince this guy who thought he might-- the studio might want to go ahead and put money into it--that nobody was interested in slave pictures anymore, and it died, that died. And eventually, we sort of drifted away because of a lack of interest, trying to get the money. We were down-- but we had an obligation, of course, to do Charlotte Forten ["Charlotte Forten's Mission"], so with what money we had left, and what money we could raise in addition to that, we went ahead and moved to produce Charlotte Forten, and, of course, the tragedies of all of those things, losing our director, losing our star, original star, Debbie Allen, losing the director, Moses, and in the end, we did a picture that it looked like it did not have enough money to be done properly, and we were really on the clock as to how long we could hold our actors and crew, and so forth, and so it was done poorly. And most of the critiques noted that it was done poorly. And, at that time, people were cutting back, and so our project was one of the projects that it was cut back on. Speaker 1: Do you think-well times now, it is getting tighter again. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 88807 Speaker 1: But do you still intend to try to work on such projects in the future? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. I'm not sure. Obviously, if--and I do interact a lot with producers and funders, and so forth, if I found a funder ready to put money into such a project, I would like to, but some of the things that I found out, not only with my own films but with other people's films, is that where you think you can get the support of the black community-and the black community is enough to make any film, any film--but where you think you can get the support of that community, you can't always. I think of the sad things that happened with "Ghetto on the bus." I use that as a good example, where all the production funding for that film came out of the black community and yet, there was a very serious part of our community that went to see that film, but all of the people who support all the hip hop films and the shoot 'em up and gangster films did not show up. They were simply not interested. And I'm thinking of the Tony Brown film, where we could get the various sororities and fraternities and other groups in a particular city to come out and support the film. We could not get young teenagers who spend the most money to come out and support that film, and yet they would support any film that had drugs, shoot 'em ups in them, and cursing and using the word, "ho" and so forth. These were educational films but entertaining and well done, so that's one of the sad things. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any hope that things will change in terms of that? Do you think there is more black --(simultaneous)-- around? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think there's more sensitivity than there was when I was trying this before when Tony Brown did "White Girl" or we did Denmark Vesey ["Denmark Vesey's Rebellion"]. It's interesting to note that we did have a license from PBS to show "Denmark Vesey," Charlotte Forten ["Charlotte Forten's Mission"], and Solomon Northup ["Solomon Northrup's Odyssey"] commercially. At the same time, they gave [Edward] Eddie James Olmos, he had released something, "El Norte," [sic, Olmos did not produce "El Norte." He did produce "The Ballard of Gregorio Cortez" for American Playhouse in 1982] at that time and they got the same sort of license. It was a way to attract more producers into coming in and doing something for PBS by allowing them a short term window license to make money off of their films. And the-- even under that license, again, we got a certain audience, usually well-educated, well-informed to come, but we could not get that primary audience, young teenagers to come out. And in fact, I would go back to San Diego [California] and even here at Washington, D.C. at Howard University when young teenagers, college students, were denying that there wasn't any truth to Denmark Vesey. --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: The fact that there were free blacks living in Charleston, South Carolina in 1820, they denied-- that all blacks were slaves up until they were set free. It's a history that they simply did not accept and, therefore, did not find any great interest in. Speaker 1: That's a-- Speaker 2: It's a very, very interesting phenomenon. They could not believe Solomon Northup, that back in 1848, there was a free black living in New York who would travel to Washington, D.C. on a music gig, you know. And it's reflective of that we don't know who we are or where we've been. We're ready to buy into his story as opposed to history in so many instances. Story_ID: 88808 Speaker 1: Could you talk about the Woody Strode incident at the screening in Santa Monica [California] in Solomon Northup ["Solomon Northrup's Odyssey"]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I found that very, very interesting. Of course, all the actors and the crew that participated in the making of the film making of Solomon Northup, who lived in Los Angeles [California], were invited to come out for that special screening, and we held it at a theater in Santa Monica. And I had seen the final version a number of times, and so I was standing in the vestibule of the theater as they were screening the film and Woody Strode came out, and I asked him what was wrong, and he said that he just could not watch anymore, just brought up bad memories in him, and it really hurt him just watching the sort of beatings that they were showing that he knew was part of slavery, and it just bothered him. At, about this time, John Saxon, who, of course, plays a slave master in this film, he came rushing in. He had been late getting there, and he came up and Woody Strode just glowered at him. Now, they had been good friends on the set, but it was something about seeing John Saxon's face and seeing that set him off, and he wasn't saying anything but he was just glowering, and that's the best term that I can use. And John Saxon recognized it, and even though they had been friends on the set, he decided he didn't need to say, "hello" to Woody or anything else. And he rushed into the theater where it was dark, and he could sit in the dark, but I like to tell that story because it's a reminder of how blacks respond to films such as this even today- Speaker 1: Yes sir. Speaker 2: --and how whites respond. Speaker 1: That was an intense, I mean, especially the scenes involving the young lady that Soloman Northup is friends with, who the master uses, you know, whenever he gets ready. It is really frustrating for, I think, a lot of people to watch, but it's part of the story. Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: The other is a footnote on this too that we interviewed, two months ago, [HM] Archie [C.] Epps [III], who is the Director of Admission at Harvard. His family is related Epps Plantation, where John Saxon played the master Epps at the plantation. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But it's really interesting how things hook up. Speaker 2: Exactly. That is very interesting. I like connecting between that period and this period, and, for me, I'll find myself crying sometimes, that-- being that moved, but wanting to know and understand this. It's important for me to understand what motivated that person, how they could be cruel to a slave and still go to church and feel comfortable. Story_ID: 88809 Speaker 1: You know there was a recent movie, Antwone Fisher, directed by Denzel Washington, where the character that Denzel plays is an [U.S.] Army psychiatrist, gives a book to Antwone Fisher to read in response to his questions about white and black people treat each other the way they do. And book was, "The Slave Community," by John W. Blassingame. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And that makes all the difference in the world. It's interesting. I did go out to the Academy Awards and the real [HM] Antwone Fisher said that book opened his eyes. It made him start to realize-- and I think that's knowledge that all of us have to have. That's why, I think, black history is so important, not to find out if we have supermen, but to understand what motivated whites, what motivated blacks, in those years, you know. I think that's the only way that we're going to be able to forgive one another, you know. We have to understand it first. And so that's why I think a series like this is important. (phone rings) People are really afraid of that history, but until we read it and understand it, we're going to be in a dilemma in our country for quite some time. I happened to be watching something on television the other night, Tom Brokaw, a question of fairness about the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] case [Gratz v. Bollinger], and looking at people who had attended the University of Michigan thirty years ago, and you could see some who had dealt with it, and had forgiven any unjust things that had happened to them. And there was one woman who clearly had never forgiven anybody, and you could see the hatred she still had for what had-- the experiences she had gone through at the University of Michigan that long ago. She is in very serious trouble until she finds a way to forgive what has happened to her. And I use that as an example. Story_ID: 88810 Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, is there anything else about your--are you still working in the production of movies and film at all? Speaker 2: Yes, I still do some public service announcement for various institutions, just recently did some on the University of Michigan case [Gratz v. Bollinger]. I feel very strongly about Affirmative Action. Of course, doing the Bakke case [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke], under a Ford [Foundation] grant, back in 1977 was very, very informative for me. It was informative for a number of reasons. It helped me understand the black community and what they have to have and what they want. It helped me understand better the white community and how sensitive they are; and when I spoke earlier about them being very, very sensitive about the things that have happened, the Bakke experience was very, very informative. And, just as an example, I would use--there were a number of white reporters working for various daily's around the country who saw the Bakke case as threatening to their jobs; therefore, they felt they had a stake in it and were not prepared to write an unbiased piece in the paper. And a paper that has been in the news just recently in the "New York Times." We were in New York to do the "Today" show when Tom Brokaw was the host of the "Today" show and I was able to get a reporter from the "New York Times" to do a piece on what the true facts were in the Bakke case. This was the first time they had ever done it, and they-- it came out in the 11:00 edition, that night, the early edition as they call it. And I picked up a copy and I was very, very happy the way this story had been portrayed. It was below the fold, but it was front page; and it was about the most I could hope for. I had some very bad experiences with 60 Minutes and a number of other newspapers and television outlets--radio outlets, showing me that instead of journalists seeing this as an issue that they could deal with in a very fair, they saw it as a threatening issue, personal, threatening, issue. So I was very happy about this story. The next morning, I got up and did the "Today" show with Tom Brokaw and got on a train to go back to Washington, D.C. Later, I was talking to a friend of mine in New York, [HM] Basil Paterson, and I said, "How did you like the story?" I was waiting for him to give me compliments on getting the story into the "New York Times," and he said, "It's alright," I thought he was pulling my leg. He wasn't. The reason why he was so reticent about saying it was a great story was because the story had been rewritten for the early morning edition. The entire story had been rewritten, leaving the same byline on the story, but it had been rewritten as a story in which they were putting in a lot of quotes by Eleanor Holmes Norton, saying that even if we lost the Bakke case, it would not make that much difference in admissions and so forth. An entirely different view than in that story that had come out in that first edition had said. Story_ID: 88811 Speaker 1: Just to follow up on it; 60 Minutes, I was able to meet with the producers there, and they all agreed that the issues that we were presenting and uncovered [in the case of Regents of the University of California v. Bakke] through going to the courts in California and the schools, and a number of other things were very important story to be covered by 60 Minutes. In the production meeting, one man killed it, and that was--who is? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Mike Wallace. Speaker 1: Mike Wallace killed that story, and he was able to kill it all by himself. Years later, of course, we are able to see a movie [The Insider] about how Mike Wallace could kill any of these stories on the tobacco thing, but I was so disappointed in that. One of the people--I remember a legal reporter for CBS at the time--and I'm just trying to remember his name, but, anyway, his brother worked with me under this huge grant that we had under the Ford Foundation. He was at the University of California in Santa Barbara, and--I'm trying to think of this guy's name--he's on Court TV now as a legal reporter. Speaker 2: I know who you're talking about, but I can't think of his name. Speaker 1: Yeah. Anyway, I went to lunch with him, and I gave him the usual spiel and this wouldn't have happened. And so you see even if no blacks were admitted, [Allan P.] Bakke would not have gotten in, and he was saying, "Oh, I know that. My brother fills me in on the details. Oh, I know that." You know, so I felt real good after that meeting, that now we had CBS that we could count on to tell the true story. And then the morning of the Supreme Court hearings on the Bakke case--I can remember lying in bed with the radio on, and Leslie Stahl was on-- Fred, was his name, I'll get the last name in a few moments, but Leslie Stahl and Fred were on that morning prior to the opening of the Supreme Court, and Leslie Stahl says, "Fred, is it true that if Bakke were black, he would be in school now?" And Fred said, "Oh, absolutely, Leslie." And I have never, never--that's why I can repeat (unclear) so accurately and not repeat his name as well, but I began to see that white reporters felt threatened by the Bakke case. They had bought into-- Speaker 2: They were threatened by Affirmative Action basically. Speaker 1: They were threatened by Affirmative Action. Exactly. Speaker 2: Were in favor of Bakke trying to block Affirmative Action. Speaker 1: Exactly. Exactly. So anyway, those were my examples to see what I was really up against, but it became very, very difficult. I'm not sure whether-- you know, but by going to Yolo County, having the money to go to Yolo County and look at those records, and pull them, and read them. You know, I knew that the judge had ruled that Bakke had no case, and the case couldn't go any further unless the defendants in the case were willing to stipulate that there had never been any racial disharmony or discrimination in the state of California in the state's history; and they stipulated that so that the case could go on. Otherwise, the case could have been thrown out right then and there, and it would have been over. It would have been over. I know that the University of California admission policy was one in which had said it would admit disadvantaged kids from certain neighborhoods. It never mentioned race. Only after the Bakke suit was filed, did it insert race in there. And I know the Admissions Director of University of California at Davis, was one who talked Bakke into filing the suit with the promise that they would get funds from the University of Arizona [Tucson, Arizona], University of Washington [Seattle, Washington], Columbia University [New York City, New York], and several other places. And that was all a part of the record, by the way. I also know that his father has worked as hard as anybody in the country to try to get students who was director of admissions at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], who worked as hard as anybody else in the country to get minorities into Cornell. Speaker 2: Bakke's father? The father of the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --the father of the admission's director of the University of California at Davis, right. Right. Story_ID: 88812 Speaker 1: And so, if you don't know the history though, you buy into [Allen P.] Bakke into saying he doesn't know why he wasn't admitted to the University of California at Davis because his mother-in-law was dying of cancer, and he never filled out his application on time, and the second time when they tried to get him into a special program that they were going to admit him in, not the one that allowed the people from disadvantaged neighborhoods to come into the program, but one that allowed older students to come in because, at that time, the University of California did not allow older students because it cost so much money, and they would only be in practice for such a short period of time. They wanted to bring him under that piece, and he wanted to come in under a regular set. And it was not his idea, he resisted filing a suit at first, on that. And I also know that he was turned down thirteen times by thirteen different schools, including his Alma Mater, University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota], so-- and he did not sue any of those people. Many people do not understand Affirmative Action, blacks and whites; therefore, they don't know how to present their case or to argue against the good parts or the bad parts of it. Story_ID: 88813 Speaker 1: Now, you are currently Chairperson of the Prince George's County NAACP Act-So program, Media Director for the Village Foundation, and Chairperson for the Prince George's County branch of the NAACP? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And as such, you're probably in the thick of a fight now to restore Affirmative Action. Speaker 2: I am. Actually, now I'm not with the Village Foundation anymore, but I am a Special Assistant for Communications to the president for the Institute for Democracy studies. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as such, we are definitely in the thick of things. As I said, working with the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor] working on the public service announcements, bringing people in to make sure that they understand what we are talking about. At the University of Michigan I saw on television where the plaintiffs kept saying. "Oh, they chose this black person instead of me." Well, they admitted 5000 people, and they show 4,000 and some whites and how you can determine that that black person got into your seat instead of those 4,500 or 4,700 whites, you know, I don't know. I don't know, but once a person says that, it's allowed to go out on the airways, and Tom Brokaw does not refute it. Then it becomes gospel out there, and it's hard catching up with that fallacy. Speaker 1: Now do we have-- we have sort of a war going on here, don't we? There are people colluding to bring affirmative action down, and other civil rights--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh absolutely. Absolutely. Speaker 1: --you've been-- you work with those who are documenting this war. Speaker 2: The Institute for the Democracy Studies is documenting a war that has been going on for a number of years, over thirty some years, by far right elements, not only in this country, but in other countries around the world. We should be very concerned about this country because it impacts blacks. It impacts Hispanics, women, other minorities in this country, but this is a chess game, in which we have to understand what moves, the far right or these right extremists, are planning to make or going to make, so that we can be prepared to respond. Right now, what we're doing is waiting until the moment that they implement their move, and then we try to catch up in trying to decide what move we're going to do or make. We should have been on the University of Michigan case [Gratz v. Bollinger] a long time ago. We should have been informing people what has been going on; and I want to compliment the former president of the University of Michigan who is now the president of Columbia University, Lee Bollinger, because of his strategy. Unfortunately, he had people right at his own university working against him, and some of the people who claimed to be great Liberals or supporters of Affirmative Action, but this is racial and so forth and so on, who are not. And we need to distinguish between those people. We need to talk about, "If we don't do it this way, what way can we do it?" And we have a president [George W. Bush], of course, who has said he's found a way to do it and he's done it in Texas, but his way, now, has been shown that it depends on segregated school systems. That's the only way his would even have a small chance of working, and already students are finding ways to get around it. When a straight A student who can't be among the 10% in a top notch high school, then can transfer to a high school that is not as highly rated, so she can be among the 10% which would get her into college, that's very easy to get around; and he can't say that is working. It is not working. It is a horrible failure, and I think a survey by Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] a few months ago demonstrates that. And in Florida, in Texas, and in California, where they're trying other means, other than the kinds of programs that the University of Michigan is using, they are not working. And minority enrollment in those three states have been dropping. Story_ID: 88814 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: My hope--my concern is: the black community is putting a lot of time into relaxing, vacationing, looking for leisurely ways to enjoy life. They bought into, as Americans, they are entitled to this great leisurely life; and my concern is that they don't know that they cannot afford that life. They may be able to fiscally take a cruise and doing a number of other things, but they cannot afford to relax their guard thinking they have made it because they've reached a high goal or because [HM] Colin Powell or Condoleezza Rice has reached a high place in government and so forth. They must be aware of the attacks that are being perpetrated against them every day; and there are people out here trying to tell them about these attacks, trying to demonstrate to them what these attacks are about, and trying to show them that this could be-- their status in life could be very, very temporary unless they begin to understand what is happening to them and begin to understand how to fight back. This summer, we are going to a number of organizational meetings, in which we are going to be demonstrating to black journalists, to lawyers, to judges, to NAACP'ers, to Urban Leaguers, to a number of groups that these things are happening to them right now. Who the next Supreme Court judge is going to be is not something that they can take leisurely, and this is something they must join in the battle or spend a lifetime suffering. Or what is going on with the Patriot Act that the Justice Department is perpetrating on the American public? What is going on with all of the other things happening in this administration [of President George W. Bush]; they must be taking a hard look at it; and, if nothing else, they must understand how this impacts them. And if it means taking some vacation time and understanding it, so be it. It's well worth it or else they will lose the rights that they are enjoying right now. Story_ID: 88815 Speaker 1: At this stage, you're still not finished with your career. You're still working. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: At this stage, though, what would you consider as your legacy? Speaker 2: Um, I'm afraid my legacy would certainly be my children because I think they've grown up to be fighters in their own right. And I'm certainly proud of them over that, but, unfortunately, because I see more and more people turning away from hard questions that they should be answering for themselves, I don't know if I have a legacy. Or one, I'm certain, it's not one that I'm generally satisfied with. And until I start seeing people take the threats to their careers, or their homes to their children more seriously, I would not be satisfied with asserting that I have a legacy that I would be satisfied with, I should say that. I'm certainly proud of my children, my grandkids and so forth, but I'm very, very concerned about the number of people who are not taking time out of their very busy schedules to address some of the challenges that are being made against their lives. Speaker 1: Would you see your life as one that is being about trying to educate through? Speaker 2: Yes, as a journalist, I wanted to educate; and I saw a small number of people that I was reaching through an individual radio station, and then I went to a network. Then, it was still too few. And that's when I decided, well, maybe I can educate through film and reach a much wider audience. Even then, it was not satisfying, so I'm going back to doing it the old fashion way, in some cases one by one. All a person has to do is say, "I'm interested in why this is happening to us," and that's enough to stop me and help them understand that. Story_ID: 88816 Speaker 1: And one last question, sir, how would like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a person who tried, who was unafraid to face those challenges that were threatening us as a community, as a group, as a culture; and that I did my damnedest-my very, very best-to help those in my community, in my culture, to be better, better prepared and better individuals. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you, sir. Story_ID: 88817 Speaker 1: Of course, that's a picture of me in the United States Air Force back in 1952 when I was in Radar school, and Lackland Air Force Base [San Antonio] in Texas. Speaker 2: Matthew Hickey: You were curious why that one was sideways. We scan these into a computer from the video, and flip them. Speaker 1: Okay. I may have to lean forward on this one. He looks familiar. Obviously, I was a lot heavier in those days. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was noticing that. Speaker 1: Matthew Hickey: Maybe we should pass on this one? Speaker 2: We need to pass on this one--oh, I was getting ready to say, we were talking about John Flemming. I was thinking that was John Flemming. Speaker 1: This was an assistant of mine at the Democratic National Committee, and if I have to give you his name, I know I can't do it. He was an intern with me there, and -- Speaker 2: Okay, this guy looks familiar to me. Speaker 1: This was right after I had finally been turned down after being on the "Wide World of Sports" show when it first started; and I was assured that I had been hired for that job and little did I know they were trying to find ways not to hire me. And I was in New York doing fill-in work in a number of New York radio stations, and finally decided to bring my four children, myself back to Washington, D.C. and I accepted a job with Smith-Corona; and there I am giving a class the year I was salesperson of the year nationally with Smith-Corona. Speaker 2: Did you ever meet a guy named Barry Frank in (unclear)? Speaker 1: You know, for some reason, it's sounding familiar, and it could be--they had told him--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: The first and only time I met him. Speaker 1: That's my wife [Virginia Embrey] and I the night of some affair we were at, I think it was a Links affair in 2002. Speaker 2: I wonder where we were. We're obviously at some affair. Speaker 1: I can tell you that was the director of communications for the Village Foundation. We were in San Francisco [California] for a staff retreat, and the year would have been 1999. I'm sorry, it was 2000. Speaker 2: That looks like George Stanford Brown. Is that him? Speaker 1: It sure is. That's George Stanford Brown. Speaker 2: Who the young lady is? Speaker 1: I know who that is--as soon as I remember her name. Speaker 2: Matthew Hickey: Do you remember the occasion? Speaker 1: I'm looking at the way George is dressed. I think that's me. It is me. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's you. I just didn't know who she was. That's what you ought to remember. (laughter) Speaker 1: I do. What's the name of that singer? Speaker 2: She is a singer? Speaker 1: I'm just wondering if that's her. The one who's the psychic. Speaker 2: It's not [HM] Dionne Warwick. No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was wondering if it was Suzanne de Passe for a minute, but I don't know. Speaker 1: Matthew Hickey: Do you know the occasion for this? Speaker 2: I would have to guess--I do. I do and that'll help me remember who she is. That was at the Black Oscar nominees dinner. What year it was is the question. Speaker 1: '70s [1970s] shirts and the collar, the '80s [1980s]. I think early 80s. Speaker 2: Right. Oh, Roxy Roker. Now, how that name came back to me, I don't know. Roxy and I were very close, and--you know, this looks like it was at the same place. Speaker 1: Matthew Hickey: Yeah, looks like the same tuxedo. Speaker 2: So, I'm going to say the place, I believe that was that night at the Black Oscar dinner. Speaker 1: Matthew Hickey: Okay, now we're rolling on this one. What was the occasion? Speaker 2: Paul Brock, National Marketing director for Tony Brown Productions. Speaker 1: Matthew Hickey: Lila Curry, Director of Alcohol and Drug abuse program at Morgan State [University in Baltimore, Maryland]. We've been going to Morgan State quite a bit on this trip. Speaker 2: That's where, that's who she is and was a showing of the film, "The White Girl," premiering of the film. Speaker 1: You were trying to attract the people to the box office there. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, Taimak and Troy could bring 10 times as many people. Taimak, you'd be surprised on how popular he was. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Because of the thing he did where he played the martial arts character [The Last Dragon]. Speaker 1: Where he played?-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know what you're talking about. Now, that takes us to the book here. Speaker 2: Tell us her name and everything. Speaker 1: Oh, this was my mother. Her name was Virginia Estelle Gray. Later, she moved, when she left home in Virginia, she changed it to Estelle Virginia Gray. She went to junior high school in Washington, D.C. and high school in Washington, D.C.; and always thought her relatives and brothers and sisters as country, and wanted to make her mark in Washington, D.C. I came along in 1932, very unexpectedly, and that sort of ended her ambition on going to college, and after that she went to work for Watkins Products [J.R. Watkins Company], and eventually married the general manager there [Edward Donald Budd]. I think when my mother died, my daughter found that picture. Speaker 2: That's interesting because I don't know that we have one of Peg Leg Bates. I used to go to resort once a year with the Natural Black Holistic Society. Speaker 1: Oh, okay! Speaker 2: Yeah, we used to retreat there. [HM] Haki Madhubuti and Morris Jeff, [HM] Chester Grundy from Kentucky. Speaker 1: I remember when he had--simultaneous- Speaker 2: Okay, this is my stepfather, the Watkins general manager that she married when I was around eleven years old; and his name was Edward Budd. He was from North Carolina, very ambitious, working for a Canadian company [sic, Minnesotan], of course, that allowed blacks to be as good as they wanted to be, rise as high as they wanted to be, as the general manager in Washington, D.C., back in the early '40s [1940s] he had whites and blacks working for him. He, later, at the beginning of World War II was moved to New York as the general manager there, replacing a gentleman that went off to war. Then, later, he came back to Washington as the manager of the Watkins Products company, following World War II. Speaker 1: Um, you might want to go there. That's the youngest one. Speaker 2: That's the youngest one? Speaker 1: The one with the big, wide hat. Oh, no, I'm sorry, this one. Speaker 2: That's what I thought. Speaker 1: Matthew Hickey: What's that portrait taken for? Speaker 2: This portrait was taken for my graduation from junior high school. I had graduated from Shore Junior High School in Washington, D.C. and later when to Armstrong High [Armstrong Manual Training School]. Speaker 1: And this is a picture of one of my best friends, Raymond Duncan and I in our backyard. My father had moved the Watkins Products company to a store right across the street of Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and this is behind that store, where we lived over the top of the store. This is a picture of Raymond Duncan and myself in the backyard from the store. Speaker 2: Matthew Hickey: What was the big hat? Speaker 1: These were my days when I was in high school, and at that time, the big brim Stetson was the thing. And that was my big, brim Stetson to strut along U Street at that time and a big man. Speaker 2: Matthew Hickey: Okay, the profile portrait? Speaker 1: Like the black power portrait. Speaker 2: That is my black power portrait; and interestingly enough, I told you the story of being considered for the job of first news director of National Public Radio [NPR]. And this was a picture that I had taken at that time, although I did not get the job because I decided I wanted to have a beard and mustache and so forth and wore a dashiki, and I think I scared the people at National Public Radio. (Laughter) Speaker 1: Matthew Hickey: Fly pants shot. Speaker 2: Oh, you going to do fly-- Speaker 1: That is a picture taken by my daughter in Washington. I was just taking a vacation. This was also right around the period that I was working for WETA radio and they were considering the National Public Radio setup network. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: It was about 1972, maybe? Speaker 1: I would say about 1972, yes. Speaker 2: It's funny. I met a person that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: This portrait was prior to my growing the beard and wearing the dashiki, so that would have been around 1971. The rest of the pictures, I did have the beard and the mustache and in all the others. Speaker 2: Okay, this was my desk at WHUR at Howard University, where I was news director; of course, a father of four kids. And that's part of my long day that usually ran from around six in the morning until around nine at night. The top picture is my desk at the Democratic National Committee as deputy Communications director at the Democratic National Committee. And my desk, which, incidentally, stayed there even after I had moved over to another job, six months after I had move over to another job because it had just so much stuff on it and my trying to clear it. Speaker 1: Matthew Hickey: Let's start right at the top of the left page. Speaker 2: Look at the monitor. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Those are the first two grandchildren. One, my grandson, Edwin, the older one, and the younger one, Christopher. Edwin is the son of my oldest daughter, Paula, and Christopher is the son of my youngest son, Christopher. Speaker 2: And there is Edwin grown and on the night of his graduation from high school. Speaker 1: There we are back to the grandchildren. On the left, is my youngest grandson, the son of my youngest daughter, Lisa. In the middle is my grandson, Christopher and on the right with the glasses is my grandson, Edwin. Speaker 2: Matthew Hickey: Here again with Christopher. Speaker 1: There, you see my youngest son, Christopher and I in a shot together. Christopher, of course, is my youngest son. Speaker 2: Matthew Hickey: I'm going to go back. I'm managed to somehow not be rolling the first time. Is that your youngest daughter in this picture? Speaker 1: Right, and that's my youngest daughter, Lisa. She lives in California and myself, and, of course, you see the mustache and the beard is back. And there is my oldest daughter, Shelley, or Paula. Her name is Paula Shelley. And she is around eight years old in that picture. Speaker 2: Matthew Hickey: Ready? Speaker 1: There's my oldest son, Michael and I together and we're having a little something to eat some place...