 Story_ID: 3226 Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers interview is being conducted with Miss Olive Lee Benson. At her home 59 Woodcliff Road, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts. The interviewer is Robert C. Hayden. The videographer is Mr. Scott Stearns. And the date is January 26, 2005. Miss HistoryMaker, would you give me your full name and would you spell your name for me. Speaker 2: It's Olive Lee Benson "O-L-I-V-E, L-E-E, B-E-N-S-O-N". Speaker 1: Mm-hm. And your date of birth and place of birth. Speaker 2: My date of birth is 9/11/32 [September 11, 1932] and I was born in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Okay. And how do you describe or characterize your profession? Your occupation today? What are you? What do you do? Speaker 2: I am a beauty consultant specializing in straightening all textures of hair in the world. Story_ID: 3227 Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year Miss Benson? Speaker 2: I would say my favorite time of year would be spring. Coming on to summer. Everything just beginning to bloom. And--Yeah. I would say my favorite time of year would be spring, looking towards summer. Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is purple. Speaker 1: Mm-hm. And what's your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination has always been a health spa. When I learned about the health spas, I felt like being in the beauty business that the best thing you could do for yourself was to learn how to take care of your body for prolonged life and healthy life. So my favorite vacation is always looking for the best health spa. Speaker 1: Your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food. I love all kinds of food. Yeah, all kinds of food. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying that you like to use from time to time? Speaker 2: Well the phrase that I've been using lately from time to time I always say, "I'm not always right, but I'm very seldom wrong." And then I tell all the young people about Philippians 4:13, that all things are possible through Christ who strengthens us. Story_ID: 3228 Speaker 1: We want to start to talk about-discuss your family background. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Okay. And we're gonna start with your mother. Would you give her-give us your mother's name, where she was born. Speaker 1: My mother's name -maiden name was Lillian Clayton. And I'm told she was born in Bedford Massachusetts. She died at age thirty-nine with the eleventh child. I was the ninth child out of ten. And I was three when my mother was born-When my mother died I mean. And I-I cannot remember her face, at the age of three. So my relationship with my mother is really nil. I mean in my mind. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. But did she grow up in Bedford, Mass? Speaker 1: As far as I knew, my mother grew up in Bedford, Mass. Now where my father [Henry Basil Battle Sr.] met her, I know that we were all born and raised in Cambridge [Massachusetts]. So we're-What town my father met her, I'm not quite sure. I think it was before he went to war. My father was in the First World War. Speaker 2: Okay. What things were shared with you by your older siblings and your father about your mother and her personality and her persona? What do you know about her through your siblings? Speaker 1: My mother was a very caring person. I noticed that when I read in the book where she used to keep a record of everything, of what she bought each and every one of us. And it seems as though my mother used to sell her milk to the community. And also my mother had the help of her mother, my grandmother, raising us as children. Speaker 2: What was your grandmother's name? Her mother? Speaker 1: My grandmother's name was Annie Stokely. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. And where was she from? Do you know? Speaker 1: Annie Stokely, if I can--was told--Not that I can remember. But as I was told was a ward of the state. And so I do not have really any background of my grandmother. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Who was my mother's mother. Speaker 2: Right. Your mother was a caring person. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Definitely. Speaker 2: What else do you know about her personality? Speaker 1: My mother was the type of person that set the table with linen table cloths, put out the crystal. Everything we had to do--And we were taught in the home from my grandmother and my mother being there. Prayers before dinner, prayers before going to bed, on your knees. Speak when spoken to. We were taught how to cook very early on in life. But that came from my father. Because at seven years old I was able to stuff a turkey and make a complete meal. Set a table and to serve any dinner. So we learned very early on, you know, with ten of us in the family that we had to share and we cared for one another. We had-there was definitely a bonding there, that we still have amongst the siblings. And--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We're gonna come back and talk about your siblings. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But let's talk about your father. Tell me his name. Where was he born and when was he born? Speaker 1: Well it seems as though my father was born in Battleboro, North Carolina. We were never taken back to Battleboro, North Carolina. So I don't know that much about it. I'm told that it's-Battleboro represents four corners some where in North Carolina. And it-We probably got our maiden name Battle from the plantation. Because I know-I hear there's a lot of Battles down near Rocky Mount in that area of North Carolina. My father left North Carolina at the age of fifteen and was here with-came up here with my grandfather. And it seems as though my father's mother died and my grandfather had remarried again. So I had a step-grandmother on my father's side. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Did you give me your father's first name? Maybe I'm--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) My father's first name is Henry Basil Battle Sr. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. And you say he came North at age--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Fifteen. Speaker 2: fifteen. Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Speaker 2: What do you know about his father? Speaker 1: I only know that his father which was my grandfather who was in the Civil War. My grandpa was in the Civil War. Yeah. My father was in the First World War. Yeah. My grandfather married again. And he married Mary C. Battle. They lived in Cambridge at 318 Concourt Ave in Cambridge. And after he got out of the service I can remember when was-I think he had something to do with garbage. What they call now-a-days waste management. And my grandfather died from cancer. Speaker 2: And your grandfather's name? Speaker 1: My grandfather's name was General Battle. Speaker 2: Okay. That's your father's father. Speaker 1: My father's father. Mm-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Did your father ever share with you any stories about his growing up years in Battleboro, North Carolina? Speaker 1: My father had a brother named Alzee. And it seems like he had another half-brother named Eddie Battle. Speaker 2: How do you spell Alzee? Speaker 1: Alzee--I believe it's "A-L-Z-E-E". Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Something like that. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Is Alzee. We did not have too much of a relationship with my uncle. Would have been Uncle Alzee. We didn't see him that often. And-And also from my uncle Eddie which was my father's half brother. It seems as though there was a cousin-I mean aunt, cousin-a sister-their sister that died. And there was some type of court disagreement with money left. Speaker 2: So that's one of the stories that your father talked about? Speaker 1: Yeah. That's one of the stories. And she also was a hair dresser-A beauty salon owner as myself. And I often think that I took after her in a sense. Because the very salon that I am in now, she worked in. The very salon that I own now. And that's really dÃ©jÃ vu. I mean I--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) She worked in it where? Speaker 1: Years ago. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: She worked in that same spot on Columbus Ave [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Wow! Well we'll come back to that when we talk about the Columbus Avenue salon. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. Mm-hm. Story_ID: 3229 Speaker 1: Any other stories that you recall that your father [Henry Basil Battle Sr.] used to share with you? His favorite stories about his growing up or his life? Speaker 2: Well I'll tell you what. We were very poor. I felt as though we were not a family of means. My father did not own his own house. He did not have a car. We lived on Mead Street [Cambridge, Massachusetts], right behind the railroad tracks. And my father rented a seven room apartment which at that time I think rent was $32 a month. If you could imagine that in those days. But we-He always took us to Maine in the summer. And we dreaded getting in that cold water. We always went to church picnics. We belonged to the community center. Speaker 1: What church did you and your family attend? Speaker 2: We attended Cornerstone Baptist Church in Cambridge [sic, Belmont, Massachusetts]. Right around the corner from our house. And we always went to the circus. And he would sometimes take us to the ice-capades. So my father, although we didn't have the means, he always managed to expose the best he could to all activities that a child would look forward. Speaker 1: How do you remember your father then at this point? What's your fondest memory--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) How I remember him is because my father worked for the post office for thirty-three years. And he worked at [Boston] South Postal Annex [Boston, Massachusetts]. And my father did not believe in sparing the rod and spoiling the child. He had put the fear of God in us. And if he told us he didn't want us playing in the front of the house or on the lawn, and stay in the back of the house, in the back yard. That's what he meant. So if he ever came down the street and we was in the front of the house, you can know that we certainly got punished for it. If we ever did anything in the library-We lived right across the street from the library. And the librarian-It was like the community raised us. Because we didn't have any money-mother. So whoever in the community told our father what we did or what we didn't do, we were definitely punished for it. So my father was a man that-he ruled with an iron rod. He did not-You know, he spoke once. And that was it. There was no time out. You know, "We'll talk about it. Or we'll see." It was, you know, "Right, wrong." And that was it. It was hot or cold. It was up or down. There was no in-between with him. It was no gray area with my father. Most people get a gray area. "Maybe, we'll see." And so forth and so on. We weren't allowed to go to parties or anything. Not unless he knew the people. You know. So he raised us the old way. The old fashioned way. Which I think is the best way. According to today's, you know. What's happening today in today's world. A lot of people say, "Oh that's just the old fashioned way." I don't think so. You know. There is a right way and a wrong way. And then it's the way that people choose. But my father was very strict. There was no two ways about it. Story_ID: 3230 Speaker 1: You said that your mother [Lillian Clayton] passed -died when you were three. Is that correct? Speaker 2: Mm-hm, m-hm. Speaker 1: And I believe you showed me a picture earlier--. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Of one of your sisters? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Who actually helped raise you? Speaker 2: My sister Avis. When my mother died , my sister Avis was fourteen years old. And my brother Francis had gone in the service at an early age-seventeen or eighteen. He was the oldest and so--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Tell me about Avis. Your sister. And what was she like as a sibling raising you? And how do you remember--? Speaker 2: Avis gave us everything that she could afford to give us. Avis used to work at Mattapan [Massachusetts]. You know, up there. The [Boston State] Hospital where they kept the, you know, mentally ill or whatever. And Avis worked there for years. And we used to wait for her to come home. And sometimes she would treat us with chop suey. Oh we just loved that Chinese chop suey. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) How old was she when she was working at Mattapan State Hospital? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I was say Avis was somewhere--I would say she was in her late twenties. Speaker 1: I see. When she was fourteen was she in school? Speaker 2: Yes she was in school. Speaker 1: In Cambridge? Speaker 2: Yeah, Cambridge. High, [Cambridge Rindge &] Latin [School]. Speaker 1: Any other siblings that were part of your raising, in addition--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My sister Anita was the next oldest girl in line. Nita was one that was pretty strict too. I can remember. But my brother Henry-He was in the service. I can remember them being in the service, my brother Henry and my brother Phillip was in the Navy. And my brother Francis was in the Second World War [1939-1945]. My brother Henry was in the Second World War. And my brother Phillip. They were all in the Second World War. So I had a grandfather in the Civil War [1861-1865], my father [Henry Basil Battle Sr.] was in the First World War [1914-1918]. My brothers were in the Second World War. And then my oldest brother Francis was in Vietnam War [1961-1975]. So the boys were always away. There was only one brother that was home. My brother Bobby was the youngest. And he did--when they drafted him, he didn't make the examination. Because they said he had some kind of a heart murmur or something. So therefore, it was just the seven -six sisters-I mean six girls at home and my brother Bobby. Speaker 1: Mm-hm. I noticed on your questionnaire Anita-Your sister Anita was a hair dresser. Speaker 2: Yeah, my sister Anita and my sister Virginia. They became hair dressers after I had gone to beauty school. Speaker 1: Oh after you. Well we'll come back to that then. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah. Okay. Speaker 1: Did you motivate them or did you inspire them--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, I believe so. Mm-hm. Story_ID: 3231 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about-What was the name of the street that you lived on? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mead Street. Right off of Walden Street [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And how do you spell that? Speaker 2: "M-E-A-D" Mead Street. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) How do you remember your neighborhood and the children and the people? What was your neighborhood like? How would you--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My neighborhood was like families of ten. The Robinsons I believe was ten. The Binghams (ph.), ten in their family. The Coblins (ph.) there was ten. Jacksons--Our neighborhood was filled with families of multiple siblings. More so than families today. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) So you had a lot of friends and a lot of playmates. Speaker 2: Yes. And we always had to do something with the community center. Which was Mr.-Mrs. MacRea (ph.). She was in charge of the community center. And we would have May parties. And every holiday there would be something. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) There was a Cambridge Community Center? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Was that near your home? Speaker 2: That was on Hubbard Ave., the one we went to. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) In North Cambridge? Speaker 2: In North Cambridge. Yeah. So we-I have very, very good memories of my neighborhood, and our association with the people that lived in the neighborhood. I can remember Mrs. Center (ph.), Edna Center. I-Edna Center would have me come to her house to braid her daughter's hair-Janie Center. And Edna was always telling us, you know, right from wrong. So, you know, we had-When you hear about Hillary [Rodham] Clinton when I was reading her book and they talked about "It takes a village to raise your children," I noticed that I really came from that kind of a village. Because when I was raised the community was very concerned. We had respect for those people in the community. Where if you try now in these times-I mean many times I came out of my salon when I see somebody fighting. And I tried to break it up, or tell the kids that wasn't right. And they literally just cuss you out. That didn't happen in our day. We didn't dare disrespect any adult that spoke to us. So my younger years in growing up in the neighborhood it was very clear to us what was right and what was wrong. Speaker 1: What's your favorite memory of growing up on Mead street? Speaker 2: Well we had so many different things. May would come, we'd have the May party. You know, the summer. We would always go to Salem Willows [Park, Salem, Massachusetts] and the picnic. Or you'd get on a bus and go somewhere. You know. The winter we just played out in the snow until you--your feet and your hands were--we didn't have enough sense to come inside when we were cold. You know. We had such a wonderful, like I said, neighborhood. And you just lived to enjoy and to have fun. I can't really remember anything that was sad until we got into high school. One of our friends died from TB [tuberculosis]. Or something like that. Or you'll hear somebody in a car accident. But I don't really have any sad memories of being raised as a child. Only when I did something wrong. And I knew when I came home I'd have to face my father [Henry Basil Battle Sr.]. Because then you know you was gonna get a beating. But other than--I really-can't really share too many sad memorie Story_ID: 3232 Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory? Your farthest back memory as a child growing up? Speaker 2: My earliest--Remember as a child, I was going to kindergarten. And my father [Henry Basil Battle Sr.] used to do our hair. And I could remember my father straightening my hair. And I would say, "OW! Oo! You burnt me." You know, with that straightening comb. The hot comb. And he'd say, "Keep still. Stay still." And he--that's--he's really responsible for me learning how to do hair. Because our father was not a hair dresser. He worked at the post office. But he used to burn us sometimes so with that hot comb, that I learned very quickly how to do my hair. But my earliest memory of my father is when I had on a little white Peter Pan blouse and a green pleated skirt. And I was going across the street to school. And he told me to hold my sister's hand. My sister Lillian being older than me, the one that's here. And I can remember walking across the street to go to school after my father had dressed me, my first day of school. That was very clear in my mind. And he used to shop for us too and buy us, you know, our clothes. And he pretty much-he pretty much had all that in order. With the help, of course, of my older siblings. But my father was definitely the main person in the household that made a whole lot sense. And was a guide in our direction. And so I would say I was four, four and a half. Four and a half, yep was my earliest memory. Speaker 1: Going back to your father's profession-occupation in the post office. You said he worked thirty-two, thirty-three years--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm, mm-hm. Speaker 1: [Boston] South Postal [Annex, Boston, Massachusetts]. When did he start and when did he retire? Do you know what the time frame is? Speaker 2: I think it was-he retired-I know he died in '67 [1967]. So I think he retired around '65 [1965]. And he had retired eighteen months and he was dead. It wasn't long after he retired that he had died of cancer. Story_ID: 3233 Speaker 1: You've given us a very good sense and a feeling of your family life, your growing up years with your family and your friends in the neighborhood. But just to finish that off were there any special events that took place in your family life from year to year? Any special memories of holidays or things that you remember in your daily life with your family? You talked about going to Salem Willows [Park, Salem, Massachusetts] and the summer picnics. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. Christmastime I can always remember my father [Henry Basil Battle Sr.]. We had to be-Christmas morning we had to be totally dressed before we could open our gifts. And he would always cook on Christmas morning fried rabbit. We looked for it-forward t that. Speaker 1: Where'd he get the rabbit? Speaker 2: My father used to go fishing. I can remember him going fishing. But I believe he bought that rabbit somewhere. He never went hunting that I can remember. He was mostly fishing. And so, you know-and Thanksgiving. We always had a table full of family or friends. He always entertained in the sense that there was always something happening. I can remember sitting round the table and playing all kinds of games. And us young women learning how to cook and make dessert and things like that. But Easter dinner, Mothers' Day dinner, Mothers' Day going to our mother's [Lillian Clayton] grave. You know, so things were always paid attention to. Whatever the season or whatever the reason. It was always a family affair, as I can remember. Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Another way of looking at your growing up years--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm. Speaker 1: And your memories what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: What sights, sounds and smells? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Or smells. Sights, sounds or smells remind you of--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well the--not--the sight of snow and the cold reminded us how we had to go down and stroke the furnace fire and make sure the fire didn't go out overnight. Because every winter we had that problem of we used to have to go to the coal yard and buy a dollar bag of coal. And put it on the cart and bring that home, to make that furnace fire. If the coal didn't get delivered, or we--Or if our father didn't have enough money for that coal. So I can remember that. As far as the sight of snow. And then walking to school. But smells was he would make tripe soup. He would do all kinds of fish chowders, corn chowders. He would do beef stew. So there was always something in the kitchen that was cooking. And we had to remind ourselves that when you went into the pot to get something that there was somebody coming behind you. So you always had to think not only of what you wanted, it's only what you needed at that particular time. So there's a lot of things that happened in my childhood that I can remember that-as far as feel. Well you certainly didn't wanna feel the results of his razor strap from getting beat. So you was always cognizant-You always kept in mind that if you did something wrong, you knew that the end result was gonna be. Story_ID: 3234 Speaker 1: Let's talk about formal education. You talked about your earliest memory as a youngster, and that is going to kindergarten. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend in Cambridge [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I went to the Lincoln School. Abraham Lincoln School. Abraham Lincoln School right across the street from my house. And after that, I went to the [Lesley] Ellis School [Arlington, Massachusetts] for, you know, the seventh and eighth grade. 'Cause the Lincoln went up to the sixth grade. Then I went to the Ellis school on Norris Street up in North Cambridge for the seventh and eighth grade. I graduated from the Ellis school and then I went to Cambridge High of Latin [Cambridge Rindge and Latin High School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. At that particular time after I went to Cambridge High of Latin, I applied to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. I thought I could go to college. I wanted to be a social worker. And my father [Henry Basil Battle Sr.] said to me, "Who is going to pay for you to go to college? I don't have this money." He said, "You've been doing hair in my kitchen." That's another thing. I had picked up doing hair and was doing the neighbors' hair and everybody's hair. He said, "You need to go to beauty school." And that's when he had me meet him at [Boston] South Postal Annex [Boston, Massachusetts] on pay day. And he gave me a $50 bill to pay down on beauty school. I remember that. He said that was my down payment. And I had to pay the rest. In that particular time beauty school was only $375. So he had given me the down payment. So I cried all the way to (pho.) Wilford Academy [of Cosmetology, Boston, Massachusetts]. Because my friends were going to college. And I wanted to go to college. So I thought. 'Cause I wanted to be this social worker. But in the work that I have been doing, I've been more of a social worker (laughing) than even if I had, you know, the professional training to be a social worker. Speaker 1: I wanna come back to high school. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Because there was something in the yearbook-in your high school year book that I wanna talk about. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: But before we get to high school, let me go back to the elementary school-the Lincoln elementary. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Briefly what was elementary school like for you? How do you remember your elementary school years? Speaker 2: Well I remember realizing that there was a difference between black and white. And I think it was because some of our teachers made it known to us that-Out of a classroom I would say of maybe twenty-two or twenty-three children, we would probably either be one or two blacks in the classroom. But if we asked to go to the lady's room, sometime the teacher would say, "No." Or if we asked certain things, we felt like we were being discriminated against. Whether or not it was true, there was something there. I cannot-I can remember my father always having to come up to school or stick up for us. Or one time he came up to school to say, "If my daughters need to go to the bathroom, I don't think they need to ask. I want them to have permission to leave the room and come back." And I can remember when I was in the first grade being promoted from kindergarten, going into the first grade. They had a teacher named Mrs. White. And they had a teacher named Mrs. Tines (ph.). And Mrs. Tines was a black teacher. And I thought because I was black I was supposed to be put in the black teacher's room. But they promoted me from kindergarten to Mrs. White's room. And in the auditorium, I just broke down and cried. And said, "No, I cannot go into Mrs. White's room. I have to go into Mrs. Tine's room." So when we came back to school in September instead of me going to the room I was assigned to, I went right into Mrs. Tine's room. And they just left me there. They never did anything about it. But later on because I guess they knew Mr. Battle had all these children, they we were always-seems like given milk that someone else didn't have or didn't use. Given or food or something. I can vaguely remember that. But I thought pretty much our teachers cared for us in a sense. I can remember my fifth grade teacher Miss Kacharski (ph.). And I remember her because she was very strict. But forthright. But they on the whole, I think, it's because they knew my father wasn't going to take anything. That we didn't have too much trouble in school. Speaker 1: Your elementary school was predominantly white then. Speaker 2: yes. The element--definitely white. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Even though your immediate neighborhood, you mentioned four or five families--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm. Speaker 1: With nine, ten, eleven children--. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Wasn't the--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The Robins--. Speaker 1: Wasn't the residential area of this part of Cambridge predominantly black or not? Speaker 2: Yeah. But some of them were in the [William E.] Russell School [Dorchester, Massachusetts] area. We was in the Abraham Lincoln and some of them were in the Russell School. Speaker 1: So the school was predominantly white then. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have any thought in elementary school about what you wanted to do or be when you became an adult at that-did you have any notions at that early age? Speaker 2: When I was in elementary school, no. I had no notions of what I wanted to do. No, when I was like say in the fifth or sixth grade, no. When I was going to Abraham Lincoln School. Speaker 1: What kind of student were you? What kind of student were you as an elementary school student? How do you remember yourself as a student? Speaker 2: I was very congenial. Everybody was my friend. I would make friends with anybody. So I thought. You know. It wasn't anything like, "Oh I hate her." Or, "I don't like him." You know. There wasn't-That didn't even enter my mind. You know. I was always trying to be part of someone until they offended me. And then I found out. I always learned lessons the hard way. Story_ID: 3235 Speaker 1: You moved into junior high school or middle school. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Middle school for seventh and eighth--. Speaker 1: (unclear)? Speaker 2: Ellis. The [Lesley] Ellis School [Arlington, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: How do you remember those middle school years? What were they like? Were they--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I can-the only thing-Ellis school was fine. I had more friends there. There's only one gal that got me in trouble in the Ellis school was Sally Davis. I'll never forget her. I used to-didn't like her. 'Cause she used to-Her mother and my father [Henry Basil Battle Sr.] they knew one another. And she would go home and tell her mother things-Tell my-and mother would tell my father that I was acting up in school or something like that. That's the only thing I can remember from the Ellis School. That one young lady Sally Davis. We was only over there for the seventh and eighth grade. So she's the only one that caused me any problems. Other than that and we went from the Ellis to high school. In high school, you know, I used to like gym. And I played volleyball and got a ribbon for volleyball and all that. But-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) This is Cambridge--? Speaker 2: High Latin [Cambridge Rindge and Latin High School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: High Latin. Speaker 2: Yeah. And--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Over all those four years how do you look back on those four years? What-What stands out? Speaker 2: We had to walk to school every day. As I said before, we were poor. We couldn't even get a ride. Sometimes I would see that the people came there. And they had nice lunches. And I would see their mother made them lunch. And we could only have whatever it was which wasn't very much all the time. But whether it rained, whether it snowed. We walked from North Cambridge to Cambridge High Latin past Harvard Square each and every day. In the rain or in the snow. Speaker 1: Where was--? It was beyond Harvard Square toward Central Square? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. On Broadway [Avenue]--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm. That's at least a mile. Right? Speaker 2: Or more. Speaker 1: More. Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely. Speaker 1: Mm-hm. What was your favorite subject in high school? A subject? What did you like most besides the physical education, sports? What--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I had a problem with English. I didn't understand. Just like [William] Shakespeare. I had a problem with Shakespeare. And I--so my English teacher made a deal with me. He says, "Now Olive, you're having a problem here. I'm gonna give you an exam." And he says, "You agree whatever you get on the exam, that's what I'm gonna put on your report card." He said, "You're gonna agree?" And I said, "Yeah." I said, "Whatever I get on this exam, you're gonna put on my report card?" He said, "Yeah." Well I got fifty-eight and I flunked English (laughing) . But I can remember that. 'Cause my heart just sunk. But now, you know, I think I heard a report the other day that if more students knew the biography of people, or saw a picture. You know, like we read a book now. And then we could see the play. And you could see the movie. So you can understand it. My understanding of Shakespeare was very, very ah! I just couldn't handle it. You know. Speaker 1: What did you do well at? What subject did you-did you like the most? Did you do well at? Speaker 2: The two that I hated was English and math. So the rest I guess I did well at. Speaker 1: Pointed question. Did you take chemistry in high school? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: I think I did not have the college course [track]. I believe in high school I took the-They had different courses. And I-Mine didn't come under-I had science the first year. But I didn't have biology, yeah. Or chemistry. Yeah. Of course, I know a lot about that now. Speaker 1: Well that's why I asked. Pointed question. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: We're gonna come back to that when we talk about your accomplishments. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Were you involved in any extracurricular activities at school? And did you do any things in the community while you were in high school now? Did you do any other things as extracurricular kinds of things? Speaker 2: Now I can remember caroling in the snow. That came from high school. But I can't really remember any extra curriculum [sic] things I did. Story_ID: 3236 Speaker 1: Did you work while you were in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah. I got my first job in Filene's Basement. You know they send you. They tell you how you have to dress for your interview. And I went and was interviewed for Filene'd downtown. And I got my first job as a salesperson in the basement selling sweaters. I was so thrilled that I got hired. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And you were how old now about? Speaker 2: Maybe--What was I? Sixteen or something like that. So-and we learned that through-Now what was the class that we had-'Cause I took the commercial course [educational track]. That's what it was. Yeah. 'Cause they had the college course, the commercial course and some other course. I took the commercial course. Let me see. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Your high school year book I understand had the following, I guess, under your name-under your pictures. Speaker 2: Hairdresser most--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Most likely to succeed. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Hairdresser. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me about that. How--? Speaker 2: Well everybody knew in school my hair was always perfect. Or seemed like it was. And I was doing people's hair. So that's why, you know, when I came-When it was time for our year book-and by then I knew that I was gonna go to hair dressing school at the end when my father [Henry Basil Battle Sr.] said-You know, when you send your applications out in February and whenever and that wasn't happening--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) In high school you worked at Filene's. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: But how did you get started doing people's hair? Speaker 2: That was always in the kitchen. Because my father--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) yeah. But how did you-How did you get started with that? Speaker 2: Because when--We decided that--my sisters and I--you know, we got burnt enough by our father [trying to use the hot iron on their hair]. I used to do everybody's hair. My sisters. And then from doing my sisters-my siblings, then it started with some people in the neighborhood. And then from the neighborhood it just started spreading. In fact--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Did you get paid for that? Speaker 2: I got paid two dollars a head. Speaker 1: That's a lot of money wasn't it in that time? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Just to curl it. Yeah. In fact, after I got out of high school and was really doing hair in the kitchen, the hair dresser up Concourt Ave [Cambridge, Massachusetts]--'cause I lived on Mead Street--heard about me doing hair in the kitchen. And someone reported me to the State Board [of Cosmetology]. And, of course I-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And what happened? Speaker 2: And they called me. And--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You are now seventeen. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I'll never forget Madeline Johnson's mother, Penny Patterson (ph,). I used to do her hair. I did all the people up Concourt Ave., their hair. And they called me and says, "You've been reported to the State Board. So Olive be careful. Because don't accept everybody that calls. So when somebody call--." And they did. And she says, "Oh I'm calling to get my hair done." I said, "Hair done?" I says, "I don't do hair." And, "Oh I was told that you do hair." I said, "Oh no." I says, "I may fool around with my sisters' hair or my friends, but I don't do hair." So that was the State Board. So. And that's when I decided I'd better go to beauty school. Story_ID: 3237 Speaker 1: You graduated from high school in what year? Speaker 2: 1950. Speaker 1: 1950. Okay. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And you told us about your father [Henry Basil Battle Sr.] giving you the $50 to put down for your tuition. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: And you attended what school? Speaker 2: Wilford Academy [of Cosmetology, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: And where was-where was that? Speaker 2: Wilford Academy was on Boylston Street. Speaker 1: On Boylston Street. Mm-hm. Tell me about that training and that program. How long you were there? What was it like? What was (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well I-the Massachusetts-the state of Massachusetts requires 1,000 hours before you can take the board-take your board to take the li-to get your license. You have to take an exam to get your license. But you have to do a thousand hours of theory. And so Massachusetts for me to do 1,000 hours, I was going nights. 'Cause by then now, I was-I had four children by the time I finished school. Speaker 1: By the time you finished Wilford. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Well how many years were you at the--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) 'Cause I started at night. And it takes two years nights. And my two years extended longer. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And it was only because I could do hair that it-I didn't. I really wasn't motivated to finish that quick. And I should have finished quicker than what I did. But when I did I finish, I worked in one salon. And she saw how wonderful I was and everybody was asking for me. So the owner decided she would ask me to leave. And so I left that salon. And she had also asked another person that was working there to leave. So we both left. And I went further down Concourt Ave., and worked for this other person that left with me that was fired with me. Speaker 1: Now this was all in North Cambridge [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: All in North Cambridge. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. And I worked for her. And no sooner I worked for her and she saw the same thing happen. Everybody was coming in asking for me. And I guess they owed-they felt they were the owners and they really should have gotten most of the customers. But I was getting most of the customers. So she fired me. So I was out of beauty school eighteen months and was fired twice. And then it dawned on me, "You gotta get your own place." So, you know, I say thank you to those two women Shirley Wiler (ph.) and Debbie Anderson for doing what they did to me. Because both of them fired me. And if they didn't fire me, I probably would have became complacent. You know. Sometimes you get comfortable. You get in a comfort zone. Story_ID: 3238 Speaker 1: Before we move into your first store--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Your own business as an entrepreneur, you said that during the time that you were at Wilford Academy [of Cosmetology, Boston, Massachusetts], you had four children? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Let's talk about your children. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm. Speaker 1: At this point. 'Cause that's very important. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Tell us about your four children. Their names, when they were born? And what they're doing now. Your oldest child? Speaker 2: Well my oldest child Debra, she has three children. She lives in Florida. She's married to a neurosurgeon and she has two masters-one in education and one in psychology. And her three children, one is in her last year of law school. And is over at the Hague Institute [for the Internationalisation of Law, The Hague, Netherlands] right now doing her internship. And one is in Howard [University] Medical School [Washington, D.C.]. And the youngest one is in community college. So that's my oldest girl. Stephanie has a degree in psychology. And wanted to go on to law school. But she came back from California to help me with the business. So Stephanie has been working in the business for the past twenty years. Thomasina, the third oldest is a special ed [education] teacher. She graduated from BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] in special ed and she teaches middle school. And--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Where does she teach? Speaker 2: She teaches at the Cleveland School-Oh what's the name of that school? It's a middle school--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) In Boston? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Grover Cleveland [School]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Grover Cleveland. That's right in Boston. Speaker 1: Middle school? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where she's at. Lost my thought there for a minute. Uh-huh. So she's been doing that for-Thomasina's been teaching school for the past twenty years or so. And then Dianna who went into theater and back and forth, here and there, hit and miss. But she also went to hair dressing school early on. So that's what butters her bread and keeps a roof over her head. Because, you know, that acting, if you don't really hit-Although Dianna was at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] when Angela Bassett was there. So Dianna now works with me doing hair in the salon. And Dianna, because she was in theater does a lot of shows and does a lot of the make-up for the models. And so she-she wears more than one hat. Dianna does. Story_ID: 3239 Speaker 1: Let's go back to you're being fired twice in three years (chuckling). So you decided--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Eighteen months. Speaker 1: Eighteen months. All right. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And so you decided you were gonna do what? Speaker 2: I decided I had to open up my own place. I had to find a place. 'Cause I couldn't get fired like that again. And in the mean time I'm building this clientele. And here I'm building this clientele and no place to do them. And I certainly couldn't take them back to the kitchen. So I found a spot. And then I had to figure out, how do I pay a plumber and an electrician, buy beauty shop equipment and open up a place. Well at that time they wasn't giving loans to anyone that-Well a black woman opening up a business. I can remember going to Harvard Trust [Company] and the banks that refused me. So I had saved some money. And I had to just like do that rob Peter to pay Paul to get open. And that's how I got the first salon open in--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And where was your first salon? Speaker 2: It was at 292, I believe, Columb-Concourt Ave [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: In? Speaker 2: Cambridge. Speaker 1: North Cambridge? Speaker 2: Yeah. North Cambridge. 292 Concourt Ave. And I opened a four booth salon. And I got a black contractor, Harry Johnson to build it for me. You know, do the necessary things I needed to get open. And that's what happened. So-the main things that I needed. I had to be able to pay the rent, and then set it up. And before I knew it I was open. And ever since then, I have never ever looked back as far as opening salons. But it's not as easy--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well I remember that you were very, very, very, very busy in this first business. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: On Concourt Avenue. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How long were you at that site? Your first business? Speaker 2: Well I don't know why I moved across the street. There was some reason why-There was a hair dresser across the street who was going out of business. And she told me she was going out of business, and I could have her place. But why I moved across the street-Either I grew out of the place -but I don't remember her place being that much bigger. But any how I took her place and did it over. And I got a lease for about five years or something like that. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) So all and all you were on Concourt Avenue for how long roughly? At both places? Speaker 2: I was on Concourt Avenue at both places, out of school '69 [1969]-Oh for about fifteen years. Fifteen, eighteen years. Yeah. Story_ID: 3240 Speaker 1: So now you're an entrepreneur. You own your own business in North Cambridge [Massachusetts]. Where do you go from those first two beauty salons that you operated? Where did you then move to? What was the next step? Speaker 2: Downtown Boston [Massachusetts]. And because everybody said, "You need to be downtown. You just-you're too big to be out in Cambridge. You need to be downtown. So everybody has a chance to get to you." So I decided, okay. I would try to expand and go downtown. Speaker 1: Now how many employees did you have at that point? How many people were working in your salon? Speaker 2: (softly counting) Maybe-And I think I may have a picture of them. We may have been eight of us. Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Eight. At that point. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: So you went downtown with roughly eight people? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And where did you go downtown? Speaker 2: I went to 755 Boylston Street. So I went downtown to rent the place. I called. They said the place was empty. It was right across from Lord and Taylor at 755 Boylston Street. Right across from-Right in the Prudential Center. And --. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) This was what year now just for our record? Speaker 2: This was (pause) Could I say maybe 1969, '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And when I got down there to rent the place, the man told me, it wasn't available. I knew the place was available 'cause I just got off the phone with him. He was-There was no way he could have rented the place that quickly. So I got so upset that I called my lawyer. And I said--Larry Shubow (ph.) has always been my lawyer through thick and thin. He was a civil rights worker years ago. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I remember Larry. Speaker 2: Yeah. Larry says, "Oh. Stop crying. Don't worry about it." He says, "You do the footwork and I'll do the legal work." So he says, "I'll send my wife down." And so he sent his wife Lillian Shubow. And the place was available. So they rented it. And that's how I got downtown Boston. But then after I was down there and ran up-You know, built the place out, the people on the same floor discriminated against me and tried to have me put out of the building. And, of course, we had to get Larry again. And then they had to take care of that. And he claimed that we had -I don't know what he claimed. That we had odors coming out from the beauty salon. And when they investigated--He was in the filming business. And it was his stuff going down the pipes from the filming business that--they made him move. This same man that was causing problems--causing problems for us in the building. So we stayed in the building until they decided they were gonna empty out the building. They emptied out the building and do the building over. And so we had to move. And that's when we moved from Boylston Street to Newberry Street. We found a place on Newberry Street. It was only 1200 square feet. So It wasn't that big. And-but we had built such a clientele, we wanted to stay downtown. And when we first went to Newberry Street our rent was -I believe it was $1200 or $1500 a month. I stayed on Newberry Street 'til my rent--Every year he went up. It was $3500 a month. When he got to $3500 a month, I said to the man, Mr. Hanning (ph.). I says, "Now I only have 1200 square feet here. There's no where I can go. You keep raising my rent. Pretty soon I'm gonna be working for just paying my rent and my utilities and things." So I was determined to find a place on Newberry Street to buy. We tried and we tried. But it just wasn't working out. So that's when I moved off of Newberry Street and bought the gutted place. They were selling those gutted places on-in the South end. And we brought the place on Columbus Ave. Speaker 1: Mm-hm. And what was the address there? Speaker 2: It was 565 Columbus Ave. Speaker 1: And whereabout on Columbus was that? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It's right on the corner between Columbus and Mass [Massachusetts] Ave. Across from the Harriett Tubman House. We're strictly right across from the Harriett Tubman House. Story_ID: 3241 Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Now what was the size of your business at that point, compared to what it was when you first went to Boylston Street [Boston, Massachusetts]? I mean how much had you grown? In terms of staff and clients? Speaker 2: Well, of course, the receptionist was still my daughter Stephanie. And I must have had maybe about six stylists. And then we always have assistants. So maybe I had about maybe three assistants. Nine that worked there. But we needed to enlarge the place and grow. We wanted a aesthetician that does facials. We wanted somebody to do manicures. We wanted body massage and all that. So when we moved to the South end, that's how we got--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You had all those services. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How many floors did you have there? Speaker 2: Just one. Just that one condo. We were still growing. And so when next door came available, we had to buy next door and break down the wall. All right. But now with our PR [public relations] and our advertisement and our growth, the business was beginning to integrate more. We had a lot of white clientele. And a lot of the white clientele and even the black clientele was complaining that when they came into the South end, there was no place to park. So they says, "Olive, you need to consider moving." So I said to myself. "Okay. Now we just bought this building here. And I can't -I can't really stretch myself that far. So I will see if I can work in this salon in Chestnut Hill." This woman Connie Sullivan had a salon Genesis right in Chestnut Hill. And I went to her. 'Cause she's a member of the same organization that I'm in. In fact, we both sit on the same board right now, in Intercoiffure [Mondial]. Intercoiffure is an organization of thirty-one different countries. And we belong to the United States sector. And it's an organization of the top echelon of hair stylists or hair salons. I mean. The people that belong to this organization--they have chain salons, they have schools, you know. But it's the top in the industry. So I went to Connie. And I said, "Connie, you know, there's a service out here, that you don't do in your salon. And I'm willing to come to your salon one day a week or two days a week and service these clients that wanna come to a mall where there's a place to park and its comfortable for them. Because a lot of the white clients didn't feel comfortable coming down to South End. They felt like maybe somebody was gonna steal their car or snatch their pocketbook. That's the-That's the feedback I was getting. So Connie said, "Sure you can come and work here." So she made an arrangement with me that I would work out of her salon for two days for these clients that wanted to. So I worked in Connie's salon for two years until I built the clientele that I said-I went to her and I said, "Connie, I need more space." And Connie says, "Well I can't give you any more space." So I said to her, "Well I have to leave. Because I'll have to get space up here in Chestnut Hill. To take this overflow now." 'Cause I still had my salon in the South end. And I was just working with her for two days. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Now what decade are we in now? That's just for the people that are watching and listening to your autobiography or oral history. We're talking now when? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I would say let me see. I would say we're in 1995, '96 [1996]. Speaker 1: You were doing both. You had the--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: Columbus Avenue. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yep. I had Columbus Avenue and Connie. 'Cause I've been with her for two years. And then I got the Chestnut Hill salon in -We've been there seven years. So I got that around '98 [1998]-'97 [1997], '98. Story_ID: 3242 Speaker 1: But in the mean time I'm developing product now, along the way. So we gotta slip that in. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Before we get to the products--. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Even before and perhaps by the time you arrived at Columbus Avenue [Cambridge, Massachusetts]--. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And you bought the condo and so on--. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You had an increasing national, international reputation-. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: As a premiere hair stylist. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Tell us about your regional and national, international work. How did you branch out and become part of the profession the way you did? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And tell us about your techniques that you developed and so on. What--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well, you know, I'm a person that-I like a challenge. And I was always rejected because of the, you know, the color of your skin. And people tell me, "You couldn't do this with this kinky, nappy, bad hair." You know. I'd get tired of hearing that. I first would go to the competitions. They had state competitions. And I would see the hair dressers just style hair beautifully and win these trophies. So I said to myself, "Gee, I can do that." So I hurried up and got me a black model and entered these competitions that the state would put on. And so I found out that very early on that-And I think I may have some pictures of that. I do. But very early on that I wasn't accepted. They wasn't judging this black model that I put in. So the Massachusetts show, they had a competition. And I says, "Now I can style hair just as well as these people. I got to really get into this and win." So I went and I got some information. And I got some classes from some of the world's greatest. And I came back and decided I was gonna enter Massachusetts again. What I did was, I put in a black model and-I put in two models. I put in a black model and then I put in a white model. Blue eyed blond. I made her hair strawberry blond. And they judged the competition. Usually they took-When they saw the work that was being done even on the black girl, they said, "And third place goes to--." You know, number whoever. Number six. That was me. And I had did the black girl. Then they gave out second place. And then they said, "And first place goes to number six." But I was already on the platform. They didn't know I did two of them. I just stepped over. So when I stepped over, they were just amazed that this is the first time that a black hair dresser had won the state show. So then I just went and I won Maine, New Hampshire, Connecticut and Rhode Island and Massachusetts. I did all the New England states. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) All in one year or consecutive? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: All in one year? Speaker 1: Not all in one year. But, you know, as the shows came on. And as I got stronger, I decided that I would enter those competitions. And that's what got me the regional and state recognition. And then I joined the national. And I took my exam in the national. I think I took my exam. Because I belong to the national now. Story_ID: 3243 Speaker 1: The national what? What was the--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The National Cosmetology [Association]. Speaker 1: Mm-hm. And so you competed in their competition? Speaker 2: You had to take an exam to join the National. And when you belong to the National, then you become an educator. By then I was a licensed instructor anyhow. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) How'd you become a licensed instructor? Speaker 2: Because you take the exam or you qualify because of your hours in your work. And so that's why I'm a licensed instructor also. So I joined the National. And I took the exam. The first year I took the exam. You have to take-get eighty to pass. The exam is broken up. You have to do make-up. You have to do hair. You have to do a hair cut. You have to do a mannequin. And I was very, very nervous. And the first year I took the exam. Of course, I-You need eighty to pass. And they passed me with a seventy-eight. So I didn't pass two points. I didn't pass. So I had to wait a whole year around to take the exam again. And so I waited 'til the next year. And I had to take the-I flew wherever it was. Whatever state it is they have it in. I flew to Minneapolis [Minnesota] or someplace to take the exam. And then I passed. This is the same organization that had given me the Hall of Renown Award after I got in there, and proved myself. That I can embellish all textures of hair. It doesn't make a difference of the color of your skin. Well your hair-We determine the texture of your hair through genetics. Whoever your mother and father is, determines the texture of your hair. Not the color of your skin. 'Cause you can find straight hair on black people and kinky hair on whites. So, you know, my whole career has been both one the black side and on the white side, that I'm a texture person. Whatever texture your hair is, if you come from-I did the princes from Kuwait. I've done so many different people, stars. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Who are some of the people that--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay. When-I can remember when the Supremes were right here at Basson Street in Boston. I did the Supremes. I did Ruby Dee. I did, who was that woman that was just at Scullers [Jazz Club]. Old woman that is still singing. I couldn't believe it. I went to her and I said, "I remember doing your hair when you were doing the jazz workshop." The one-some of them. Wait a minute. I did Anita Baker. I did-I got a whole list of people. Anita Baker. Who else did I have the-I'll think about-I'll think about it. Should have wrote all those down. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) you talked about texture and understanding what texture was. And what to do in texture. Some things I read about the work that you do, you also talked about timing and strength. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: How do those factors play into--? Speaker 2: Well once you learn about product knowledge-knowledge. Product knowledge you have to know and the active ingredient. And we all know about permanent waving. And when permanent waving first came to the United States, it was introduced to the United States it was in 1935. And Charles Nestle was the one that introduced permanent waving. And nothing has changed since then. It's a process that we use in hair dressing that you have to know the basic elements of hair dressing and what you're going to do to either put wave in or take wave out. And so there's one product that we can use to take-- to put wave in. And there's one product to take wave out. And that's sodium hydroxide. And once you know the product and the process, you know, what is happening to the hair in relation to the hair and geographically where the hair comes from? What hair are we working on? Are we working on Irish hair? Is it French hair? Is it Italian hair? 'Cause every hair is different. Speaker 1: It's interesting. 'Cause you said earlier that you didn't take biology. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you didn't take chemistry. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But you are using biological and chemical information? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Concepts and so on? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How did you learn all that? I mean--? Speaker 2: I learned some of it through trial and error. And then in my travels. I've been to I don't know how many World Congress. Because where I belong to this organization, it took me to Brazil. It took me to France. I've been to China and Japan. I've been all over the world participating in some of these World Congress that has to do with a lot of texture. And it wasn't until I went to Israel-When I went to Israel, I was just dumbfounded. I could have set up a shop there and straightened everybody's hair. Because, you know, we're taught---We weren't that-We're the only ones it seems as thought that we have this curly-excessively curly, kinky hair when European textures are the strongest-one of the strongest textures. In fact, of course, the Japanese texture is the strongest. 'Cause it has the most cuticle layers. It has something like fourteen cuticle layers. But the European textures are much stronger than the Afro-American hair. Ours is the most fragile. And ours gets the most damaged. Because everybody thinks you have to use super or something strong to really straighten this nappy, kinky, you know-You know. What do they call it? Brillo pad, you know, hair. And where we come from, our hair is very fragile. And -but when we came over-And I tell this story sometime when I have a class about before the Mayflower. And we came over on the Mayflower. And the black woman was--The races were infiltrated when the black woman was raped, especially on the plantations. This is where we got these different textures. And this is where we had the light people telling the blacks, "Your hair is nappy." And the blacks telling the light, "Oh she has good hair." There's no such thing as good hair or bad hair. Hair is hair. It's a texture. And every texture has an origin. Story_ID: 3244 Speaker 1: You are known for developing a technique called off the-off the scalp application. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What is that? And tell us what-? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well it's because when they first created this relaxer, I heard-The story that I get was it was created in jail by a man. And they made-I heard that a inmate had actually made this lye formulation, with potatoes and whatever. Lye. And they used to put it on their hair and-to straighten their hair. And it burnt their scalps up. But now since research and development, and they have developed the sodium hydroxide, with the cream base and a lot of conditionings in it, that, you know, we have learned that you apply the product off the scalp, not directly on the scalp. So my technique is first to protect the scalp from any sensitivity that you may be feeling. And you apply the product off the scalp. And a lot of hair stylists haven't learned that yet. So depending on whose product you're using and-A lot of the products do not give you that sensitivity. Speaker 1: When you say, "Off the scalp." Do you mean literally off the scalp? Speaker 2: Literally off the scalp. Speaker 1: Or do you mean using a product that does not damage the skin? Speaker 2: It's-it's--. Speaker 1: Literally off the scalp. Speaker 2: Literally off the scalp. We apply it off the scalp. Does it finally arrive on the scalp? Of course. Because when you manipulate the hair and pop the hair to get it in and get it off. But we have protected the hair with an oil. The olive oil. And then we use a mild formulation. We don't use the super. And then the product that I have formulated--My own product--Universal Textures works on all the textures of the universe. And mostly the Jewish clientele that I have are Irish or a combination. 'Cause we have a lot of combinations, whether their father is Italian and their mother is Irish. You have a certain texture. We evaluate that. And then we know just how much time is necessary to straighten the hair and what strength we would use to straighten the hair. Speaker 1: Tell us more about your line of products. How many are there? And are you using them in your current salon? Speaker 2: Yeah we use them. We have a shampoo. And we have a protein conditioner that we use right after the relaxer. And we have two strength relaxer. We have one delicate for color treated hair. And then we have one normal to resistant-for resistant hair. Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Now when did you develop these products? Speaker 2: Well after I became popular in the industry and known for educating, the companies would hire me. And, of course, I have been in a sense because of what I knew and what I learned from trial and error , I've really been prostituted by a lot of these companies. I first learned how to straighten hair through Johnson Products through a Mabel Morton (ph.)who taught me how to straighten hair. And then I went on to Hair Straight--[S.] Henry Bundles and Henry Childrey [?]. Henry Bundles was the President. Henry Childrey used to be the-was the Vice President of Hair Straight. And I did ten different cities for them. 'Cause I was always a show person. And I always-Not only could I relax hair, I could style hair through those competitions that I won. And then from Hair Straight I worked a little with Ted Manuel [?] with French Perm. And then from French Perm I went to Revlon. And I worked with Bill Madison. He was one of the VPs [vice presidents] of --. Story_ID: 3245 Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Being a consultant and having the opportunity to develop your own products--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) yeah. Speaker 1: With these other companies-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) yeah. Speaker 1: Both chemical and hair products and so on. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) yeah. Speaker 1: Being involved continually in competitions--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) yes. Speaker 1: Being an educator--. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Traveling to Europe. How did you do all this and keep your businesses going too? Speaker 2: Well that's it. That's why Stephanie has been in it (chuckling) for the past twenty years or more. And the kid-The children have really helped me. And then I've always had good help. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And Dianna your daughter. Speaker 2: Dianne yeah. And then we had Bonnie. Bonnie Feldkins (ph.) who's worked for me since she came out of beauty school for twenty-five years. And then Donna who was in beauty school when Dianna I believe was in beauty school. She's been working for me for fifteen years. And I always had-People were always attracted to me because of the education I was gonna give them, for them to grow and open their own salon. So I feel like I have trained all of Boston. You see? Story_ID: 3246 Speaker 1: Then L'Oreal gave me a contract. And they wanted me to represent their product. So I represented L'Oreal's product. It was called the Olive Benson line. And I traveled to France, and I did shows and classes for them. And then they were supposed to be giving me four percent royalties of gross and I found out that I wasn't getting it. And so I had to breach the contract. From L'Oreal, then Soft Sheen hired me. Soft Sheen hired me as director of education. They had 110 techs. Speaker 2: And where was this? Speaker 1: And this was in Chicago, Illinois. And so I moved to Chicago. Still kept my salon here. Now my daughters were running my salon. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I remember-I remember when you left. Speaker 1: Yep. And I moved to Chicago. And I helped develop Soft Sheen's Optimum line. When I went to Soft Sheen, they went from whatever. They went-It was a company of forty-five million or something like that. But I worked for them for six years as director of education. Built that educational part. That platform part. And created-helped to develop Optimum line. Soft Sheen has since sold their company for $92 million to L'Oreal. The company I used to work for. And that's to gain all of those companies under that name, Carson products and Soft Sheen products and whatever other products. and now L'Oreal has those products. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm. What were the years you were at Soft Sheen? Speaker 1: From six-'82 [1982] to '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: '82 to '88. Speaker 1: And then when I came home, another company picked me up. They says, "Oh we want to be married to you. We want you to develop a product for us. And blah-blah-blah." So I was-I figured it would be okay. 'Cause I would be home. Now I don't know why I did not at that point decide to just make my own product. Because now I'd worked for Revlon. And I did L'Oreal and now I went to Soft Sheen. That was three companies. Working in their lab. You know, testing. I was the one that tests. I would-They would give me the product. I would go down to the tests salon. I would use it. I would do half heads. Do this head with this product, this head--Was this head shinier? Is this head better? You know. I was the tester. I was the one that they used. So that's how I got to learn about the product. Story_ID: 3247 Speaker 1: You were saying that when you came back from your six years in Chicago [Illinois] with Shoft Sheen-Soft Sheen--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm. Speaker 1: That you were approached by another company. Speaker 2: Yes. Pantresse. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was approached by Pantresse. And they told me they wanted to speak to me. So I said, "Okay." Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Were they a local group? Or--? Speaker 2: They were in Canton, Mass. Speaker 1: Canton, Massachusetts. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And they did just liquids. Liquids meaning shampoos and conditioners-liquid conditioners. But they never did any chemical. They never did any professional line. They did retail line. Their company was composed of retail. So when they said that they wanted to speak to me, again I got my lawyer. And when I met them, we met with Larry Shubow (ph., Benson's attorney) and myself. And they told Larry, "We would like to have a marriage with this young lady. We will want to-We want her to help us develop a relaxer--." Everybody wants this relaxer. "And we will give her royalties. And she will do so many shows for us. And she'll do this and we'll do that." So Larry says to me, "Well Olive, it sounds like a pretty good deal. You know. Why not? You're at home. You came home. These people are close. You don't have to go, you know, anywhere. Travel anywhere, but other than to do the shows and things like that." Well, of course, after I did all the testing and developing, helping them to get the product, then when the product began to sell, and all of a sudden they began to renege on some things. So it got to a situation that I had to--. Speaker 1: You were saying that once you had developed the product and--. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. So then they began to-They said that they would help me to get a place in Chestnut Hill [Boston, Massachusetts]. 'Cause now I've grown too big for Connie's [Connie Sullivan]. And I had to move. And when I had to move, I had the same problem in Chestnut Hill as I did when I first went to Boylston Street. So, of course, they went and rented the place. I found the place. But they wasn't gonna rent to me. So they rented the place. And that's the place that I'm in now. That's the same place I'm in now. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) So that was recent-very recent years that you--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: That they discriminated against you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: 1997 roughly or '96 [1996]. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That's it. That's it. Speaker 1: That recent. Hmm. Speaker 2: So, of course, we got the place started. And when they saw that I was able to perform and to make money, they tried to like take over. And, of course, they were literally not paying me my royalties for the product. So again, I was in the same situation that I was in with L'Oreal. So with a lot of legal fees and things that-We settled out of court. Story_ID: 3248 Speaker 1: And I went on about my business to develop my own product. And that's how I came about to do Universal Textures. And I worked with some chemists that I knew before in the business. And they developed the product for me. I registered the product. I have my own formulation. And this is where I am right now. Looking forward to putting other people in business. Showing them how to run a full service salon, using the proper technique. Because this a-This is a big business. You know, Madame C. J. Walker was the foundation of this beauty industry business. She was the first black woman millionaire. And I believe that we as a people, we need leaders. We need guidance. We need direction. And I-My experience in the industry for as many year as I've been in the industry, and have worked with all the top conglomerate companies that should understand texture. But because of racial prejudice, it has impeded our progress into understanding. The need of a texture has nothing to do with the color of your skin. And so I feel great about where I am today and what I'm all about. Because it has been a struggle. But it is a struggle that I'm going to really experience great rewards. Not just I'm saying money wise-compensation wise, but just spiritually. So with Universal Textures, we expect to expand or to grow. You know, all over the world wherever it's necessary. And that's why I call it universal. Because it has to do with the universe. It has nothing to do with the color of my skin. It has to do with the textures that are being produced today in America and everywhere else. America is nothing but a melting pot. Everybody from America or in America comes from-Or their parents comes from somewhere. Story_ID: 3249 Speaker 1: In addition to that tremendous dimension--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm. Speaker 1: That you're embarking upon, you've been in the business as an entrepreneur owning salons now for fifty-five years. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: And you have Olive's in Chestnut Hill [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: How many people are employed there now on a daily basis? A weekly basis? Speaker 2: Well we have about twenty people all together. We are open six days a week. And we service all textures. We discriminate against no texture. So our main service is straightening the unwanted wave or curl. We do offer body massage. And we do have an esthetician for facials. Speaker 1: Mm-hm. You said you still go into Olive's two and a half days a week. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now what do you do when you're there? Speaker 2: Well I meet with a lot of new clienteles. You'd be surprised, the new people that we-We have new people every day. When I was at work yesterday, I had new customers. The business is still growing. Because there's a need for someone to consult. We have consultation too. To consult with the person on-It's almost like a make-over. Where they are with their hair? And what they expect as far as controlling their hair. So I'm in there two days a week-Two and a half days a week. Tuesday and Thursday and a half day on Saturday. And sometime I'm in just to train or just to support the team that we have there. Story_ID: 3250 Speaker 1: You mentioned earlier Madame [C.J.] Walker--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Probably the pioneer black African American hair care specialist. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Pioneer. In what very special ways was her life meaningful to you? How did she specifically influence you? Speaker 2: Well, you know, after reading her book and meeting, of course, with her great, great granddaughter who came up here to Radcliffe [College, Cambridge, Massachusetts]-Went to school there at Radcliffe, A'Lelia Bundles. And then A'Lelia-I worked with A'Lelia's father [S. Henry Bundles] when I worked at-with Hair Straight. When I was working with Hair Straight. When I--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You mentioned Bundles earlier. And I wondered--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) yeah. Speaker 1: Whether it was the same relation. Speaker 2: Yes it is. Yeah. A'Lelia Bundles is the daughter of Henry Bundles. And I can remember when A'Lelia was coming up here to Radcliffe when Henry had called me and told me she was gonna be in the area to look-To look out for her. Speaker 1: What was the name of that book again? I've forgotten the title? Speaker 2: 'Oh Her Own Ground'. 'On Her Own Grounds'. I think I have two of her books downstairs. And I'm-It was really a pleasure to read and understand where she [Madame C.J. Walker] was coming from. How she was a washer woman in Louisiana years back in the 1800s. And 1895 or so. And how her parents died. And how she married. And she created this hair oil. And she reinvented the straighten comb. She redesigned the straighten comb. That would straighten our hair. So we would have some control. The oils, of course, protected our hair from the heat. So they did most of the pressing of the hair with. So it's like we've come-Through research and development, we've come a long way. But not only did Madam C. J. Walker just redesign the straightening comb, and created the oil. You know the formulation of the oil, but she did a lot of civic things. She was in-She had the school. And I read about her going to the business meeting and the national business meeting. And how they accepted her and didn't accept her. First they didn't. And then she was able to come back years later and donate so much money to them. And so she went from door to door. And it's-and Jim Crow during those days in the South, she wasn't allowed to do-go certain places. But she survived it all. And she was the first real entrepreneur. So I feel as though all the other companies that actually developed their product-we-We were at a-They developed their product or they were new manufacturers or whatever. They didn't give us the education. Where do we go from here? So it's like [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. Unfinished business. Where do we go from here? Okay. So we know we have this texture. We know it needs to be controlled. Because if it stays dry-in a dry state, its going to chip and break. So it needs to be moisturized. It needs to be conditioned. It needs to be controlled. Where do we go from here? And so Madam C. J. Walker-Many times I think about her and how I'm motivated by her in all the work she has done. And we haven't had that kind of legacy since. And we're still looking for. Because it's not-we're still looking for or waiting for a magical thing to happen. With hair and it is not. It's accepting the state that it's in and why we have the success of the curly hair. And the things that can be-how we can have it serviced without damage. And we can still have healthy heads of hair. Speaker 1: Where do you go from where you are at Olive's now in Chestnut Hill [Massachusetts]? Now you talked about your product line. But where are you going with the salon business? You have some new business--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. I would like to either license salons with a system that would help them to build a better clientele. A return clientele, or either do a franchise. Because we haven't had that. There's too many of us that are booth renting. 90% of black stylists are booth renting. And are doing our own thing. And so many clienteles-or so many of our customers are going into the salon and are paying to have their hair taken out. Speaker 1: Mm-hm. We talked about Madam Walker and what her life and work means to you today. There were several other people. [William] Bill Wright and Paul Barnes [NOT FOUND]. Who were they? Speaker 2: They were leaders in the industry where they won national and international competitions. I would go to the world-They would have a World Olympics in hair styling. And I've seen them actually compete and win for the United States. Speaker 1: So were they helpful to you? Speaker 2: Yeah. I had visited Bill Wright's home. And he was very helpful in telling me what is expected of me as a platform artist and as a person entering into the competition world. Story_ID: 3251 Speaker 1: What's it like getting ready for a competition? Speaker 2: Well you have to understand what they're looking for. And what the silhouette is and the form. 'Cause they give you a certain form how that hair should look. Either higher here, low here, not hanging in the crown or whatever. Something in the occipital area. But they give you a shape. They give you a form. And it's who comes the closest to that form and allow creativity within the form. So that's what competition is all about. Speaker 1: Now who sponsors these competitions? Speaker 2: They're sometimes sponsored by the state. The national. I'm getting ready to go and judge a competition now. And it's being sponsored by Bronner Brothers [Cosmetics]. Bronner Brothers in Atlanta, Georgia. They are going into five different regions. And they're having a competition in each region. Each region they'll-Whoever wins in that region will win $10,000. If you win in your region, then they're gonna take the five regions-people who have won and have a last competition. Five people competing against one another. And they're gonna give away $50,000. So I'm supposed to go to--The first competition is February 19, in Atlanta, Georgia. And then they're going to Los Angeles [California] March 5. And I believe April 3, they're gong to Houston [Texas]. And then they're going to New York and then to Maryland. And then all those regions will get together and compete. So we're judging that competition. Speaker 1: And looking at all the competitions that you've entered and the rewards and the prizes that you've got for being number one and number two or whatever--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm. Speaker 1: What are the most significant-the most meaningful award that you've received? Speaker 2: I--. Speaker 1: during your long career? Speaker 2: I think being placed in-After twenty-five years-being placed in the Hall of Renown with the National. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The National Cosme--. Speaker 2: Cosmetology Association. The National Cosmetology Association. And then I received a lifetime achievement award from NAHA, North American Hair Dressing Association. And then I received hair stylist of the century at the DuSable Museum [of African American History] in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: When was that? Speaker 2: That was an AHBAI [American Health and Beauty Aids Institute] Award. Hair stylist of the century, I believe I received in 1998 I think it was. Speaker 1: So those three kind of standout? Is--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Those. And the, of course, being the first black stylist director for the National. I was-And that means you direct the style for the spring and summer. You are responsible for whatever the looks are for the spring and the summer. And they have a fall and winder director. But I was the director for the spring and the summer. Story_ID: 3252 Speaker 1: Any things you wanna add? Speaker 2: Well I think that what I would like to add and what I would like to share with the young ones that are interested in this hair business, it's more than what meets the eye. It's more than just sitting-standing behind a hair servicing a person's head. You know, they would have to ask themselves, "You know, would I be better as an instructor owning a school? Owning chains of salons?" When I think of the people that I service. One salon owner that I went to, they made $50 million dollars last year with eighteen salons. Another salon that I service made $30 million. We as blacks in the industry really haven't been privileged to capitalize off of those large amount of money and haven't really been taught how to manage and to grow and to expand. But when I see -When they call me to consult with the, and to find out why they're making mistakes or why they have problems with straightening-I went out to Seattle, Washington and-to consult with a salon out there that had made-They were salon of the year one year and made $30 million. He had four salons. But he had something like several malpractice suits. And it because his people didn't know how to apply the product properly. And when I went out there, they had 50 models for me and my right hand assistant. Which is [Bonnie] Feldkins to do. Fifty for us to tell them how to do these right. Out of fifty, there was only four of those people that were black. Forty-six. That was forty-six European textures that were looking for us to straighten them properly. Story_ID: 3253 Speaker 1: So, you know, whether you work on a ship-Whether you work in a health spa, you can be as glamorous whether you're doing hair for the stars. There's just more to-We did the hair for the DNC. Now that was the most interesting. Speaker 2: The DNC is? Speaker 1: The Democratic National Convention. Speaker 2: Oh the recent one [2004]. (unclear). Speaker 1: Yes. We had Bonnie [Feldkins] and Donna, Casey and my daughter. We were assigned to do everybody that went on the platform. We either touched them, sprayed them, cut them did something to their hair. We did all the women senators. We did Al Sharpton. We did Jesse Jackson. We did [Barack] Obama. It was just wonderful to--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) John Kerry? Speaker 1: Ha? Speaker 2: John Kerry? Speaker 1: Oh, John Kerry no. We did his daughters [Vanessa Kerry and Alexandra Kerry]. They came into the room. And we had a room that was set up in back of the -the podium. And so our salon Olive's Beauty Salon and another salon in Boston [Massachusetts] was assigned there for the three days that the convention was there. So we had an opportunity to do all textures of hair and meet a lot of different people. Speaker 2: A very unique experience for you. Speaker 1: Oh yeah. It was real profound. Yeah. We really enjoyed that. That was one of the highlights. We get to do, you know, a lot of things. Several things. But that was definitely one of the highlights. Story_ID: 3254 Speaker 1: Anything else you wanna add to this autobiography? Speaker 2: Well there's a lot of things I guess I could add. Because my journey is not over yet. I am still working on it and still trying to fulfill my dreams. Of course, along with trying to fulfill my--your dreams, you have the same problem with the banks. And regardless how much you accomplish, they have a reason to not credit you for any kind of success. And as long as I been in the business, I tell them all the time, "At least you can recognize brand equity." And I just had a bank tell me that, you know, we don't know what's gonna happen since 9-11 [September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks]. And I says, "What has 9-11 have to do with me being in business for forty-five years and still survive? And I can tell you the business that have come in and out around me." We had just-I've been up Chestnut Hill [Massachusetts] for seven years. But let me tell you what happened after we were there for-This man moved next door to me. We was the first one in the block. Up at Chestnut Hill. They were just developing the block. I was the first one in the block. We renovated, did it over and moved in. Next door to us was a jewelry store. This man opened up this jewelry store next door to us he had this very, very expensive jewelry. And not-It just wasn't a place for a jewelry store to be. And so he I guess decided he wanted to get out of his lease. So what he did was he created a story that our salon had odors that was permeating through the walls causing his customers eyes to burn. And so we were actually chasing his customers away. Now can you imagine this happening in these times. I mean this just happened three years ago. This just happened about three years ago. Three or four years ago. They called the fire department. The called the board of health on me again. I had to call the same lawyer (laughing) Larry Shubow. Everywhere I go, there's a problem. And Larry asked the, "Is there a problem with the color of her skin?" So what happened when the fire department came in there, they said, "Because the odors we had-One of the Brookline [Massachusetts] fireman came to me. And he said, "Ma'am, you're being set up." And I said, "Thank you." So when we got Larry. And they sent the board of health out, they found out, there was no odors. There was nothing that could hap-The man next door was trying to create something 'cause he couldn't pay his rent. He couldn't pay his rent. Next thing you know, He's gone. He moved. But before he moved, he was going to create a problem there for us. And here we had a brand new built out salon, running business as you've seen. And when the Board of Health came-The Board of Health came twice. The first time the man came. The second time a woman came. And the woman said, "I don't smell anything in here that's any different than the salon that I go to." Story_ID: 3255 Speaker 1: So I guess I'm saying this to day that the young people need to know that they have to have a business plan. They have to have the right location. Location is everything. Because where we are in Chestnut Hill [Massachusetts], we have every one that comes in and enjoys our service. Experiences our service. We don't discriminate against any texture. And we do a cross-over market. It's fine when the white man can come into your neighborhood and take your money. Or you pay them your money. But when you go into their neighborhood, they don't want to pay you the same. Or they don't expect that you will operate the same. So that you always have to be aware of the unexpected. And it's happening each and every day. You know, I'm always asked to go in and speak to young people. Or tell them what to expect or how to go into business. I said, "I don't see it any different. It's no different." You still have to have collateral. You still have to have credit. And they want-They want everything. There's no such thing as your community banker who's going to help you in business. And you have to show them where even-whatever they loan you, how you're going to pay it back. But I believe that-And I know that we are successful because we don't discriminate against any texture. And we do market to all the textures in the universe. And we have placed ourselves in a location that allows that freedom of service. I don't know that that would happen if I was in a neighborhood that was limited. And I felt some of that limitations in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts]. Although we had a lot of white clientele in the South End. Their most complaint in the South End and even on Newberry Street was parking. 'Cause Newberry Street-you would come out and you would have a ticket. You got your hair done and you would come out and you would have a ticket. So there's a lot of things to be considered when you're going to go into business. Story_ID: 3256 Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you have lived your life? Speaker 2: I feel as though I have been blessed by the almighty God in more ways than one. I feel as though with the meager start that I had it was real valuable to me as an adult, than the start that some of our young folk today have. The principles and the morals and the integrity are not there. And that's what I feel as though my father [Henry Basil Battle Sr.], what he gave me allowed me to live in today's world. Everything is not always a monetary gain. But if you are-Anything that the mind can conceive, you can achieve it. And you just cannot allow someone to discriminate against you about anything. That only happens when you accept or allow it to happen. Story_ID: 3257 Speaker 1: What are your hopes or concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: That we have to stop looking for people, governments, organizations corporations to do things for us. We have to do things for ourselves. And I think we've go too complacent. And when I say complacent, we got too comfortable. And when I think of the civil rights days and the March on Washington [1963], when I go way back, and how we used to actually, you know, participate in and work for change we have to make it happen. We really have to get in and make it happen. If one door closes, we have to open up another. And this is what I'm going to do as far as the beauty industry in putting a model out there for the young people. A turn-key operation. For them to really have a wonderful career for themselves, if they choose to go into this field. I supported and I educated four girls. I had four girls in college all at the same time. My oldest one [Debra] was in graduate school and three in undergrad. We've always had a family business. And it can work. But if they're focused and if they have some vision, and if they have some goals and some dreams, it can happen. Story_ID: 3258 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered Or what do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: I would like to leave a legacy of empowering people. That I had empowered people to satisfy some of their--or to reach some of their goals and their dreams. Definitely...