 Story_ID: 662487 Speaker 1: Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. And if you could start out by stating and spelling your name, including your middle name? Speaker 2: Okay, well I go by my-- Speaker 1: Married. Speaker 2: I don't use my first name, so. Speaker 1: Oh that's right okay. Speaker 2: Denise D-E-N-I-S-E, Bradley B-R-A-D-L-E-Y, hyphen, Tyson T-Y-S-O-N [HistoryMaker Denise Bradley-Tyson]. Speaker 1: Now, how did you end up hy- hyphenating it? I th- that's true you do hyphenate it, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, now could I have your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Oh Lord, my date of birth (laughter). December 5, 1958, Chicago, Illinois, Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County]. Speaker 1: Okay. You born in--I didn't know that, okay see that's what I'm saying? (Laughter) You already proved it. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Wow, I didn't know that. Okay, and today's date and our location and your occupation? Speaker 2: Today's date is December 17, 19--I'm sorry, 2015. And we are in my home, my and my husband's [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson] home in Pleasanton, California, in Ruby Hills. Speaker 1: And your, and your occupation? Speaker 2: Internet entrepreneur. Speaker 1: Okay. And but we can say you're a entrepreneur but you've had lots of roles too, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 662488 Speaker 1: So five People magazine-ish questions. Your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite foods would be gumbo, grits, fried catfish, fried chicken and caviar. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Any time. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: So far it's been Italy. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: If you can conceive it, you can achieve it. Speaker 1: That's good. You know Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson] he liked--, Italy was his favorite place to vacation too, so. Story_ID: 662489 Speaker 1: So I want to start out by asking you about your mother and her background and what you know about her family on that side? Speaker 2: Um-hm. My mother was born in Sardis, Alabama, which is about twelve miles I think outside of Selma [Alabama]. And her family was--they were a sharecropping family. So, you know, my mother was one of those many African Americans who have as part of their history that, you know, she used to pick cotton. And she came, you know, was one of thirteen children. I guess some more to pick cotton, with. So, yeah that was my mother's family. Speaker 1: So, does she talk at all about growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you share some those stories? Speaker 2: Well, being from where she was in Alabama, yeah like so many people there was the, you know, the issue of racism. And there was always the issue of striving to get beyond their sharecropping status and eventually, you know, she and her family moved north like so many other black families migrated north. You know, seeking better opportunities for themselves and for their families. Speaker 1: So, where was she raised in the North? Speaker 2: Well, she lived in, you know, Alabama until one of her older sisters moved to Chicago [Illinois], some part of her family moved to Chicago and she eventually moved there where she met my father [Howard Bradley, Sr.]. And, but my father was in the [U.S.] military and she moved to Oakland [California] with him. So, my two older brothers [Howard Bradley, Jr. and Carl Bradley (ph.)] were actually born in the Oakland military hospital [Naval Hospital Oakland, Oakland, California]. Speaker 1: So, how far back do you know on your mother's side? Do you know to, to your grandmother any past that or grandparents? Speaker 2: I know my grandparents [Viney Smiley and Matthew Smiley]--I know that my, mother's mother was, you know, biracial and the product of, you know, like so many in terms of having been part of a slave community. My grandfather's--father, you know, side of the family I know less about. My father was a, his father [Robert Bradley] was a Pullman porter and my father's mother [Virgie Bowie Bradley] was part Native American. But, she--my father was from Texas (background noise) and she died in childbirth. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, we missed that one (background noise). Speaker 2: It's close, too. Speaker 1: Is that my phone, I thought? Speaker 2: No, no, no that's not your phone. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: So, in Oakland, okay. So, what about your, on your, your father's side, can you talk, give his name? You know, you didn't give your mother's name? Speaker 1: Oh. My mother's name's Lacey May, her maiden name was May-, Lacey May Smiley [Lacey Smiley Bradley]. Story_ID: 662490 Speaker 1: So your father, can you give his name and--? Speaker 2: Howard Bradley [Howard Bradley, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what do you know how far back do you know on his side? Speaker 2: Not very far my father was an only child and as I mentioned his mother [Virgie Bowie Bradley] died in childbirth. And his father [Robert Bradley] was a Pullman porter. So, he was raised by in part by, you know, his many uncles, his mother's uncles, which were Bowies [ph.] from Texas. Speaker 1: So, was he raise--he was raised in Texas? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, so you know, what (unclear) in Bowie, Bo- ? Speaker 2: Well, Bowie family, they have five families Dallas [Texas]; Fort Worth [Texas] area; Houston, Texas; Rose, Texas; sort of, all over Texas. Story_ID: 662491 Speaker 1: Now what was your father [Howard Bradley, Sr.] like? Speaker 2: Loved my father very much, said unfortunately he, you know, I lost my father when I was thirteen. So, you know, I wish I had more memories of him, but unfortunately I don't when he and mother [Lacey Smiley Bradley] married, he worked for the U.S. post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] in Chicago [Illinois]. He served in the Korean War, in the [U.S.] Army. Warm, loving man who, you know, loved people. Speaker 1: Now, how would you describe your mother? Speaker 2: My mother was an angel I think to everyone who knew her. You know, because she eventually became a single parent raising five kids, you know. I have not only the utmost respect for, you know, her and what she did as a single parent but certainly help me to develop empathy for all the single mothers, you know, who are charged with raising their children. And she was also a very spiritual woman. We lived a couple doors from the church [Shiloh Missionary Baptist Church, Newark, Ohio], so now at one point she was the superintendent of the, of the Sunday school. She was a long time deaconess in the church. And I would certainly describe her as a, a prayer warrior. And looked to you know, most of those who knew her in the community as a, a, a rock of support. Speaker 1: So, Denise [HistoryMaker Denise Bradley-Tyson] how did your parents meet? Speaker 2: I think they may have met through relatives but I'm, I'm not exactly sure. Which I, I wish I knew and unfortunately both of my parents are deceased now. Story_ID: 662492 Speaker 1: What was your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: You know, I was from a very loving family, lots of cousins around. Yeah, after Chicago [Illinois], I left Chicago and we ended up moving to Newark, Ohio, small very small town, with one public high school [Newark High School, Newark, Ohio], one Catholic high school [Newark Catholic High School, Newark, Ohio] and one vocational school, at school. And you know, you knew everybody on your street. We had somehow my, you know, several of my mother's sisters ended up moving to Newark at the same time. I, as I guess families did and you know, cousins ended up migrating to Ohio. So, we lived in the east end of town as did one of our, you know, other sets of first cousins. And my, another one of my aunts and her family lived in the north end of town. And now when I go back to Newark it's hard to believe that there's a, you know, there's, there's such distinctions in such a small community. Speaker 1: That's great. So when you, do you know why your fam- your parents moved from Chicago to Newark. Do you know the reason for that? And how old were you when that happened? Speaker 2: They moved to, you know, I started elementary school there [Conrad Elementary School, Newark, Ohio]. So again, I think in terms, of you know families migrating looking for opportunities. And then when my hus- my father [Howard Bradley, Sr.] went to the [U.S.] military they, my mom [Lacey Smiley Bradley] moved there in part because of, you know, her sisters were there and having support, while my father was away. Story_ID: 662493 Speaker 1: And can you describe--now, oh also I'd like first of all for you to give your siblings' name and birth order? Speaker 2: I'm the middle child, my oldest brother Howard Jr. [Howard Bradley, Jr.] who, you know, is deceased. My older brother Carl Bradley [ph.], my young-, then there's me, and then my younger br- brother Matthew Todd Bradley [Matthew Bradley (ph.)] and then my youngest brother Robert Charles Bradley [Robert Bradley]. Story_ID: 662494 Speaker 1: Do you remember the address where you grew up, where your house was located in Newark [Ohio]? Speaker 2: I want to say it was 351 Washington Street. Speaker 1: Okay. And can you, can I ask you what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: The church was a big image in my head because we lived a couple doors down from the church. I remember lots of kids' voices. One of our neighbors, actually the Woods [ph.] who lived at the end of the street actually had chickens and sometimes horses that they tethered in their backyard (laughter). And then there was a railroad track that the B and O Railroad [Baltimore and Ohio Railroad] track that ran in the back of, not through my, you know, backyard, but you know, you could see the railroad tracks sort of beyond Henderson Street [sic. Henderson Avenue], which was the street down from Washington Street. Speaker 1: And what, what smells and what's smells remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Lots of, my mom [Lacey Smiley Bradley] was a great cook and actually at one point in her life she served as a cook in the local restaurant. So, greens, cornbread, fried chicken. And then there's always the smell of gasoline, not in my home, but, you know, just based on the gasoline that cars used to then. But, it's funny when you asked that question I don't necessarily remember a smell necessarily but I just remember love and being loved. Speaker 1: And when you say, I think you talked about sounds, but did you--are there other sounds that you remember from your childhood? You talked about laughter-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, prayer. Speaker 1: And the church was that, Shiloh Baptist Church [Shiloh Missionary Baptist Church, Newark, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yes, I was-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --baptized in Shiloh and grew up in that church. Story_ID: 662495 Speaker 1: Talk about just some of your earliest memories of growing up in Newark? Speaker 2: I remember the, I don't necessarily remember, I, I remember it being a very sort of inclusive environment at least in my neighborhood. You know, not really being aware at the time of the distinctions between growing up the east end, versus the west end and versus the north end. And probably didn't really become aware of that until going to high school [Newark High School, Newark, Ohio]. But, I remember having a diverse group of friends growing up despite the fact that I grew up in a predominately black neighborhood. And I remember being able to stay out, you know, you know, down the street, you know, fairly late. I remember the fact that people didn't lock their doors then. You know, most people front doors were open. Speaker 1: And you know I, I--'cause I should disclose that this is the same town I grew up in. But, can you describe Newark, Ohio at the time? Speaker 2: You know, it's funny it's sort of if I knew then what I knew now. I mean one thing that I became aware of as I became older there's an Owens-Corning fiberglass plant [Owens Corning Fiberglass Corporation] that was in our community. And there was a fairly high incidence of cancer among neighbors that I grew up with there. The parents of, of neighbors and you know at the time I didn't connect the dots around, you know there possibly being a linkage. In terms of the pollut- pollutants that were being given off by the factory. In terms of the impact that it had on, particularly on our community, you know, being in the east end. Because the plant was in the east end of town. You know, because people were, you know, was a working class community. Again you don't know what you don't know, in terms of there were a number, you know, the, the path a lot of young men in my community took. You know, as was the, you know, choice of least my two older brothers [Howard Bradley, Jr. and Carl Bradley (ph.)] initially was people graduated and you know, both black and you know, nonblack young men. But, certainly I remember that being the case of among the African American community. Where the [U.S.] military was the next step in terms of people not being aware of other career opportunities or other pathways of people took when they graduated from high school. Speaker 1: And Newark was I mean it was primarily a white community with a small black population. And I would say, you know, there was a wealthy part, but a lot of it was lower middle class, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 662496 Speaker 1: So, what, what favorite memories do you have? That's you know, like, I and I want, and I but before I ask that tell me what kind of child you were? And I'm talking about that seven, eight, nine year old? Speaker 2: I was a very studious child. I was a very creative child. I like to, to draw. I loved old movies then and now. And I remember even then being a sort of very compassionate, caring person. Both as it related to my younger brothers [Matthew Bradley (ph.) and Robert Bradley], but also my cousins and my friends. To the point where one of my cousins was being bullied by another girl I remember, you know, getting in a fight, you know, with the girl in terms of protecting one of my cousins. Speaker 1: And would you say? Speaker 2: And maybe that was a function of having two older brothers [Howard Bradley, Jr. and Carl Bradley (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Two, two older brothers, that's right. So, you were trying to protect like, did they protect you also? Speaker 2: Um-hm, I, I think that on the whole people ask sometimes would, what's like, you know, what was it like being the girl and I said I think my two older brothers made me a tomboy. And my two younger brothers helped to balance that out, by bringing out my maternal side. Story_ID: 662497 Speaker 1: What was school like for you? And you went to elementary school? Speaker 2: Um-hm, I went to Conrad Elementary School [Newark, Ohio], which seemed like a long way from the house when I was growing up, but, wasn't. I went to Lincoln Junior High School [Newark, Ohio] and Newark High [Newark High School, Newark, Ohio]. And again I remember having a very, you know, diverse set of friends growing up. Didn't really have, didn't have a boyfriends until, you know, hung out with friends but didn't have a boyfriend until I went to college [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. But, I also because when I was in junior high school, you know, my father [Howard Bradley, Sr.] had passed away. So, I participated in the summer, you know, I forget what the name of the summer work program that they had for, you know, working class lower income families. That I also worked during, you know, I had summer jobs, you know. From a very young age, as early as I could, be employed in one of the programs. Story_ID: 662498 Speaker 1: So, what were the things, you know, 'cause I think of, you know, there was a lot of emphasis on, I mean this really even though the Civil Rights Movement was going on. And you knew things were going on. You know, you were somewhat sheltered there in some respects. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But, I, I guess well how would you describe your whole sort of living there? You know, and what impact and what things are a very much intrinsic part of you because of having grown up there? Speaker 2: Well, I think because of my, you know, for that lack of a better term, academic excellence that I may have been in a different environment from, you know, some of my peers, in terms, of being in a more mixed environment. You know, I was selected as one of the, I was a member of the homecoming court, you know, growing up in high school [Newark High School, Newark, Ohio]. Speaker 1: In a, in Newark, Ohio. Newark. Speaker 2: Newark, um-hm. And so, while I was probably, I was but because we lived in a predominately black community we, you know, white people in the community were more the exception. But, they were very welcomed in terms of people who lived there. You know, the church that I grew up in was a predominately black church [Shiloh Missionary Baptist Church, Newark, Ohio]. You know, I re- I remember, you know, very much like many black families the, the Kennedys and Martin Luther King Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. And, you know, the role that they played but again because I our community was so insolated or isolated in that it was faring, you know, felt very far removed. Even though it was it was only thirty-five miles east of Columbus [Ohio], which was, you know, the big town near Newark, Ohio. Going to Columbus was a big trip at least for my family. So, I didn't necessarily I, you know, don't feel like I lived on the front lines of, of the movement. And probably saw it more through, you know, my brothers had Afros and you know wore Flagg Brothers shoes. And you know my oldest brother [Howard Bradley, Jr.] I remember, you know, when he first listened to Prince and to Jimi Hendrix. And, you know, which is in some respect for our community at least in our environment felt a bit counterculture. That I don't remember again sort of, you know, racism I guess because we were already isolated. In that-- Speaker 1: And a minority, too-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --very much a small, too small a number to be of threat. Story_ID: 662499 Speaker 1: When your father [Howard Bradley, Sr.] passed away, how was that time period, then? Speaker 2: Horrible. Having grown up in the church, I remember very vividly that was one of my more vivid memories asking, you know God to, you know spare my father's life. And when he didn't, I remember I was very angry with God for a long period. And not so much for me but for the fact that my two younger brothers [Matthew Bradley (ph.) and Robert Bradley], you know particularly, you know, my two, well both of younger brothers not having a father around. But, you know, my father was I remember, you know, you asked about smells I mean there another smell was smoke. My father was a, you know, a very heavy smoker, Pall Malls. And, you know, he eventually succumbed to emphysema, lung cancer. But, you know in those days everybody or many people smoked. But, it certainly impacted how, you know, the strong feelings I have against smoking or about smoking, now. And, you know, I think regardless of when you lose your parents you still, you know, miss them. So, you know, I miss that he wasn't there for me when I went to, you know, the prom [at Newark High School, Newark, Ohio], you know, and other big moments in one's life. (Background noise) But, I am--was very, very thankful for the fact that I had my mother [Lacey Smiley Bradley] and, you know, my won- you know, wonderful brothers to support me. Story_ID: 662500 Speaker 1: So, you were saying that in Newark [Ohio], 'cause-- Speaker 2: You were asking about memories in, you know, things in addition to playing there was always a commitment of having to do household work. And, you know, we felt like I and my mother [Lacy Smiley Bradley] were the maids and, you know, said I used to resent being the only girl in that I felt like I had to, you know, I had to wash the dish, there was no dishwasher. So, you know, I did, you know, clean up duty after kitchen. In fact, my brothers were surprised when we got older to learn that I could cook. Because I didn't, you know, I may have observed our mother cooking but I didn't participate very much. Because it would be one more thing that I had to do as a in terms, of a division of labor, labor along, sort of gender lines. Speaker 1: So, so you purposely didn't try cook, and you were-- Speaker 2: Well, she was a gre- great-- Speaker 1: Good cook-- Speaker 2: Yeah, a great cook. Speaker 1: And what, what you said that she worked at one of the restaurants? It was, god-- Speaker 2: It was downtown Newark [Ohio]. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: I can't, its starts with a D, is there a Donatello's [ph.], or a--I can't remember, but yeah, she worked in a restaurant downtown. Speaker 1: And, and so what, I wanna go back to your father's [Howard Bradley, Sr.] death because now how did he pass away? Oh, you said because of his-- Speaker 2: Lung cancer. Speaker 1: Lung cancer, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so, what role did you have to play at that point? You know, 'cause often you're you know, you have your two older brothers [Howard Bradley, Jr. and Carl Bradley (ph.)] and you have you and you have your two younger brothers [Matthew Bradley (ph.) and Robert Bradley] and you have your mother, you know. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So who is playing what roles at that point? Speaker 2: I think for me it was pivotal in that I became much more independent and I was very mindful of not wanting to be a burden in any way on my mother. And so, you know, as I mentioned, you know, seeking out summer jobs even during school I've you know worked at the grocery store. Was a cashier at the local grocery store, Super Duper, that was right up the street. You know in addition to, you know, my academic studies, but yeah I was very mindful of pitching in and doing my parts of it. You know, my mom who was working and never remarried. And I think by that time my oldest brother may have been serving in, may have been in the [U.S.] Army. But, yes it, it definitely sort of brought on feeling the need to not be a burden to wanna be independent. Speaker 1: And how did you mother make it through? Did family come around or how did they, you know, 'cause that's, it's a lot there, five kids? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Nowadays we would think that would be total overwhelming. Speaker 2: Yeah at one point we did get food stamps and I, I, yeah you were asking about memories, I, I do remember being embarrassed about, you know, having to use them at the grocery store. So I'm glad things like that have changed. You know, just in terms of again the empathy that you have for, you know, people who, you know, face life challenges. And then just, you know, because she worked there was and I used to babysit for other, you know, people's families. But, I guess with people having, you know, based on the ages of kids and the fact that the neighborhood was much sort of a, a safe place. One could go to work and sort of, you know, expect kids to go home and to do their homework and not worry so much about them, being at home alone. Story_ID: 662501 Speaker 1: What about school, so when--were you always a good student? You know, from elementary [Conrad Elementary School, Newark, Ohio] to, junior high school [Lincoln Junior High School, Newark, Ohio], to, to high school [Newark High School, Newark, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yes, I was. Speaker 1: And so, who were some of the teachers that influenced you? Speaker 2: Probably the greatest one would have been my fourth grade teacher Mrs. Settles [ph.]. You know, who recognized and appreciated my curiosity. But, I really don't remember having a one teacher in high school. You know, there's some people who talk about sort of having, you know, influential teachers. You know, I was always very internally driven. And when I hear stories not necessarily about me, but in terms of having, you know, young people, particularly young kids of color having their ambitions thwarted by, you know, teachers telling them that they should, you know, pursue--as opposed to sort of them stretching and, and sort of thinking about pathways for kids to achieve their dreams. You know, sort of, you know maybe you should go be, you know, be a plumber, or you should do I know it happened with my own, not plumber necessarily, you know, the lack of encouragement I felt like one of my, you know, stepsons got from his, his counselor. But, I was always very internally driven. And I'd say that the one greatest gifts that my mother [Lacey Smiley Bradley] gave to me was teaching my how to pray, so a lot of my strength really has always derived from my being a very spiritual person. Story_ID: 662502 Speaker 1: Denise [HistoryMaker Denise Bradley-Tyson] so what are you thinking that you want, what are you attracted to, and what are the other things that are influencing you even to think about a world beyond Newark [Ohio]? 'Cause remember you're saying and it was the same thing with us, a trip to, to Columbus [Ohio] it seemed so far away, I'm so, so shocked that it's so, was so close. Speaker 2: My initial attraction to you know, I was either going to go to Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] or said I was al- I've always been interested in people and you know, maybe that came from well I think both of my parents [Lacey Smiley Bradley and Howard Bradley, Sr.] were very compassionate people. You know, just caring about people I initially want to study psychology and, and become a psychologist. And I'm not even sure how I came across Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] in my researching institutions. But, I did and they had a, you know, great psychology department and it was that that attracted me to toward or lead me to apply to, to Stanford. Speaker 1: And that's pretty bold because you know, the East Coast maybe there but the West Coast it seems so far away except you know, your, your brothers [Howard Bradley, Jr. and Carl Bradley (ph.)] had been born. You know least maybe your family had orientation towards--? Speaker 2: And, and actually to that point the only reason that my, you know, I, I was actually the first person in my family to go and graduate from college. My older brother has subsequently, you know, gone to complete his degree. And my younger brother now is a professor at a Midwestern University [Downers Grove, Illinois] but, in my case the reason that my mom allowed me to go, and I didn't visit the, the college before I went. It was, you know, all about its reputation. The reason that she allowed me to go and that I was able to go was one because of an academic scholarship. But, by then my grandfather [Robert Bradley] had passed away but my grandmother [Bradley-Tyson's paternal step-grandmother, Laura Bradley (ph.)] still lived in Oakland [California]. And so the reason she allowed me to go was because my grandmother lived in Oakland, so she felt like that was, you know, somebody who was, you know, that I had family was close by, should I need so and so there was, you know, in addition to going and spending holidays with, you know, friends that I had made at Stanford, you know, some of those holidays were spent with my, at my grandmother's house in Oakland. Speaker 1: 'Cause that's quite a trek there, you know; you know, for yourself and sort of sight unseen. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The, the other thing I, I'm wanting to know is how about your other friends, were they, who were your friends? And were they similarly had a disposition to, to college. Speaker 2: It's, you know, good question, some of my white friends were but, I don't stay in touch with any of them. You know, maybe it be great if I went back to a high school reunion [at Newark High School, Newark, Ohio] and saw some of those folks. There were a few that I used to stay in touch with, but, you know, haven't for a long time. And then several of my friends like, you know, Lynn Cole [ph.] or yeah they were a couple of years or a year older or a grade ahead. So, again I think, you know, I've continued to feel very blessed so it's not even as if I had role models among my peers that I sort of sought out or, or emulated. Speaker 1: So, you were, were you tracked, were you part of a tracking system? You know, how they had the kids, you I think I was tracked. But, they had kids on different tracks. So, like the academic track. Do you remember anything while you were growing up where you were in a special class, of--? Speaker 2: I think I was academically tracked as well (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 662503 Speaker 1: You apply to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. You get in and then tell me about your first day on campus? Speaker 2: It was a little overwhelming in that I think my grandmother [Bradley-Tyson's paternal step-grandmother, Laura Bradley (ph.)] brought me over. And, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's sort of like worlds apart too, right (laughter)? Speaker 2: And I think it was the first time that I truly met, you know, black, you know, teens and kids who had you know, parents who were, you know, professionals. You know, several of them in terms of, you know, doctors, lawyers. I mean I think there were those people in our community [Newark, Ohio] a few but I didn't really I didn't really, you know, know them, or I can't recall who were there were. But, that was, you know, one of those, you know, high impact moments for me. And, you know, one of my sort of biggest, sort of mistakes in, you know, filling out my application in terms of, you know, the roommate situation in I'd selected to live in Ujamaa which was sort of the black dorm. In terms of, you know, just a self selection thing for many students. And still have, you know, great friends who, you know, across all years as a result of that. But, my, my personally, personally my biggest mistake was the fact that I didn't tick off the box that I wanted a nonsmoking roommate. And therefore, you know, of the many things that, you know, the few things that I felt strongly about was smoking. I was assigned a, you know, a black roommate who went on to become a doctor, you know, young lady who when on to become a doctor, from Los Angeles [California] who's very smart. But, she smoked and I, you know, hated it. Speaker 1: And that was your roommate? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, did you stay roommates? Speaker 2: We did but yeah, yeah we managed to, you know, we both, we only roomed that one year. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. So, how was, so how as the experience because, you know, this is like a new world opening up. You know, the, the topography of, of the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] then is, you know, much different from western Ohio where we're from. And so I'm just wondering, you know, and college is a time of a lot of freedom. And you know, you have been involved, and you, you had been in a strict household. So, I'm just wondering what that was like--and this is 19- (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I had, I had my first, you know, my first boyfriend. I remember my mom [Lacey Smiley Bradley] saying when I went off to school. I just want to tell you the three things that we joked about later. You know, drugs, sex and rock and roll. And I joked I said, "You never told me whether that was a good thing or a bad thing. You just like, you know, warned me about," (laughter), "about it," (laughter)." So, you know, I had my first boyfriend, when I went to college. I went to overseas, you know, through Stanford. I did an overseas program, again-- Speaker 1: In, in your junior year or freshman? Speaker 2: In my, in my junior year. So, yeah it, it was life changing for me. Speaker 1: Were you, what were you doing during summers were you going back home, during summers? Speaker 2: My first year I worked on, in Washington, D.C. as a congressional intern. For congressman, what was it, Ashbrook [John M. Ashbrook] or for one of the Ohio legislators. Speaker 1: Oh, for the, okay it may have been Ashbrook, um-hm. Speaker 2: Which was quite a big deal, you know, a freshman. Speaker 1: That's huge. Speaker 2: My sophomore year, my sophomore or junior year I did an internship at Ogilvy and Mather. You know advertising agency in New York [New York]. So, I worked and lived in New York during the summer. And, I traveled a bit through my junior year. So, yes Stanford was a fabulous place for me as I said, life changing. Speaker 1: So, you came into Stanford in what year and you graduated in what year (unclear)? Speaker 2: I was class of '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Seven [1977]? Speaker 2: And I graduated in '81 [1981]. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's right 'cause you're Gail's, you're, you're Gail's-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --okay, so my sister Gail (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See--you know, one of the few black, you know, folks in my class. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right, that's right, okay. Gail Richardson [Gail Richardson Arnold], so, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 662504 Speaker 1: I want you to describe what Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] was and what it's black community was like in 1977? You know, when you arrive. And you know, you described living in the black house [Ujamaa], but who else is there with that we might know the names of? What is the, you know, what is the, the-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: How many-- Speaker 2: For many people, I mean, Clarence Otis [Clarence Otis, Jr.] was in law school there. [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett was at Stanford when I was there. Carol Espy [Carol Espy-Wilson] was there, there are several black players who went on to, you know, spend a few years playing professional football like James Lofton. So you know there were, you know, quite accomplished group of I'm sure I'm missing many people who, sort of a fabulous group of engaged African Americans. And the community was very supportive of each other. Speaker 1: And how much interaction was there between the blacks at Stanford and the blacks at, at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. Is there much? Speaker 2: That I don't really know. I remember when while I was at Stanford, Stanford got its first black sorority. But, the sorority had to pledge with San Jose [San Jose State University, San Jose, California] because there was no--well there was no chapter on campus. But, some people pledged through San Jose, not Berkeley. Speaker 1: And was that AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] or the, or the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it was Deltas. Speaker 1: Okay. But you didn't, you didn't pledge? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 662505 Speaker 1: Is there anything you also could describe about the experience because your summers are fabulous? You're not going home, you're going, you know, you one summer in, in New York [New York], one summer in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and then your third year you're abroad. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Right? And where did you go abroad again? Speaker 2: At the time Stanford [Stanford University] had a campus Cliveden, Maidenhead [England], which is now a posh hotel [Cliveden House] that's owned by I think Bill Gates and Bono. But, it was Stanford's overseas campus. It was outside London [England]. Speaker 1: So, you spent time in London then? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I see so how did, how did you like that experience? And I'm just, I need you to tell me how you're developing and how you're changing? And you know, what you're aware of and--? Speaker 2: I, I did a project it was at the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation] when I was there, 'cause I changed my major from psychology to double majoring in economics and communications. So, I was just always naturally curious about people and cultures. And, you know, to your point I, after I left to go to college, you know, I never went home, to work, not even Columbus [Ohio]. You know, nowhere in Ohio, now that I think about. Speaker 1: That's what I'm saying I was coming home, you're all over the place. So, so the thing I want to-- Speaker 2: I did do a training program with Federated in Cincinnati [Ohio] at one point. Speaker 1: Okay. Right, which Federated owned (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Federated Department Stores [Federated Department Stores, Inc.]. Speaker 1: They owned-- Speaker 2: Macy's [Macy's, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Macy's that's right, okay. Story_ID: 662506 Speaker 1: So you're really about seven years after me. So, I'm just trying to understand the nature of the, the black student body, you know, there at the time. And whether there were, you know, how many kids were from the Midwest? How many were from, you know, high incomes. How many more from public schools, how many from private schools? Do you know? Speaker 2: I don't have that data, but it was I mean and I think Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] remains so, it's been a great institution in terms of insuring diversity amongst its student body. So, you know, we had a, a mix or, you know, talking about the African American community. We had a mix from, you know, there were a large number from California. But, there were, you know, kids from all over, Ohio, from, you know, the East Coast, from the Midwest, from Washington State--from Texas from Arizona. Speaker 1: And you know Denise [HistoryMaker Denise Bradley-Tyson], the, the thing that you were--how the change in your major, how did that happen because economics is pretty. I mean psychology is one thing but economics? Who, who advised you or what was your desire at that point when you changed majors? Speaker 2: I decided that if I really want to understand people and how they thought that, you know, economics was a bigger determinate than studying mice. At least for me, just the impact that that has on choices that people make. As well as their own sort of psychological profile. Speaker 1: And did, were you all, were you good with math in, in high school [Newark High School, Newark, Ohio]? Speaker 2: I was good enough. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so when you, were you thinking at that point about business school at all? Speaker 2: No, that was truly influenced by my peers being at Stanford. Speaker 1: And what are people saying they want to be and do at that point? Speaker 2: I think it was easier as probably as it, it was easier certainly then because people who knew they wanted to be doctors or engineers that there were certain classes that had to be taken. Whereas those of us who were sort of more liberal arts had more of a liberal arts bent. And there was also, there was a strong contingent of people who knew they wanted to be lawyers. So, those of us who were sort of in the liberal arts space. I think we experimented a bit more, in terms of, you know, choices. But, then there were a number of people who wanted to go to law school who did do the, you know, internship in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] internship thing as well. Speaker 1: So, are you saying that [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett was in your class 'cause she-- Speaker 2: No, she wasn't in my class she was I think she was in law school I think-- Speaker 1: She was in law school-- Speaker 2: --when I was there, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, yeah, 'cause University of Michigan [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and then maybe okay, so (unclear). So, when you, now do, are--do you have much contact with the, the upperclassman? Is that--do, do, do the undergraduates at that point in time have a lot of more contact with the-- Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now what--tell me, when you're graduating, what are you thinking you want to do? Speaker 2: I think by then I wanted to work in the media business. Story_ID: 662507 Speaker 1: So, let's talk about what happened at that point when you graduate [from Stanford University, Stanford, California]? Now, do you remember graduation day? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: So, te--describe it? Speaker 2: I was, you know, my mom [Lacey Smiley Bradley] was there, my grandmother [Bradley-Tyson's paternal step-grandmother, Laura Bradley (ph.)] was there. You know, and it was sense of--less a sense of relief because it was never a question about not getting through but, certainly a feeling of great joy. And you know, having my peers there and sort of sharing the moment with them. Speaker 1: So, what are you doing right after that? What do you do, what's your job afterwards? Speaker 2: I went to work for HBO [Home Box Office] in their sales and marketing area, out of their San Francisco [California] office. Speaker 1: Oh, I oh I see so what who is how large is that office at that point and, and what are you--? Speaker 2: Not very, not very large. Speaker 1: And how long do you work there? Speaker 2: I worked there for, I was in their management training program. So, for two years or a year and a half. Then I left because I had the opportunity to join the communications team at Levi Strauss [Levi Strauss and Company] as part of their Olympic sponsorship. They were the outfitters for the '84 Olympics [1984 Summer Olympics, Los Angeles, California]. And by then I knew I wanted to go to business school. And so, I, you know, wanted another opportunity under my belt and I love sports so it was a, that was a wonder opportunity. Speaker 1: So, what were the things you did there at Levi Strauss? And how large an outfit was it there? Speaker 2: You know, it was probably as big as, I mean it was the official outfitters so during those games. You know, when I first met people like Michael Jordan and you know, the Olympic basketball team but the staging area they did the summer and winter games [1980 Winter Olympics, Lake Placid, New York]. So, I was conducting interviews, you know, arranging interviews, writing press releases. Sort of whatever was required and then actually, you know, at the games. You know, arranging interviews with people wearing, you know, the star athletes like Jackie Joyner-Kersee people wearing, doing their interviews in the Levi's official outfit, you know. The opening ceremonies outfit, fun job. Speaker 1: Right, meeting a lot of people and, and this is a, a fun time. I mean when you mention people like Jackie Joyner-Kersee and-- Speaker 2: Carl Lewis (unclear)-- Speaker 1: --Carl all of the, I mean those who are you know, those who are I even things in terms of sports. Speaker 2: Dwight Stones yeah, what's the high jumpers name, all those folks. Yeah it was-- Speaker 1: In terms of sports it was a lot of activity going on and really some stellar, you know, stellar people? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 662508 Speaker 1: So, I went from there to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Okay, so when you're applying to business schools what, what schools do you apply to? Speaker 1: Then I thought about at the time also I applied to the joint program at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]. The, which I got into the master's in journalism program. And their M.B.A. program. Speaker 2: And what made you decided and you didn't apply to Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California]? Speaker 1: Because I had gone there for my undergraduate degree I wanted a different experience. Speaker 2: And so, how, I mean, so how did you decide between the two programs, since you got into the, the joint program? Speaker 1: That was case where, you know, friends who had gone or were there. You know, friends from college [Stanford University, Stanford, California] who where there, who sort of helped to tip the scales. Story_ID: 662509 Speaker 1: So, tell me how that experience was at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] then? Speaker 2: First year it was very stressful because I think they still have this thing called hitting the screen, you know, with forced curve. So, a certain number of students don't make the cut in terms of the lower part of the class. There are kids booted out, or has to, you know, take a year off or, so yeah they have a hitting the screen essentially and maybe this is the right way to characterizes this, or flunks out the first year. So-- Speaker 1: How many (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) second year is a-- Speaker 1: How many, how many, how many students is that? Speaker 2: Is it 10 percent or? Speaker 1: And the class is that smaller, smaller than the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], how, how large is each class? Speaker 2: There are about eighty kids in the, in each section, I was in section H. Speaker 1: And how many sections did they have? Speaker 2: H, let's see no there wasn't a section J. I think it's A through H. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and so, so what did that so you, you were worried about that you might, what did you say hit the--? Speaker 2: Hit the screen. Speaker 1: Hit the screen? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so what did you find challenging, at least you had come and you have an economics background now? Speaker 2: But, it was different. Probably again I mean it was a different way of, you know, preparing, a different way of presenting, you know, case study method. So, the class is probably that, you know, where you thought I might have done the, you know, performed better. You know, it's like the, you know, the more rigorous sort of accounting classes, you know, I performed less well than in the marketing and the sort of the more creative classes then. Speaker 1: You performed less well on the more creative classes? Speaker 2: No better. Speaker 1: Better, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, and, and, and you know, and talk about Harvard Business School and what it's known for, it's definitely known for its case study method? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, and can you describe that method? Speaker 2: Well, it's taking, you know, they go out and they find real situations in the corporate world and bring them back to class and have class explore, analyze dissect and recommend. And defend your recommendations in terms of choices or strategies that a company should adopt. Speaker 1: And, and what did you find most challenging about it though, I mean besides is it, was, was it, was it, competitive, did it feel unduly competitive. And I just want you to sort of describe what the whole like the, this is two years? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: It was extremely competitive, you know, because again, because it was a, you know, forced curve there. You know, it was certain allocation in terms of people who do well. And certain allocation of, you know, people who perform in the middle and then a certain allocation of people who perform less well. And because of the nature--some of the teaching while you develop, you know, great presentation skills. I felt or felt at times, some of it was very subjective. So, I guess in some respects, you know, the, the politics. And you know, you were encouraged to work in, in teams, the politics sort of I guess this is good training ground for, it's a very corporate environment. In terms of, you know, internal politics that are a part of most corporate environments. Speaker 1: And, and it's not as if you're really inspired for corporate environment I don't think is it? Were you thinking, 'cause either there are people who are wanting to be entrepreneurs or-- Speaker 2: Or Wall Street. Speaker 1: Or Wall Street, the big Wall Street that's right, um-hm. Speaker 2: Or management consulting was another sort of top job that people sought. Story_ID: 662510 Speaker 1: Now, who, who is African American on the faculty when you were there? Speaker 2: James Cash [James I. Cash, Jr.], wow there was someone else but James Cash is the one who was the most stands out most in my mind. Speaker 1: And I think he may have just retired. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I think he did. Speaker 2: (Unclear) I think he's doing work, more board work Speaker 1: And so, who is in your class, who's, who's, who's at, at the business school there [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] when you are? Speaker 2: I don't know if you know Rob Davenport [Robert R. Davenport III]. Who else was in our class? You asked me a question now I'm drawing up blank Willis Settleton [ph.]. [HistoryMaker] Carla Harris was a year behind. Who else was in my class? People like on the other side of the equation, he runs Comcast universal [Comcast Corporation]. His father was head of ABC. Shoot I can see his face, but-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Barry Sternlicht was like in my class who started Starwood [Starwood Capital Group]. Shoot I'm drawing a blank on his face. Greg Maffei, who works for Liberty Media [Liberty Media Corporation]. (Pause) I need to study up we have another reunion coming up next year-- Story_ID: 662511 Speaker 1: So what do you do your--the job in between, you know, first and second year [at Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], where do you work? Speaker 2: Between first and second year I worked at JPMorgan [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.]. Speaker 1: In New York [New York]? Speaker 2: In New York, um-hm. Speaker 1: And then what are you thinking you want to do, or what do you do afterwards? Speaker 2: I worked in their mergers and acquisitions group. And sort of the experience sort of solidified the fact that I really thought I wanted to go into media, go the media route. Speaker 1: That M and A work that's hard right? There're a lot of hours that people are working. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And that was your second summer in New York, right? Speaker 2: Yes, second summer, but you know, it wasn't-- Speaker 1: Continuous. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: That's right, um-hm, um-hm. Story_ID: 662512 Speaker 1: So what then do you decide to do? Speaker 2: I ended up working after graduation [from Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] for CBS News, in their finance group. Speaker 1: And then what happened after that? Speaker 2: I got promoted and got moved to Chicago [Illinois] for, to the news bureau in Chicago, where I served as business manager for their Chicago news bureau. Speaker 1: What year is this? Speaker 2: I was there from '80s [1980s], '89 [1989] to '91 [1991]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so I didn't so that, so that I at that point in time was-- Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Johnathan Rodgers. Speaker 1: Jonathan Rodgers was, he worked-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) was he was head of WBBM [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois]. And Gold Harvey or it was Harvey Goldberg [ph.] there was the bureau chief. I worked for the CBS News, news bureau as opposed to a local station, which was what Johnathan headed up. But, we were housed in the same building. Speaker 1: So, what were some of the issues you were dealing with? You know, at for your position 'cause CBS they had had I mean Johnathan got brought in because some tumultuous period, you know, where they felt they needed-- Speaker 2: I was really focused on cost cutting. Because I think the, I think Tisch had, the Tisch family had bought CBS. And, you know, they were putting new metrics in place in terms of productivity for, you know, they're producing. So, I was evaluating, you know, there was large roster stringers that they worked with freelancers. And you know, assessing cutting some of their foreign news bureaus, and so, a lot of cost cutting. Speaker 1: And were you successful, were they successful with that, ul- ultimately? Speaker 2: Painfully so. Speaker 1: 'Cause those are who the news firms hated (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, so not, not a beloved a, not a beloved position within the organization. Speaker 1: So, what if you had stayed at CBS, what would you have wanted to then? Speaker 2: If I had stayed at CBS, maybe been a Howard Stringer, who used to, you know, run the network. Story_ID: 662513 Speaker 1: But then what happens after that, so in 1991? Speaker 2: I got recruited in by Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation] and moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: And that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I worked on the, in the production finance area. One of the programs it was in their syndication division I worked on was 'The Arsenio Hall Show.' Speaker 1: So, this was when he was launching his show? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so, Ar- during that time do you meet people like [HistoryMaker] Debra Martin Chase? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so I met all of those folk when I moved to L.A. So, I think she and I moved out there around the same time. Speaker 1: Right, 'cause she may have been coming from New York [New York]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I think at that point. And, and with, 'The Arsenio Hall Show,' now, were you there from--can you just describe it instead of me asking questions? Just describe the, you know, at what point you come in, who's the team involved? Speaker 2: Well, Arsenio had his management team that was involved. And I was on the Paramount team in terms of doing all the, the numbers in terms of its profitability, because it was a show that was made for syndication. And it was a show that people didn't have a lot of confidence or, or questioned whether it would work, because Johnny Carson had been on the air ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'] for so long. And so, the Paramount took greater risk with this show or people who were willing to try it at stations across the country, who were willing to try it they tried it on the basis of paying Paramount less of a smaller licensing fee to carry the show. But, the tradeoff was that Paramount got to keep more of the advertising revenues that were generated from the spots that were sold during the show. Which proved to be a great gamble on their part because as, you know, everyone knows Arsenio Hall ended up being a hot, hot, hot property. You know, a show that broke the stereotype broke the mold. And it was attracting younger demos, younger demographics which people were willing to pay a lot more money for in terms of, you know, that coveted demo like you know, twenty-four to thirty-five [years old] or so it was attracting a younger, younger demographic. That advertisers wanted to reach, which meant that we could command a lot of money for the advertising spots that were sold during the show. Speaker 1: And what, and that, it was, it was hot until he had [HistoryMaker] Minister Louis Farrakhan on the show. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then it went poof. And he went poof. Speaker 2: Interesting huh. Speaker 1: So, so and you know, and then recently he had his show and he had all the celebrities that I couldn't--you know, but times had changed. Speaker 2: Changed. Speaker 1: So, I did, were you enjoying that kind of work? You know, at that point doing the business side? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a fun, you know, that was a fun time, fun show. And I also I had responsibility for the Tribune Broadcasting [Tribune Broadcasting Company, LLC] portfolio which included programs like 'Joan Rivers' ['The Joan Rivers Show'], you know, which was another talk show that was in syndication. So, that was a great time to sort of be at the studio and to work on and have the opportunity to work on programs like that. Story_ID: 662514 Speaker 1: And who are looking up at in the, in the industry 'cause really Denise [HistoryMaker Denise Bradley-Tyson] aren't you at that point part of a, a new crop of black professionals coming into Hollywood? And especially on the, you know, on the business side (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, one person who I looked up to, I still greatly admire who is head of, who's, who's in the marketing area at Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation] at the time was Cheryl Boone Isaacs. Who is, you know, in her second I think second term as head of the Motion Picture Association [Motion Picture Association of America]. So, she was an executive who I greatly admired and looked up to there. Speaker 1: And, and so what was the business of the business. I mean first of all, was it exciting to be on the business side of the business, as opposed to the people who are on the creative side? And then, what is it being, you know, was, was L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and Hollywood all that you somewhat expected? Speaker 2: (Laughter) All that I expected. I don't, I don't know it was certainly a city that, you know, gave new meaning to because associated with the hot show and I had access to tickets [for 'The Arsenio Hall Show']. And it was a show that everybody either wanted to be or be affiliated with or be part of the studio audience. You know, you got lots of calls about tickets. And I think like any other community, you know, L.A. can be very much in terms of the circles or degrees in terms of, you know, who do you know? And, you know, sort of being part of the inner circle, or sort of outside of the circle. Because, you know, the town does revolve around the entertainment industry. I mean I think that's probably become more, more pronounced in my second term as president of San Francisco Film Commission. A role that I was appointed to as, appointed to the commission when Gavin Newsom was mayor. And reappointment when our current mayor, Mayor Ed Lee [Edwin M. Lee] became mayor. And then, (unclear) voted by my peers when my first and now second term as president. And certainly sort of the difference in terms of being in San Francisco [California] and trying to attract film making here versus, you know, taking for granted that so much of it sort of happens on the ground. But, I'm guess I'm looking through, at it from a different lens. In terms of now looking at more the ic- economic impact it has on entire city. So, I don't think I appreciated the economic impact as much that, you know, because you're sort of in it. You know, you certainly know that it creates employment opportunities for those people who are working in the business every day. But, not sort of the, the reverberations in terms of all the, the communities and families that get supported by having a thriving production community in the city. Story_ID: 662515 Speaker 1: So you had, it was almost like you had a really from the time you were at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and through this time, really almost dream jobs in a lot of ways. You know, that you, you were getting. And so, what are you wanting to do, now do you get married around this time? Speaker 2: I worked a couple other places before I got married. I pitched in--always having sort of that duality in terms of loving, culture and cultural drivers. I after Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation] I pitched, did a entrepreneur stint which I sort of almost not knowing what I would be doing now. But, pitched QVC [QVC, Inc.] on the first African themed merchandising program successfully pitched them on doing a program. Because sort of seeing that was a time when everybody was embracing or you know, one of the times when people wanted to wear things that were reflective of their culture. And seeing that there were all these artisans out there who were only able to sell their product via craft fairs and street fairs. But, seeing that there was this thing called QVC and HSN [Home Shopping Network] where people were going and selling, you know, lots of product or making a business out of it. So, I took all that data and in terms of black spending power, what trends were in and pitched them on--successfully sold into them idea of doing an African theme merchandising program. And was actually on air, you know, selling product for a couple of the programs that they did. So, I did that, and I said the lesson learned from, from that was that, you know, you need to have your deal upfront. Because it's like why do they need you, they see that the, the model works. Other people see the model works and go to themselves so I didn't protect my, I didn't protect the space that I was in there. But, it was a great experience. Story_ID: 662516 Speaker 1: And so I went from there [QVC, Inc.] to working at Warner Brothers [Warner Brothers Entertainment, Inc.]. Again leveraging my experience in terms of, and love of product and merchandising to ending up working in Warner Brothers consumer products. Where I was charged with I, you know, working with the team to help revitalize the Looney Tunes franchise. And it was done through Michael Jordan's 'Space Jam.' And so, I developed the branding strategy for that movie, for Warner Brothers consumer products which was hugely successful. From there I went to-- Speaker 2: Now, how large was the, your budget for that? And how much, how, what does success mean, in terms of revenue? Speaker 1: They made over 100 million [dollars] from the licensing products associated with the movie, which then was a big number. Well it made in several hundred million I'm sorry, several hundred million on the, the licensing. The licensing was a much bigger sort of revenue generator I think than the movie itself. But, then a lot those movies exist to sell merchandise. Speaker 2: (Unclear) this was, this was really a new trend at that point don't you think? I mean this and that, you're talking about in some respects is that called product placement? Speaker 1: Sort of. It was licensing development where you are granting companies the right to put, you know, Looney Tunes on a t-shirt, on a toothbrush. And probably the closest analogy that sort of, you know, in terms of tapering to the present time is you look at all the, the product tie ins. And product that's been developed around the 'Star Wars' movie ['Star Wars: The Force Awakens']. So, everything that you can think of from, you know, cradle to grave we were selling. You know, with the Looney Tunes image you were paying a whole lot more if it included Michael Jordan. Always very savvy about his use of his image. Speaker 2: In fact he just, he just won a big case and donated the money to-- Speaker 1: To Chicago [Illinois] charities. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I think that was just announced yesterday. Story_ID: 662517 Speaker 1: You're moving like this and this way. Now, how are you making decisions about where you go to next? Or are opportunities coming to you? Speaker 2: It was a combination of both. And you know, unlike some, I'm one of those people who spent careers at companies--yeah, so I think I was more open to opportunity and adventure which may not have been probably the best decision, but, certainly made for a sort of more filling life. So, from there I ended up being a put in the role of director of international marketing for Warner Home Video. Which afforded me the opportunity to travel all over the world working with Warner Home Video offices around the globe. Which was again for someone who's loved--from Newark, Ohio who's always loved travel that was a dream job. Speaker 1: And Warner was very popular back then, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What properties did it, what, what- Speaker 2: 'Batman' ['Batman: The Animated Series'], Kevin [Kevin Conroy] they did a shoot I--. They had the, the TV, you know, big TV shows, what was the show that George Clooney was on, he stared on 'ER.' Another big fran- they have a lot of big movies. Yeah, huge movies, but yeah 'Batman' is the, the franchise that comes to mind. But, lots of franchise movies. Speaker 1: And so, who are you cutting deals, with thinks like that, like internationally? What were, what were your charge? Speaker 2: I was, working with our offices on the ground to help them develop marketing campaigns and supporting them in their sales efforts on the ground in the territories that they working in. And developing those campaigns for, you know, working in conjunction with the domestic partners. And one of the properties that I led the charge on and actually consulted the theatrical marketing group, in terms of taking some of the ideas that I developed was on 'Space Jam.' So, that was one that I sort of worked on from its inception all the way through to its video release internationally. Story_ID: 662518 Speaker 1: Who are you meeting then? Who, who else is in your space that's African American or, you know, or, or female? Who, who else is in your space? Speaker 2: (Unclear) I mean, there certainly are people like my dear friend who's as you know a star, [HistoryMaker] Debra Martin Chase. (Unclear) Cheryl Boone Isaacs, you know, Nina Shaw, you know, who's an extraordinary entertainment lawyer. The woman from my class at business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] who has been successful as a writer, producer Jacque Edmonds [Jacque Edmonds Cofer]. Who else, but, you know, it was such a fluid environment in terms of, you know, the music people, the TV people. The movie people, so particularly among people of color who you saw socially. I think who else was, but there weren't many people and there still aren't that many people in the, the distribution end of the business. And you know, again lots people who have product but, you know, not as many people in terms of outlets in which to, to show product. Speaker 1: And were-- Speaker 2: Now, in fact Magic Johnson or you know, Earvin I think it was during that time I lived there, the Baldwin Hills theater [AMC Magic Johnson Crenshaw 15; Rave Cinemas Baldwin Hills Crenshaw Plaza 15 + Xtreme, Los Angeles, California], which you know, was kind of a, a big deal in terms of a black owned movie theater in terms an outlet in the community. Speaker 1: That, now what about the movie theater? Speaker 2: I think that was around time that during that time too was when, you know, Earvin "Magic" Johnson, the Baldwin Hills theater opened. Speaker 1: Well, that, that he got involved in, in the ownership of movie theatres? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, this is after the whole AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] thing with Magic Johnson? No, 'cause I thought he got involved with those after his--I may be wrong, maybe I'm wrong. Speaker 2: Yeah. Maybe it was after that. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know, after a certain age it all gets blurry (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 662519 Speaker 1: When I left Warner Home Video, you know, I'd left, I got married and I moved to London [England]. And so, you know, London represented a new chapter in my life, you know, in several respects. And while the marriage was short lived, my time in, you know, I continued to live and work and be blessed to have some wonderful opportunities, in London. And one of the highlights was certainly through my employment by the-- Speaker 2: Arts Council [Arts Council England]. Speaker 1: But, I was a part of the team but through my working for Hayward Gallery [London, England]--what's that place called now, we can start over I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: That's okay-- Speaker 1: Shoot it's called? Now I've never blanked on that one. World festival hall, Hayward Gallery, it's the equivalent of YBCA [Yerba Buena Center for the Arts, San Francisco, California] right on the Thames [Thames River]. The Southbank Centre [London, England], duh. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Sorry. Speaker 2: So, it was the Southbank Centre? Speaker 1: Did I, did I affect my--? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, but you were finished speaking then. Speaker 1: Okay, sorry. So, through my work with the Southbank Centre-- Story_ID: 662520 Speaker 1: So you can go on. Speaker 2: So, when I moved to London [England] after I got married I had the opportunity to work with the Southbank Centre [London, England], as part of Africa 05. Well, Africa 05 was a yearlong initiative under Tony Blair, to promote all things African, through arts and culture of the Africa throughout the UK [United Kingdom]. And one of the lead venues for the yearlong celebration was a gallery that I was associated with, the Hayward Gallery [London, England], which was a partner in bringing the, what still maybe the largest exhibition of contemporary African art, to have been shown in one place. So, it was the Museum Kunstpalast [Dusseldorf, Germany], the Pompidou museum [Centre Georges Pompidou] in Paris [France] the Mori Museum [Mori Art Museum] in Tokyo [Japan] were all partnered in showing this exhibition. And so, for that I was charged with helping to them to well to bring synergy across the organization. In terms of the all the, the multidisciplinary arts that were going on at the Southbank Centre in terms of their literary program, their music program. All the around supporting this exhibition of art and, you know, the overarching thing that I was charged with was helping to diversity the audience composition of their visitorship, which had been predominantly Anglo. And during that time it shifted from to about 60, 40 [percent] and we really enliven the space with music, with poetry reading to get out to the community. And then it was also part of Africa 05 that under Blair were other institutions, that program was sort of spearheaded by, oh shoot I can remember Gus' [Gus Casely-Hayford] last name. but, I was part of the steering committee were we worked with the Royal Festival, I sorry, with the Royal Festival Hall as part of the Southbank Centre. But, the, the galleries on the Thames [Thames River], Royal Academy of Arts [London, England], local cafes, it was just, it was I'll have to show you posters from the exhibition. But, it truly sort of brought a energy and pride across particularly London. And behind in terms of educating at least momentarily I think sort of fostering new race relations. Because, you know, of the things was a learning for me at least living in London, is African Americans are viewed differently than from Africans versus blacks who are from the Caribbean. There in terms of there's a real, you know, distinction made among, you know, depending where you're from. You know, where you're from as a person of color, you know, particularly a black person. The other thing that was a, a big learning was, you know, their black history month is inclusive of the Indian diaspora in other in terms of, you know. Them recognizing that they are also, you know, colored people, or you know, black people. Or what the, you know, what the definition of even being black is, is a bit, is broader. Story_ID: 662521 Speaker 1: And how did that, how did London [England] change your whole view of things? And what expats [expatriate], American expats did you, you know, meet there too? Speaker 2: Did I meet there? Speaker 1: Or that were there and you know, 'cause it, it has a decent number of--right? Speaker 2: One of the people was Sherry [ph.] living there, was Connie Jackson [Constance Jackson], you know who's from Chicago [Illinois]? A couple of my dear friends had married Brits. But, they became friends over, you know while I was there. There was a friend who I'd known from Chicago, Lynn Blades who, you know married a filmmaker [Damian Jones]. British filmmaker, whom she met in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. We both ended up in L.A. at the same time. Who lives here, there are, there are people like shoot, I'm drawing a blank on Edith's last name who works for Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.] who did the stint there. Edith Cooper did a stint there while I was living there. So, it's a continuing sort of a continuous flow of people who are either living in the city or passing through the city. But, then there are but the, the other wonderful thing is that, you know, in terms of being the United States of Europe is the fluidity with through which people can move around from Paris [France] to, you know, other places in Europe. In terms of people, you know, traveling a lot and passing through. Speaker 1: And what did that tell you about, I know you said you know, when we were off camera, that you miss your, your family. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But, what did that, what, what did, what did that give you in terms of a sense of more of a worldview? Or did, did that, or even of the African diaspora or of Europe? I'm you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. And I think one of things certainly was that, you know, as somebody who is a part of, you know, news organizations and sort of having a, you know, continuing to sort of have a big appetite for, you know, in taking news of the world. As (unclear) you know, it's the filter is different in terms, you know through which issues are covered, which is I guess is to be expected. Just like they would be if we were in China versus, you know, how they're filtered here versus being in Europe. It's even as it relates to, you know, one of the things that reminded of here just, you know, gun laws, you know. Guns are outlawed in the UK [United Kingdom]. And you know, while they went through a period where, you know it was when I first moved there it's like why are there no trash cans in the, the Tube [London Underground], you know, the subway system. And it's because they had this history of sort of the, you know, Irish bombed the, you know, the terrorist bombs that were done which has, you know, that's changed but I remembered being there during, you know, one of those sort of happened near where I lived. And, you know, the more of the fear of that family has just wondering if, you know, with you being far away and sort of how you're impacted. But, I think now the world is such a, you know, people are, the, the people travel the world is such a big place. And with, you know, technology the walls that were, that previously existed, because people didn't have the ability to travel in the manner that some people, you know it's a disparity in terms of people's mobility. I think that the world is a much more open place in terms of people learning about different cultures. Speaker 1: And so, you were there how long? Speaker 2: I lived there from this time from 2000 to 2005. Speaker 1: So, that's a long time. That, that's a long time. Sometimes people end up staying when they're there that long unless it's for a corporation. Story_ID: 662522 Speaker 1: What brought you back to the United States, then? Speaker 2: I actually got recruited and moved back by the Museum of the African Diaspora in San Francisco [California]. Which I had helped with fundraising while I was there. When they found out what I was doing through folks I knew who were involved with the museum. That I helped arrange to help them get access to the exhibition and to people who were involved with the program for them to do a fundraiser here but it was the work that I did there that I enabled to be given consideration as a candidate for the job was executive director which I opened the museum. Speaker 1: So, what museum, give the name of the museum? Speaker 2: The Museum of the African Diaspora of San Francisco that's housed in the, it's part of the St. Regis hotel and condominium complex [St. Regis Residences]. Speaker 1: So, who are the organizers of that museum and what was the vision? And what did they see in you? Speaker 2: (Unclear) so, the museum was a conceived and carved out when Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] was the mayor. This hotel was going up and there were lots of ideas in terms of, you know, public space, public private partnerships and in terms of ideas being considered for putting in the space. And there was no such institution that was dedicated to our culture, you know in San Francisco. And so, he was really the one who (unclear) I think you have to give credit to sort of blessing with going forward. And then there was a whole, there were a whole community of people who were engaged in the museum before I even knew it existed. People like [HistoryMaker] Belva Davis, like Dr. Ernest Bates, Dr. Jewelle and Dr. Jewelle Gibbs [HistoryMaker Jewelle Taylor Gibbs] and-- Speaker 1: Lowell is his, her husband [sic.]. Speaker 2: Not Lowell, Lowell's the son [Lowell Gibbs]. Speaker 1: Okay Dr. Jim (unclear). Speaker 2: Jim, James [HistoryMaker James Lowell Gibbs, Jr.], yes the Gibbs. (Unclear), that means there was, you know, it was, a wonderful case where every, you had people working in the community. You had, you know, people coming together from all over people like, you know, Pamela Joyner [Pamela J. Joyner], people coming together, who lived in the city to help to, you know. And they did lots of (unclear) with the community in terms of getting community input. You know and Belva was the fearless leader in terms of on the fundraiser front for making institution happen. And I guess I was very fortunate that I was, I think I was one of the last candidates looked at for the role. And I forget the recruiting firm they were working with. So, my first interview was actually conducted via phone before they flew me over for a second interview. And I think what they saw in me was my passion for what they were trying to do. My ability to connect the dots. My ability to and I'm very much about collaboration and synergy and having worked with a number of institutions across the world. And I had a ma- marketing background in terms of helping to build the brand of the museum. I think all those factors, you know, weighed in their decision to hire, you know, to hire me. You know, and maybe my Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], you know, degree and Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] M.B.A. didn't hurt. Story_ID: 662523 Speaker 1: Well, you would have been a real find for a startup black museum [Museum of the African Diaspora, San Francisco, California], Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And were they interested in your marketing background too in the, the merchandising and things like, was that? Speaker 2: All that came into play and-- Speaker 1: So, so talk about what did you to launch the museum, 'cause it's one thing to have a building, it's another thing to open an institution. So, tell, tell us what you did? Speaker 2: You know, we had lots of PR [public relations]. And you know, lots of access and large part that's to people like, you know, Belva [HistoryMaker Belva Davis]. Even though, I had worked with another local PR firm. As you know, San Francisco [California] said it's a little town with a big footprint. But, everything from, you know, I secured a cover story in The New York Times arts section to a piece in the Financial Times. I guess in some respects, you know, a visionary, but we also I mean in terms possibilities. You know, just as I was when I was growing up in terms of if you believe it you can achieve it. To, you know, the logo were already served, they had already been working with a firm out of L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to come up with the, the logos and the branding. So, it was a question of how the, you know, the implementation in terms of, of applying those across merchandise. How I opened the, with my staff, opened the gift store for the institution. Established the pricing model, the opening hours, I mean the hours of operations. I mean it truly was a, a start up, yeah. Speaker 1: So, the, the whole thing is that this would have been the first of its kind on the West Coast, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I think there, there had been a conscious decision to go after, to focus on the diaspora-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --with it, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, with, how-- Speaker 2: And the thing that I was particularly attracted to about what they were doing too as someone who had lived abroad and traveled extensively is that in someone who feels very passionately about education. And, you know, using the arts as a tool to educate and break down barriers so that they were--the museum was committed to again connecting the cultural dots. You know, showing first and foremost that we are all African. And how culture emanated from Africa, how it manifests itself in terms of its people migrated, you know, throughout the world. And, so that was a very powerful, for me, that was a very powerful mission that the museum had. Speaker 1: And what did it take so, how long did it take from the time you were hired to the museum opening? Speaker 2: It was very short. I was hired in--I think I was hired in April or May, but then wrapped things up--I started in June and we opened in December. Speaker 1: That's a quick turnaround. Speaker 2: Um-hm. As I said, you know a lot of things were already in place. And they already had a wonderful, you know, Lizzetta Collins was the curator, Dr. Lizzetta Collins [Lizzetta LeFalle-Collins], and had put together wonderful opening exhibit. So, again my job was sort of, you know, then starting to work with the, the board on the gala. And you know, all the wonderful things that go along with the keeping a nonprofit going on the fundraising side. Speaker 1: And, and how much did you, how much did you raise, ultimately? Speaker 2: For our first gala (unclear) I think we raised over, around five hundred thousand [dollars] on that one. But, then there's sort of the ongoing, in terms of finding you know underwriters for the ongoing institution. And, you know, for exhibitions schedule. But, these things become and you look at a place like, you know, the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], which has such a wonderful team in place. Both, in terms of, you know, under [HistoryMaker] Thelma Golden but as well as, you know, their board. In terms of, having their model down so you look to places like that to borrow from best practices. In terms of, you know, people who've been doing it at such a high level for a long time. Story_ID: 662524 Speaker 1: That's true because they're not in the museum world, there're, there're great variances, you know, in terms of black museum world, in terms of presentation. Speaker 2: So, even while I was running MoAD [Museum of the African Diaspora, San Francisco, California], you know, [HistoryMaker] Lonnie Bunch came and visited. And now we know what, you know, the, the wonderful thing that will hopefully is going to happen in 2016. In the form of, the African American museum [National Museum of African American History and Culture] in Washington, D.C. But, just again, you know, him looking at, we were calling MoAd then sort of museum 2.0 make a concerted effort to embrace technology. As part of our remit in terms of, because the physical space is not that large in terms of calling ourselves a museum without wall, to do online exhibitions. As well as being a first voice museum in terms of capturing peoples stories and their oral histories. You know, and which is a wonderful thing about what you do at, you know, black HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] in terms of trying to preserve, you know, voices that aren't often heard or that people can benefit from hearing. Speaker 1: So, so when you so you, you stayed through, were you, you, so wait a minute, it took a year and then how long were you still affiliated? How long did you stay on with MoAD? Speaker 2: I was there until 2007, sometime in two thousand--yeah 2007. Speaker 1: So, two, was it two years? Speaker 2: A little over two years. Speaker 1: Two years, a little over two years. And, and what, what did you, what do you think because I was just thing that you know, you were able to use your journ- you know, you had been interested in journalism. And you know, getting placements of articles in different places and raise a profile. So, you were using both your advertising and journalism training? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: To do that, but what would you say that you also learned about running a cultural institution, like that? Speaker 2: Constituencies I mean there's. When you're running a public entity because, you know, that it is a not for profit that, you know, supported by the city. You know, there's the politics of you have an entity and you know, all the different communities that you need to serve and engage. And you know, so that involved even working with the San Francisco Unified School District in trying to get, you know, to ensure that MoAD was a museum of the African diaspora was a place that was on the sort of museum visiting list. For schools to collaborating with the other culture entities in the city to having to go and lobby the city for more funding. To dealing with the parking department to try to get a permit so that no one could park in front of the museum. And having a bus shelter put in. So, it was, you know, dealing with things at the highest level from dealing with board relations to perspective funders all the way down to ensuring that you know that yeah you had the right security team on staff. To ensuring that the building was open and clean and, you know, for visitors to come through. Story_ID: 662525 Speaker 1: So why do you leave, then? Speaker 2: I left in part because I said one of my big lessons again sort of, was board fac- yeah that was my first board facing role. And I think I did an amazing job of running the museum [Museum of the African Diaspora, San Francisco, California] and, you know, all the things that I thought I was charged with doing. In terms, of overseeing the entity but I don't think I did as good a job in terms of managing of my board relationships. And-- Speaker 1: What do you mean, by that? Speaker 2: You know, you have several bosses when you are running, when you're running an initiation and ensuring that everyone was engaged. I think too the institution at the time because it was being, you know, was on such a fast track to get built that, you know, they were still dealing with some challenges around the financial part of the entity. And felt like they wanted to go a different direction in terms of trying to retire the intuition's debt which, you know, had been hopefully is, you know, almost settled. Speaker 1: So, what direction did they want to, go in, in retiring the debt? Speaker 2: Just maybe needing, you know, I probably would rather have that part sort of off the-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay, no that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, just-- Speaker 1: It's not a problem, okay sorry no it's not a problem. Speaker 2: You know I'm happy to have, you know, I had nothing to do with that, but just sort of off the record. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: In terms of feeling like being made the fall guy for people who were there before. In terms of cost overruns of people-- Speaker 1: I see, I see. You know, boards are--they can be very complicated. And I guess, that could be the same thing with corporations but non profits you know, can be, you know-- Speaker 2: Even more so. Speaker 1: --more complicated organizations to, to navigate. And it was a high profile project here in town, right? Speaker 2: So, I think I, I was the right person to open the museum but maybe not the right person, you know, for its ongoing operation. Speaker 1: And since that time I think it's maybe now on its third director, right? Speaker 2: There were a lot of interims in between maybe, yeah maybe the others were interims, but yeah they've had several directors. Speaker 1: And now it's Linda Harrison? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and so she's trying to put a new face and really raise money too, right. Speaker 2: Yes. Okay, so Denise [HistoryMaker Denise Bradley-Tyson] then what--after that then, that's what, you know, after you left MoAD, what did you, what--'cause that's when you became part, affiliated with the San Francisco Film Commission or is it? Speaker 1: Yes, that was after the museum. But, probably another milestone for me was that my mother [Lacey Smiley Bradley] passed around the same time. And you know, part of what I spent time, I was very close to my mother is took the time in terms of healing but also going home to Ohio. To you know close up our little house and deal with the all stuff that, you know, is associated with her having lived in you know the same house since my youngest brothers [Matthew Bradley (ph.) and Robert Bradley] were born. Speaker 2: So, that must, that was an emotional experience, right it was (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, deeply. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 662526 Speaker 1: But I think the love of travel, sort of the one time I felt that it was a, a curse and we were talking about my mother's [Lacey Smiley Bradley] passing, whom I was very close to. I was, overseas when she passed. And I had gone over for the opening of international museum of slavery [International Slavery Museum] in Liverpool [England]. And, you know, she passed while I was, you know, there for that. So, in terms of one just again sort of the, the empathic side of me just the feeling for people who don't have the opportunity to have closure. You know, I know it's whenever you lose a person but I think that there's something that particularly strikes one, when you don't have that opportunity to say goodbye. And then the notion of trying to make your way home to deal with everything. Speaker 2: It's hard. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a very difficult time. And not only sort of the love of friends and support but that was probably a, moment where my now husband who was, you know, my friend, you know, where he really sort of he endeared himself even more to me. And our bond was probably strengthened by the fact he came for my mother's funeral. And the day that he got back home, you know, his father [Moses Tyson, Sr.] passed away. But, his father, you know, he always said he felt like his father was waiting for him to get back. So, when he got off the plane for having come for my mom's funeral he went straight to the hospital. And, you know, had the opportunity to say, you know, goodbye to his father. Speaker 2: So, both of your parents passed away so, so close to each other? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I see, okay 'cause his father had been a major role in his life also. So, so did, give your hus- husband's name. Speaker 1: Bernard Tyson [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson]. Speaker 2: And so, you had started to see him then at that point? Speaker 1: We were, yeah-- Speaker 2: More friends. Speaker 1: Friends (unclear). Speaker 2: Friends, more friends okay. And so, what, how long did it take you, the healing period at that point over the--you know, 'cause clearing up, so you when back to close up the house? Speaker 1: Um-hm, I mean, sometimes I still miss my mom. But, I mean that's--I think that's a natural thing. But, it's one of the times that I remember most again in terms of the spiritual grounding that she gave me one of the things that one of the last conversations with her was us praying together on the telephone saying The Lord's Prayer together. And so, now, you know, when I say The Lord's Prayer you know, I hear my mother's voice in my head. So, it's interesting in terms of how that connection sort of remains. Story_ID: 662527 Speaker 1: And so, Denise [HistoryMaker Denise Bradley-Tyson] the two of you, you and Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson] ultimately got married? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Right, and was there a job in between there, that I missed? Speaker 2: I'd done consulting, fundraising, consulting in arts projects. Consulting, you know I worked with the arts commission in San Francisco [San Francisco Arts Commission] to develop strategic plans for one of its, the Bayview Opera House [San Francisco, California], in terms of ensuring that it, its sustainability and helping it to get its funding restored with the city, which is a community center that is--services a diverse community to working with the San Francisco tourism diversity committee on a project in terms of trying to ensure that there are more people of color employed by the hospitality industry in the city. So, I've done various, you know, consulting projects during--and I've taken on the role since I've married him of being the stepmom [to Bernard Tyson, Jr., Alexander Tyson and Charles Tyson]. Speaker 1: So, talk about your marriage to, to, to Bernard? And this, this period of your life that you're in right now? Speaker 2: Marrying Bernard has been, you know, great, I--part of one of my mottos too, is, it, it pays to do good in meaning that, you know, you know, you don't know how sort of being kind is going to come back to you. In the case of him, I met Bernard when I was the executive director of the Museum of the African Diaspora [San Francisco, California]. And I did a presentation to him and his Boule chapter [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], which was at the invitation of Dr. Ernest Bates, who is the largest donor on my board at MoAD at the time. And through my presentation, Bernard got Kaiser [Kaiser Permanente] to make a significant contribution to the museum. And so, I got to know him professionally first and then we became friends. And, you know, it evolved so one, it's wonderful in that, you know, the foundation, having a friendship and respect for each other. I think especially, you know, when you're a little older and getting married. You know, it makes a difference, but he's been a wonderful person, partner, support, love in my life. Story_ID: 662528 Speaker 1: What do you think about your journey? Do you ever reflect upon your journey? Speaker 2: Yes and I think--I don't think that I would have. You know, there's some people who can sort of see their future very clearly I don't think that I could have given--sort of the nature of my journey was not a sort of linear one, you know. No, I could not have foreseen sort of the place that I would be in right now. Story_ID: 662529 Speaker 1: What do you want to do going forward do you think? Speaker 2: Well, I just recently started inspiredluxe.com, which is a website devoted to supporting artisans and artisanal traditions around the world. In some respects I feel like that's another sort of culmination of all the different sort of thing and experiences that I've had. In terms, you know, loving art, loving culture, loving people. And wanting to utilize technology and my marketing experience to share those people and what they're doing with the community, buying community in terms of making a difference. So, through that, that's one way and through the work that we're doing there. You know, we're working with a number of women's cooperatives, working with initiatives on the ground in Africa that support HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. Getting ready to start doing some work with an organization that's working with artisans in Haiti. Working with several woman entrepreneurs. So, wanted to sort of make a difference through that. And but, the, the nice thing is in terms of trying to at this point, to trying to have a, a balanced life. In terms of wanting to be present and available to spend quality time with my husband [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson], with my family, friends. And being a great mom, stepmom to, you know, my three stepsons [Bernard Tyson, Jr., Alexander Tyson and Charles Tyson]. So yeah just wanting to serve them in some small way to continue to make a meaningful contribution and make a difference in the world. Starting with, you know, my local community. Speaker 1: And, and which has become your adopted home is San Francisco [California], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California]. And I, you know, that the, the piece you have right there is, is a gift but it's also one of the artists, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. This particular artisan is from India between Indian actually and Baltimore [Maryland], who makes beautiful carvings. But, again this one's infused with sort of the history of their culture in terms of the, you know, the, you know, gods and goddesses, you know, who are part of their culture. And the ring I'm wearing is actually, you don't see black cameos very often but this is a, an old cameo that I found at Grays antique market [Grays Antique Centre] in London [England]. Speaker 1: Oh wow, it's beautiful. Speaker 2: But, one of things is that continuing to sort of and actually I said since you're asking, I mean the earrings are again sort of telling a story. These are black, black Moors. The black Moors who were such an integral part of trading throughout Europe. So, for me in terms of, you know, still you can wear, you know, things that sort of you can look and feel good in terms of one giving back. To making a difference on the ground but also sharing being a, another to share history and to educate people as you sort of walk through life. Story_ID: 662530 Speaker 1: I want to ask you, because as I was telling Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard J. Tyson], our collection has people older, you know, that are primarily, it's, you know, it was started fifteen years ago so it has. Majority of the people are mid-seventies and above or even now it maybe more, yeah mid-seventies and above. And as we start to move, you know, down the age group, which was always our intent, you start hearing different stories, so these, you represent the children of the, you know, affirmative action babies. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: So, I, I want to ask you, what do you feel, your, your generation's--a legacy or contribution will be at the end of the day? Speaker 2: I think it doesn't change, in terms of, you know, you often hear people say that they're standing on the shoulders of--that I think that we have a responsibility to continue to sort of be the best that we can be. So, that we are not only--so that we can foster other talent and serve as role models but ensure that doors remain open and that doors are opened even wider for those who follow behind us. But, I think we also have the responsibility because you know, in some cases you know there's a greater influence and we experience when we were going up that there is a responsibility to give back but financially and also of yourselves to those who are less fortunate. As I said, you know, said somebody who personally has been a beneficiary of the, you know, couldn't have gone to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] without an academic scholarship. And, you know, I just think that we have to continue to be mindful. And I think even maybe perhaps more vil- vigilant, you know, because for as far as we've come just looking at the, you know, as we've come in terms of you think that the world is a colorless place. All of the things that have been happening just even on the ground in our country that we even have to have as a mantra that Black Lives Matter. And just, you know, the reason that that even came to be means that we shouldn't all be so comfortable thinking that, you know, that the. And, and also the fact that some of the strides that have been made are sort of, you know, people are pulling back on, you know, affirmative action not as reverse discrimination or affirmative action laws that were put in place are being looked in, being looked at as to go away. Or, you know, people are legislating, or trying to legislate to take some of those hard fought strides that many people sacrificed to make happen, away. So, I think that we need to continue to be vigilant and (unclear) the work that organizations like yours is doing. I think it's important, you know, some cultures have a very strong culture of doing that in terms of ensuring that people don't forget. While you move forward it's important to know where you came from. Story_ID: 662531 Speaker 1: And what are your hopes and, and concerns for the black community? You've talked a little bit about that, but what are your hopes and what are your concerns? Speaker 2: Hopes, that people are, you know, have the opportunity to, you know, everyone has the opportunity to live a fulfilled life in which they are one, armed with the tools they need to perform at the highest level of themselves. And, you know, so that's my hope. And my concern is that people don't whether, you know, they aren't given access; whether their lives are cut short senselessly. And yeah, so that's, you know, my biggest fear. And that we also don't continue to support each other, but I guess that's sort of the same, saying the same thing. Story_ID: 662532 Speaker 1: So, what do you think you would consider unique, unique about the black experience? Speaker 2: I think the fact that regardless of how high you may go, in terms of achieving your goals or you know, within your career, your profession at the end of the day, unlike other groups, ethnic groups you are distinguished by the color of your skin. That while you may have sort of, you know, integrated the board room, you know, the corporate echelon or wh- whatever sort of, you know, walk of life that, you know, not that it's something you run from, from but you are always identified as such. And even the fact that I mean, you know, we have, you know, in some cultures in the Jewish culture if your mother is Jewish, you're considered Jewish. We have a, you know, what I think is an amazing president in [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama, whose mother [Ann Dunham] is white. But, he's considered, you know, a black president, or a black man. That, you know, the skin, the color of your skin makes you--serves as a mark of distinction regardless of what walk of life you find yourself in. Story_ID: 662533 Speaker 1: And last question, what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: My legacy, I think I want my legacy to be to have made a difference in the spaces where I operated in. So, for example even in, in doing this latest endeavor in inspiredluxe.com there remain few people of color who are in the ecommerce space at least that I'm aware of. That, yeah that in whatever I that whatever I undertake that I'm able to make a positive difference in the lives of, you know, some or hopefully many. Story_ID: 662534 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Tell us about this first one. Speaker 2: So, this was on my first trip to China and the Great Wall of China. And so this is me with the, what're those statues called-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Call the Terracotta soldiers [Terracotta Army, Xi'an, China]? Speaker 2: Yeah, the Terracotta soldiers. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: You got all kinds of equipment there. Boy you know, it's like I've met the Queen of England [Elizabeth II] and President Mandela [Nelson Mandela]. and you know, none of those photos I have now. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: This is my mother and my grandmother with me during the-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) give them her name (unclear) and spell it please? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) and left to right please. Speaker 1: You could look again (laughter). Speaker 2: No, 'cause my shadow, sorry. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: I think this, no this was Stanford yeah. This is my graduation from college from Stanford University [Stanford, California] and it's my mother to my left and my grandmother was actually my [paternal] step-grandmother. My grandfather's second wife, Laura Bradley [ph.]. But, the only grandmother I knew on my father's, my, the only grandmother I knew on my dad's side. Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-one [1981]. Speaker 1: This is a photo of my dearly beloved belated older brother Howard Bradley [Howard Bradley, Jr.], who was truly a strong, was a strong man in more ways than one. A life gone too soon. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my grandfather with the shovel. My grandfather Robert Bradley, who my youngest brother's [Robert Bradley] named after. And he was a Pullman porter. Speaker 1: Oops. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: This is a photo of my oldest brother Howard, me-- Speaker 2: Howard, Howard Bradley. Speaker 1: Howard Bradley, me, my older brother Carl Bradley [ph.] and my mother Lacey Bradley [Lacey Smiley Bradley] on our way to or from church. Speaker 2: Year about? Speaker 1: That must have been early, it must have been like three years, so early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: This is a photo of my grandfather Matthew Smiley, who my younger brother Todd, Matthew Todd Bradley [Matthew Bradley (ph.)] is named after. Whose family had a really interesting--his family history, you said you're gonna take a photo of that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And this is my fierce and fabulous grandmom, Viney Smiley who was my mother's mother. Who always used to stay with us when we she came visit in Newark [Ohio]. And my brothers always wondered why she couldn't stay with her other daughters who lived in town? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) But my grandmother was actually, you know, she was one of those people--I loved my grandmother dearly but she was one of the first people that I experienced up close and personally who, you know, you hear that sign about the brown paper bag test? Speaker 1: Oh, oh she was like? Speaker 2: That, so my youngest brother she didn't like very much because of the color of his skin. So, what I just shared with you is my family history on my mother's. On my grandfather's side, the Smiley side. But, I don't you said you'll put that up there or something? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Um-hm. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: I have it photographed, the actual if you want that I can take off my office wall if that's better. I'll grab that. I'm gonna kill your cord. Is that-- Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right tell us about this? Speaker 2: So, it was a big deal, you know, this photo made me really happy because of the joy on my mom's face, when I got the job at Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation]. She's actually holding another article, photo article that was done about me when I was at Paramount and they're showing photos of me when I was on the set and working with Michael Jordan on the movie 'Space Jam.' Speaker 1: How about this one? Speaker 2: Oh, that's my mom and that's my mom when she was--my dad and my and my-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) that's a nice one. I didn't do a very good job. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead tell us about this? Speaker 2: That's my mom Lacey Bradley, on the left that's my father Howard Bradley [Howard Bradley, Sr.], in middle and that's my mom's oldest sister Viney Mae [Viney Smiley] who was named after her mother, their mother Viney Smiley. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And this one. Speaker 2: I felt that I had made it when, when I-- Speaker 1: Want me to hold that? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you hold that, yeah? Speaker 1: I felt that I had made it until you interviewed me when I was featured in a Morrie--in a Wee Pals-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: When I was featured in a Wee Pals-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Cartoon. I think that was, so he had sent me, he sent me the-- Speaker 2: I loved him. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Could you (unclear)-- Speaker 2: What did I do wrong? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Nothing. Speaker 2: Like this-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We're just getting a glare, there we go. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: But, it's funny. I never knew that my life would evolve around, you know, cartoon characters and that I would actually become one from, you know-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --having worked with Bugs Bunny to having done a consulting project with the Disney [The Walt Disney Company] in Europe. To working with Mickey Mouse and Winnie the Pooh. To-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And [HistoryMaker] Morrie Turner he lived around here, right (unclear). Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, he was (unclear), that's right. Speaker 1: Berkeley [California], yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, was that when you (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Oh wait, there're, there're a few more. Speaker 2: Just a few more. Oh you, no you, you got that one, that was my grandmother with a, with us, but you had the one with my mom (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 662535 Speaker 1: My mom, who they say I look a lot like. But-- Speaker 2: Just say it. Speaker 1: Oh, that's a picture of my mom during her school days in-- Speaker 2: What's the name? Speaker 1: Lacey Bradley [Lacey Smiley Bradley], who they said looked-- Speaker 2: Spell Lacey. Speaker 1: L-A-C-E-Y. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We can shoot the cover. Can you hold this? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): 'Cause it needs to be held open. Speaker 2: You know, I also was in Playboy. Speaker 1: You were? Speaker 2: I don't have that photo for you. But, no I was one of the girls of the Pac 10 [Pacific 10 Conference; Pacific 12 Conference], but I was clothed. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: It's true. The layers keep unfolding (laughter). My--what do you call it, zig zag life? I was clothed. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So, so this article's about--? Speaker 1: Yeah, in terms of when I opened the--? Speaker 2: Explain what this is otherwise we think it's fake. Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry let's try to retract this, so sorry. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: So, this was a, a profile when MoAD [Museum of the African Diaspora, San Francisco, California] first opened and we joined the, the quote, cultural quarter. So, next to me is standing Ken Foster [Kenneth Foster], who was then the director of Yerba Buena Center for the Arts [San Francisco, California]. That's me in the middle and that's Neal Benezra who is the head of the--the executive director of a--San Francisco Museum of Modern Art [San Francisco, California]. And I felt very proud to be included in this photo because MoAD being a new little entity-- Speaker 2: Was with the big boys? Speaker 1: The big boys, yeah. Speaker 2: Now, how do you sell Neal B, B--? Speaker 1: Benezra, I think it's you know let's do one more in terms of-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: So, I love this picture because it just shows you that how dearly beloved our mother was. This picture was after my father [Howard Bradley, Sr.] and my oldest brother [Howard Bradley, Jr.] had passed away. So, this is my--all three of my brothers have mustaches, my surviving brothers. My oldest brother, my older brother Carl Bradley [ph.], me, my younger brother Todd Bradley [Matthew Bradley (ph.)] standing behind our mother Lacey Bradley. And then to the right is our youngest brother Robert Bradley. Speaker 2: Now, where's Carl? Speaker 1: He's in Columbus [Ohio]. Speaker 2: He's in Columbus. Speaker 1: Next time you go that way you have to call. Speaker 2: And this again sort of represents the latest chapter in my life when I launched inspiredluxe.com. And again the thing that's important about--one, I was excited that the website was so well received here in San Francisco [California]. But, I also love the fact, you know, they call me an artisan ambassador which is truly what I feel like in terms of work, working with some of these artisans. But, they also got the fact that we are trying to, you know, they call it commerce crafted with a conscience. That we're trying to support ethical fashion, fashion that's sustainable and supporting artisans, women's cooperatives and artisans who are trying to make a difference in the communities where they live and work...